
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79

Demand, public procurement and transformation

Jakob Edler

Karlsruhe, May 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
This working paper is published jointly by The Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research, Ger-
many (the ISI Discussion Paper Series) and The Manchester Institute of Innovation Research, UK (the MIoIR
Working Paper Series).

To access the paper on the web-site of The Manchester Institute of Innovation Research, please use the link
https://documents.manchester.ac.uk/display.aspx?DocID=67078

Responsible for content
Jakob Edler, Jakob.Edler@ISI.Fraunhofer.de

Recommended citation
Edler, J. (2023): Demand, public procurement and transformation (Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Pol-
icy Analysis No. 79). Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer ISI.

Published
May 2023

ISSN
1612-1430

DOI
doi:10.24406/publica-1322

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Content
1 Introduction.................................................................................................................... 1
2 Transformation, demand and innovation ............................................................... 3
3 Demand side policies ................................................................................................... 5
3.1 Demand side policies as innovation policy ................................................................................ 5
3.2 Demand side policies and PP in the context of transformation. .......................................... 7
4 Zooming into public procurement for transformation ....................................... 9
5 Public procurement as a tool for transformation – towards a
conceptualisation ........................................................................................................ 14
6 Conclusion: some basic policy considerations .................................................... 17
Literature ......................................................................................................................................20

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | II

Figures
Figure 1: The multiple rationale of demand side innovation policy ................................................. 6
Figure 2: Public Spending on procurement as % of GDP ..................................................................... 9

Tables
Table 1: Old vs. new missions ........................................................................................................................ 7
Table 2: One example of a policy mix for transformation .................................................................. 8
Table 3: The role of public procurement in transformational policies ......................................... 15
Table 4: The potential of strategic public procurement as part of a transition
policy mix ............................................................................................................................................ 16

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 1

1 Introduction
The meaning of demand and demand side policies has been discussed with three major
perspectives. First, demand has always been a major feature in economic theories of innovation and
market creation. In line with long waves of economic thinking, the meaning of demand and the role
of the state to intervene on the demand side has fluctuated over time (Clarke 2003; Frenkel et al.
2015; Godin et al. 2013; Knell 2012; Miles 2010; Nemet 2009) . In the last 10 to 15 years, however,
especially innovation economics and innovation theory has tu rned to demand side much more
forcefully again. This debate has reminded us of the bottlenecks and the catalytical effects of
demand side behaviour for the creation of markets and for economic and societal benefits
emanating from innovations; and subsequently of the necessity and various possibilities of the state
to intervene.
Second, demand has been a major feature in a limited number of sectoral policies. Most notably,
traditional energy policy has focused on demand measures, on demand side management e ven,
for decades (Geller et al. 2006; Gillingham et al. 2004; Neij 2001; Nemet 2008). This has always been
done with the idea that entry and use barriers for energy efficient technologies need public policy
support, as the public benefit of the diffusion of those technologies exceeds the sum of individual
benefits and as private demand changes are not fast enough to achieve the political goal of new
energy markets. Those policies have hardly been linked with innovation or e ven economic policy
consideration, i.e. the effects on innovation behaviour of firms and as to who reaps the benefit on
the supply side have not been at the core of this debate.
Third, and in extension of the sectoral policy approaches, transition studies have long stressed that
functional systems can only be transformed if consumers, private and public, are ready to change
behaviour and adopt and use innovations. It is not so much the inventiveness of suppliers of
innovation that enables transformation, it is the broad adoption of innovations that does it. Thus,
transition studies have always had great interest in how the behaviour of consumers and citizens
influences the direction and speed of transformation (Kivimaa et al. 2014; Köhler et al. 2017; Schot
et al. 2016). However, when it comes to policies that seek to support transformation, e.g. through
mission oriented innovation policy approaches, in many OECD countries the take up of demand
side measures instruments still is "the weakest point" (OECD 2021b, p. 81).
One particular lever on the demand side is public procurement. With public procurement it is the
state itself, state actors, at different levels, that can influence the market directly by demanding
something new or absorbing innovations that strugg le to take off, but are potentially of broader
benefit to societies. This direct influence through public procurement of innovation (PPI) does not
infringe market dynamics as competition for tenders is open, and it allows – in principle – the
orchestration of institutional change needed to ensure the success of innovation uptake and market
development.
However, there are only very few contributions in the literature that discuss and analyse innovation
public procurement explicitly in the context of trans formation (Edquist et al. 2020; Flanagan et al.
2022; Wesseling et al. 2018) . More broadly, the various literature strands that discuss the role o f
demand for innovation and for transformation and the role of the state on the demand side have
not really been brought together fruitfully. Given the increased ambition of many states to support
transformations, in particular to slow down climate change and increase sustainability of our
economies and societies, and given the outstanding meaning of innovations to achieve other
ambitious goals, one would expect a more systematic discourse as to how the two demand
perspectives relate to each other. Clearly, there are potential synergies as well as tensions between

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 2

the two as creating and supporting markets for innovations has both economic and
transformational effects that may or may not be complementary.
In this article we want to explore the role of the s tate to influence and support the demand for
innovation in the context of transformation with a triple focus. First, we discuss the importance of
demand for innovation and transformation. Second, we elaborate the conceptual underpinning of
state intervention on the demand side. This In doing so, we link the demand side interventions with
both the transformation debate and the innovation based competitiveness of systems debate. We
then zoom into the main focus of this discussion paper, public demand and publ ic procurement
practice for innovation and transformation as this is – or can be – a powerful lever to spur both
transformation and innovation which is largely underexplored and underused. Here we differentiate
different forms of public procurement as well as different functions it can play in different
transformation contexts. Rather than elaborating individual instruments and measures to support
procurement, which is done in many ways elsewhere, we conclude with a number of high level
recommendation for policy and analysis in order to further a debate the value of which has been
recognised, but yet which has not materialised in any serious policy strategies for procurement.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 3

2 Transformation, demand and innovation
Transformation has been conceptualised and empirically analysed through various academic lenses
such as the Multi-Level Perspective, Technological Innovation Systems, Complex adaptive systems
approach, practice theory (Grin 2016; Hansmeier et al. 202 1). Even if the causal explanations and
the context and framework conditions conducive to transformation are different in the different
approaches: transformation in essence results from the interplay of change in attitude and
behaviour, social innovation (new practices) and technological innovations that are adopted widely
and diffuse through the system, triggering further spill over and spill back effects to suppliers and
thus a positive self -reinforcing dynamic. Accordingly, one of the major failure s of systems to
transform is demand articulation failure (Weber et al. 2012). Weber et al. claimed very early on that
the traditional innovation systems failure approach has been very limited to address failures on the
demand side, ranging from poor complementary institutional and organisational conditions to a
lack of understanding of user needs or thei r reluctance to use a certain innovation. They concede
that many sectoral polices had failed to articulate those demand conditions sufficiently. Since then,
however, all major strands mobilised to understand transformation dynamics highlight the
importance of demand (for many see (Jacobsson et al. 2011; Kivimaa 2014; Köhler et al. 2017; Suurs
et al. 2010).
As one major dynamics for transformation is the adoption and diffusion of innovations in the
market place, it is reasonable to start with a short general discussion on the role of demand for
innovation more generally. Economic and innovation studies have long established the importance
of demand for innovation (Mowery et al. 1979) . The reasons are manifold. Product innovations
contribute to a firm's market position as it satisfies new needs or existing needs better, process
innovation increase productivity and allow cost advantages. At least since Schumpeter, innovation
has been regarded as is the engine of competition and constant improvement of performance and
efficiency. The nature of demand and the quality of demand conditions for innovations to be
generated and diffused is critical for the generation and diffusion of innovation which is an essential
component of any transformation that is driven – inter alia – by market forces.
The quality of the demand side has a number of effects on the likelihood of innovations to be
produced and diffused. Innovations can be demand driven, i.e. reacting to changing needs of
potential buyers. Thus, in innovation systems in which citizens, firms and public bodies are curious,
are inclined to seek improved performance or develop new needs and to articulate those novel
needs well to potential suppliers, those suppliers are more lik ely inspired to produce and test
innovations. Equally, innovations can be supply driven, whereby firms anticipate markets to take up
innovations they have developed. In innovation systems in which citizens, firms and public bodies
are open to novelties, ar e inclined to be early or even lead users and develop the skills to apply
innovations, firms will be eager to produce and test innovations. In those systems, uncertainty for
suppliers is reduced, and through user -producer interactions for co -generation or co-adaptation
of innovations learning (Malerba et al. 2007; Miles et al. 2009; Rothwell 1977, 1984) and
demonstration effects across the system are more likely to occur.
In addition, there is a positive feedback effect on firms and their inclination to innovate in the future.
The effects of market conditions conducive to early user-producer interaction, early uptake and fast
diffusion on the innovation activities of firms is well established in the literature. A number of studies
have shown that the positive effects of demand side conditions and p olicies are considerable for
innovation activities of firms (Edler 2016; Guerzoni et al. 2015).
Those dynamics have in particular been analysed for public demand. Mowery and Rosenberg (1979)
conclude a long term analysis of the US in the last century that public demand has had more effect

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 4

on innovation and growth in the US than supply side policy measures such as R&D subsidies.
Similarly, Shin et al. have shown that public demand can play a very specific role for market creation
(Shin et al. 2020). They recently conceptualised and analysed market creation and in particular the
diffusion effect of public demand of innovation. Applying an innovation system perspective, they
demonstrate direct and indirect PPI effects in a comprehensive fashion, backed by evidence of
existing studies and unde rpinned by a modelling approach in the electric vehicle (EV) sector in
Korea. In particular, they demonstrate a number of positive spill over effects throughout the sector
delivering the innovation and its supply chains (Shin et al. 2020) . They assert that PPI can have a
considerable effect on accelerating the diffusion of innovation, including the shift of corresponding
supply chains and interacting economic sectors. These multiple dynamics the authors call "indirect
demand pull effects triggered by PPI" (ibd. 197). Further, Guerzoni et al. (2015) show in their
econometric analysis the power of PPI to stimulate innovation in the private sector. They show that
while the combination with other demand s ide and supply side policies is important, PPI as an
isolated instrument is a major lever for the innovation activity of supplying firms. They go even one
step further, indicating that public demand inspires more private R&D and may spill over in private
markets (ibd. p. 275) and by definition has a market formation effect.
Similarly, knock on effects on firms are confirmed by Czarnitzki et al. (2020) and Aschhoff et al.
(2009) showing that innovative public procurement has a considerable effect on innovation
generation in firms. Czarnitzki et al. (2020)specifies that the innovation effect is particular relevant
for incremental innovation, while Aschhoff et al. find that innovation procurement is particularly
important for SMEs and for firms in weaker regions, and that the effect is most pronounced for
technological and distributional services. They explain this effect by the fact that publ ic
procurement offers immediate sales opportunities and – in contrast to R&D subsidies often does
not require additional R&D efforts (Aschhoff et al. 2009, pp. 1243).This means the innovation effect,
again, is more incremental, but the innovation effect spreads more broadly, which benefits a
broader market formation and triggers innovative activities very broadly, underpinning a broa der
diffusion of innovation. At city-regional level extensive case work has shown the effect of demand
for the development of innovative products in the circular economy (Alhola et al. 2019).
More comprehensive knock on effects on supplying firms are shown by Edler et al. (2015). In a
survey of 800 firms supplying to the public sector in the UK they find that firms supplying an
innovation to the public sector benefit in other markets. Almost 80% of all firms in their sample
supplying an innovation to a public body first subsequently sell this innovation to other public
customers, 55% to customers in the private market, and 25% to customers overseas. This is a clear
indication for the lead user argument, both in domestic and export markets, a strong argument for
innovation diffusion triggered by public demand. Therefore, for innovations conducive to
transformation that are politically intended, there is a potential win -win situation. Economic
competitiveness and additonal exports for a system coupled with fast diffusion of innovation.
In sum, the effects of innovation demand, and of public demand in particular, on innovation
dynamics and on broader economic benefits, and thus potentially on transformation, are immense.
This is at the core of the argumentation for a state playing an active role as regards innovation
demand. Given this importance of demand conditions, and given the aspiration of states, at various
levels, to accelerate transformation, we now turn to public policies on the demand side before
zooming into public procurement as the most direct lever of state action, and one of the most
neglected.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 5

3 Demand side policies
3.1 Demand side policies as innovation policy
In the last 15 years or so, demand side has come back strongly in the innovation policy discourse
(Edler et al. 2007; Edler 2016; Edquist 2019; Weber et al. 2017; Zabala-Iturriagagoitia 2022). This was
due mainly to a realisation that the innovation policy measures had a strong focus on enhancing
the capabilities of the system to produce knowledge and innovation. The direction of those
innovation activities and the satisfaction of dem and was, in terms of economic and innovation
policy, to a large degree left to the market, and in parts – as highlighted above – to sectoral polices.
However, despite considerable efforts to strengthen and broaden the innovation policy toolbox
(Polt et al. 2021) , many OECD stat es failed to improve competitiveness and innovativeness
markedly. Exacerbated by the financial and economic crisis of the late 2000s, the EU certainly did
not succeed in becoming the most competitive region in the world. Consequently, the attention
turned to an additional legitimation for innovation policy, a shift towards a challenge discourse. The
new, or more pronounced, imperative for innovation policy towards societal challenges forced
policy makers and politicians in all policy areas to focus policy much more on contributing to solve
the associated problems, and to become more directional. This development led to OECD wide
national strategies for demand side policies (OECD 2011).
To understand the broader policy context of public procurement, a short recollection of the broad
conceptual rationales to underpin demand side innovation policy measures is needed. Figure 1
displays three major bundles of rationales 1. The first is a set of market and system failure s. There
are a number of characteristics of demand for innovation that restrain or slow down potential
demanders from asking for or buying and using an innovation. This has to do with uncertainty and
lack of information about the added benefit of an innova tion, poor communication between
potential suppliers and demanders, high entry costs, a reluctance to bear learning costs from which
subsequent demanders benefit (adoption externalities) and various adoption costs (learning,
change of behaviour, complement ary investments etc.). A second rationale of demand side
innovation policies has to do with sectoral policy goals. If the market forces are too slow for
diffusion, the roll out through supply and demand means becomes a political prerequisite. This of
course is at the heart of sectoral policies and can be at the heart of transformation oriented demand
side measures. And third, as research on lead markets has shown (Beise 2004; Quitzow et al. 2014),
improving demand condition, positioning a market as lead market can be a means of competition
policy, as the generation of innovation is often close to lead users and markets. This anticipates
positive feedback loops to supplying companies as outlined above.

1 For a more detailed conceptualisation of demand side policy rationales see Edler 2010 (Clarke 2003; Edler et al. 2007; OECD 2011).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 6

Figure 1: The multiple rationale of demand side innovation policy

Source: Own elaboration, partly based on Edler 2010, (Edler 2016)
The tool box of demand side innovation policies to overcome those failures and achieve sectoral
and innovation related goals can be categorised into measures(OECD 2011):
 to reduce the entry costs of an innovation (subsidies or tax incentives for the purchase of an
innovation),
 to increase awareness and reduce uncertainty (information, labelling, regulation),
 to improve the ability of potential users through training,
 to support the articulation of needs into market demand.
 and direct purchase by the state (public procurement) as a deliberate innovation policy tool.
There are considerable challenges in policy design, implementation and evaluation in demand side
policies First, the various bundles of justification for public action and the instrument deployed are
not free from tensions and target conflicts. Most notably in the context of this article, the sectoral
policy goals, or transformation goals for that matter, may not be in line with the innovation policy
goals. If, for example, innovations that are supported by demand side policies are being imported
to speed up transformation, the competitive balance between firms in different countries may shift
in ways that might be seen as detrimental for firms in the importing country. The example of
photovoltaic technologies is telling here. Despite a clear early technolog ical lead in Europe in the
1980s, it were mainly Chinese producers who delivered for the mass deployment of photovoltaic
devices to speed up energy transition in the last 20 years. This, however, was often supported by
demand subsidies in Europe and partic ular in Germany (feed -in tariffs in particular), whereby in
response to the market formation success in Germany actors in Germany were "increasingly
concerned that the large PV deployment program of the feed -in tariff is benefiting Chinese PV
manufacturers at the expense of the development of German industry and at high costs for German
electricity consumers" (Grau et al. 2012) . The share of European producers in the production of
photovoltaic devices in 2020 was down to 1,8%, with Chinse producers claiming almost 70%2.

2 (IEA (Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme) 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 7

A second challenge of demand side policies is to understand if a market or system failure exists,
and if the scope is big enough to be targeted with a demand side measure, and which measure is
the most effective, is far from trivial. Further, the timing is critical. Applied too early, a demand
subsidy may push an innovation in the market despite it being technologically not mature yet.
Applied too late or too long, dem and side subsidies may result in windfall gains for suppliers,
leading to inefficient allocation of resources (see also Fan et al. (2022)). In both cases, the result
may be a deceleration of further innovation activities as pressure for innovation is taken out of the
market place. The design of demand side innovation policy measures supported by ex -ante
evaluations is characterised by high level of uncertainties due to a range of unpredictable
behavioural developments and spill overs in supply and demand side of the market3.
3.2 Demand side policies and PP in the context of transformation.
The discussion as to the role of demand side intervention for policy missions has started three
decades ago. Very early conceptualisation of "new style" mission policies already stressed the
importance of demand (Soete et al. 1993) . Soete and Arundel defined a paradigm in which
technological and non -technological innovation were to be supported to tackle broad societa l,
sustainability and economical challenges that are politically defined into policy problems and
potentially missions. Those policy problems were distinguished from old style missions, that are
focused on governmental functions, often have to do with large scale technological developments
and concern a limited group of actors (Köhler et al. 2019; Mazzucato et al. 2016; Mowery et al. 2010;
Penna et al. 2022; Soete et al. 1993) . While this distinction is meanwhile well established, it is
important to stress here because it puts so much emphasis on demand, on public and private
demand, with diffusion of results being "the central goal of policy (Soete et al. 1993). Consequently,
demand conditions as a context condition or even enabler for transformative policy is critical.
Table 1: Old vs. new missions

Source: Version by (Mazzucato et al. 2016) of table 5 in (Soete et al. 1993, p. 51)
While transformational, cross sectoral policies along the lines outlined by Arundel and Soete, with
a stronger focus on demand conditions, did not feature strongly in policy debates for 2 decades,
demand side policy play a transformative role in sectoral policies. First, in many sectoral policies a

3 For a more elaborated analysis of demand side policy design see Edler 2016.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 8

mix of the demand side measures mentioned above have been standard policy tools to push for
certain sectoral policy solutions. Most notably, energy efficiency policies or energy management
policies have long relied heavily on demand side measures (Geller et al. 2006; Gillingham et al. 2004;
Neij 2001; Nemet 2008). In particular, demand side management involved a conscious and explicit
mix of measures to support the diffusion of energy effi cient technologies. This rather "old"
approaches are worth remembering. With them, energy policy makers for example took decisions
on what kinds of functional requirements they sought to pull in the market place for specific
functions around different electrical appliances. They took the effort to analyse the specific supply
and demand situations for those applications, co-generated specifications and then put together a
demand side policy mix, often with public procurement as its core. This was very much about speed
and scale, less about searching for the next generation of those appliances. Those policies were
introduced with the main driver of pushing diffusion, and thus transforming the related functional
systems. The evaluation of those bundles of measu res was largely very positive, diffusion
accelerated, energy consumption was reduced and supplier companies were further incentivised to
innovate (Edler 2016; Neij 1998, 2001; Nemet 2008; 2009).
With regard to transformation poli cies that aim for comprehensive change beyond diffusion of
incremental innovation, the picture is more complex. While energy demand side policies as
described above simply seek to speed up the diffusion of already existing efficient solutions or for
isolated incremental innovations, the ambition and scope for innovation and transformation are
often higher in transformative policies. The latter seek to support the formation and growth of
markets for niches and subsequently the shift of entire regimes. As the transition literature has
shown in the last two decades, for those broader, ambitious regime changes most often substantive
institutional and behavioural change are needed, and complementary skills and further
technologies may have to be developed (Köhler et al. 2017). Thus, policy for transformation – and
within it demand side policy – is considerably more challenging than policy to support the diffusion
of incremental innovations in largely stable market constellation.
A number of studies ha ve analysed the role of policy, and policy mixes, for transformation of
systems (Falcone et al. 2017; Rogge et al. 2020; Scordato et al. 2018). Figure 2 below is an example
of one typology among a number of typologies to indicate the range of instruments mobilised for
transformation. Note that here, demand policies play a major role, and ex post analyses of policy
mixes for transformation has highlighted the complex interplay of supply and demand side
measures. Public procurement is mentioned as one tool among many. In the following we will zoom
into public procurement in the context of transformation.
Table 2: One example of a policy mix for transformation

Source: (Rogge et al. 2016)

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 9

4 Zooming into public procurement for transformation
To understand how public procurement can support transformation strategies we first need to
remind us of the sheer volume of public
procurement. Public procurement
accounts on average for 15% of GDP in
EU countries, and during the pandemic
this figure has slightly increased (figure
3). In comparison, EU countries on
average roughly spend 1% public
money for R&D. The leverage for
innovation is considerable.
Second, we need to distinguish two
established modes of public
procurement that are both developed in
order to serve purposes beyond the
immediate need of the buying
organisation: green, or sustainable,
procurement and procurement of
innovation. Following the EU Definition,
green public procuremen t (GPP) is “a
process whereby public authorities seek
to procure goods, services and works
with a reduced environmental impact
throughout their life -cycle when
compared to goods, services and works
with the same primary function that
would otherwise be pro cured”
(European Commission 2016).
Green public procurement has long been a tool for public policy organisation to support
environmental sustainability (OECD 2015; PricewaterhouseCoopers 2009) . In the last decade in
particular, green public procurement has been expanded to sustainable public procurement (SPP),
defined as a “process whereby public organisations meet their needs for goods, services, works and
utilities in a way that achieves value for money on a whole lifecycle basis in terms of generating
benefits not o nly to the organisation, but also to society and the economy, while significantly
reducing negative impacts on the environment” 4 (UNEP 2021). In principle, green or sustainable
public procurement is about buying established products in the market place that meet certain
sustainability standards. In terms of transformation, sustainable public procurement would
accelerate the diffusion of products or services for which an initial market is already established and
standards are set and performance criteria established. This is the major difference to the
procurement of innovation.
Recently, the call to use GPP or SPP for transformation have become louder. The public
procurement agenda has broadened now globally, or at least the ambition to mobilise public
procurement for societal goals. Green public procurement has been established in many countries

4 (UNEP - UN Environment Programme 2022) https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-do/sustainable-consumption-and-produc-
tion-policies, accessed September 9.
Figure 2: Public Spending on procurement
as % of GDP

Source: OECD 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 10

as a tool in environmental policy (Larrue 2021; Peñate-Valentín et al. 2021; PricewaterhouseCoopers
2009), according to a recent OECD survey, all 28 countries surveyed have a framework to mobilise
public procurement for environmental purposes (OECD 2021a). At UN level, it is now seen as one
critical instrument to drive the SDGs (Gutiérrez-Goiria et al. 2022). While the UN logic is not one of
concrete missions or concrete transformation pathways, it nevertheless indicates a number of very
concrete sub-goals and how public procurement can be mo bilised to achieve them (Gutiérrez-
Goiria et al. 2022).
However, while the authors recognise the potential to mobilise SPP to "really make progress worthy
of the title of the UN declaration (Transforming our world)" and to "promote development with a
local and socially responsible vision", they concede that the instrument is not given enough
importance (ibd., p. 13). While a number of good practice exist (e.g. Green Purchasing Network
Malaysia 2017; UNEP 2021), national governments are far from mobilising SPP for transformation
(Gutiérrez-Goiria et al. 2022; Hansen 2020). GPP and SPP do not live up to their potential. Taking
the e xample of Germany, we see that green public procurement lacks ambition. A number of
encouraging individual examples cannot disguise the fact that the role of GPP and SPP in the
sustainability strategy of the country is minor. In fact, the examples mentioned are recycled paper
and modernising the vehicle fleets, without any clear target or push for next generation
technologies. Action plans are focused on support measures, rather than procurement strategies,
let alone innovative procurement (Bundesregierung 2021)5. Overall, across the world, the United
Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) has conceded, it is necessary to "wake up the sleeping
giant" (UNEP 2021).
A range of barriers appear to inhibit a broader roll out of GPP or SPP, at the individual,
organisational and political level. Those include lack of integrating GPP and SPP in broader policy
strategies and high level managerial commitment, higher transacti on cost of purchasing and of
using sustainable products, higher purchasing costs, lack of expertise and general awareness
(Brammer et al. 2011; Milios 2018; Ntsondé et al. 2021; Sönnichsen et al. 2020).
As stated above, public procurement of innovation (PPI) is the purchase of a product or service by
a public organisation that is new to the organisation. It is important to distinguish different modes
for the sake of conceptual clarity. Public procurement of innovation may be targeted at products
and services that
a. may be already developed but have not found yet a first buyer or sufficient number of users to
trigger market formation, what Edquist et al. (2012) have labelled diffusion oriented or adaptive
procurement (APPI),
b. are inspired by the needs formulated by the buying organisation and thus are developed on
demand, with the expectation that a market for it can be developed.
Importantly, for the latter two specific modes have been developed and tested in recent years. First,
with so called " functional procurement " (Edquist et al. 2015; Edquist et al. 2020) a buying
organisation specifies functionalities which go beyond what existing products or services can
perform. The necessity to innovate is thus built into the specification, while the public body needs
to develop a conscious process to define the articul ation of its need, or together with the public
define the articulation of the need of the public. If complex new functionalities are requested that
cannot be formulated easily by buying organisations, specific pre-commercial procurement (PCP)
schemes can be applied (Rigby 2016). Those schemes allow a step -wise competition for innovative

5 The author has presented some analysis of the German procurement practice to the German Council for Sustainability in September 2021, with the Council
being concerned about the lack of ambition of public procurement for sustainability transformations.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 11

solutions, whereby fir st multiple R&D service contracts are tendered with various competing
providers. This may happen in several rounds, with decreasing number of competitors. The result
of this step wise competition is then the starting point for a regular procurement 6.This approach
furthers experimentation, interactive learning between buyer and suppliers, and is a means to
reduce uncertainties and risks (Rigby 2016). Both schemes offer processes to articulate demand, to
engage in experimentation and learning, to support niche creation in combination with the uptake
of an early market.
However, public procurement has not fulfill ed its potential as an enabler for markets for
innovations. Both buying something that is new for an organisation and buying a market novelty
face a whole range of institutional, organisational and political challenges. Organisationally, there
is fragmentation of there is poor division of labour. A number of studies have shown that i n the
context of innovation policy to define and use PPI as a tool to support the innovative activity of
firms faces a number of institutional challenes in the public sector , such as lack of conviction and
backing at the leadership level, general lack of awareness, inappropriate incentive structures for
those responsible (risk aversion) and for those affected internally (learning costs), lack of technical
knowledge about possi ble procurement procedures and supplier markets, poor interaction
between public buyers and the supply side and limited understanding of life-cycle cost and benefit
considerations (Edquist et al. 2020; Georghiou et al. 2014; Obwegeser et al. 2018; Rainville 2021;
Uyarra et al. 2014).
Strangely, public procurement of innovation in its various variations has not been analysed
empirically very much as yet. This is true already for the analytical frame of strategic nich e
management, which in a way represented a first kind of deliberate transformation policy attempt
in the late 1990 (Kemp et al. 1998) . This concept postulated that it is not enough so support the
generation of a technological innovation that is socially desirable. Rather, the condition for a market
to emerge, the institutional and behavioral changes ne eded, need to be supported. As those
technologies are in their infancy with no or little demand, the creation of learning opportunities
and market expectations is critical. In strategic niche management, the state has multiple roles to
play beyond supply sided subsidies. Interestingly, although creation of positive market expectations
supported by the state are defined to be important, the original approaches of niche management
did not develop the potential of public procurement of innovation strongly.
As to existing examples, Palm et al. (2017) analyse two Swedish municipalities which sought to
speed up transformation of the automotive transport system by supporting the procurement of
electric vehicles. They mobilised the relative purchasing power of the municipalities to make a
difference in the market and they understood that a short term financial loss had to be accepted in
order support the broader goal of transformation. The strategy in both municipalities was to let the
municipal organization act as role models, create buying power and develop a second-hand market
for EVs. The strategy to speed up diffusion within the municipal organization was through
information and test-driving and in dialogue with the administration solve problems that arise. A
potential improvement of the diffusion process would be to find ways to share the extra cost of an
EV. The authors also point to the fact that the need to bundle demand, to create a bigger incentive
for suppliers and to speed up diffusion is highly challenging. Despite shared goals, the routines,
financial and political framework conditions and the acceptance of paying a higher price differs
between different procuring agencies and municipalities.
Further examples with explicit focus on public procurement of innovation and transformation is
presented by Edquist et al. (2020) and Wesseling et al. (2018). Edquist et al. (2020) offer a number

6 In a yet more holistic approach, the innovation partnership, the buying organisation does not have to tender for a regular procurement after the competi-
tion, but can assign the final procurement contract to the winner of the competition right away.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 12

of case studies that distinguish different contexts and purposes of public procurement to highlight
various ways in which public procurement can contribute to solving societal problems. The value of
their approach is the differentiation of procurement modes and a detailed analyse of concrete
procurement practice. They did not, however, put their analysis in the broader frame of
transformation and market acceleration. Wesseling et al. (2018) made this move. They put public
procurement firmly in the context of transformation. Using one specific case study, they developed
tentative suggestions as to multiple benefits of public procurement in the context of transformation
needs. Recently, Flanagan et al. (2022) discuss the role of public procurement of innovation as a
regional industrial policy tool that could be mobilised to support societal challenges at the regional
level.
Despite those isolated examples, in the literature on policies for transformation in general, public
procurement does not play a prominent role, both in the academic conceptualisation and in the
empirical analysis and findings. It appears that the transition literature has not focused on the role
of the public sector as buyer for transformative and solution oriented technologies. This is mirrored
in an empirical overview of mission oriented policies in OECD countries (OECD 2021b) where
demand side measures are "the weakest point" (ibid, p. 81) and public procurement is only
mentioned in passing in very few selected examples.
It is wor th noting transition studies who look at procurement, but do not exploit it sufficiently.
Kivimaa et al. (2016) develop a framework to understand transition in low energy fields in the UK
and Finland. They mobilise and extend the Technological Innovation Systems (TIS) framework and
apply the policy mix approach across all relevant policy domains. They explore the build -up of a
functional TIS around a transformational technology and processes to build up and support a new
niche and to support the destruction of the incumbent regime (ibid., p. 208 -209). Their policy mix
approach then mirrors policies and instruments against the various TIS functions and in relation to
steps towards destabilisation: (1) Knowledge creation and diffusion, (2) market formation, (3) price
performance improvements, (4) entrepreneurial experiment ation, (5) resource mobilisation, (6)
support form powerful groups and legitimation, (7) influence on the direction of search. They find
a wide range of instruments applied in both countries, with some focus on niche creation rather
than destabilisation. T he main point, however, is that there is no mentioning of systematic,
deliberate inclusion of procurement policies. Rather procurement is mentioned only as a
complementary generic policy tool supporting entrepreneurial experimentation (ibid., p. 212).
Operationally, this is limited to energy efficiency guidelines for procurement. Similarly, Kivimaa et
al. 2014 ) analyse the transition policies in transportation in Finland. They also apply the TIS
framework and ma tch it with policy instruments. Again, public procurement plays a minor role,
mentioned only a few times in passing without any further elaboration.
The example of the wood based bioeconomy that is presented by Purkus et al. (2018) is a further
case in point. Again using the TIS framework, they analyse policies to support those functions. They
find that improving demand conditions can accelerate the diffusion of innovations that are condu-
cive to the wood based bio-economy. They concede the critical role the public sector could play in
encouraging wood as a construction material in public buildings through public procurement of
innovation. However, in their own conceptualisation they reduce PPI to the market formation func-
tion while empirically, they do not find public procurement as a major policy approach at all.
A final example is an analysis of the strategic innovation programme in Sweden. Grillitsch et al.
(2019) show that even a novel, systemic and transformation oriented programme did not manage
to re-balance the relationship between demand and supply side measures, and public procurement
for innovation has not been a major element in implementing the programme. As for procurement,
this programme focused on the competencies of procuring organisations, neglecting the deeper
institutional framework conditions and governance challenges that go far beyond competencies

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 13

and capabilities. In their policy implications, while talking of the need for institutional change and
entrepreneurship, the authors do not really reflect on how to support the demand side and what
specific role the state may have to play, including through public procurement (Grillitsch et al. 2019,
p. 1058). And their case study confirms the lack of proper market creation focus despite the broader
claims.
This neglect of the potential and effects of public procurement of innovation for broader diffusion
in transformation studies is also apparent in a synthesis of the evaluation of public procurement as
an innovation policy tool a couple of years ago (Uyarra 2016). The effects of public procurement on
the diffusion of innovation more broadly are hardly explored. This is of note as the literature on the
evaluation of demand side measures more broadly (for an overview see Edler et al. 2016a) is rich
on the question how demand side measures in general can boost diffusion. However, public pro-
curement of innovation, while having become increasingly important as a an instrument to improve
public services and boost innovation activity in the economy (Edquist 2019; IDB 2019; Obwegeser
et al. 2018; OECD 2011), it is not sufficiently recognised as a catalyst for broader market formation
and diffusion.
This finding is puzzling. Policy and policy mix analyses of transformation, be it as strategic niche or
transition management, in the tradition of MLP or in the TIS framework, puts more emphasis on
the demand side then traditional innovation studies in the last 2-3 decades. In doing so, transition
studies differentiate demand side policies more than innovation studies. Due to the nature of di-
verse technological systems and economic sectors as well as the focus on diffusion we see an ex-
tended set of tools as compared to the traditional innovation policy tool box (Edler et al. 2007; Edler
et al. 2016a). This encompasses feed-in tariffs for electricity from renewable energy or deposit re-
fund systems (see figure 2 above). Still, the enormous power of the public purse is not high on the
agenda.
This is striking, as market formation is critical, and as in many markets the lead of the public sector
would make a substantive immediate and a symbolic indirect difference. The main point here is the
lack of comprehensive transformation strategies that design poli cy mixes and assign public pro-
curement a role in market formation. If policy making, at all levels, had those strategies in place and
if public procurement was a recognised tool to support transformation, taken really seriously for
transition policy, support measures and positive feedback loops would be in place that would in-
centivise public organisations to adjust their procurement practice.
Against this background, we finish this discussion paper with some first thoughts towards a con-
ceptualisation of transformational public procurement that would combine logics of green (GPP),
sustainable public procurement (SPP) and public procurement of innovation (PPI) with its various
modes, i.e. adaptive (APPI), pre-commercial (PCP), and functional procurement.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 14

5 Public procurement as a tool for transformation – towards a
conceptualisation
To conceptualise procurement for transformation, we build on an established, simplified, dichot-
omy of transformational policies, distinguishing between the state as initiator of transitions and the
state as supporting emergent transformation, in combinatio n with the relative size of public de-
mand (see table 1 below). In a narrowly defined mission oriented innovation policy approach prom-
inent throughout the EU and OECD (Fisher et al. 2018; Larrue 2021; Mazzucato 2018) it is the state,
through various means of consensus finding and participation, who initiates and governs missions.
In this approach, public procurement of innovation and even pre -commercial procurement of in-
novation can have critical role s. Mission oriented innovation policies are, after all, still innovation
policies. While this focus in itself can be problematic, for the purpose of this article it is a reflection
of the fact that missions are selected for which innovation, most often tec hnological innovations,
are deemed to be essential. The development and deployment of innovation, most often techno-
logical innovation is the key. Therefore, it is highly likely that in many of those missions the clear
articulation of needs, the investment in innovation development based on this articulation and its
first use are essential. Therefore, pre -commercial public procurement or functional procurement
can be major approaches here. Both necessitate an explicit process to formulate a need. Both also
lead to experimentation and variety. While creating choice, they lower uncertainty and reduce risk
for the first user. Further, both approaches provide the opportunity for co-generation of solutions
with suppliers and joint learning 7. The elaborated, inter -active process of PCP or functional pro-
curement also increase the likelihood of developing e necessary skills or change of social practice
(social innovation) at the side of the users. PCP and functional procurement can thus play a major
role both in deve loping solutions for missions and in supporting the roll out in both public and
private markets. This is particular obvious in constellations in which the public sector has a consid-
erable share of the market. However, even in markets with a minor share of public demand, espe-
cially for complex solutions, PCP and functional procurement can result in signaling and demon-
stration effects support the legitimacy of new solutions and help to improve performance.
In a second mode of transformational policies, policy supports transformations that are emerging,
that have emanated through societal dynamics (Molas-Gallart et al. 2020; Schot et al. 2018). Here,
very often new needs have alre ady been expressed and first niche solutions have already been
created. The role of public procurement would much more be focused on diffusion, on supporting
market enlargement of existing innovations. This would by default call for broad diffusion procure-
ment such as green or sustainable procurement. However, absorptive public procurement of a nov-
elty that struggles to find first buyers (APPI) can play a role to absorb new niche solutions and to
also make the public sector transform itself.

7 Edquist et al. 2020 have strongly highlighted the importance of interactive learning in public procurement of innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 15

Table 3: The role of public procurement in transformational policies
 Relative (potential) market share of public demand *
 Minor Major
(or catalyst for private market)
Transformation emergent Limited procurement ac-
tion (regulation, private
demand support actions)
SPP, GPP (APPI)
acceleration of early markets
initiated by
state (missions)
If possible isolated
demonstration projects
and early use
APPI, PPC,
support demand driven crea-
tion of innovation, lead market
Further, different forms of public procurement can support important niche management function
(Kemp et al. 1998), such as joint articulation of needs into demands (through functional procure-
ment and PCP), learning between users, producers and those affected (especially PCP), identifying
user side bottlenecks in terms of training and awareness (PPI) and finally the creation of a niche or
"protected space" (ibid 186) for a first application, and subsequent signaling of concrete market
potential to suppliers and scaling up through broad diffusion (all forms of procurement).
We can further broaden this fun ctional conceptualisaion of procurement by mobilising the Tech-
nological Innovation Systems framework. As shown above, this framework has been used to analyse
not only system change, but also policies to support system change. It is focused on system change
around certain key technologies for which by default public procurement can be highly relevant.
Table 2 below indicates seven functions of technological innovation systems. This stylised functional
differentiation is an eye opener as to the various roles public procurement can play for the emer-
gence or deliberate change of a technological system. It further shows again, that different kinds
of public procurement serve different functions. Public procurement has a major role in all of those
functions, not o nly in the most obvious, i.e. market formation. Rather, across all functions it can
support major knowledge coordination mechanisms and help reduce market risks and thus increase
legitimacy. Analysing public procuremen t through an evolutionary lens, Bleda et al. (2020) have
shown how different stages of the procurement process support, in principle, all necessary
knowledge coordination function to create and diffuse innovation. Importantly, they highlight the
importance of early phases of the innovation procurement process – for which especially the PCP
scheme is designed – for the adoption and diffusion of innovations

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 16

Table 4: The potential of strategic public procurement as part of a transition policy
mix
TIS functions8 GPP RPPI PCP*
Knowledge creation and diffusion X XX
Market formation X XX X
Price performance improvements XX XXX
Entrepreneurial experimentation X XX
Financial and human resource mobilisation X
Support from powerful groups and legitimation XX XX X
Influence on the direction of search X XXX
* and functional procurement
We can argue that differentiating various basic forms of public procurement can further sharpen
the application of public procurement for the support of system transformation. Green public pro-
curement would very much contribute to price performance improvements through enabling fast
scaling of innovations and could mobilise support of public organisations to signal the value of an
innovation. Pre-commercial or functional procurement, at the other end of the scale, would in par-
ticular support the direction of search as it asks for specific functionalities to be provided in line
with transformations and missions that are to be supported, and it would mobilise stakeholders to
turn to specific problems. It allows entrepreneurial experimentation as it reduces risk and offers an
initial market. And it would in particular support joint knowledge production and learning as a basis
for adoption and diffusion in later stages.

8 This version of the functions is based on Kivimaa et al. (2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 17

6 Conclusion: some basic policy considerations
This discussion paper has shown the importance of demand conditions and of the lever of public
demand when it comes to a major condition for transformation, i.e. to ask for need driven innova-
tions, to create early markets (niches), to support learning conditions and to subsequently provide
conditions for diffusion in public and subsequently private markets. Transformation policy and tran-
sition scholars have long somewhat neglected the enormous lever of public procurement as learn-
ing, coordination and diffusion mechanisms. Beyond a few noteworthy exceptions, public procure-
ment has mainly been mentioned as one of many policy instrum ents, with recommendations to
buy more and better.
To conclude, we do not want to outline all the various recommendations to better design, imple-
ment and support individual green public procurement or innovation procurement processes. The
major institutional problems are well known and have been listed above. Meanwhile, there are nu-
merous guidelines and handbooks available to support practice in public organisations9, and both
for green public procurement and for innovation procurement directives and legal approaches have
been developed that strongly encourage both processes10, and number of policy tools have been
devised to tackle those obstacles (Georghiou et al. 2014), including defining new roles for interme-
diation to support all stages in all types of public procurement (Edler et al. 2016b; Rainville 2021).
All those individual measures to tackle bottlenecks in innovation and green procurement do not
need repeating here.
The main point is this: as states, at all levels, now increasingly seek to support transformation in a
concerted and holistic effort, they need to develop transformative procurement strategies defined
as the ensemble of all procurement approaches (GPP, SPP, APPI and PCP/functional procurement)
that start of and accelerate transformation. This discussion paper has tried to outline the various
ways in which procurement can lever transformation. The effects of intelligent sustainable and in-
novation procurement on the supply side, the demand side and thus on transformation of systems
has been demonstrated. This win-win dynamics need to be exploited much more systematically.
A change of mind-set: factoring in societal benefits
What is missing, therefor, is a change in mindset. Currently, the cost – benefit ratio of innovations
are calculated for the buying organisation. In more advanced approaches, this is done with a life
cycle cost approach, thereby factoring in future savings through buying a more expensive innova-
tion now. However, this still does not capture the wider benefits of buying an innovation. First, there
are additional future benefits in better services that may not materialise in cost savings, but in
higher satisfaction of citizens or civil servants. Those soft benefits are hard to factor in. More im-
portantly, however, any public buying organisation has to limit its cost-benefit considerations to its
own organisation. We have seen, however, that there are wider systemic benefits through multiple
feedback loops. This is the very mo tivation for considering public procurement as an innovation
policy too. Those wider benefits, societal cost savings or broader benefits for society, be it economic
or in terms of sustainability, currently cannot be factored into the consideration of a public buying
organisation. They are often very indirect and hard to comprehend, and rest on a number of ex
ante assumptions. Thus to conduct PPI beyond the immediate need of the buying organisation is

9 For innovation procurement see e.g. https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/docs/h2020 -funding-guide/cross-cutting-issues/innovation-procure-
ment_en.htm; https://procure2innovate.eu/fileadmin/user_upload/Documents/KOINNO_PublicProcurementofInnovation.pdf , for green or sustainble
procurement see https://sustainable-procurement.org/fileadmin/user_upload/layout/Documents/Buying -Green-Handbook-3rd-Edition.pdf
10 However, some legal scholars argue that the existing framework for green public procurement still leaves too much uncertainty for procuring organisations.
and ask for a more mandatory approach (Melon 2020).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 18

highly challenging in the context of innovation or transf ormational policy. Nevertheless, a step
change towards a societal cost-benefit analysis in transformational pubic procurement is needed.
Additionally, if public procurement shall turn into a means for transformative policy, and not only
a means to improve the ability of the public sector to perform its immediate task, an integration of
procurement strategies into broader policies would be needed, going far beyond those existing
which support individual organisations and their internal processes. Additional support would have
to help justify the purchase of innovations within the organisation and vis -à-vis the wider public,
cover some of the additional costs as well as risks, support good practice across the public sector.
In short, public policy for transformation needs to co-fund and systematically support transforma-
tional public procurement. Beyond some – limited – mobilisation of green public procurement for
environmental policy, this link hardly exists.
Creating critical mass
Supporting market creation through procurement is about mobilising actors and creating oppor-
tunities for scale. Tested procurement procedures such as co-operative procurement and catalytic
procurement (Edquist et al. 2020; Flanaga n et al. 2022; Hommen et al. 2008; Rolfstam 2006) can
support those dynamics. In co -operative procurement buying organisations cooperate to bundle
demand and approach suppliers together, whereas in catalytic procurement public organisations
buy an innovation with the main or explicit additional aim to catalyse buying by other (Rolfstam
2006). In the former case, public organisations share a need and realise an increased incentive for
suppliers to invest in innovation by bundling their demand. In the latter case, public organisations
have "intrinsic needs" for the innovation. But here they also support broader societal needs, the
satisfaction of which is, for various reasons, slow or hampered because of a lack of adoption and
diffusion of innovation. In both cases, the procurement process needs coordination between public
organisations as well as between public organisations and firms and citizens.
Mobilising place based dynamics, scaling up and scaling out
A further dimension to consider for the issue of public procurement for transformation is place and
scale. There is emerging literature on the value of missi ons and solution oriented industrial policy
at regional or city-regional level (Flanagan et al. 2022). This starts form the assumption that social
acceptance and appropriateness of innovative solutions are often highly context specific. This in-
sight is in itself not novel. Already in 2002, Meyer-Krahmer has highlighted geographical proximity,
the purposeful networking of regional actors as the best level of experimentation with novel solu-
tions. Coordination of actors, from the articulation of needs to the specification of solutions, their
testing and roll out, is easier at regional or city-regional level. Recently, Zabala-Iturriagagoitia (2022)
has demonstrated, how public procurement can support learning at regional level, both on the
supply and the demand side and can be a means for regional growth strategies that are problem
oriented. In a similar vein, Flanagan et al. (2022) conceptualise market formation processes as a
result of interactive, networked framing and valuation processes that benefit from local proximity,
joint exposure to problems and the pr ospect of concrete solutions to problems defined together
and thus a high er level of social acceptance. They conclude that regional industrial policy, rather
than oriented towards industrial competitiveness should thus be problem -oriented, to support a
positive relation between economic development and problem solving.
In this line of reasoning, public procurement of innovation can be a means for the definition and
deployment of place based solutions with high social acceptance. Problem-oriented industrial pol-
icy that aims at market formation can be supported by public procurement of innovative solutions
to serve economic and societal needs with a high level of legitimacy. The more interactive and

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 19

transparent this process is organised, the better citizens, civil servants, and suppliers are engaged,
the higher the likelihood of problem specific solutions being developed and rolled out.
However, place specific solutions are exactly that, place specific. Similar problems might be tackled
differently in different places or framed differently in different places. Because of the idiosnycracies
in each region or city-region, one can argue, scaling up in the sense of transferring certain problem
definitions and solution and their implementation mode in other contexts is not likely to yield suc-
cess easily. The more contextualised a problem and a solution is, the harder it is to transfer between
regions.
Therefore, cross-place coordination, learning and networking for scaling up are to be mobilised.
For this coordination to happen, a range of options are available. For co-operative or coordinated
procurement, network of public organisations can be activated. One concrete example is the Ac-
celerating Carbon Neutrality Public Procurement project funded by the European Com mission,
bringing together six European cities and public procurement organisation to explore PCP schemes
(ICLEI 2022), enlarging the network with a number of further preferred partners to engage and
learn. The idea here is to conduct joint PCP projects that then lead to further purchasing by those
preferred partners and potentially other cities. This thus is a combination of co-operative and cat-
alytic procurement to develop targeted sustainable AI solutions and roll them out quickly.
A further example with a high potential for co -operative and catalytical strategic procurement is
the covenant of mayor for climate and energy (Diercks et al. 2019). This network aims at a "scaled
implementation for urban innovation" (ICLEI 2015, quoted in Diercks et al 2019) as part of a com-
prehensive, interactive transformation strategies within and across cities in a "learning, going, us-
ing" mode (Diercks et al. 2019) with public organisations at its heart.
Towards a triple win dynamics
This discussion paper has tried to argue and show that more attention to the demand side is critical
for transformational policies. Ample empirical evidence exists as to the positive dynamics of ad-
vance public purchasing beyond the needs of the buying organisation. The positive dynamics that
can be set in motion are threefold and intertwined, in sum pushing strongly for transformation.
Innovations are induced and markets created and accelerated for innovations that are c onducive
for transformations and thus societal benefit, supplying industries are incentivised to invest more
and can realise lead market benefits and finally public organisations improve their performance and
transformation contribution. Given the enormous power of the public purse, and the enormity of
our societal challenges, and given that we – in principle – know how to overcome the institutional
challenges of complex procurement procedures, it is indeed about time to "wake up the sleeping
giant" (UNEP 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 20

Literature

Alhola, K.; Ryding, S.- O.; Salmenperä, H.; Busch, N. J. (2019): Exploiting the Potential of Public
Procurement: Opportunities for Circular Economy. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology, 23 (1),
pp. 96–109. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12770.
Aschhoff, B.; Sofka, W. (2009): Innovation on demand—Can public procurement drive market
success of innovations? In: Research policy, 38 (8), pp. 1235–1247.
Beise, M. (2004): Lead markets: country-specific drivers of the global diffusion of innovations. In:
Research policy, 33 (6-7), pp. 997–1018.
Bleda, M.; Chicot, J. (2020): The role of public procurement in the formation of markets for
innovation. In: Journal of Business Research, 107, pp. 186–196.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.11.032.
Brammer, S.; Walker, H. (2011): Sustainable procurement in the public sector: an international
comparative study. In: International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 31
(4), pp. 452–476. https://doi.org/10.1108/01443571111119551.
Bundesregierung (2021): Deutsche Nachhaltigkeitsstrategie. Weiterentwicklung 2021. Berlin.
Available at
https://www.bundesregierung.de/resource/blob/998006/1873516/3d3b15cd92d0261e7a0b
cdc8f43b7839/2021-03-10-dns-2021-finale-langfassung-nicht-barrierefrei-
data.pdf?download=1, accessed 04.08.2021.
Clarke, A. E. (2003): Situational Analyses: Grounded Theory Mapping After the Postmodern Turn.
In: Symbolic Interaction, 26 (4), pp. 553–576. https://doi.org/10.1525/si.2003.26.4.553.
Czarnitzki, D.; Hünermund, P.; Moshgbar, N. (2020): Public procurement of innovation: evidence
from a German legislative reform. In: International Journal of Industrial Organization, 71, p.
102620.
Diercks, G.; Larsen, H.; Steward, F. (2019): Transformative innovation policy: Addressing variety in
an emerging policy paradigm. In: Research policy, 48 (4), pp. 880–894.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.028.
Edler, J. (2016): The impact of policy measures to stimulate private demand for innovation. In:
Edler, J.; Cunningham, P.; Gök, A.; Shapira, P. (Eds.): Handbook of innovation policy impact.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN: 1784711845, pp. 318–354.
Edler, J.; Cunningham, P.; Gök, A.; Shapira, P. (Eds.) (2016a): Handbook of innovation policy impact.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN: 1784711845.
Edler, J.; Georghiou, L. (2007): Public procurement and innovation—Resurrecting the demand side.
In: Research policy, 36 (7), pp. 949–963.
Edler, J.; Georghiou, L.; Yeow, J.; Uyarra, E. (2015): The meaning and limitations of public
procurement for innovation: A supplier’s experience. In: Edquist, C.: Vonortas, N.; Zabala-
Iturriagagoitia J.M.; Edler, J. (Eds.): (eds), Public Procurement for Innovation, ISBN: 978 1
78347 188 1. Public Procurement for Innovation. Edward Elgar. ISBN: 978 1 78347 188 1.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 21

Edler, J.; Yeow, J. (2016b): Connecting demand and supply: The role of intermediation in public
procurement of innovation. In: Research policy : policy, management and economic studies
of science, technology and innovation, 45 (2), pp. 414–426.
Edquist, C. (2019): Towards a holistic innovation policy: Can the Swedish National Innovation
Council (NIC) be a role model? In: Research policy, 48 (4), pp. 869–879.
Edquist, C.; Vonortas, N. S.; Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, J. M.; Edler, J. (2015): Public Procurement for
Innovation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. Available at
http://gbv.eblib.com/patron/FullRecord.aspx?p=1934347.
Edquist, C.; Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, J. M. (2012): Public Procurement for Innovation as mission-
oriented innovation policy. In: Research policy, 41 (10), pp. 1757–1769.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.04.022.
Edquist, C.; Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, J. M. (2020): Functional procurement for innovation, welfare,
and the environment. In: Science and Public Policy, 47 (5), pp. 595–603.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scaa046.
European Commission (Ed.) (2016): Buying Green! A handbook on green public procurement.
https://doi.org/10.2779/246106.
Falcone, P. M.; Lopolito, A.; Sica, E. (2017): Policy mixes towards sustainability transition in the
Italian biofuel sector: Dealing with alternative crisis scenarios. In: Energy research & social
science, 33, pp. 105–114.
Fan, R.; Chen, R.; Wang, Y.; Wang, D.; Chen, F. (2022): Simulating the impact of demand-side
policies on low-carbon technology diffusion: A demand-supply coevolutionary model. In:
Journal of Cleaner Production, 351, p. 131561.
Fisher, R.; Chicot, J.; Domini, A.; Polt, W.; Turk, A.; Unger, M.; Kuittinen, H.; Arrilucea, E.; van der Zee,
F.; Goetheer, A. (2018): Mission-oriented research and innovation: Inventory and
characterisation of initiatives. European Commission EC. ISBN: 9279857932.
Flanagan, K.; Uyarra, E.; Wanzenböck, I. (2022): Towards a problem-oriented regional industrial
policy: possibilities for public intervention in framing, valuation and market formation. In:
Regional Studies, pp. 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2021.2016680.
Frenkel, A.; Maital, S.; Leck, E.; Israel, E. (2015): Demand-driven innovation: An integrative systems-
based review of the literature. In: International Journal of Innovation and Technology
Management, 12 (02).
Geller, H.; Harrington, P.; Rosenfeld, A. H.; Tanishima, S.; Unander, F. (2006): Polices for increasing
energy efficiency: Thirty years of experience in OECD countries. In: Energy Policy, 34 (5), pp.
556–573.
Georghiou, L.; Edler, J.; Uyarra, E.; Yeow, J. (2014): Policy instruments for public procurement of
innovation: Choice, design and assessment. In: Technological forecasting & social change :
an international journal, 86 (2014), pp. 1–12.
Gillingham, K.; Newell, R.; Palmer, K. L. (2004): Retrospective examination of demand-side energy
efficiency policies. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Godin, B.; Lane, J. P. (2013): Pushes and pulls: Hi (S) tory of the demand pull model of innovation.
In: Science, Technology, & Human Values, 38 (5), pp. 621–654.
Grau, T.; Huo, M.; Neuhoff, K. (2012): Survey of photovoltaic industry and policy in Germany and
China. In: Energy Policy, 51, pp. 20–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.03.082.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 22

Green Purchasing Network Malaysia (2017): A Sampling of Successes in Green Public
Procurement. Case Studies of Green Public Procurement Implementation in Asia-Pacific
Countries. UNEP; KEITI; MEP. Available at
https://www.oneplanetnetwork.org/sites/default/files/case_studies_140317_web.pdf.
Grillitsch, M.; Hansen, T.; Coenen, L.; Miörner, J.; Moodysson, J. (2019): Innovation policy for
system-wide transformation: The case of strategic innovation programmes (SIPs) in Sweden.
In: Research policy, 48 (4), pp. 1048–1061. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.004.
Grin, J. (2016): Transition Studies: Basic Ideas and Analytical Approaches. In: Brauch, H. G.; Oswald
Spring, Ú.; Grin, J.; Scheffran, J. (Eds.): Handbook on Sustainability Transition and Sustainable
Peace. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 105–121. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-43884-9_4.
Guerzoni, M.; Raiteri, E. (2015): Demand-side vs. supply-side technology policies: Hidden
treatment and new empirical evidence on the policy mix. In: Research policy, 44 (3), pp.
726–747. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.10.009.
Gutiérrez-Goiria, J.; Amiano-Bonatxea, I. (2022): The role of public procurement in the framework
of the 2030 Agenda: the approach of institutions and civil society. In: Revista Internacional
de Comunicación y Desarrollo (RICD), 4 (16). https://doi.org/10.15304/ricd.4.16.8331.
Hansen, C. (2020): Waking the Trillion-Dollar Giant. Sustainable Public Procurement and the 2030
SDG Agenda. Available at
https://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/sites/default/files/SPP%20Article%20-
%20Waking%20the%20Giant%20(Carsten%20Hansen%202020)%20(Final)%2001%20Octob
er%202020.pdf.
Hansmeier, H.; Schiller, K.; Rogge, K. S. (2021): Towards methodological diversity in sustainability
transitions research? Comparing recent developments (2016-2019) with the past (before
2016). In: Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, 38, pp. 169–174.
Hommen, L.; Rolfstam, M. (2008): Public procurement and innovation: towards a taxonomy. In:
Journal of public procurement.
ICLEI (2022): AI4Cities | Project. Available at https://ai4cities.eu/about/project, accessed
29.09.2022.
IEA (Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme) (2022): Distribution of solar photovoltaic module
production worldwide in 2020, by country [Graph]. Statista, accessed 27.09.2022.
Inter-American Development Bank (2019): Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works
financed by the Inter-American Development. GN-2349-15. Washington D.C.
Jacobsson, S.; Bergek, A. (2011): Innovation system analyses and sustainability transitions:
Contributions and suggestions for research. In: Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions, 1 (1), pp. 41–57.
Kemp, R.; Schot, J.; Hoogma, R. (1998): Regime shifts to sustainability through processes of niche
formation: the approach of strategic niche management. In: Technology Analysis &
Strategic Management, 10 (2), pp. 175–198.
Kivimaa, P. (2014): Government-affiliated intermediary organisations as actors in system-level
transitions. In: Research policy, 43 (8), pp. 1370–1380.
Kivimaa, P.; Kern, F. (2016): Creative destruction or mere niche support? Innovation policy mixes
for sustainability transitions. In: Research policy, 45 (1), pp. 205–217.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 23

Kivimaa, P.; Virkamäki, V. (2014): Policy Mixes, Policy Interplay and Low Carbon Transitions: The
Case of Passenger Transport in Finland. In: Environmental Policy and Governance, 24 (1), pp.
28–41. https://doi.org/10.1002/eet.1629.
Knell, M. (2012): Demand driven innovation in Economic Thought. In: Demand, Innovation and
Policy: Underpinning Policy Trends with Academic Analysis.
Köhler, J.; Geels, F.; Kern, F.; Onsongo, E.; Wieczorek, A. (2017): A research agenda for the
Sustainability Transitions Research Network, STRN Working Group. STRN.
Köhler, J.; Geels, F. W.; Kern, F.; Markard, J.; Onsongo, E.; Wieczorek, A.; Alkemade, F.; Avelino, F.;
Bergek, A.; Boons, F.; Fünfschilling, L.; Hess, D.; Holtz, G.; Hyysalo, S.; Jenkins, K.; Kivimaa, P.;
Martiskainen, M.; McMeekin, A.; Mühlemeier, M. S.; Nykvist, B.; Pel, B.; Raven, R.; Rohracher,
H.; Sandén, B.; Schot, J.; Sovacool, B.; Turnheim, B.; Welch, D.; Wells, P. (2019): An agenda for
sustainability transitions research: State of the art and future directions. In: Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions, 31, pp. 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.01.004.
Larrue, P. (2021): The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies. A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges. Paris: OECD Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
Malerba, F.; Nelson, R.; Orsenigo, L.; Winter, S. (2007): Demand, innovation, and the dynamics of
market structure: The role of experimental users and diverse preferences. In: Journal of
evolutionary economics, 17 (4), pp. 371–399.
Mazzucato, M. (2018): Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities. In:
Industrial and Corporate Change, 27 (5), pp. 803–815.
Mazzucato, M.; Penna, C. C. R. (2016): Beyond market failures: The market creating and shaping
roles of state investment banks. In: Journal of Economic Policy Reform, 19 (4), pp. 305–326.
Meyer-Krahmer, F. (2002): Industrial Innovation and Sustainability: Conflicts and Coherence. In:
Archibugi, D.; Lundvall, B.-Å. (Eds.): The Globalizing Learning Economy. Oxford: Oxford
University PressOxford, pp. 177–194.
Miles, I. (2010): Mini Study 11 Demand-led innovation. Manchester: MIoIR- INNO-GRIPS
Intelligence and Policy Studies.
Miles, I.; Bleda, M.; Clark, J.; Edler, J.; Simmonds, P. (2009): The wider conditions for innovation in
the UK. How the he UK compares to leading countries. London: NESTA.
Milios, L. (2018): Advancing to a Circular Economy: three essential ingredients for a
comprehensive policy mix. In: Sustainability science, 13 (3), pp. 861–878.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-017-0502-9.
Molas-Gallart, J.; Boni Aristizábal, A.; Schot, J.; Giachi, S. (2020): A formative approach to the
evaluation of Transformative Innovation Policy. Utrecht Centre for Global Challenges,
Utrecht University.
Mowery, D. C.; Nelson, R. R.; Martin, B. R. (2010): Technology policy and global warming: Why new
policy models are needed (or why putting new wine in old bottles won’t work). In: Research
policy, 39 (8), pp. 1011–1023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2010.05.008.
Mowery, D. C.; Rosenberg, N. (1979): The influence of market demand upon innovation. A critical
review of some recent empirical studies. [S.l.]: [s.n.].
Neij, L. (1998): Evaluation of Swedish Market Transformation Programmes. Summer Study, Panel II.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 24

Neij, L. (2001): Methods of evaluating market transformation programmes: experience in Sweden.
In: Energy Policy, 29 (1), pp. 67–79.
Nemet, G. (2008): Demand-pull energy technology policies, diffusion and improvements in
California wind power. In: Foxen, T. J.; Köhler, J.; Oughton, C. (Eds.): Innovations for a Low
Carbon Economy. Economic, Institutional and Management Approaches. Cheltenham, UK
and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar, 2008. ISBN: 9781847203823, pp. 47–78.
Nemet, G. F. (2009): Demand-pull, technology-push, and government-led incentives for non-
incremental technical change. In: Research policy, 38 (5), pp. 700–709.
Ntsondé, J.; Aggeri, F. (2021): Stimulating innovation and creating new markets – The potential of
circular public procurement. In: Journal of Cleaner Production, 308, p. 127303.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127303.
Obwegeser, N.; Müller, S. D. (2018): Innovation and public procurement: Terminology, concepts,
and applications. In: Technovation, 74-75, pp. 1–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2018.02.015.
OECD (2011): Demand-side innovation policies. Paris: OECD. Available at
http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/Doc?id=10477821.
OECD (Ed.) (2015): Going Green. Best Practices for Sustainable Procurement. Available at
https://www.oecd.org/gov/ethics/Going_Green_Best_Practices_for_Sustainable_Procurement
.pdf.
OECD (2021a): Government at a glance.
OECD (2021b): Times of crisis and opportunity. Paris: OECD Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1787/25186167.
OECD (2023): Size of public procurement | |. Available at https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/sites/18dc0c2d-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/18dc0c2d-en,
accessed 21.04.2023.
Palm, J.; Backman, F. (2017): Public procurement of electric vehicles as a way to support a market:
examples from Sweden. In: International Journal of Electric and Hybrid Vehicles, 9 (3), p.
253. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJEHV.2017.087587.
Peñate-Valentín, M. C.; Del Sánchez-Carreira, M. C.; Pereira, Á. (2021): The promotion of innovative
service business models through public procurement. An analysis of Energy Service
Companies in Spain. In: Sustainable Production and Consumption, 27, pp. 1857–1868.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.04.028.
Penna, C. C. R.; Schot, J.; VElasco, D.; Molas-Gallart, J. (2022). The Formative Evaluation of Open-
Ended Transformative Missions: the Vinnova experience in the food system.
Polt, W.; Ploder, M.; Breitfuss, M.; Daimer, S.; Jackwerth, T.; Zielinski, A. (2021): Politikstile und
Politikinstrumente in der F&I-Politik. Studien zum deutschen Innovationssystem. Berlin.
Available at http://hdl.handle.net/10419/231475.
PricewaterhouseCoopers, S. a. E. (Ed.) (2009): Collection of statistical information on Green Public
Procurement in the EU. Report on data collection results. PwC Sustainability. Available at
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/gpp/pdf/statistical_information.pdf.
Purkus, A.; Hagemann, N.; Bedtke, N.; Gawel, E. (2018): Towards a sustainable innovation system
for the German wood-based bioeconomy: Implications for policy design. In: Journal of
Cleaner Production, 172, pp. 3955–3968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.04.146.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 25

Quitzow, R.; Walz, R.; Köhler, J.; Rennings, K. (2014): The concept of “lead markets” revisited:
Contribution to environmental innovation theory. In: Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions, 10, pp. 4–19.
Rainville, A. (2021): Stimulating a more Circular Economy through Public Procurement: Roles and
dynamics of intermediation. In: Research policy, 50 (4), p. 104193.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104193.
Rigby, J. (2016): The impact of pre-commercial procurement on innovation. In: Edler, J.;
Cunningham, P.; Gök, A.; Shapira, P. (Eds.): Handbook of Innovation Policy Impact.
Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781784711856.
Rogge, K. S.; Pfluger, B.; Geels, F. W. (2020): Transformative policy mixes in socio-technical
scenarios: The case of the low-carbon transition of the German electricity system (2010–
2050). In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 151, p. 119259.
Rogge, K. S.; Reichardt, K. (2016): Policy mixes for sustainability transitions: An extended concept
and framework for analysis. In: Research policy, 45 (8), pp. 1620–1635.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.04.004.
Rolfstam, M. (2006): Public Procurement and Formal Institutions as External Limiting Factors of
Design for Innovation. The Case of Innovative Procurement of Maritime Radio Technology.
Skørping, Denmark.
Rothwell, R. (1977): The characteristics of successful innovators and technically progressive firms
(with some comments on innovation research). In: R&D Management, 7 (3), pp. 191–206.
Rothwell, R. (1984): Technology-based small firms and regional innovation potential: the role of
public procurement. In: Journal of Public Policy, 4 (4), pp. 307–332.
Schot, J.; Kanger, L.; Verbong, G. (2016): The roles of users in shaping transitions to new energy
systems. In: Nature energy, 1 (5), pp. 1–7.
Schot, J.; Steinmueller, W. E. (2018): Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of
innovation and transformative change. In: Research policy, 47 (9), pp. 1554–1567.
Scordato, L.; Klitkou, A.; Tartiu, V. E.; Coenen, L. (2018): Policy mixes for the sustainability transition
of the pulp and paper industry in Sweden. In: Journal of Cleaner Production, 183, pp. 1216–
1227.
Shin, K.; Yeo, Y.; Lee, J.-D. (2020): Revitalizing the Concept of Public Procurement for Innovation
(PPI) from a Systemic Perspective: Objectives, Policy Types, and Impact Mechanisms. In:
Systemic Practice and Action Research, 33 (2), pp. 187–211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11213-
019-09488-7.
Soete, L.; Arundel, A. (1993): An integrated approach to european innovation and technology
diffusion policy(a Maastricht memorandum). In: Commission of the European Communities,
SPRINT Programme, Luxembourg (1993).
Sönnichsen, S. D.; Clement, J. (2020): Review of green and sustainable public procurement:
Towards circular public procurement. In: Journal of Cleaner Production, 245, p. 118901.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118901.
Suurs, R. A. A.; Hekkert, M. P.; Kieboom, S.; Smits, R. E. (2010): Understanding the formative stage
of technological innovation system development: The case of natural gas as an automotive
fuel. In: Energy Policy, 38 (1), pp. 419–431.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 79
Fraunhofer ISI | 26

UNEP (Ed.) (2021): Sustainable Public Procurement: How to Wake the Sleeping Giant. ntroducing
the United Nations Environment Programme’s Approach.
UNEP - UN Environment Programme (2022): Sustainable consumption and production policies.
Available at https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-
do/sustainable-consumption-and-production-policies, accessed 29.09.2022.
Uyarra, E. (2016): The impact of public procurement of innovation. In: : Handbook of innovation
policy impact. Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 355–381.
Uyarra, E.; Edler, J.; Garcia-Estevez, J.; Georghiou, L.; Yeow, J. (2014): Barriers to innovation through
public procurement: A supplier perspective. In: Technovation : the international journal of
technological innovation, entrepreneurship and technology management, 34 (10), pp. 631–
645.
Weber, K. M.; Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for
transformative change. In: Research policy, 41 (6), pp. 1037–1047.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015.
Weber, K. M.; Truffer, B. (2017): Moving innovation systems research to the next level: Towards an
integrative agenda. In: Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 33 (1), pp. 101–121.
Wesseling, J. H.; Edquist, C. (2018): Public procurement for innovation to help meet societal
challenges: a review and case study. In: Science and Public Policy, 45 (4), pp. 493–502.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy013.
Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, J. M. (2022): Fostering regional innovation, entrepreneurship and growth
through public procurement. In: Small Business Economics, 58 (2), pp. 1205–1222.
