
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 66
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, August 2020

Understanding Conceptual Impact of
Scientific Knowledge on Policy:
the Role of Policy-making Conditions

Jakob Edler1,2, Maria Karaulova1,2, Katharine Barker2

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
1 Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research, Breslauer Str. 48, 76139 Karlsruhe, Germany
2 Manchester Institute of Innovation Research, Alliance Manchester Business School, University of Man-
chester, Booth St West Manchester United Kingdom M15 6PB

Funding
This research is supported by the Research Council of Norway under the FORINNPOL Centre OSIRIS,
coordinated by the University of Oslo. The grant number is 256240.
https://www.sv.uio.no/tik/english/research/projects/osiris/

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I
Contents
Abstract ....................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction .......................................................................................................... 1
2 Previous research and its assumptions............................................................. 4
3 Theoretical foundations .................................................................................... 10
3.1 Reflexive/discursive institutionalism ................................................... 11
3.2 Three elements of institutions ............................................................ 14
4 Conceptual framework ...................................................................................... 16
4.1 The basic idea ................................................................................... 16
4.2 Intra-organisational conditions ........................................................... 18
4.3 Inter-organisational conditions ........................................................... 20
4.4 Individuals in organisations ................................................................ 22
4.5 Summary and operationalisation ....................................................... 24
5 Contributions and implications ........................................................................ 26
6 References ......................................................................................................... 30

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II Abstract
Figures
Figure 1: Policy user conditions for the impact of science - Simplified
framework ....................................................................................... 3
Figure 2: Institutional conditions influencing impact of scientific
knowledge on policy - Expanded framework ................................. 16
Tables
Table 1: Major academic conceptualisations of the relationship
between science and policy ............................................................ 6
Table 2: Operationalisation of the institutional conditions for the
impact of scientific knowledge on policy-making ........................... 25

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Abstract 1

Abstract
This paper presents a framework to understand the impact of scientific knowledge on
the policy-making process, focusing on the conceptual impact. We note the continuing
dissatisfaction with the quality and effects of science- policy interactions in both theory
and practice. We critique the current literature’s emphasis on the role and the activities
of scientists to generate policy impact, neglecting the conditions and roles of ‘user’ pol-
icy-making organisations. The framework offered in the paper addresses these cri-
tiques by developing an argument about the essential role of institutional ‘user side’
conditions for scientific knowledge to achieve impact. The framework is informed by the
reflexive institutionalist and the neo -institutionalist theoretical appr oaches. The main
contribution of the framework is that it unpicks the institutional conditions within policy-
making organisations that influence the uptake of scientific knowledge and provides an
operationalisation to analyse them . The wider relevance of t he paper is in moving the
focus from the activities of scientists and the incentive structure in scientific organisa-
tions to the policy user side.
1 Introduction
How can science have an impact on policy -making? This question has been with us
since the beginning of institutionalised public funding of research . The discussion
around this question has been extremely broad, with a variety of perspectives and ap-
proaches to conceptualise and measure impact of science (Matt et al. 2017; Bozeman
and Sarewitz 2011; C aplan 1979; Weiss 1982; Borgenschneider and Corbett 2010).
We would like to add to this debate by shifting the perspective and developing a con-
cept that focuses on the conditions on the side of the scientific knowledge user.
Our motivation emerges from four observations regarding the impact of science 1 on
policy-making.
First, despite a long history of looking at science – policy relationships and the use of
scientific expertise and evidence for policy -making, there still seems to be dissatisfac-
tion with the way scientists and scientific results actually inform policy -making, espe-
cially scientists from academia (Almeida and Báscolo 2006; Kenny et al., 2017).
Second, science, technology and innovation policies are increasingly formulated to
address global challenges or societal missions (Mazzucato 2018; European

1 When we talk of scientists we include – in the continental European tradition – social scien-
tists as well if not otherwise indicated.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction
Commission 2018) . F unding systems are being re- shaped to support scientific
knowledge production to tack le challenges (Weber and Rohracher 2012) . Scienc e
since the Second World W ar has always had an element of mission orientation. T he
last decade, at least in Europe, has seen a broadening of this approach in science
funding, often framed in the language of crisis, response urgency and severity of the
challenges (Boon and Edler 2018; Kuhlmann and Rip 2018; Kuhlmann and Rip 2014).
In consequence, the impact of science on policy or society more broadly, as one critical
dimension in challenge orientation, has come to the fore again as a major justification
of scientific activity.
Third, and as a consequence of this trend, there is an increasing demand for scientists
to produce knowledge that has impact (Kessler and Glasgow 2011; Brownson et al.
2006). Many research councils, such as the UK Research and Innovat ion Council, the
US National Science Foundation, or the European Framework Programmes, now ask
for explicit impact pathways and engagement strategies in fundi ng applications. In per-
formance-based funding systems, such as the UK Research Excellence Framewor k,
the explicit demonstration of impact is becoming increasingly important for the assess-
ment of organisations (Hicks 2012) , and for the scientists working within them
(Wilkinson 2017). This puts the onus of generating impact on the scientists : to choose
topics and create engagement strategies that increase the likelihood of impact.
Lastly, in the policy-making space, there is a persistence of the idea that objective evi-
dence can be produced on the basis of rigorous approaches, translated into layman
language, and used by the policy -making system co-determining decisions on policy
(Parsons 2002; Sanderson 2009; Van Nes 2011; Mthiyane and Breckon 2020) . In this
reasoning, the more convincing the evidence, and the more convincing the translation,
the more likely the scientific evidence will have effect on the policy-making process. In
this perspective, the nature of the evidence determines its impact on policy-making.
Against this background, there is a need for a change of perspective, to balance our
understanding of the ways in which science generates policy impact. To this end, our
paper develops a new conceptual framework that allows us to shift the perspective
towards the users of science in the policy -making arena ( Figure 1). This framework
stipulates that the way policy ‘user’ organisations set up the search for scientific
knowledge, its uptake and use co-determines the impact of this knowledge as much as
the circumstances and the context in which it was produced, and the effort s scientists
made to ensure its impact. In particular, the framework conceptualises the conditions
that drive and otherwise influence the ability and willingness of policy users to access
and use scientific research. This process is very rarely linear. It typically involves co-
development and alignment between knowledge users and producers through formal

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Introduction 3

and informal networks, funding and accountability tools and learning from previous
successful examples of impactful research (Donovan 2011; Spaapen and van Drooge
2011; Penfield et al. 2013).
Figure 1: Policy user conditions for the impact of science - Simplified frame-
work

Source: own compilation
In this paper, we focus on the relationship between scientific knowledge and a particu-
lar kind of impact: conceptual impact . We can speak of conceptual impact if we ob-
serve a change in the normative and cognitive understanding of policy problems, of
causalities underlying those problems and of possible solutions to those problems in
the minds of policy makers and politicians (Amara et al. 2004). This focus is deliberate;
we do not seek to present yet another policy change framework that explains the out-
come of power and interest driven policy-making processes and the relative role scien-
tific evidence can play. This final step towards actual substantive policy change is regu-
larly reviewed in political science and STS contributions (Sabatier 1988; Bennett and
Howlett 1992; Smith 2013a; Jäger and Ferguson 1991) . The framework presented in
this paper is a tool that allows to zoom in on one critical and largely overlooked element
of the policy-making process: the conditions and processes for cognitive and normative
changes within policy-making organisations. It offers tools to explain how scientific evi-
dence contributes to those changes.
Scientific knowledge, encompassing scientific evidence and (scientific) ideas, is the
primary subject of interest of the framework. Science is a specific knowledge produc-
tion enterprise associated with particular goals and norms (Merton 1973) : the scientific
research process, its certification and publication conventions, scientific institutions and
organisations. The term ‘scientific evidence’ is different from, for example, ‘research
evidence’, which is a related, but broader concept. The term ‘evidence’ is broader still
and signifies any facts or information used to make decisions (Nutley et al. 2003) . In
this article, we note that various terms, e.g. ‘knowledge translation’, are meant to signi-
fy the range of data and sources that are broader than scientific research (Dobrow et
al. 2004) , but are typically used to analyse the delivery of scientific research results

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 Previous research and its assumptions
from academia t o policy. In the remainder of the paper, ‘scientific knowledge’ will be
our preferred concept.
We mobilise and combine political science and sociological neo- institutional approach-
es to develop the conceptual framework . More concretely, we utilise reflexive (Edler
2003) or discursive (Schmidt 2002; 2008; 2010; 2012) institutionalism. These concep-
tualise policy change as primarily ideational change, a result of actors deliberating
about, and reflecting on, their ideas about issue framing, policy problems and policy
options. This is not to say that this approach neglects the importance of power, politics,
or polity. However, its epistemological and ontological stance enables a focus on
knowledge-driven cognitive and normative dynamics. We combine this with a broad
organisational institutionalist approach (Scott 2014) that allows us to operationalise the
conditions in organisations that influence the ideational processing.
The relationship between science and policy is an established topic that is well re-
searched in multiple disciplines. Our specific framework is grounded in a particular in-
stitutional approach, but also draws on many complementary insights. Therefore in
Section 2 we offer a targeted overview of the key strands in the literature about the
impact (and use) of science in policy -making. Section 3 then reviews the reflexive (dis-
cursive) institutional theory and lays the foundation of the framework. Section 4 re-
introduces the framework and its components . Section 5 discusses the merits of the
framework and concludes the paper.
2 Previous research and its assumptions
Interest in the relationship between science and policy goes back several decades
(Caplan 1979; Weiss; 1977; 1979 ; 1980) and predates the surge of attention on the
societal impact of scientific research brought about by the considerations of evi dence-
based policy. To understand our specific conceptual take on the issue, it is valuable to
briefly characterise the key approaches and their assumptions. We review five key bod-
ies of literature in this section: evidence- based policy, research utilization, two commu-
nities, literature on policy development, and research impact assessment. Not all of
these are coherent research strands, and some of the domains (e.g. policy develop-
ment or research impact assessment) are very broad and have been subject of dedi-
cated reviews (Bornmann 2013; Smith 2013a). In the following, we mostly note distinc-
tive sets of assumptions within each domain. We do so by using two structuring devic-
es: common theoretical roots and the logic used to frame the issue (see Table 1). The
review demonstrates the emphases on the various parts of impact processes across
the bodies of literature, and also indicates overlapping findings with complementary

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Previous research and its assumptions 5

insights. Taking a note of these findings allows us to position the novel framework pre-
sented in Section 4.
In Table 1, logics represent specific ways in which challenges are understood and solu-
tions are offered in the different approaches. Studies that employ a functional logic are
primarily concerned with whether science is used in the policy -making process, how it
is used (e.g. instrumentally, conceptually, symbolically), and which factors affect the
type of use. Impact follows naturally from use. Studies that employ interactional logic
instead prioritise different forms of exchanges on science-policy interfaces. Here, some
authors leave the end use or impact of science outside their scope altogether, while
others argue that due to the limitations in identifying and measuring i mpact, scholarly
attention should instead focus on efforts scientists make to engage with policymakers
(Kogan et al. 2006; de Goede et al. 2012).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Previous research and its assumptions
Table 1: Major academic conceptualisations of the relationship between science and policy
Approach Logic Assumptions Representative Studies
Evidence-based
policy Functional
Scientific research can help address political questions and issues.
Clear instructions, mechanisms of collection and analysis lead to
better policy-making. Promotes experimental, quantifiable data for
policy collected and aggregated using a number of particular tech-
niques (e.g. RCTs, systematic reviews). Mixed academic-
consultancy-government contributions to the knowledge base.
Nutley et al. (2007)
Haynes et al. (2012)
Head (2008)
Cairney (2016)
Research
ctilization Functional
Scientific research can help address political questions and issues.
Seeks to understand the processes and circumstances of research
use by policy officials, usually focusing on bureaucracies and the
‘middle level’ of policy-making (e.g. agencies), paying most attention
to factors, enablers and barriers, routine activities of policy officials.
Knowledge base heavily relies on utilisation surveys.
Landry et al. (2003)
Amara et al. (2004)
Hanney et al. (2003)
Elliott and Popay (2000)
Two Communities Interactional
Scientific research can help address political questions and issues.
Science and policy communities are conceptualised as separate
entities and the main problem is seen in bridging the gap between
them. Better interaction, awareness of each other’s values, practices
and priorities, and better information exchange can help improve the
use of science. Diverse approaches emphasise networks, sustained
linkages, co-creation.
Caplan (1979)
Weiss (1979)
Glasgow and Emmons (2007)
Gagliardi et al. (2016)
Literature on policy
development Mostly Interactional
Good policies are developed as a result of careful consideration and
deliberation of evidence and normative arguments. Scientific re-
search is valuable, but not primary reason for developing new poli-
cies. Encompasses many theoretical stances that disagree about the
extent to which new information (including research) can influence
policy change.
Sabatier (1988; 1993)
McRight and Dunlap (2010)
Kogut and Macpherson (2011)
Research impact
assessment
Interactional and Func-
tional
Publicly funded scientific research should produce societally relevant
and impactful results, including policy impact. Scientists and universi-
ties should demonstrate their successes in doing so. Internal de-
bates about attribution. Recommendations for scientists to increase
the chances of policy uptake. Communicative approach emphasises
networks, productive interactions, sustained linkages, co-creation.
Bornmann (2013)
Penfield et al. (2013)
D’Este et al. (2018)
Source: own compilation

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Previous research and its assumptions 7

The differentiation between the two logics is not strict and relates more to the emphasis
they give to certain parts of the impact process. For example, studies that discuss co -
creation (and co- production) can be conducted f ollowing both logics. Co -creation sur-
faced in recent years as the important approach to produce research with societally
relevant outcomes (Donovan 2011). Studies following the functional logic pay attention
to how co- creation generates scientific knowledg e that is tailored to policy needs and
thus increases the likelihood of being used by policymakers (Lemos and Morehouse,
2005). Studies following interactional logic stress the importance of knowledge ex-
changes between scientists and policymakers during the co -creation process regard-
less of whether these interactions result in immediate uses of science in policy settings
(Spaapen and van Drooge 2011; Pohl 2008).
A major body of literature, termed here evidence-based policy, focuses on the nature of
good evidence for policy -making. Conducted mostly within the functional logic, these
studies originate from the renewed academic interest in the topic after the UK New
Labour’s initiative to employ evidence-based policy-making principles in 1997. This has
evolved over the years; its latest, more nuanced, iteration, labelled ‘evidence-informed
policy-making’, re-shapes the desired relationship between evidence and policy and
clarifies the need for ‘research evidence’ (Head 2016). Within the academic domain,
earlier contributions believed that as long as robust, reliable evidence is available to
policymakers at the right time, good policies can be developed (Goldman et al. 2001).
They received persistent criticism from later contributions that stress the many ways in
which evidence- based policy channels can be influenced by political interests
(Strassheim and Kettunen 2014).
The evidence- based policy literature focuses heavily on what constitutes good (re-
search-informed) evidence, how it can be produced and what make s it credible
(Grimshaw et al. 2012; Perrier et al. 2011; Green and Glasgow 2006; Brownson and
Jones 2009; Sanderson 2002). The popularity of a very limited number of specific
methods, such as randomised control trials, is a major point of contention (Haynes et
al. 2012). A lot of attention is dedicated to developing ways to aggregate and synthe-
sise evidence (Dobbins et al. 2004; Humphries et al. 2014). Among these, research
repositories and databases are the latest solution coming in focus (Lawrence et al.
2017).
Research utilization studies also follow the functional logic, but focus more on policy-
makers’ ability to search for, understand and use (research) evidence. This literature
often considers the relative value of scientific evidence alongside other types of re-
search evidence, such as that produced by think -tanks and consultancies. It differenti-
ates different types of knowledge, including codified and non- codified outputs, and

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 Previous research and its assumptions
types of research use by policymakers, e.g. instrumental, symbolic, conceptual (Amara
et al. 2004). Empirically, utilization scholars have focused on middle- level bureaucratic
policy organisations and paid some attention to the role of organisational and institu-
tional factors, such as the existence of knowledge brokering roles ( Lomas 2007; Crona
and Parker 2011), organisational culture (Belkhodja 2014), and routines (Jbilou et al.
2007).
Studies conducted within the interactional logic see the effective solution to ensure the
impact of science on policy as setting up appropriate knowledge exchange channels
between these ‘two communities’. The metaphor was first suggested by Caplan (1979)
who pointed at cultural gaps between scientists and policymakers. It was criticised as
inaccurate by many subsequent contributors who showed that boundaries between the
‘two communities’ are at best blurry, or the separation may not exist at all (e.g. Bartley
1992). However, both the notion of, and the empirical distinction between, ‘scientists’
and ‘policymakers’ persist in recent literature (Gagliardi et al. 2016). The current con-
sensus about bridging the research/policy gap stresses the importance of sustained
exchanges and interactions (Sarkki 2017; Broström and McKelvey 2017;
Weichselgartner and Kasperson 2010; Armstrong et al. 2013). Using ne tworks and
linkages, the two communities can develop shared values and understanding, ex-
change evidence, co-produce knowledge, and facilitate long-term ‘knowledge creep’ of
science-based ideas into political debates (Weiss 1980, Lemos and Morehouse 2005).
There appears to be widespread support in the literature reviewed so far of the techno-
cratic assumption that scientific research is particularly valuable for good policy-making
compared to other types of information and therefore the uptake of science in policy
should be encouraged and supported. Political scientists do not always agree; they
stress divisions among scientists who can feed evidence to different sides of political
debates (McCright and Dunlap 2010; van der Sluijs et al. 1998; Smith 2013b). While
doing so, some scientists may advocate certain policy instruments and even disregard
evidence that contradicts their opinions (Pielke 2004; Pielke 2007).
We group such contributions under the umbrella of policy development literature. They
analyse various aspects of the political deliberation process, such as the role of differ-
ent types of arguments backed by different actors (Sabatier 1988), the role of individu-
als, such as policy entrepreneurs (Edler and James 2015), and the ability /inability of
the entire policy system for change (Cerny 1990). Scientific research can play a role in
the development of new policies, which is often the empirical interest of this literature,
but it is not assumed to be more valuable than other arguments or evidence (Hall 1993;
Kingdon 1984; Beland 2005). Within this corpus of literature, the ideational stream
forms the basis of the conceptual development of this paper and is reviewed in detail in

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Previous research and its assumptions 9

Section 3. This approach positions scientific knowledge as one of the sources of ideas
that underpin policy decisions. It focuses on the deliberation processes that lead to
certain policy outcomes.
The research impact assessment literature, as noted in the introduction, analyses con-
ditions, incentives and activities of scientists to generate impact of their research. Alt-
hough the studies in this stream typically theorise the impact of science generally,
some authors advocate more nuance, for example to recognise different types of im-
pact pathways in different disciplines and societal areas, including policy (Douthwaite
et al. 2003). This body of literature is rarely included in science- policy reviews. Howev-
er, as its focus is mainly on scientific knowledge produced in academic settings (as
opposed to ‘research’ or ‘evidence’) it offers important insights about the knowledge
production side of the impact process. Most important in this perspective is the crucial
role of incenti ves and institutional conditions for scientists to engage with society
(Perkmann and Walsh 2008).
Functional-based impact assessment research typically proposes frameworks that
build causal attribution links between scientific research results and their impact (Reale
et al. 2018), while interaction- based studies criticise this excessive focus on discrete
research outputs, because they downplay the potential of science to influence society
conceptually and over the long term (Molas -Gallart and Tang 2011; Donovan 2011).
These are linked to the systemic issue of ignoring the less -observable impacts in some
topics and disciplines during research evaluations (Spaapen and van Drooge, 2011 ;
Donovan and Gulbrandsen 2018). As scientists have limited ability to influence the im-
pact of their research, these studies argue, their efforts to establish and maintain link-
ages with the potential ‘users’ of their research should be the focus of evaluations, not
the evidence of its impacts.
The review so far illustrates an impo rtant discrepancy in understandings about how
science is used in policy and how it generates impact. Instances of use are discrete
and short-term. They are available for empirical investigations, and there are abundant
examples from the literatures on policy development, research utilization and evidence-
based policy about how various actors use knowledge. Impact, on the other hand, re-
fers to longer-term lasting changes that occur as a result of individual instances of re-
search use over time. As these are harder to study and go beyond individual policy
outputs, there is less knowledge about how scientific knowledge can generate lasting
impact on policy. Actual impact is harder to demonstrate than use of science.
Additionally, we note a recurring tension in the debates. Some studies emphasise ob-
servable instances of scientific research use. Others stress that impact is not always

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 Theoretical foundations
observable or identifiable. Observable instances of science use can be consistently
reliably measured. In many instances, it is possible to build a causal attribution link with
long-term impact. Critics of this approach stress that science may influence policy and
leave no observable evidence behind (Contandriopoulos et al. 2010; Rudd 2011). The
conceptual use of science is at the centre of this tension, because changing one’s mind
about an issue does not always lead to concrete action. Moreover, conceptual impact
of science is often linked to long-term policy change, potentially resulting in changes on
a larger scale than individual observable instances of use (Weible et al. 2010; Albaek
1995).
Patterns of science use differ across domains. Health research, for example, has a
strong evidence- based practice mandate (Hanney and González -Block 2009), with
robust records of instrumental use of scientific results, while the impact of arts and hu-
manities research tends to be mostly conceptual (Hazelkorn et al. 2016; Hicks and
Holbrook 2020). Research utilization studies have paid some attention to organisational
characteristics, but only within a narrow understanding of science use. We add to this
perspective by focusing on the institutional conditions that make the uptake of scientific
knowledge in policy organisations more or less likely.
We argue that in-depth analyses of policy organisations’ institutional and organisational
conditions allows for a novel and useful conceptualisation of the missing link in our un-
derstanding of how scientific knowledge can achieve lasting impact on policy -making.
We achieve this by drawing on reflexive institutionalism, an ideational strand of policy
development research, combined with organisational institutionalist theory. These two
constitute the theoretical foundations of the conceptual framework this paper develops .
We review them next. To develop the conceptualisation, we mobilise insights from all
five strands of literature discussed so far.
3 Theoretical foundations
We now turn to a political science approach that allows us to capture and operational-
ise the key dim ensions influencing the process through which scientific knowledge
generates impact on policy-making. The reflexive (Edler 2003) or discursive institution-
alist tradition (Schmidt 2002; 2008; 2010; 2012) offers an analytical lens to understand
why and how new cognitive and sometimes normative elements (ideas embedded in
scientific research) influence thinking and acting in policy systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Theoretical foundations 11

3.1 Reflexive/discursive institutionalism
In traditional neo -institutional analysis, change is thought to be brought about t hrough
rational calculation in given incentive structures and fixed preferences (rational choice
institutionalism), changes of contextual settings over time in within historical paths (his-
torical institutionalism) or through evolutionary change in all -encompassing social
norms (sociological institutionalism). Those three institutionalist approaches build upon
specific ontological understandings of what determines change and can be applied to
analyse particular empirical cases. However, they all neglect a major underlying prop-
erty of decision making, which is the individual and organisational sense -making. This
refers to the gathering of credible information and data and theoretical concepts to
make sense of that data and information.
A fourth strand of neo -institutionalism has its starting point here. It asserts that what
actors define as problems, what they consider to be possible solutions and what they
define as their interest s is open to change. Thus, change comes about as a result of
cognitive processes based on reflection on cognitive (or causal) and normative ideas
(Cox and Béland 2013). Ideas can change interest perception, alter existing institution-
al paths and overcome boundaries set by pervasive social norms. Beliefs in terms of
policy-making can " provide the recipes, guidelines, and maps for political action and
serve to justify policies and programs by speaking to their interest -based logic and ne-
cessity" (Schmidt 2008, p. 306).
The ideational approach in political science is situated in a broader movement of idea-
tional approaches in social sciences that has a strong root in a constructivist paradigm
(for an overview see Béland and Cox 2010). In political science, there has been a
range of scholars focussing on the role of ideas and argumentation for understanding
the policy process (Blyth 1997; Fischer and Gottweis 2012; Anderson 2008; Finlayson
2004; Seeleib‐Kaiser et al. 2007). Across those approaches, the authors agree that
there are different types of ideas and they have different influence on policy -making
(Béland 2005). The most prominent and pervasive - and most appropriate one for our
purpose - is the distinction in three levels of ideas: ideas on the nature of a problem,
ideas on the nature of the solution and ideas that shape the overall ‘public philosophy’
(Heclo 1986) or "Zeitgeist", i.e. the understanding of the public about the very role of
government vis-a-vis certain issues (Mehta 2010).
Vivien Schmidt el aborated the ideational institutional approach and coined the term
‘discursive institutionalism’. We mobilise this approach in particular because it empha-
sises the importance of both the substantive content of ideas (e.g. scientific evidence)
and the inter active process (Schmidt 2017, p. 5) for the influence of ideas on policy

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 Theoretical foundations
change (Schmidt 2008, p. 303). In doing so, she enables us to shed light on the ways
in which the substance of ideas as well as the interaction with which they are generat-
ed and transformed in the deliberation and policy -making process make an impact up-
on the policy-making organisations and individuals.
Important for our context is Schmidt`s distinction between coordinative and communi-
cative discourse. Both provide different venues for scientific ideas to be transported,
transformed and absorbed (Schmidt 2008). The coordinative discourse unfolds within
the policy-making system to develop policy solutions in the policy space in order to
establish a necessary level of policy consensus. Participants in that discourse are all
those actors that are involved in the creation, elaboration and justification of policy ide-
as. This discourse explicitly involve s technical experts and is shaped by epistemic
communities (Haas 2009) arranged around a shared body of knowledge and tech-
niques and spanning organisational boundaries. As these communities adhere to cer-
tain basic epistemological and ontological truths , they influence the likelihood with
which new ideas are transmitted and accepted. 2 Epistemic communities are cross -
organisational, linking academia, think tanks and policy-making bodies. Yet there may
nevertheless be a need for ideational brokerage (Parsons 2002, p.174). Epistemic
communities can support ‘advocacy coalitions’ (Sabatier 1988), which combine, delib-
erately, material interest and causal and normative beliefs in their attempt to pro -
actively influence policy decisions.
The communicative discourse builds a discursive connection between the political
sphere and the general public . It serves to legitimise political decisions or to trigger
policy change through public pressure. Here, the formal institutional context, the polity,
as well as the political culture, are important intervening factors. The two discourses
interact in many ways. The technical discourse fed by scientific arguments connects
with the public narrative - and vice versa. The power of the epistemic community within
the coordinative discourse may add legitimacy when engaging with the general public
(Edler 2003). Conversely, the comm unicative discourse may exert normative power
against which cognitive beliefs in the coordinative discourse cannot persist (see also
Schmidt 2002).

2 As Haas developed this model in the cont ext of international organisations and power poli-
tics, he focused strongly on the agency of those epistemic communities and their interest to
promote certain kinds of ideas. We can abstract from this qualification here, as the basic
proposition, the cross-organisational epistemic community as a transmission belt for (scien-
tific) ideas remains an important element of a framework on the influence of scientific ideas
on policy-making

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Theoretical foundations 13

Discursive institutionalism offers an entry point to understand the existing - and
changeable - institutional conditions in policy organisations that interact with science,
absorb and transform scientific research. This is done by taking into account the ability
of actors to make sense of ideational content ( in particular in coordinative disc ourses).
Organisational systems of meaning and understanding – labelled background
knowledge – act as an ideational filter and an interpretative device. Organisations (and
individuals within them) exercise their background ideational abilit ies when they en-
counter new (scientific) ideas . These background ideational abilities influence the ex-
tent to which the ideas can exert conceptual influence within policy-making organisa-
tions (Schmidt 2008). Therefore, the systems of meaning collectively maintained by
agents significantly influence the conceptual impact of new ideas, including scientific
knowledge. This part of discursive institutionalist theorising has not been developed
further to interrogate the extent and ways in which the institutional context can act as
an intervening variable for the impact of (scientific) ideas on policy.
In sum, for our framework to conceptualise the meaning of scientific knowledge for pol-
icy-making, we can conclude that
1. We mobilise the established approaches to understand policy change as a result
of ideational processes,
2. Ideas must be distinguished on three levels (broader "Zeitgeist", problem defini-
tion, solution space), each with their own specific meaning for policy change,
3. We need to understand the origin of ideas as well as the ways in which they un-
fold in the discourse in order to understand their conceptual effects in and be-
tween policy-making organisations,
4. We can distinguish different kinds of ideational discourses with their own logics,
5. We need to take into consideration the (pre-)existing and co-evolving institutional
and ideational conditions in policy -making organisations to understand how ex-
ternal ideas exert influence on them.
We have outlined these principle tenets of ideational, discursive institutionalism to con-
ceptualise the meaning of ideas for policy-making. We now turn to what we see as a
major gap even in this approach. The elaboration of the background ideational abilities
are far too limited to understand what is in the core of our interest : the institutional con-
ditions within policy-making organisations for participants in the ideational discourse, as
recipients of ideas and as instigators of idea creation for their own use. In the following
section we turn to a framework for those conditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 Theoretical foundations
3.2 Three elements of institutions
A policy organisation’s background ideational abilities can be analytically accessed by
distinguishing three elements of institutions: regulative, socio- normative and cognitive,
as suggested by Richard Scott (2014) . They encompass both structures and process-
es, which can be explicit or implicit. They emerge as a result of sustained social inter-
actions, are interdependent and interwoven in practice (Edelman 1992). The three el-
ements of institutions can help us to operationalise the organisational dimension of
policy actors’ engagement with different types of scientific knowledge.
Regulative institutional elements are constituted by formalised instructions that influ-
ence human behaviour via a system of sanctions and rewards. These can be legal pre-
scriptions or a set of formally set rules. In organisations, regulative elements encom-
pass formal authority structure, incentives, bonuses, promotion, and also penalties and
fines. Within the policy-making space, formal and legal processes of policy develop-
ment rest on the regulative pillar , which in the context of our interest could manifest
itself, for example, in instructions to use the best available evidence and disclose the
evidence base of a policy to the public.
Normative institutional elements reflect shared expectations and social obligations re-
garding the behaviour in certain circumstances. Encompassing values and roles, n or-
mative elements emphasise the processes through which actors interpret social con-
text in order to take an ‘appropriate’ course of action that leads to achieving their goals
(March and Olsen 2011). These common frames of reference allow the actors to navi-
gate social life by anticipating the behaviour of others. In the context of our specific
interest, normative processes would dictate the extent to which policymakers expect to
draw on scientific research in debates about the issues, and the notions about w hich
research is seen as robust or reliable.
Cognitive institutional elements encompass assumptions, meanings attached to social
action, symbols, identities, causal connections, and scripts. They are taken for granted,
are rarely contested and are sometim es not even rationalised. They all make up the
‘natural order’ in which the actors operate , and its ‘constitutive rules’ (Searle 1969),
creating shared frames of meaning in social life. Structural isomorphism is one of the
key examples of the cognitive ins titutional processes, as people expect to see ele-
ments that are ‘normal’ when they interact with various organisations (Scott 2014). In
the policy-making space, cognitive proximity to certain domains of knowledge enable
easier diffusion of scientific resea rch from these domains into policy. For example, the
institutional logics of quantification and the economic style of reasoning pervasive in
many policy spaces are among the key reasons of why economics research might be

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Theoretical foundations 15

one of the most policy impactful social sciences (Espeland and Stevens 2008;
Hirschman and Berman 2014).
We can now integrate the theoretical foundations. Discursive institutionalism offers a
conceptualisation of the policy development process as an ideational deliberation be-
tween the actors engaged in the coordinative discourse (Schmidt 2008). The mecha-
nisms through which the actors develop and/or change their ideas about the nature of
the problem, the solution space and the overall role of governance are explained
through the notion of background ideational ability. To this we add that policy actors –
both individual and collective – operate in organisational environments and are embed-
ded in various institutional processes. These directly affect actors’ background idea-
tional abilities and influence their ability and willingness to engage with new ideas, in-
cluding ideas embedded in scientific research.
For both Scott and Schmidt, depth is an important dimension of institutionalisation be-
cause it explains the extent to which ideas are malleable. Schmidt uses Sabatier’s
(1993) concept of the policy ‘deep core’ t o explain the difference between often un-
questioned public philosophies and programmatic, debatable, policy options. More rad-
ical ideational scholars represent institutions as persisting, ‘sedimented’ ideas that are
collectively shared and reproduced by the actors inhabiting them (Eleveld 2016). The
institutional elements approach can explain how this ‘sedimentation’ happens in organ-
isations, for example, using the concept of legitimisation (Cashmore and Wejs 2014;
Deephouse et al. 2017). Regulative, normat ive and cognitive legitimacy mechanisms
influence the way ideas are observed, filtered and made sense of by the actors em-
bedded in institutionalised organisational processes. Some of these ideas are consid-
ered credible, while others do not pass institutional filters as easily.
These conceptualisations pave the way for operationalising the process through which
policy actors are influenced by ideas embedded in scientific research. For example,
scientific knowledge may be carried by one or several institutional elements, e.g. by the
regulative pillar requiring the use of evidence in policy -making and by the cognitive
pillar in the case where policymakers have academic backgrounds and value science.
In that case, the two institutional elements would reinforce each other and influence the
policymaker’s background ideational ability to interact with scientific research. Such
situations generate favourable conditions for the conceptual impact of science. In the
following, we return to our conceptual framework to demonstrate how it captures such
dynamics in a systematic way.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 Conceptual framework
4 Conceptual framework
4.1 The basic idea
In this section we propose and explain the conceptual framework of how institutional
conditions in policy ‘user’ organisations influence conceptual dimensions of policy. The
framework consists of three major components: the properties of scientific knowledge,
the organisational and institutional conditions, and the various types of impact that can
be generated. Th ese components mutually influence one another ( Figure 2). The
framework is informed by the discursive institutionalist research that emphasises the
role of ideas in policy -making (Section 3.1) and the organisational institutionalist re-
search that theorises about various institutional elements that affect knowledge trans-
fer, acquisition, and absorption (Section 3.2).
Figure 2: Institutional conditions influencing impact of scientific knowledge on
policy - Expanded framework

Source: own compilation
Component one, scientific knowledge, encompasses both research results and under-
lying scientific ideas, either of which may find use in policy -making. Both the character-
istics of scientific knowledge and the pathways through which it reaches policymakers
influence its upta ke. For example, non- codified knowledge transfer, e.g. via personal
communication, was found to be more likely to influence policymakers conceptually
(Molas-Gallart and Tang 2011). Other important characteristics of scientific knowledge
are the type and reputation of the author and organisation that produced research
(Olmos-Peñuela et al. 2014); whether there is contestation or consensus in the scien-

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Conceptual framework 17

tific community (Shackley and Wynne 1996; Upham and Dendler 2015); and the social
context surrounding the res earch process (Kessler and Glasgow 2011; Stirling 2007).
In the following, we will leave these aspects largely outside of this paper's scope, in line
with the focus on the user side conditions.
Component three, the impact of science, draws on the established typology that divides
impacts of science into those affecting cognition (conceptual), those that aid decision
making (instrumental) and those that are selected to support pre- existing opinions
(symbolic) (Pelz 1978; in Astley and Zammuto 1992). Conceptual impact of science is
most generally understood as the process that enlightens decision makers, sensitises
them to issues, helps to identify policy problems (Weiss 1979). Some studies see con-
ceptual impact only as a passive long -term process that indirectly promotes general
enlightenment (Beyer 1997; Weible et al. 2010). However, conceptual impact also oc-
curs if policymakers change the way they frame the issue, or their thinking about cau-
salities and solutions pertaining to it (Estabrooks 1999). Although we focus on concep-
tual impact in this paper, we recognise the complex relationships between the different
types. Even if conceptual impact takes place, it may or may not result in the instrumen-
tal use of science in policy action. Therefore, we do not focus the attention on the out-
comes of policy -making processes, which are influenced by many factors beyond the
ones considered in this paper (Hamlett and Cobb 2006; Oliver et al. 2014; Smith
2013a). Instead, we bring together the literature that theorises the conceptual influence
of science on policy-making, regardless of the final policy outcomes.
The main contribution of this framework is the focus on the second component, the
institutional conditions of policy ‘user’ organisations that influence the proces s through
which scientific knowledge achieves impact on policy. We ascribe importance to both
the conditions within policy organisations, termed ‘intra-organisational conditions’, and
the broader conditions within the organisational fields they are embedded in, termed
‘inter-organisational conditions’. The latter are essential to understand the flow and co -
development of scientific knowledge between organisations. The framework also rec-
ognises the characteristics of individuals as ‘thinking’ and sense-making agents capa-
ble of reflecting about new ideas and evidence. We assert that individual and institu-
tional conditions influence the background ideational ability of scientific knowledge us-
ers to meaningfully interact with and be conceptually influenced by sc ientific research.
The conditions thus determine the l ikelihood and the type of impact to occur , without
the impact pathway being linear. On the next pages, we substantiate and further qualify
the organisational components of the framework.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 Conceptual framework
4.2 Intra-organisational conditions
Intra-organisational conditions encompass institutional structures and processes within
policy user organisations . Elements, such as guidelines , values, management struc-
tures and practices of knowledge acquisition are important to understand the ways in
which various types of scientific knowledge affect policies developed by the organisa-
tion. The meaning of these conditions can usefully be characterised along the three
institutional elements as follows.
Regulative institutional conditions in our framework describe the formal instruction for
the use of research in policy -making. They encompass formally defined research units
and roles within the policy organisation; formally established research communication
channels; accountability for the extent and type of research used in policy develop-
ment; and the research resources available in the organisation. Setting up a formal
instruction to use research (or evidence) reinforced by a monitoring and incentives sys-
tem is a powerful push to change behaviour of policy organisations (Nutley et al. 2007).
The capacity to support engagement with research by allocating resources, setting up
infrastructure and creating dedicated staff roles is widely recognised as the foundation-
al condition for effective use of science in policy (Makkar et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2017;
Olmos-Peñuela et al. 2014).
Scientific research will be more likely to find use and generate impact on policy if the
mechanisms for its use are clearly outlined (Armstrong et al. 2013). Organisations that
formally define the roles and units responsible for research utilisation, such as in-house
analytical units, knowledge brokers or the position of a Chief Scientific Adviser can
work more effectively with research than the ones that do not have such formal set-ups
(Topp et al. 2018; Belkhodja 2014). The use of scientific research is further supported if
internal teams have access to relevant research repositories . Larger organisations of-
ten have repositories or libraries on site symbolising and supporting the importance of
scientific research in policy -making (Uzochukwu et al. 2016). These structures and
roles help decision makers navigate the abundance of information and opinions about
policy issues (Dobrow et al . 2004). Formally established horizontal and vertical com-
munication channels between research and non -research units also significantly influ-
ences the uptake of science (Makkar et al. 2016), especially in terms of having oppor-
tunities to advise senior policymakers.
Formal units, roles and communication structures can only be effective if they are rec-
ognised as needed and appropriate by staff, in other words, if they are acknowledged
as necessary, appropriate and legitimate, highlighting the role of normative institutional
conditions (Weiss et al. 2008). If policymakers at all levels of authority honour the for-

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Conceptual framework 19

mal prescription for research use and value scientific research as a source of infor-
mation for decision making, it is more likely for science to be used conceptually and not
symbolically (van der Arend 2014). The alignment between the regulative and the nor-
mative institutional conditions influences the absorptive capacity of the organisation: its
ability to seek out, recognise, import and meaningfully use relevant knowledge to
achieve its mission or improve performance (Harvey et al. 2015; Harvey and Kitson
2015).
If policymakers are expected to stay up to date with research in their relevant area of
work, or if research expertise yields additional informal authority, they are be more like-
ly to make choices to consult scientific research during policy development, even if it
might not be a part of their remit ( Oliver et al. 2014). Policy organisations may further
emphasise their valuing of science by incorporating commitment to res earch-informed
policy-making in the mission or strategy statements, organising dedicated events
(ibid.). In addition to valuing science, organisational culture that is receptive to new
ideas and approaches is more likely to open up opportunities for multiple different types
of research to generate impact (Hammami et al. 2013). Valuing diversity and explora-
tion of new sources of knowledge as an organisational value (March 1991) is particular-
ly important, because policymakers are known to be drawn to familiar sources of re-
search (van der Arend 2014).
Networks and communities of practice organised around science and technology topics
in the organisation facilitate the exchange of information between different functional
units and different levels of authority. They serve an important legitimisation function: to
recognise the value of research (Currie and Suhomlinova 2006), and also contribute to
learning about effective ways to use scientific research that work in that particular or-
ganisational setting (Andereggen et al. 2013). Where the intra-organisational networks
span the organisational boundaries, the individuals linking to the outside may accrue
additional informal roles and become knowledge brokers (Bielak et al. 2008).
The last group of institutional factors is cognitive. Taken for granted institutional ele-
ments encompass assumptions, meanings attached to social action, symbols, identi-
ties, causal connections, and scripts . As Brownson and Jones (2009) have noted, the
use of research is to a large extent habitual and is i nfluenced by stereotypes and cul-
tural norms of the decision makers, illustrating the importance of cognitive institutional
conditions. They influence the extent to which different kinds of scientific research are
likely to be considered seriously by the policymakers. They affect the ‘type’ of evidence
science represents for the organisation, the causal ideas about the link between scien-
tific research and good policy (Landry et al. 2003), and, more generally what good ‘sci-
ence’ or ‘evidence’ is.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 Conceptual framework
Further, policy organisations are established off the back of certain background ideas
and rest on the foundations of those ideas. If scientific knowledge does not align with
the dominant worldview of thos e organisation s, the worldview can act as a filter for
knowledge absorption (Boswell and Hampshire 2017; Rein et al. 1993). This concerns
both the content of knowledge and the method used to produce it (which may be per-
ceived as not robust or scientific). Similarly, the prevalence of a certain way of thinking
and reasoning in the organisation (Hirschman and Berman 2014) limits the opportuni-
ties for science generated within other modes of reasoning to be taken seriously as
credible source of evidence. Conversely, in organisations that are not underpinned by
one particular public philosophy or dominated by one way of reasoning there are more
opportunities for various kinds of knowledge to be impactful.
4.3 Inter-organisational conditions
Inter-organisational conditions are shaped through the relationship between organisa-
tions in the science and the policy domains. P olicy organisations connect to other or-
ganisations, networks and institutions and in doing so become dependent on other ac-
tors during the process of knowledge production and transfer (March and Olsen 1995).
This means that alignment between different organisations and the extent to which
various institutional logics dominate science- policy links influence the processes
through which individual policy organisations handle scientific research. Inter -
organisational interactions can match and validate the policy organisation’s structures
and processes as legal, appropriate or true, or, on the contrary, highlight contradictory
institutional arrangements (Seo and Creed 2002).
Much of the literature about science-policy interfaces emphasises the differences in the
institutional time frames and cycles of the two domains that create obstacles for mean-
ingful and timely translation of scientific research into policy (Innvaer et al. 2002). Bar-
riers, such as long time scales for research and short -term evidence demands of the
policymakers (Brownson et al. 2006; Sarkki 2017), or the abstract nature of scientific
research compared to specific, focused demands of policy -relevant evidence (Avey
and Desch 2014) are mentioned frequently to emphasise the differences.
The regulative aspect of these inter-organisational barriers concerns formal institutional
structures for the production and evaluation of knowledge in the two domains, and the
formal channels and tools for knowledge transfer between science and policy. For ex-
ample, formal evaluation mechanisms in academia reward certain types and formats of
research. As a result, academic papers are written in a highly specialist languag e and
are published in high impact factor journals, mostly behind the paywall
(Weichselgartner and Kasperson 2010) . These are not the outputs needed in policy,

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Conceptual framework 21

and there is a widespread consensus that such academic research has to be further
transformed into policy-relevant knowledge.
There are various ways in which research and policy spheres are steered towards
closer interaction in order to generate incentives, conditions and opportunities for sci-
entific knowledge to be transferred into policy and used in decision making as research
evidence. To facilitate knowledge transfer, instruments ranging from guidelines and
dedicated funding tools to intermediary organisations and other types of infrastructure
have been tested out in various empirical settings (B remer and Meisch 2017; Knight
and Lyall 2013; Spoth et al. 2013). Mission-oriented projects are one example of regu-
lative steering of scientific research to generate policy -relevant results (Weber and
Rohracher 2012).
Normative institutional elements concern the norms that influence the informal authority
of scientific knowledge, the processes and objects that make it credible for the policy-
makers and the mechanisms through which this credibility is achieved. Social authority
of science is underpinned by t he societal expectations and beliefs about the im-
portance of research (Lavis et al. 2004). Van Est (2019) argues that science is not a
neutral mechanism that provides truths about the world, but a worldview and a set of
values. The authority of science influences the strength of science-based arguments in
the political debate, and also the possibility for key scientists to lead the knowledge
transfer process, e.g. by speaking directly with elite policymakers (Weiss 1982).
‘Usable knowledge’ – scientific knowledge that can be used in policy without further
translation - is a boundary object shaped by the reflections and expectations of both
scientists and policymakers about each other’s work. What is regarded as usable
knowledge varies across research fields, policy areas, national and sometimes regional
contexts. This reflects different processes of negotiation and expectations management
between the scientists and policymakers (Wall et al. 2017; Stilgoe et al. 2013). For ex-
ample, scholars using the framework of knowledge translation especially in the area of
health care, argue that systematic reviews rather than individual studies constitute us-
able knowledge, because they aggregate results from many standardised empirical
studies and hence have high external validity (Glasgow and Emmons 2007; Green and
Glasgow 2006; Grimshaw et al. 2012). Health policymakers are in turn more aware of
systematic reviews than policymakers in other areas (Bedard and Ouimet 2017). How-
ever, in areas such as global disease research systematic reviews are not always help-
ful and are sometimes harmful due to the diverse nature of findings coming from differ-
ent disciplines that use different methods (Leach and Scoones 2013).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 Conceptual framework
Cognitive inter-organisational conditions reflect the importance of the paradigmatic
compatibility of background ideas in science -producing and policy-making organisa-
tions and the extent of their discursive alignment for successful impact process. This
type of condition is much more recognised by the ideational scholars. On the deeper
level of political ideation, predominant public philosophies in science and policy organi-
sations determine the way issues are framed, arguments are built and solutions are
selected. If the paradigm in w hich scientific research is produced significantly differs
from the public philosophy that dominates the public policy sphere, it is likely that policy
officials will simply be unable to use it due to the amount of modification to other exist-
ing policy instruments that would require. Such research may not be perceived as valid,
or legitimate. In contrast, research produced within the shared public philosophy will be
more likely to be useful because it does not challenge policymakers’ established ways
of thi nking about issues (Stevens 2007; McCright and Dunlap 2010). These are the
arguments made by Schmidt (2016) to explain the persistence of neoliberal policies in
the UK and by Lindvall (2009) to explain the different rates at which Austria, Sweden
and Denmark abandoned Keynesian economic policies after the 1970s oil crisis.
Cognitive institutional conditions also include taken for granted elements that evolve
into knowledge translation script s over time (Kuruvilla et al. 2006). Policymakers are
more likely to seriously consider the knowledge that is written in a familiar language
(Upham and Dendler 2015), presented in a familiar format (e.g. as a policy brief)
through a familiar, expected channel (e.g. via news media or a dedicated app). These
cognitive differences between what the policymakers are comfortable with and what
researchers are able to provide are cited as one of the key barriers to impact
(Weichselgartner and Kasperson 2010).
4.4 Individuals in organisations
In describing inter - and intra-organisational conditions influencing scientific knowledge
impact in the policy -making space, we stress that ideas, strategies and characteristics
of individual policymakers 3 are as important to achi eve conceptual impact as the or-
ganisational conditions. From the discursive institutionalist standpoint, individual reflec-
tion and the subsequent collective deliberation are the two key components of policy
change. Individual characteristics are therefore the key component in conceptual im-
pact generation. Below, we provide an overview of policymakers’ individual characteris-

3 Obviously, the characteristics and attitudes of individual scientists are also important in
generating impactful research, for reference see D'Este et al. (2018). I n this paper, we de-
liberately focus on the individuals in policy-making organisations.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Conceptual framework 23

tics in two parts: by first reviewing the studies that write about individuals in organisa-
tions and then the studies that write about ‘science champions’.
The research utilization literature has surveyed individuals in their organisational con-
text by examining, first, their formally defined functional responsibilities and, second,
their skills in accessing and understanding research acqui red through previous work
and training. Generally, the findings indicate that background characteristics, attitudes
and strategies of public servants and government officials working on lower functional
levels of policy are significant predictors of the ty pe and the scale of organisational re-
search use (Amara et al. 2004; Landry et al. 2007; Landry et al. 2003; van der Arend
2014).
Policy officials with dedicated research- related responsibilities increase exposure of
their colleagues to science, which in t urn results in greater overall use of research
(Belkhodja 2014), and their colleagues with advanced degrees or work experience in
research are much more likely to be conceptually influenced by science (Amara et al.,
2004). Overall, policymakers who recogni se scientific research as the importance
source of evidence tend to draw on it more in their everyday work practice (Jbilou et al.
2007).
A separate and somewhat exceptional body of literature theorises the role of scientists
who ‘championed’ science-informed reasoning in addressing complex high- level or
controversial issues. Examples frequently found in the literature concern, for example,
vaccination (Lynch and Cole 2005), drug policy (Humphreys and Piot 2012), and disas-
ter mitigation (Craig 2018). The st udies typically report the involvement of high- level
scientists who engage their expertise to argue for a certain policy action – sometimes
unsuccessfully – and analyse the reasons of the policy outcome. Credible, competent
and famous scientists who bravel y speak truth to the highest levels of power are often
discussed in these contributions as an effective channel of delivering science to policy.
Roger Pielke’s (2007) four idealised roles scientists can play in policy has become one
of the most popular heuristics used to normatively understand how these science
champions should act4.

4 Pielke’s roles are idealised and can be performed by individuals or organisations. In the
book, he mostly gives examples of individual scientists playing the roles.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 Conceptual framework
4.5 Summary and operationalisation
We have outlined the components of the framework and the various types of conditions
that influence the likelihood of scientific knowledge inf luencing policy-making concep-
tually. The joint analysis of multiple relevant strands of literature substantiates and fur-
ther clarifies the nature and types of conditions, highlights complementarities and over-
laps in thinking about the relationship between science and policy from these different
subject areas.
Taken together with the considerations about particular characteristics of the policy
area and the specific national and broader societal contexts, the framework presented
above can be operationalised for empirical analysis. Table 2 offers an option for opera-
tionalisation of the intra- and inter-organisational conditions in the order they were in-
troduced in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
With respect to the operationalisation of the individual characteristics, most studies
reviewed in Section 4.4 use research utilization surveys. If the research is conducted
with the policy organisation’s consent, accessing data about staff involved in policy -
making will be valuable. Methodologically, this task is more straightforward than opera-
tionalising the analysis of institutional conditions. However, individual characteristics
are not typically considered alongside the institutional conditions in empirical analyses.
We suggest a case study methodology to employ the framework in empirical settings,
although other types of research designs can work well for studies focusing on one
type of institutional condition. For example, secondary data, surveys and interviews will
be less effective in examining cognitive institutional conditions, which may be implicit in
organisations. Understanding these conditions would require either embedded, exten-
sive participant observation, or collecting data in settings, such as knowledge co-
production, where underlying assumptions about science and policy becom e apparent
via science-policy interactions.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Conceptual framework 25
Table 2: Operationalisation of the institutional conditions for the impact of scientific knowledge on policy-making
 Intra-organisational conditions Inter-organisational conditions
Regulative
Examine prescriptions to use research in policy-making; exam-
ine formally defined research units and roles (organisation’s
policies and protocols)
Examine formally established and endorsed channels for com-
munication with scientific knowledge suppliers (formal policies,
interviews)
Examine research resources and infrastructure (offline and
online set-up to engage with scientific research, budget for
research-related activities )
Examine the organisation’s scope, infrastructure and resources
of formal science-policy knowledge transfer (organisation’s
policies and protocols)
Are there intermediary organisations on science-policy inter-
faces? What are their functional roles? (desk research)
What is the public steering of science-policy linkages? Are any
incentives offered? (national and regional policy documents)
Normative
Do employees honour formal prescriptions to engage with re-
search? Does this contribute to informal authority in the organi-
sation? (surveys, policymaker and analyst interviews)
Does the organisation commit to valuing research? (mission
and strategy documents, interviews)
Is the organisational culture welcoming of new conceptual ide-
as? (survey)
How is science-related information exchange organised in net-
works between different units and levels of authority? (inter-
views, observation)
What is the social authority of science in the policy area and in
the national/regional context? Is there agreement about what
constitutes ‘usable knowledge’ for policy (interviews or surveys
with scientists and policymakers)
Examine networks and/or communities of practice that span
research and policy organisations (secondary data, inter-
views/surveys)
Cognitive
What are the taken-for-granted ideas about good evidence,
good science and how science is useful for policy? Is there a
dominant worldview? (interviews, naturalistic materials, any
texts produced by the organisation)
Examine the habits, scripts and routines of research use (par-
ticipation in co-creation, observation)
Is the policy organisation’s work underpinned by a particular
public philosophy? (interviews within the organisation, observa-
tion)
What is the range of public philosophies in the policy area? Are
the background ideas in the science domain compatible? (natu-
ralistic materials, interviews with policymakers and scientists,
participation in co-creation)
Source: own compilation

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 Contributions and implications
5 Contributions and implications
In this paper we developed and operationalised a framework that fills a gap in the lit-
erature on the impact of science policy -making. It is not a framework for replacing the
existing literature on science-policy interfaces, research utilization, impact assessment,
policy development and evidence- based policy. However, we believe that our frame-
work allows us to enrich those existing perspectives. It enables what Sarewitz and
Pielke (2007) called a proper "demand- side assessment" (p.12): an analysis of the
conditions and behaviours on the side of scientific research ‘users’. The novelty of the
framework, we believe, is in preparing the micro- foundations for understanding mecha-
nisms and conditions of the use of scientific evidence through a multi -dimensional and
inter-linked conceptualisation of the user conditions.
So far, we see a strong emphasis towards, first, the shortcomings of the science sys-
tem, and the individual scientist, to deliver polic y impact and second, towards ap-
proaches that explain the use of science in a power- and interest driven perspective as
one among many assets to be used by rational actors. The debates within the different
streams of literature focus on a limited number of key issues with respect to the sci-
ence-policy relationship, most importantly, the ones that prioritise the uses of science
and the ones that stress the limits of observability and propose focusing on processes,
interactions and networks. We identified and operationalised organisational conditions
on the side of the policy user as the missing link at the intersection of these studies,
and developed the framework to offer a systematic perspective.
If we accept that the way policy makers interpret the world and define solutions is one
critical dimension in the process of policy -making, we also must accept the importance
of the ideational dimension. Reflexive institutionalism as a theoretical lens allows us to
make sense of the way in which ideas exert influenc e. It helps us to understand when
and how scientific ideas and evidence influence perceptions of the nature of problems
and possible solutions, i.e. when conceptual impact occurs. Following from that is a
recognition that the discourse by which scientific ideas and evidence are transferred
and the conditions by which they are processed are critical to the impact of science on
policy. The framework combines a discursive institutionalist understanding of the na-
ture and mechanisms of ideational dynamics in pol icy-making with the organisational
institutionalist approaches to capture absorptive conditions within and between organi-
sations. We stress that these two, combined with the individual characteristics of reflex-
ive individual policymakers, are the elements required to understand the nature and
extent of conceptual impact.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Contributions and implications 27

To our knowledge, this basic perspective, and the finely grained differentiation of the
ideational and institutional dimensions we present, is the first attempt to bring concep-
tual impact of science on policy to centre stage. Jointly with others in the field (McNie et
al. 2016; Matt et al. 2017), we argue that the impact of science on policy is a multi -
stakeholder process and the shortcomings as to how science impacts policy -making
cannot be properly explained, and overcome if we continue to blame the scientists or
political power games. Focusing on policy -making organisations is a useful setting to
explain how institutional conditions co -determine the demand for , co -production and
use of scientific knowledge, and thus its impact. This, in the end, will allow us to better
understand the actual translation of scientific ideas and evidence into policy outcomes -
and thus instrumental impact of scientific knowledge - much better as well (Weiss et al.
2008).
From these contributions, we derive three implications for future research, relating (1)
to the inter-dependent nature of the institutional dimensions of the framework, (2) to the
need for existing research approaches to acknowledge and confront the gaps in their
understanding of the processes of use and impact of science, and (3) to the importance
of ideational alignment to accomplish complex policy missions.
Firstly, the framework enables us to recognise the inter-dependencies of institutional
dimensions. For example, the ability and readiness to understand the nature of scien-
tific knowledge, to interpret its outcome and to assign credibility does not depend on
"rigorous" scientific approaches and appropriate dissemination activiti es only. Rather it
also, maybe mostly, depends on the interplay of appropriate regulative, cognitive and
normative conditions within policy-making organisations and between policy and scien-
tific organisations. The extent of conceptual impact will be limited no matter how strong
the scientific evidence and how clearly it is communicated if some of the institutional
conditions for impact are not in place. For example, a lack of material resources - such
as access to scientific publications or time to seek out research – could inhibit policy-
makers’ critical engagement with scientific knowledge even if there are strong norma-
tive claims to use scientific knowledge in policy. Equally, formal internal resources and
incentives to use scientific knowledge only materi alise in sense- making and lesson -
drawing if certain cognitive and normative conditions are met.
Second, this further means that existing approaches in the literature discussed in this
paper must be confronted with their institutional gaps and complemented with an idea-
tional neo- institutionalist perspective. We criticise functional approaches a lot in this
paper. They take scientific ideas and evidence as one variable that rational policy -
makers and politicians use in intra- organisational and political negotiations. The func-
tional logic also underpins a significant number of science assessment and funding

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
28 Contributions and implications
frameworks in a considerable number of countries (Stampfer 2019). In believing that
high quality, robust and relevant evidence will be used by rational (unbiased) policy-
makers, and that use will be demonstrable and attributable, these approaches have
severe limitations. Interaction- based approaches, which start by acknowledging the
various differences and gaps between the policy-making and science producing worlds,
fall short of systematically acknowledging how the three institutional dimension inter-
fere with the ability to build meaningful bridges.
The final implication of the framework we discuss here is that it can be used to address
research questions that are increasingly pertinent. This brings us back to a key initial
observation made in the introduction. The current calls for mission orientation across
the OECD implies that science, technology and innovation policy can support the solu-
tion of societal problems. However, if societal missions are to be accomplished, it is
increasingly recognised, that this can only be meaningful if different areas of policy
(transport, energy, health etc.) are strongly aligned. This implies that they have com-
patible problem framings and are able to develop policies that are underpinned by evi-
dence that can be understood and shared by diverse organisational actors. This is not
simply a question of traditional policy coordination. It is, in a very fundamental sense, a
question of ideational alignment and co-evolution.
To define a mission that spans multiple policy areas, such as "plastic free oceans",
"carbon free cities", or "automated driving" necessarily needs sound scientific under-
pinning. Applying our framework, it means a "coordinative discourse" for policy -making
that takes into consideration the pre- existing historically path -dependent ideational
backgrounds of diverse ministries and agencies. Their ideational alignment that ena-
bles science to have an impact on the overall mission needs careful consideration. Cer-
tain bodies of evidence or even basic scientific ideas for a mission might be in line with
that background of one key ministry, while entirely conflicting with another one. Similar-
ly, the acceptance of scientific evidence as a driver for the definition of policy interven-
tions and assessment of policy success, and the readiness to make sense of this evi-
dence, will differ as organisational conditions differ.
To be conscious of the critical dimensions within and between organisations when it
comes to mobilise science for missions is therefore imperative, from the framing of the
mission down to the identification of problems and imaginations about the solution
space. Inter-organisational conflicts in the pursuit of missions may much less be a re-
sult of traditional power games. Rather, it may be the result of severe challenges in the
ideational alignment of those organisations, who do not recognise why scientific evi-
dence and ideas cannot help them. To accomplish complex missions will not work
without scientific support. Policy organisations must inspect their own conditions for the

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Contributions and implications 29

uptake of scientific ideas and evidence and examine the differences if they want sci-
ence to play its necessary role effectively. For those academics who seek to under-
stand the impact of science on policy, on mission policy even, it means to open up for
ideational approaches.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the insightful comments of Magnus Gulbrandsen, Jordi Molas-Gallart,
Richard Woolley, and Rainer Frietsch who have helped us shape this paper as well as
numerous commentators at conferences where we presented these ideas.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
30 References
6 References
Albaek, E. ( 1995): Between Knowledge and Power - Utilization of Social -Science in Public -
Policy Making. Policy Sciences, 28, 79-100.
Almeida, C.; Báscolo, E. (2006): Use of research results in policy decision- making, formulation,
and implementation: a review of the literature. Cadernos de Saúde Pública, 22, 7-19.
Amara, N.; Ouimet, M.;Landry, R. (2004): New evidence on instrumental, conceptual, and sym-
bolic utilization of university research in government agencies. Science Communication,
26, 75-106.
Andereggen, S.; Zoller, F. A. ;Boutellier, R. ( 2013): Sharing Research Equipment to Bridge In-
traorganizational Boundaries. Research-Technology Management, 56, 49-57.
Anderson, E. (2008): Experts, ideas, and policy change: the Russell Sage Foundation and small
loan reform, 1909-1941. Theory and Society, 37, 271-310.
Armstrong, R. ; Waters, E. ; Dobbins, M. ; Anderson, L. ; Moore, L. ; Petticrew, M. ; Clark, R. ;
Pettman, T. L.; Burns, C. ; Moodie, M. ; Conning, R. ; Swinburn, B. (2013): Knowledge
translation strategies to improve the use of evidence in public health decision making in
local government: intervention design and implementation plan. Implementation Science,
8.
Avey, P. C.; Desch, M. C. (2014): What Do Policymakers Want From Us? Results of a Survey of
Current and Former Senior National Security Decision Makers. International Studies
Quarterly, 58, 227-246.
Bedard, P. O.; Ouimet, M. (2017): Awareness and use of systematic literature reviews and me-
ta-analyses by ministerial policy analysts. Canadian Public Administration- Administration
Publique Du Canada, 60, 173-191.
Béland, D. ( 2005): Ideas and social policy: An institutionalist perspective. Social Policy & Ad-
ministration, 39, 1-18.
Béland, D.; Cox, R. H. (2010): Ideas and politics in social science research, Oxford University
Press.
Belkhodja, O. (2014): Knowledge Utilization in Canadian Health Service Organizations: A Path
Analysis. International Journal of Public Administration, 37, 339-352.
Bennett, C. J.; Howlett, M. (1992): The lessons of learning: Reconciling theories of policy learn-
ing and policy change. Policy Sciences, 25, 275-294.
Bielak, A. T., Campbell, A., Pope, S., Schaefer, K. ; Shaxson, L. (2008): From Science Commu-
nication to Knowledge Brokering: the Shift from 'Science Push' to 'Policy Pull'. Communi-
cating Science in Social Contexts: New Models, New Practices, 201-226.
Blyth, M. (1997): "Any more bright ideas?" The ideational turn of comparative political economy.
Comparative Politics, 29 (2), 229-250
Boon, W.; Edler, J. (2018): Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new trends in
innovation policy. Science and Public Policy, 45, 435-447.
Borgenschneider, K. ; Corbett, T. ( 2010): Evidence-based policymaking: Insights from policy -
minded researchers and research- minded policymakers. Routledge and Taylor & Francis
Group.
Bornmann, L. (2013): What is societal impact of research and how can it be assessed? a litera-
ture survey. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 64,
217-233.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
References 31

Boswell, C.; Hampshire, J. (2017): Ideas and agency in immigration policy: A discursive institu-
tionalist approach. European Journal of Political Research, 56, 133-150.
Bozeman, B.; Sarewitz, D. (2011): Public Value Mapping and Science Policy Evaluation. Miner-
va, 49, 1-23.
Bremer, S. ; Meisch, S. ( 2017): Co-production in climate change research: reviewing different
perspectives. WIREs Clim Change, 8, e482.
Broström, A. ; Mckelvey, M. (2017): Engaging Experts: Science- Policy Interactions and the In-
troduction of Congestion Charging in Stockholm. Minerva, 183-207
Brownson, R. C. ; Jones, E. (2009): Bridging the gap: translating research into policy and prac-
tice. Prev Med, 49, 313-5.
Brownson, R. C., Royer, C., Ewing, R.; McBride, T. D. (2006): Researchers and policymakers -
Travelers in parallel universes. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 30, 164-172.
Cairney, P. (2016): The politics of evidence-based policy making, Springer.
Cairney, P.; Oliver, K. (2017): Evidence-based policymaking is not like evidence- based medi-
cine, so how far should you go to bridge the divide between evidence and policy? Health
Research Policy and Systems, 15.
Caplan, N . (1979): The two-communities theory and knowledge utilization. American Behav-
ioural Scientist, 22, 459-470.
Cashmore, M.; Wejs, A. (2014): Constructing legitimacy for climate change planning: A study of
local government in Denmark. Global Environmental Change, 24, 203-212.
Cerny, P. G. (1990): The changing architecture of politics: Structure, agency and the future of
the state, Sage.
Contandriopoulos, D., Lemire, M., Denis, J. L. ; Tremblay, E. (2010): Knowledge Exchange Pro-
cesses in Organizations and Policy Arenas: A Narrative Systematic Review of the Litera-
ture. Milbank Quarterly, 88, 444-483.
Cox, R. H. ; Béland, D. ( 2013): Valence, Policy Ideas, and the Rise of Sustainability. Govern-
ance, 26, 307-328.
Craig, C. (2018): How Does Government Listen to Scientists?, Springer.
Crona, B. I. ; Parker, J. N. (2011). Network Determinants of Knowledge Utilization: Preliminary
Lessons From a Boundary Organization. Science Communication, 33, 448-471.
Currie, G.; Suhomlinova, O. (2006): The Impact of Institutional Forces Upon Knowledge Sharing
in the UK NHS: The Triumph of Professional Power and the Inconsistency of Policy. Pub-
lic Administration, 84, 1-30.
D’Este, P.; Ramos-Vielba, I.; Woolley, R.; Amara, N. (2018): How do researchers generate sci-
entific and societal impacts? Toward an analytical and operational framework. Science
and Public Policy, 45, 752-763.
De Goede, J.; Van Bon-Martens, M. J.; Putters, K.; Van Oers, H. A. ( 2012): Looking for interac-
tion: quantitative measurement of research utilization by Dutch local health officials.
Health Res Policy Syst, 10, 9.
Deephouse, D. L. ; Bundy, J. ; Tost, L. P.; Suchman, M. ( 2017): Organizational legitimacy: Six
key questions. In: Greenwood, R.; Oliver, C.; Lawrence, T.B.; Meyer, R.E. ( eds.) (2017):
The SAGE handbook of organizational institutionalism. 4 (2), 27-54.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
32 References
Dobbins, M.; Thomas, H.; O'Brien, M. A. ; Duggan, M. (2004): Use of systematic reviews in the
development of new provincial public health policies in Ontario. International Journal of
Technology Assessment in Health Care, 20, 399-404.
Dobrow, M. J. ; Goel, V.; Upshur, R. E. (2004): Evidence-based health policy: context and utili-
sation. Soc Sci Med, 58, 207-17.
Donovan, C. (2011): State of the art in assessing research impact: introduction to a special is-
sue. Research Evaluation, 20, 175-179.
Donovan, C.; Gulbrandsen, M. (2018): Introduction: Measuring the impact of arts and humani-
ties research in Europe. Research Evaluation, 27, 285-286.
Douthwaite, B.; Kuby, T.; Van De Fliert, E. ; Schulz, S. (2003): Impact pathway evaluation: an
approach for achieving and attributing impact in complex systems. Agricultural Systems,
78, 243-265.
Edelman, L. B. (1992): Legal Ambiguity and Symbolic Structures - Organizational Mediation of
Civil-Rights Law. American Journal of Sociology, 97, 1531-1576.
Edler, J. ( 2003): How do economic ideas become relevant in RTD policy making? In: Biegel-
bauer, P.; Borras, S. (eds.) ( 2003):Innovation Policies in Eur ope and the US: The New
Agenda. Ashgate: Aldershot.
Edler, J.; James, A. D. ( 2015): Understanding the emergence of new science and technology
policies: Policy entrepreneurship, agenda setting and the development of the European
Framework Programme. Research Policy, 44, 1252-1265.
Eleveld, A. (2016): The Role of Ideas in Policy and Institutional Change: A Comparison of the
Open Functional Approach, Constructivism and Discourse Theory. Political Studies, 64,
70-87.
Elliott, H.; Popay, J. (2000): How are policy makers using evidence? Models of research utilisa-
tion and local NHS policy making. 54, 461-468.
Espeland, W. N. ; Stevens, M. L. ( 2008): A Sociology of Quantification. European Journal of
Sociology, 49, 401-436.
European Commission. (2018): Towards a mission- oriented research and innovation policy in
the European Union.
Finlayson, A. (2004): Political science, political ideas and rhetoric. Economy and Society, 33,
528-549.
Fischer, F.; Gottweis, H. (2012): The argumentative turn revisited: P ublic policy as communica-
tive practice, Duke University Press.
Gagliardi, A. R. ; Berta, W. ; Kothari, A. ; Boyko, J. ; Urquhart, R. (2016): Integrated knowledge
translation (IKT) in health care: a scoping review. Implementation Science, 11, 38.
Glasgow, R. E.; Emmons, K. M. ( 2007): How can we increase translation of research into prac-
tice? Types of evidence needed. Annu Rev Public Health, 28, 413-33.
Goldman, H. H. ; Ganju, V. ; Drake, R. E. ; Gorman, P. ; Hogan, M. ; Hyde, P. S. ; Morgan, O.
(2001): Policy implications for implementing evidence- based practices. Psychiatr Serv,
52, 1591-7.
Green, L. W.; Glasgow, R. E. ( 2006): Evaluating the relevance, generalization, and applicability
of research: issues in external validation and translation methodol ogy. Eval Health Prof,
29, 126-53.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
References 33

Grimshaw, J. M.; Eccles, M. P.; Lavis, J. N.; Hill, S. J.; Squires; J. E. (2012): Knowledge transla-
tion of research findings. Implement Sci, 7, 50.
Haas, P. M. ( 2009): Introduction: epistemic communities and international policy coordination.
International Organization, 46, 1.
Hall, P. A. (1993): Policy paradigms, social learning, and the state: the case of economic poli-
cymaking in Britain. Comparative Politics, 25, 275-296.
Hammami, H. ; Amara, N.; Landry, R. (2013): Organizational climate and its influence on bro-
kers’ knowledge transfer activities: A structural equation modeling. International Journal
of Information Management, 33, 105-118.
Hanney, S. R. ; González-Block, M. A. (2009): Evidence-informed health policy: are w e begin-
ning to get there at last? Health Research Policy and Systems, 7, 30.
Hanney, S. R.; Gonzalez-Block, M. A.; Buxton, M. J.; Kogan, M. (2003): The utilisation of health
research in policy -making: concepts, examples and methods of assessment. Health Re-
search Policy and Systems, 1, 2.
Harvey, G.; Jas, P.; Walshe, K. ( 2015): Analysing organisational context: case studies on the
contribution of absorptive capacity theory to understanding inter -organisational variation
in performance improvement. BMJ Qual Saf, 24, 48-55.
Harvey, G.; Kitson, A. (2015): Translating evidence into healthcare policy and practice: Single
versus multi-faceted implementation strategies - is there a simple answer to a complex
question? International Journal of Health Policy and Management-Ijhpm, 4, 123-126.
Haynes, A. S.; Derrick, G. E.; Redman, S.; Hall, W. D.; Gillespie, J. A.; Chapman, S.; Sturk, H.
(2012): Identifying trustworthy experts: how do policymakers find and assess public
health researchers worth consulting or collaborating with? PLoS One, 7, e32665.
Hazelkorn, E. ; Gulbrandsen, M. ; BennewortH, P. (2016): The Impact and Future of Arts and
Humanities Research, Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Head, B. W. (2008): Three Lenses of Evidence- Based Policy. Australian Journal of Public Ad-
ministration, 67, 1-11.
Head, B. W. (2016): Toward More “Evidence-Informed” Policy Making? Public Administration
Review, 76, 472-484.
Heclo, H. ( 1986): Reaganism and the Search for a Public Philosophy. Perspectives on the
Reagan Years, 40, 25-41.
Hicks, D. (2012): Performance-based university research funding systems. Research Policy, 41,
251-261.
Hicks, D. ; Holbrook, J. B. ( 2020): A Cartography of Philosophy’s Engagement with Society.
Minerva, 58, 25-45.
Hirschman, D.; Berman, E. P. (2014): Do economists make policies? On the political effects of
economics. Socio-Economic Review, 12, 779-811.
Humphreys, K.; Piot, P. (2012): Scientific evidence alone is not sufficient basis for health policy.
BMJ. 2012; 344:e1316.
Humphries, S.; Stafinski, T.; Mumtaz, Z.; Menon, D. (2014): Barriers and facilitators to evidence-
use in program management: a systematic review of the literature. BMC Health Serv Res.
Innvaer, S. ; Vist, G. ; Trommald, M. ( 2002): Health policy -makers' perceptions of their use of
evidence: a systematic review. J Health Serv Res Policy, 7, 239-244.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
34 References
Jäger, J.; Ferguson, H. ( 1991): Climate change: science, impacts and policy , Cambridge Uni-
versity Press Cambridge.
Jbilou, J.; Amara, N.; Landry, R. (2007): Research-based-decision-making in Canadian heal th
organizations: A behavioural approach. Journal of Medical Systems, 31, 185-196.
Kenny, C.; Rose, D. C.; Hobbs, A.; Tyler, C.; Blackstock, J. (2017): The Role of Research in the
UK Parliament. Volume One. London, UK: POST.
Kessler, R.; Glasgow, R. E. (2011): A proposal to speed translation of healthcare research into
practice: dramatic change is needed. Am J Prev Med, 40, 637-44.
Kingdon, J. (1984): Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies. Boston: Little, Brown
Knight, C.; Lyall, C. J. E. P. (2013): Knowledge brokers: the role of intermediaries in producing
research impact. Evidence and Policy, 9, 309-16.
Kogan, M.; Henkel, M.; Hanney, S. (2006): Government and Research: Thirty Years of Evolu-
tion, Dordrecht, Springer.
Kogut, B.; Macpherson, J. M. ( 2011): The mobility of economists and the diffusion of policy ide-
as: The influence of economics on national policies. Research Policy, 40, 1307-1320.
Kuhlmann, S.; Rip, A. (2014): The challenge of addressing Grand Challenges: a think piece on
how innovation can be driven towards the" Grand Challenges" as defined under the pro-
spective European Union Framework Programme Horizon 2020. European Research and
Innovation Area Board (ERIAB).
Kuhlmann, S. ; Rip, A. (2018): Next-Generation Innovation Policy and Grand Challenges. Sci-
ence and Public Policy, 45, 448-454.
Kuruvilla, S.; Mays, N.; Pleasant, A.; Walt, G. (2006): Describing the impact of health research:
a Research Impact Framework. BMC Health Services Research, 6, 134.
Landry, R.; Amara, N.; Ouimet, M. (2007): Determinants of knowledge transfer: evidence from
Canadian university researchers in natural sciences and engineering. Journal of Tech-
nology Transfer, 32, 561-592.
Landry, R.; Lamari, M.; Amara, N. (2003): The extent and determinants of the utilization of uni-
versity research in government agencies. Public Administration Review, 63, 192-205.
Lavis, J. N.; Posada, F. B.; Haines, A.; Osei, E. (2004): Use of research to inform public policy-
making. Lancet, 364, 1615-1621.
Lawrence, N. S. ; Chambers, J. C. ; Morrison, S. M. ; Bestmann, S.; O'Grady, G.; Chambers, C.
D.; Kythreotis, A. P. (2017): The Evidence Information Service as a new platform for sup-
porting evidence-based policy: a consultation of UK parliamentarians. Evidence & Policy,
13, 275-316.
Leach, M.; Scoones, I. (2013): The social and political lives of zoonotic disease models: Narra-
tives, science and policy. Social Science & Medicine, 88, 10-17.
Lemos, M. C. ; Morehouse, B. J. (2005): The co-production of science and policy in integrated
climate assessments. Global Environmental Change, 15, 57-68.
Lindvall, J. (2009): The Real but Limited Influence of Expert Ideas. World Politics, 61, 703-730.
Lomas, J. (2007): The in-between world of knowledge brokering. BMJ, 334, 129-132.
Lynch, M.; Cole, S. (2005): Science and Technology Studies on Trial : Dilemmas of Expertise.
Social Studies of Science, 35, 269-311.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
References 35

Makkar, S. R. ; Turner, T. ; Williamson, A. ; Louviere, J. ; Redman, S. ; Haynes, A. ; Green, S. ;
Brennan, S. (2016): The development of ORACLe: a measure of an organisation’s capac-
ity to engage in evidence-informed health policy. Health Res Policy Syst, 14:4.
March, J. G. (1991): Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning. Organization Sci-
ence, 2, 71-87.
March, J. G.; Olsen, J. P. (1995): Democratic governance, New York, Free Press.
March, J. G. ; Olsen, J. P. ( 2011): The Logic of Appropriateness. In: Goodin, R. E. (ed.) The
Oxford Handbook of Political Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Matt, M.; Gaunand, A.; Joly, P. B. ; Colinet, L. (2017): Opening the black box of impact – Ideal-
type impact pathways in a public agricultural research organization. Research Policy, 46,
207-218.
Mazzucato, M. (2018): Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities. Jour-
nal of Industrial and Corporate Change, 27, 803-815.
Mccright, A. M. ; Dunlap, R. E. (2010): Anti-reflexivity The American Conservative Movement's
Success in Undermining Climate Science and Policy. Theory Culture & Society, 27, 100-
133.
Mcnie, E. C.; Parris, A.; Sarewitz, D. (2016): Improving the public value of science: A typology to
inform discussion, design and implementation of research. Research Policy, 45, 884-895.
Mehta, J. ( 2010): The varied roles of ideas in politics. Ideas and politics in social science re-
search, 23-46.
Merton, R. K. (1973): The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, Chi-
cago, University of Chicago Press.
Molas-Gallart, J.; Tang, P. (2011): Tracing 'productive interactions' to identify social impacts: an
example from the social sciences. Research Evaluation, 20, 219-226.
Mthiyane, H.; Breckon, J. (2020): Alliance for Useful Evidence: Our Impact, 2016- 2019. London:
Alliance for Useful Evidence.
Nutley, S.; Davies, H.; Walter, I. (2003): Evidence-based policy and practice: cross -sector les-
sons from the United Kingdom. Social Policy Journal of New Zealand, 29-49.
Nutley, S.; Walter, I.; Davies, H. (2007): Using Evidence: How Research Can Inform Public Ser-
vices, Bristol, Policy Press.
Oliver, K.; Innvar, S.; Lorenc, T.; Woodman, J.; Thomas, J. (2014): A systematic review of barri-
ers to and facilitators of the use of evidence by policymakers. BMC Health Services Re-
search, 14, 2.
Olmos-Peñuela, J.; Castro-Martínez, E.; D’Este, P. (2014): Knowledge transfer activities in so-
cial sciences and humanities: Explaining the interactions of research groups with non-
academic agents. Research Policy, 43, 696-706.
Parsons, W. (2002): From Muddling Through to Muddling Up - Evidence Based Policy Making
and the Modernisation of British Government. Public Policy and Administration, 17, 43-
60.
Penfield, T.; Baker, M. J.; Scoble, R.; Wykes, M. C. (2013): Assessment, evaluations, and defi-
nitions of research impact: A review. Research Evaluation, 23, 21-32.
Perkmann, M.; Walsh, K. (2008): Engaging the scholar: Three types of academic consulting and
their impact on universities and industry. Research Policy, 37, 1884-1891.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
36 References
Perrier, L.; Mrklas, K.; Lavis, J. N.; Straus, S. E. ( 2011): Interventions encouraging the use of
systematic reviews by health policymakers and managers: A systematic review. Imple-
mentation Science, 6.
Pielke, R. A. (2007): The honest broker: making sense of science in policy and politics , Cam-
bridge University Press.
Pielke, R. A. (2004): When scientists politicize science: making sense of controversy over The
Skeptical Environmentalist. Environmental Science & Policy, 7, 405-417.
Pohl, C. (2008): From science to policy through transdisciplinary research. Environmental Sci-
ence & Policy, 11, 46-53.
Reale, E.; Avramov, D.; Canhial, K.; Donovan, C.; Flecha, R.; Holm, P.; Larkin, C.; Lepori, B.;
Mosoni-Fried, J.; Oliver, E.; Primeri, E.; Puigvert, L.; Scharnhorst, A.; Schubert, A.; Soler,
M.; Soos, S.; Sorde, T.; Travis, C.; Van Horik, R. (2018): A review of literature on evaluat-
ing the scientific, social and political impact of social sciences and humanities research.
Research Evaluation, 27, 298-308.
Rein, M.; Schön, D. (1993): Reframing policy discourse. In: Hajer, M.A.; Dunn, W.; Hoppe, R.;
Healey, P.; Jennings, B.; Dryzek, J.; Kaplan, T.; MacRae, D.; Rein, M. (e ds.) (1993): The
argumentative turn in policy analysis and planning, Duke University Press.
Rudd, M. A. (2011): How Research-Prioritization Exercises Affect Conservation Policy. Conser-
vation Biology, 25, 860-866.
Sabatier, P. A. (1988): An advocacy coalition framework of policy change and the role of policy -
oriented learning therein. Policy Sciences, 21, 129-168.
Sabatier, P. A. (1993): Policy change over a decade or more. In: Jenkins-Smith, H. C.; Sabatier,
P. A. (eds.) (1993): Policy change learning: an advocacy coalition approach Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Sanderson, I. ( 2002): Evaluation, policy learning and evidence‐ based policy making. Public
Administration, 80, 1-22.
Sanderson, I. (2009): Intelligent Policy Making for a Complex World: Pragmatism, Evidence and
Learning. Political Studies, 57, 699-719.
Sarkki, S. (2017): Balancing credibility, relevance and legitimacy: A critical assessment of trade-
offs in science–policy interfaces. Science and Public Policy, 41, 194-206.
Schmidt, V. A. ( 2002): Does Discourse Matter in the Politics of Welfare State Adjustment?
Comparative Political Studies, 35, 168-193.
Schmidt, V. A. ( 2008): Discursive institutionalism: The explanatory power of ideas and dis-
course. Annual Review of Political Science, 11, 303-326.
Schmidt, V. A. ( 2010): Taking ideas and discourse seriously: explaining change through discur-
sive institutionalism as the fourth 'new institutionalism'. European Political Science Re-
view, 2, 1-25.
Schmidt, V. A. (2012): The State and Political Economic Change: Beyond Rational Choice and
Historical Institutionalism to Discursive I nstitutionalism. In: Telò, M. (ed.) ( 2012): State,
Globalization and Multilateralism: The challenges of institutionalizing regionalism. Dor-
drecht: Springer Netherlands.
Schmidt, V. A. (2016): The roots of neo- liberal resilience: Explaining continuity and c hange in
background ideas in Europe's political economy. British Journal of Politics & International
Relations, 18, 318-334.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
References 37

Schmidt, V. A. (2017): Britain-out and Trump- in: a discursive institutionalist analysis of the Brit-
ish referendum on the EU and the US presidential election. Review of International Politi-
cal Economy, 24, 248-269.
Scott, R. (2014): Institutions and Organizations, Stanford University, USA, Sage.
Searle, J. R. (1969): Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language, Cambridge, Cam-
bridge University Press.
Seeleib‐Kaiser, M. ; Fleckenstein, T. J. S. P. ( 2007): Discourse, learning and welfare state
change: the case of German labour market reforms. Social Policy & Administration , 41,
427-448.
Seo, M. G.; Creed, W. E. D. ( 2002): Institutional contradictions, praxis, and institutional change:
A dialectical perspective. Academy of Management Review, 27, 222-247.
Shackley, S.; Wynne, B. (1996): Representing uncertainty in global climate change science and
policy: Boundary-ordering devices and authority. Science Technology & Human Values,
21, 275-302.
Smith, K. (2013a): Beyond Evidence Based Policy in Public Health, Palgrave Macmillan.
Smith, K. E. ( 2013b): Understanding the Influence of Evidence in Public Health Policy: What
Can We Learn from the ‘Tobacco Wars’? Social Policy & Administration, 47, 382-398.
Spaapen, J. ; Van Drooge, L. ( 2011): Introducing 'productive interactions' in social impact as-
sessment. Research Evaluation, 20, 211-218.
Spoth, R.; Rohrbach, L. A. ; Greenberg, M.; Leaf, P.; Brown, C. H. ; Fagan, A.; Catalano, R. F. ;
Pentz, M. A.; Sloboda, Z.; Hawkins, J. D. (2013): Addressing core challenges for the next
generation of type 2 translation research and systems: the translation science to popula-
tion impact (TSci Impact) framework. Prev Sci, 14, 319-51.
Stampfer, M. (2019): Pros and Cons of Distribution Streams of Governmental Funding for Re-
search. Stokholm: Analysis for FORMAS.
Stevens, A. (2007): Survival of the Ideas that Fit: An Evolutionary Analogy for the Use of Evi-
dence in Policy. Social Policy and Society, 6, 25.
Stilgoe, J.; Owen, R.; Macnaghten, P. (2013): Developing a framework for responsible innova-
tion. Research Policy, 42, 1568-1580.
Stirling, A . (2007): Risk, precaution and science: towards a more constructive policy debate.
EMBO reports, 8, 309-315.
Strassheim, H.; Kettunen, P. (2014): When does evidence- based policy turn into policy -based
evidence? Configurations, contexts and mechanisms. Evidence & Policy: A Journal of
Research, Debate and Practice, 10, 259-277.
Topp, L.; Mair, D.; Smillie, L.; Cairney, P. J. P. C. ( 2018): Knowledge management for policy
impact: the case of the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre. Palgrave Com-
munications, 4, 87.
Upham, P.; Dendler, L. ( 2015): Scientists as policy actors: A study of the language of biofuel
research. Environmental Science & Policy, 47, 137-147.
Uzochukwu, B.; Onwujekwe, O.; Mbachu, C.; Okwuosa, C.; Etiaba, E.; Nystrom, M. E.; Gilson,
L. (2016): The challenge of bridging the gap between researchers and policy makers: ex-
periences of a Health Policy Research Group in engaging policy makers to support evi-
dence informed policy making in Nigeria. Global Health, 12, 67.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
38 References
Van Der Arend, J. (2014): Bridging the research/policy gap: policy officials' perspectives on the
barriers and facilitators to effective links between academic and policy worlds. Policy
Studies, 35, 611-630.
Van Der Sluijs, J. ; Van Eijndhoven, J. ; Shackley, S. ; Wynne, B. (1998): Anchoring devices in
science for policy: The case of consensus around climate sensitivity. Social Studies of
Science, 28, 291-323.
Van Est, R. (2019): Thinking parliamentary technology assessment politically: Exploring the link
between democratic policy m aking and parliamentary TA. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 139, 48-56.
Van Nes, P. (2011): Impact analysis of the Joint Research Centre and its direct actions under
the EU Research Framework Programmes. EUR - Scientific and Technical Research Re-
ports. Brussels: JRC.
Wall, T. U. ; Mcnie, E. ; Garfin, G. M. ( 2017): Use-inspired science: making science usable by
and useful to decision makers. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 15, 551-559.
Weber, K. M. ; Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies
for transformative change: Combining insights from innovation systems and multi -level
perspective in a comprehensive ‘failures’ framework. Research Policy, 41, 1037-1047.
Weible, C. M. ; Pattison, A. ; Sabatier, P. A . (2010): Harnessing expert -based information for
learning and the sustainable management of complex socio- ecological systems. Envi-
ronmental Science & Policy, 13, 522-534.
Weichselgartner, J. ; Kasperson, R. ( 2010): Barriers in the science- policy-practice i nterface:
Toward a knowledge-action-system in global environmental change research. Global En-
vironmental Change, 20, 266-277.
Weiss, C. H. (1979): The Many Meanings of Research Utilization. Public Administration Review,
39(5), 426-431.
Weiss, C. (1980): Knowledge creep and decision accretion. Knowlegde, 1, 381-404.
Weiss, C. H.; Murphy-Graham, E.; Petrosino, A.; Gandhi, A. G. (2008): The Fairy Godmother—
and Her Warts. American Journal of Evaluation, 29, 29-47.
Weiss, C. ( 1982): Policy research in the context of diffuse decision making. The Journal of
Higher Education, 53, 619-639.
Wilkinson, C. (2017): Evidencing impact: a case study of UK academic perspectives on evidenc-
ing research impact. Studies in Higher Education, 1-14.
Wu, X. ; Ramesh, M. ; Howlett, M. (2017): Policy capacity: A conceptual framework for under-
standing policy competences and capabilities. Policy and Society, 34(3-4), 165-171.
