
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 63
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, March 2020

Current R&I policy:
The future development of China´s R&I system

Rainer Frietsch

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Funding acknowledgement: This paper is based on a report funded by the Joint Re-
search Centre of the European Commission as background in preparation of a JRC
report on China's industrial modernization (Preziosi et al. 2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I

Contents
1 Introduction .......................................................................................................... 1
2 Policy diffusion and implementation .................................................................. 5
2.1 Policy learning and policy experimentation .......................................... 6
2.2 Reasons for instability and inconsistencies .......................................... 8
2.3 Concluding remarks on policy learning .............................................. 10
3 Current Science and Innovation Policies ......................................................... 11
3.1 The Innovation-driven Economy Development Strategy .................... 11
3.2 Internet Plus and Made in China 2025 ............................................... 13
3.2.1 Internet Plus ...................................................................................... 13
3.2.2 Made in China 2025 .......................................................................... 14
3.2.3 Implementations of MIC2025 ............................................................. 16
3.2.4 Perspectives on Internet Plus and Made in China 2025 ..................... 17
3.3 The Belt and Road Initiative ............................................................... 20
4 Current reforms of the R&I funding and the governance of the
innovation system at the central level ............................................................. 23
4.1 Changes of the previous system ........................................................ 23
4.2 The governance of the R&I system .................................................... 25
4.3 The reform of the CAS ....................................................................... 28
5 Concluding remarks: Chinese policies and European strategies .................. 29
6 References ......................................................................................................... 31

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II Contents

Figures
Figure 1: Chinese actors in the context of Made in China 2025 .................... 17
Figure 2: Layout of the science and innovation governance structure .......... 26
Figure 3: Appropriation for S&T by Central Government in the main
programs of S&T, 2016 ................................................................. 28

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Introduction 1

1 Introduction
China's catching up was not only taking place in economic terms, but also in strategic
and policy terms. In other words, the systemic change that took place economically
was accompanied or even driven by new policy approaches and shifts in focus of the
policy activities. While the innovation system emerged , also the system of science and
innovation policy was developed in parallel.
This discussion paper addresses policy learning and policy implementation in China
since about 2006. In particular, the potential change of research and innovation policy
under Xi Jinping is discussed, as well as core policies and strategies to further improve
the Chinese innovation system and to shift it from a low -cost to an innovation-driven
economy. The Internet Plus strategy and Made in China 2025 (MIC2025) as the most
well-known policies that support the overall and most central "Innovation Dr iven Devel-
opment Strategy" are briefly introduced. A first section, however, discusses policy -
making processes and policy learning processes in China in general. It tries to sketch
the current debate in the scientific literature, if the reform era ended and if the new au-
thoritarianism under Xi Jinping is hampering policy implementation and policy learning
as well as the future economic development.
In the past years the Chinese government has initiated a number of reforms and
changes to the system, stressing the market forces and a liberalisation of several regu-
lations. Criticism, however, arises that these announcements are not sufficiently fol-
lowed by corresponding actions (ECC 2018). Business surveys like the one by the Eu-
ropean Chamber of Commerce (ECC 2 017) or also the German Chamber of Com-
merce1 emphasise the still existing challenges and obstacles for foreign companies in
China. These challenges concern regulations and limitations of market access, insuffi-
cient IPR protection, unfair and unequal treatm ent, as well as quasi monopolies of
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) with governmental support, or the discrimination
against foreign companies in public procurement procedures. Negative effects for for-
eign companies are derived from the existing dominance o f SOEs in certain sectors,
from the forced technology transfer, as well as from regulations with ambiguous rules
and discretionary enforcement. Representatives of US government agencies as well as
companies raised similar concerns. Different institutions i n the USA continuously ac-

1 https://www.dihk.de/themenfelder/international/laender-und-maerkte/asien-
pazifik/umfragen-und-prognosen/konjunktur-china-2017

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction

cuse China of following a mercantilist strategy and of breaching WTO rules on subsi-
dising companies as well as discrimination against foreign companies in China.2

BOX: Examples of obstacles for (foreign) companies
One of the most intensively debated alterations is the Cyber Security Law that took
effect in June 2017. It regulates data collection, use, storage and especially data ex-
port. Data that is collected in China needs to be stored in China and can only be ex-
ported after a so called 'security review'. This also holds for data traffic between a Chi-
nese branch and headquarters of a foreign company abroad, for example. The existing
internet censoring is an obstacle that is a challenge as well, but on top and as a further
aggravation, the Chinese government considerably restricted the use of VPN clients for
secure data transfer in and out of China in early 2018. These restrictions of internet
and data use lead to considerable (potential) problems in the business processes of
companies. Furthermore, and even more severe, it leaves a back -door for the Chinese
government to access otherwise confidential and secure data, including business se-
crets, strategies and business models, as well as valuable process data.
The reform of the Chinese patent law in 2010 integrated a similar back-door. While that
reform brought the Chinese patent system closer to Western systems, especially in
Europe – at least on paper – it also entailed a few negative aspects. Since 2010, com-
pulsory licensing is poss ible in cases of national interest. Furthermore, it is mandatory
for inventions made in China first to file them in China. Based on this, filing a patent for
a China-made invention abroad requires application and approval to do so. SIPO (now
called National Intellectual Property Administration, NIPA) checks, if national security or
vital interests are violated, and gives approval if not.
High hopes arose, by not only foreign company representatives in China, but by econ-
omists around the globe after Xi Jinping's speech at the World Economic Forum in Da-
vos in 2017, where he made a pledge for further opening China and where he defend-
ed free trade and global market principles. The public announcement at the World

2 See for example: http://www2.itif.org/2018- testimony-atkinson-countering-
china.pdf?_ga=2.230946006.833322852.1538460790-1166197201.1538460790;
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/2016-China-Report-to-Congress.pdf;
https://www.amchamchina.org/policy-advocacy/business-climate-survey/

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Introduction 3

Economic Forum was then also followed by concrete plans3 and even roadmaps to put
forward the opening of the Chinese economy. The criticism, however, is that these re-
forms are not sufficient, too slow and too half -hearted (ECC 2018). For example, the
reduction of the prohibited investment list and the accompanying announced liberalisa-
tions of investment rules in certain sectors like transport, finance, infrastructure, or ag-
riculture are criticised as being just cosmetics (Schaff and Schetelig, 2018). In addition,
some of them are just aggregations of similar sectors of the previous list or are liberali-
sations of otherwise restricted (like weapons) or settled markets with oligopolistic struc-
tures (like rail transport, shipbuilding or fuel/petrol production). In consequence, the
formerly longer list is now shortened, but with limited effect.
However, even against the background of obstacles and challenges for foreign compa-
nies, the majority of them still makes good business in present times and expects this
to be the case in the near future. The business survey of the European Chamber of
Commerce (ECC 2018), of the German Chamber of Commerce (AHK 2017) and of the
American Chamber of Commerce (AmChamChina 2018) report rather positive expec-
tations of companies for the development of the Chinese economy in 2018. In addition,
the vast majority of surveyed companies in all three studies expects their business to
improve or at least to be as good as it was in past years. Only few companies believe
that they will not meet their business targets for their China business in 2018. In con-
sequence, compared to previous years (2015 and especially 2016) the confidence of a
positive development is much higher. However, several companies are still reluctant to
release new investments or to increase their investments in t he near future, due to un-
certainties about future developments.
The EU-China Summit in 2018, where political leaders from both sides meet and rep-
resentatives of the economic and scientific communities are present as well, also
sends positive signals for future developments. It was even possible to formulate a joint
statement for the first time since 2015, which stresses the intention to intensify the col-
laboration in a number of areas between China and Europe. "The two sides are strong-
ly committed to foster ing an open world economy, improving trade and investment lib-
eralisation and facilitation, resisting protectionism and unilateralism, and making global-
isation more open, balanced, inclusive, and beneficial to all. " (Joint statement

3 GuoFa No. 5/2017: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017- 01/17/content_5160624.htm;
GuoFa No. 39/2017: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-
08/16/content_5218057.htm; an English translation of both documents can be found in
ECC 2018, pp.63-72.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 Introduction

No. 8, p.3).4 The EU acknowledges the efforts that the Chinese side made to achieve a
level-playing field, for example, to improv e market access or to strengthen intellectual
property rights. The European Union and the People's Republic of China intend to set
up an investment agr eement, which would facilitate an open and more transparent
business environment for both sides. The EU -China Annual Action Program 5 foresees
a number of projects with a considerable budget of 35 million Euro in the context of
societal challenges like environmental issues, digitalisation, or also migration.
For a very long time, foreign countries have made good business in China based on
technological superiority and their innovative competitiveness, while the competition by
Chinese companies was limited and mostly restricted to low -end market segments or
low-tech sectors ( Prud'Homm and von Zedwitz 2018; Liu et al. 2017). This, however,
has changed in the recent years and the competitiveness and innovativeness of Chi-
nese companies resembles that of foreign c ompanies in many areas and sectors, ac-
cording to business surveys (ECC 2018; AmChamChina 2018). At the same time, Chi-
nese companies in low -end or labour -based production markets are getting under
pressure by lower production cost countries like Bangladesh in the case of textiles or
by automation, for example, in the case of the assembly of micro -electronics. In addi-
tion, labour costs for R&D personnel - this not only includes wages6, but also additional
direct and indirect costs - almost increased to a similar level like in (Western) countries
in most sectors/disciplines so that cost -advantages are not among the main motiva-
tions for foreign companies to conduct or even transfer R&D activities to China (Tag-
scherer 2015; Kinkel 2014). Knowledge-seeking and knowledge-sourcing are rather the
motives for many foreign companies to conduct (parts of their) R&D in China (Tag-
scherer 2015), while it was mostly market access in the past decade (Schwaag Serger
2006; Boutellier et al. 2013; Thomson and de Rassenfosse 2013).
All these positive developments have been made possible by changes, adaptations
and reforms of the Chinese science, technology and innovation system over the past
years. While the foundations for all these reforms and policies were laid out in the MLP
(Mid-to-Longterm Plan for Science and Technology) already in 2006, more recently
three big policies were widely recognised and some of them broadly discussed also at
a global level. However, some spectators see challenges and even obstacles for the

4 http://eueuropaeeas.fpfis.slb.ec.europa.eu:8084/delegations/china/48424/joint -statement-
20th-eu-china-summit_en
5 http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/fpi/announcements/news/20180716_en.htm
6 https://www.kellyservices.cn/cn/siteassets/china---kelly-services/uploadedfiles/china_-
_kelly_services/4-
resource_centre/salary_guide/kelly20services20201720salary20guide_f2.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Policy diffusion and implementation 5

further development arising from current policy and governance changes in China. This
paper addresses some of these critiques and perspectives and describes the most
relevant innovation policies in China against this background.
2 Policy diffusion and implementation
China is about twice the size of the EU -28 countries and has almost three times more
inhabitants than the European Union. The economic development of the past years
was unevenly distributed not only between different parts of society and between rural
and urban population, but also between different regions/provinces within the country
(Kroll and Frietsch 2014). Most of the Chinese provinces are larger than European
countries in terms of inhabitants, and even some cities are larger than most European
countries. In consequence, the need for and the reach of science and innovation policy
is rather disperse. The three agglomerations of Beijing/Bohai Bay Area, Yangtze River
Delta (Shanghai), and Pearl River Delta (Guangzhou) were the main drivers of the
economic development of the last decade.
Beijing/Bohai Bay Areas mainly is the political and scientific hub of China (Kroll and
Frietsch 2014). More recently, Beijing was developed further as a financial hot -spot in
China as well as the service industry. At the s ame time production facilities and indus-
try was re-located out of the greater Beijing area to the surrounding provinces/cities to
speed-up the restructuring process. The Yangtze- River Delta developed very quickly
due to considerable foreign direct investment - most of the large multinational compa-
nies set up their first production facilities here. Meanwhile they spread out to the sur-
rounding cities and provinces (e.g. Jiangsu, Zhejiang). In addition, a number of Chi-
nese created and benefitted from a dynamic economic/innovation environment. At the
same time scientific excellence developed at a number of universities and research
institutes that provides the intellectual foundation of this dynamic environment. In the
Pearl-River Delta, on the other hand, the academic institutions are still of limited quality
and reach. The competitive edge of Guangdong province is mainly the large production
facilities, mainly with manual labour in electronic industries or low-tech sectors. In addi-
tion, the region benefitted fr om its geo -strategic location close to Hong -Kong, Macau
and the maritime transport routes to East -Asia, North -America, but also Europe and
Africa. The Pearl -River Delta was and still is China's gate to the world in terms of ex-
ports. Beyond these larger areas, a number of dynamics cities of regions came up es-
pecially in the recent years, fuelled by an increasing role of IT -services and internet -
based companies, serving the fast growing Chinese market, but also reaching out to
the world, e.g. in Shenzhen or Hangzhou.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Policy diffusion and implementation

Since the beginning of this decade other provinces like Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Chongqing,
or Shandong are on the rise, either by extensions of the existing hubs/ clusters or by
own efforts with means of science, innovation or investment policies. Besides, c ities
like Shanghai or Beijing, with 10 to 20 million inhabitants, formulated their own priorities
and strategies, based on own reporting/monitoring and policy processes. Also smaller
cities like Qingdao at the East coast, Chengdu in central China or Shenzhen in the
South set up their own research and innovation priorities and try to achieve their aims
with own strategies and policies. All of them are, however, not independent from the
central government's policy goals and policy activities.
2.1 Policy learning and policy experimentation
Chinese policy-making, among others in the context of science and innovation, always
followed a top- down approach, but with flexibility on the provincial or municipal level
when it comes to implementation and adaptation (Breznitz, and Murphree 2010; Teets
et al. 2017). This left enough room for variation and it was a way to ensure policy learn-
ing and policy experimentation that is necessary, even mandatory in a developing and
dynamic system. Policy learning in this cont ext means that provincial or municipal gov-
ernments/bureaucracies adapt central policy ideas to local needs and derive best prac-
tices. These best practices were then communicated and exchanged with other provin-
cial or municipal policymakers and in some cases rolled out nationally and became part
of a revised policy. 7 This was and is a common procedure , even used by the central
government at the national level, for example with the special development or demon-
stration zones. In some cases the policies are piloted in some regions, and the lessons
are learned and best solutions/policy formula are identified before they are diffused and
implemented nationally through a formal policy document. But in some cases, especial-
ly in the event of urgency, they might not have the time to go through the process. They
are mostly the responsive policies, and called crossing the river by touching the stones.
One of the most well -known cases is the '10 cities, 1000 cars' program launched in
2009 to get electro -mobility kick -started and support the capacity and competence
building of national electric car manufacturers ( Tagscherer and Frietsch 2014). The
free trade zone in Shanghai is another example, or even the one country -two-systems-
approach concerning the special status of Hong Kong falls into this category.
Especially in the second half of the last decade the possibility for variation and flexibility
led to strong deviances from the central government 's policies, for example in the case
of environmental regulations. In addition, policy makers at the provincial or municipal

7 https://www.merics.org/de/blog/xis-china-party-morphs-state

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Policy diffusion and implementation 7

level set -up incentive structures for companies, for example by cheap land, cheap
credits and especially tax benefits that aimed building a local/regional economic sys-
tem. Examples exist where companies enga ged in rent -seeking and built branches in
different provinces, sometimes close to borders of the provinces, to benefit from subsi-
dies (Conlé and Taube 2010). Local policymakers were judged and assessed by the
performance of the local economic system. In consequence, their main interest was not
necessarily the implementation of environmental regulations required by the central
government, but the development of their local economy.
"Heaven is high and the emperor is far away" is a traditional Chinese saying that kept
its validity over centuries and essentially means that the central policies and require-
ments are selected or adapted and the central government can hardly do anything
about it. In consequence, also in terms of the implementation of science and innovation
policy at the provincial or municipal level, the central government's approaches are
seen as guidelines that come along with sanctions and incentives. The intensity and
level of implementation or adaptation were to be decided at the local level. Based on
the flexibility and variations not only in policy implementations, but also in terms of fit
with the local economic or societal development status , several researchers (e.g.
Huang et al. 2016: 6) conclude that there is not one single Chinese Innovation System,
but a number of such systems that aggregate to the national innovation system (Liefner
and Wei 2014) . Breznitz and Murphree (2011: 8) summarise it in the following way:
"…China's economy should not be analysed as one homogenous economic entity but
rather as a multitude of regional systems. … [C]ollectively, these regional systems
combine to form a unique, de facto national innovation system …".
The positive effects of the diversity of the policy implementations were policy learning,
adaptability and (potential) orientation at the real or effective needs at the local level.
Negative effects range from strong deviations or even ignorance of central policy goals,
via inefficiencies, mismanagement, and abuse of public funding, down to cronyism and
bribery. Another negative effect is what some analysts (e.g. Teets et al. 2017)8 have
called 'ossification' – the detachment of central policy makers from the public as well as
from local officials.
To conclude and put it into perspective of R&I policy: this kind of policy learning is of
particular relevance as it allows for a fast and needs -oriented adaptation and imple-
mentation of central policies. The catching-up and fast development of the past decade
was only possible because local policy makers were using the central policy with flexi-

8 See also: http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2016/12/20/how-xi-jinpings-leadership-
discourages-local-innovation/

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 Policy diffusion and implementation

bility. It also resulted in scientific and technological specialisation as they were able to
foster their local strengths. Leaving questions of efficiency aside at this point, the effec-
tiveness of the policies and the infrastructure investments are obvious.
At the same time, flexible policy adaptation ensured the 'trickling down' not only of insti-
tutional arrangements, but also of the policy ideas as such. Most of the provinces and
even cities have similar structures like the central government level, including local
authorities with tasks like the Ministry of Science and Technology or also similar re-
search bodies like local academies of sciences or local governmental research insti-
tutes. However, next to this administrative infrastructure also the policy ideas had to
diffuse. Local policy makers were assessed based on their economic successes, but
innovation as a driving force of this economic success was not part of the mind- sets
neither of policy makers nor of managers, be it in state- owned enterprises or private
companies a decade ago - and partially still is not today. It took a while for the central
policy ideas to arrive at the local level. Directives, incentives, funding and infrastructure
investments alone were not sufficient, but simply policy learning over time did the trick.
Cities like Hangzhou or Shenzhen were able to go their own way to some extent and
then even became role models for other s, so the policy learning could spread. This,
however, has started to change already in the last decade or so as innovation has be-
come part of the performance evaluation criteria of government officials.
2.2 Reasons for instability and inconsistencies
Essentially, the promise of the early years of Deng Xiaoping's opening-up and espe-
cially of the last decade's steep economic development led to inequalities and injustic-
es. As long as the cake was growing and everyone's piece of this cake was growing as
well, it was acceptable that for some the pieces were much larger than for others.
Cleavages between poor and rich, between rural and urban, and between party cadres
and regular citizens were expanding in the last years. I nequalities and structural differ-
ences emerge, for example, out of the hukou – the national household registration sys-
tem that is linked to pension schemes, health insurance and many more – as well as
the gaokao – the national university entry test, which was perverted by the possibility of
essentially circumventing it with the rich buying their children into the elite universities.
Many riots and public conflicts arose at the local level out of such inequalities or out of
perceptions of injustice (Minzner 2018: 87). In addition, the promise of a growing cake
for everyone is not sufficient any more. Many Chinese citizens ask for less inequality or
at least for equal chances, which are not given anymore, as the example of the gaukau
shows.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Policy diffusion and implementation 9

One could say this is a lack of consistency in policy making. These inconsistencies
partly emerge due to the differences in political thoughts at top level, but also due to 1)
the changes of positions of regional or ministerial leaders at the regional and sectoral
levels, as well as 2) China is still a learning nation in terms of policy, and it is open to
correction of incorrect policy, and 3) policies coming from different ministries or differ-
ent government departments that lack of coherence or coordination.
A recent discussion in the literature on Chinese (innovation) policy emerged addressing
the changed governance style and increased control and evaluation mechanisms –
some call this authoritarianism (e.g. Shambaugh 2016; Minzner 2018) – as well as
more centralized policymaking in the era of Xi Jinping since his fir st term started in
2012. "... [M]any local officials below the provincial level report a substantial increase in
the need to file work reports to supervisors who are concerned with meeting new
guidelines for central supervision. "9 On the one hand, the hete rogeneity and flexibility
in adapting central policies is a necessary prerequisite for the economic, social, and
structural change that is underway (Breznitz and Murphree 2011; Teets et al. 2017). It
is hampered by control and reporting systems, formal evaluation criteria, and especially
by reprisals and threats of negative career paths, or even legal consequences including
lifelong prison or death sentence in case of deviating action. As an effect of this, policy
learning does not take place (to the same extent) and an improvement of the overall
innovation system – seen as an aggregation of provincial or municipal systems – is
considerably slowed down. " Although some officials are still conducting policy experi-
mentation, the overall reduction in innovation strongly suggests that potential solutions
to governance problems remain trapped at the local level, and that the central govern-
ment might lose this 'adaptable' governance mechanism that has contributed to its past
economic and political successes" (Teets et al. 2017: 505).
On the other hand, the perspective that is taken by Minzner (2018) emphasises the
negative effects of the last decade's flexible/liberal policies . He argues that the reform
era ended and the pendulum swings back to – although modernised - socialist, com-
munist and especially Chinese norms and values . The liberalisation and flexible inter-
pretation of policies under Hu Jintao and Wen Xiabao led to a deterioration of the pre-
viously existing institutions that guided policy making at the local level, which then re-
sulted in excessive negative effects. While Teets et al. (2017) argues that stronger con-
trols and top-down policy implications lead to negative effects in terms of policy learn-

9 Jessica Teets at http://www.chinafile.com/conversation/what -does-xi-jinpings-top-down-
leadership-mean-innovation-china

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 Policy diffusion and implementation

ing and policy experimentation, Minzner's (2018) line of arg umentation could be sum-
marised as the necessity to rule an otherwise destabilising country.
In Minzner's eyes, a logical reaction to this is the centralisation of power, the control
and assurance of implementing central policies, the increase of the party discipline,
and also the anti-corruption campaign to fight injustice and inequalities as well as reviv-
ing traditional Chinese norms with Xi Jinping's 'Chinese Dream', which is the appella-
tion to Chinese traditionalism and nationalism. He explains it by his torical as well as
societal/cultural reasons. Most of the time, China has been ruled top down with a cen-
tralised power system, so his argumentation.
The improvement of the 'rule of law', which means greater reliability of laws and judicial
decision making is stressed by Xi Jinping in several speeches, also in his opening
speech at the 19 th People's Congress in March 2018, can also be seen as part of this
intention to stabilise the system. 10 One could interpret this positively as bringing back
greater predictability and trust in the legal system by the citizens. Some scholars, how-
ever, are very sceptical, given the recent trends in 'social credit scoring' as well as in-
ternet and social media censoring, and see the 'rule of law' narrative effectively as an
intention to implement a stronger system of 'rule by law', which means control and pat-
ronising as well as intimidation. The Party sets the rules and might even be exempt
from the general ones, defining its own rules.
2.3 Concluding remarks on policy learning
Flexible adaptation of central policies as well as policy learning and policy experimenta-
tion still exists in today's China. It still provides a relevant contribution to the develop-
ment of the economic, social, innovation or overall political system. The academ ic
questions are not, whether the negative effects of this policy making predominate or
the positive effects justify the acceptance of the negative outcomes. Scholar mostly
agree that for reasons of avoiding inefficiency as well as gaining stability and justice,
the negative effects should be reduced. Cronyism and bribery were always criticised.
However, the discussions that arose in the recent years address the question, if the
approach taken under Xi Jinping is the appropriate way to tackle these issues. A final
answer can neither be found in the literature nor in the current status of the Chinese
economy or innovation system, so the future needs to show. At least, where most of
the authors take the same position is on the changing effects of the governanc e style

10
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/download/Xi_Jinping's_report_at_19th_CPC_National_C
ongress.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Current Science and Innovation Policies 11

under Xi Jinping compared to the previous administration under Hu Jintao. Local bu-
reaucrats and policy makers are much more cautious in what they do and how far they
deviate. "...midlevel bureaucrats have hunkered down in fear that a wrong move wil l
end their careers, or worse" (Minzner 2018: 29).
3 Current Science and Innovation Policies
3.1 The Innovation-driven Economy Development Strategy
The Chinese science and innovation policy is mainly dedicated to overcome the so
called middle-income-trap and to move away from low -cost, low value added produc-
tion to a more balanced economic structure that generates higher value added. For
Chinese policy makers, one of the core challenges is to become less dependent on
foreign markets and especially on technology i mports in crucial sectors. President Xi
Jinping pointed this out: " China’s foundation for science and technology innovation is
still not firm. China’s capacity for indigenous innovation, and especially original innova-
tion, is still weak. Fundamentally, the fact that we are controlled by others in critical
fields and key technologies has not changed" (European Chamber 2017: 7).
While the ' National Medium- and Long-Term Programme for Science and Technology
Development' (MLP) that was published in 2006 as well as the 12 th Five-Year-Plan
(12th FYP) already addressed the innovation orientation and the upgrade of the econ-
omy, it was made explicit in the National Innovation- driven Strategy in 2012 and its
outline, published in 2016. This strategy conveys three main steps for the further de-
velopment of the country that were then adopted as strategic goals for achieving a so-
cialist modernization by the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China in
October 2017. By 2020 China will be an innovative nation, an international innovation
leader by 2030, and a world powerhouse of scientific and technological innovation by
2050.11
The shift from a low-cost to an innovation-driven economy as formulated in the National
Development Strategy is the overarching approach. It was explicitly stressed in the
13th FYP and several measures and policies were put into the planning to support this
goal, among them MIC2025 or Internet Plus, but also the reform of the science system,
a focus on mass entrepreneurship and mass innovat ion as well as additional R&D in-
vestments. Elements of an innovation- driven economy are talents, enhancing innova-
tion capabilities, an adequate entrepreneurial ecosystem, or general improvements of

11 http://english.gov.cn/policies/latest_releases/2016/05/20/content_281475353682191.htm

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 Current Science and Innovation Policies

the innovation system as such (Jung 2016). Quantitative ta rgets like the 2.5% goal of
R&D expenditures over GDP that were already defined in the MLP in 2006 were em-
phasised again. A change towards a consumption- oriented economy and a develop-
ment of the local market, thereby becoming more independent of exports and global
markets, is also stressed in the strategy.12
Individual policies, like Made in China 2025 or the Internet Plus strategy are contrib-
uting to this overall goal. Individual fields and technologies should also contribute.
"Make breakthroughs in key technologies and equipment, such as additive manufactur-
ing, smart sensing and control … [as well as] breakthroughs in a range of key equip-
ment which are subject to export restrictions abroad and urgently needed domestically,
such as aero -engines, gas turbines and high-end CNC machine tools. "13 In addition,
the strategic industries, firstly mentioned in connection with the release of the 12 th FYP
in the year 2011 and updated in 2017, still play a major role also for the general eco-
nomic upgrade. The list of thes e industries covers energy efficient and environmental
technologies, n ext generation information technology, biotechnology , h igh-end equip-
ment manufacturing, new energy, new materials, and new -energy vehicles (NEVs) . In
the year 2017 two more industries were added, namely digital innovation and related
services.
Additional focal points of research that were announced in the second half of 2017 are
quantum research, 5G, and artificial intelligence ( AI)14, including autonomous driv-
ing15. Furthermore, basic research will be strengthened by restructuring the funding
system (see previous chapter) and the increase of the budget of the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC). Technology transfer and collaboration between
science and industry is still a challenge in China. The State Council had identified this
already several years ago and just recently released a notice, which drafts a plan to set
up a national technology transfer system in two steps. By 2020 a first professionaliza-
tion of institutions and people is foreseen and by 2025 the transfer system should be in
full operation.16 The concrete measures and policies to implement these plans are not
yet published, however.

12 https://www.rieti.go.jp/en/events/bbl/13041201.html
13 http://english.cd-smartindustry.com/news_show.aspx?id=245
14 http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-07/20/content_5211996.htm;
http://www.usito.org/news/china-launches-implementation-national-ai-development-plan
15 http://www.usito.org/news/ndrc-releases-intelligent-vehicle-innovation-and-development-
strategy; http://www.ndrc.gov.cn/yjzq/201801/t20180105_873146.html
16 http://www.usito.org/news/china-establish-national-technology-transfer-system

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Current Science and Innovation Policies 13

3.2 Internet Plus and Made in China 2025
3.2.1 Internet Plus
The aim to develop China into a n innovation oriented economy and upgrade its perfor-
mance is mentioned in many speeches and policies. 17 China should shift from a great
industrial nation to a strong industrial nation. The dependence on foreign technologies
is still seen as the central challenge for climbing up the value chains. The superior goal
to change China's role from the workbench of the world to an innovation -driven econ-
omy was further fuelled mainly by two new policies.
At the People's Congress in March 2015 , among others, two new strategies appeared
which have since been intensively debated within China and abroad: 'Made in China
2025' (see next section) and 'Internet Plus' . In his opening speech 18 Premier Li
Keqiang mentioned this latter strategy19, which is essentially the strat egy for the inte-
grated use and the application of the Internet in several industries, mainly in the service
sector. The Internet economy and traditional industries should merge in several as-
pects until 2025 and by then an ecosystem should be developed, whi ch is the founda-
tion for the further development. Essentially, this strategy builds the framework for the
digitalisation of China, including the needs for infrastructure investments that ensure
the fulfilment of the strategy. In addition, it paves the way for future topics and business
models that Chinese policy makers deem relevant for the economic development of the
concerned sectors. Internet Plus is mainly dedicated to the service industry – including
finance - and services within the manufacturing sector. It aims at making the processes
'smarter' and develop new business models.
The strategy is designed to merge the capabilities of the Internet with different parts of
the economic system like, for example, production, finance, or public services. More
concrete, 11 action points are mentioned: entrepreneurship, intelligent production,
modern agri culture, intelligent energy, financial services, public services, logistics, e -
commerce, transport, marine economy, and artificial intelligence. In total, the strategy is
rather broad and addresses different topics, not only, but mainly in the service industry
or at least building on smart services. This means that the strategy is still technology -
centred, but takes services and new business models into focus, i.e. it does not only
address mastering technologies, but beyond that also further parts of value chains.

17 http://english.gov.cn/policies/latest_releases/2016/05/20/content_281475353682191.htm
18 http://english.gov.cn/archive/publications/2015/03/05/content_281475066179954.htm
19 http://www.usito.org/news/china-pursues-internet-plus-strategy

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 Current Science and Innovation Policies

In July 2015 the State Council published implementation measures for the Internet Plus
strategy. Concrete programs were launched by the National Development and Reform
Commission (NDRC) in late 2017 on Internet Plus and Artificial Intelligence. 20 The
rules emphasise the role of the market and the companies, which should take an im-
portant position in this transition. Core elements of the implementation are further re-
forms of the system, the increase of quality and efficiency of industry, strengthening
new industries and branches, as well as public services and the framework conditions
set by the state. Superior aims are the improvement of the quality and efficiency of the
economy, better public services, improvement of the networks and network security as
well as a more stable economic development.
Therefore, the strategy provides the frame for the broader usage of the Internet and its
implications for the further economic development. It intends to make companies sen-
sible, especially small and medium -sized companies, to this topic and support them to
use their potentials as well as to develop new business models . In addition, it address-
es infrastructure investments and the improvement of general framework conditions as
prerequisites for modernising the economy.
3.2.2 Made in China 2025
Many policies and strategies have a similar timing, with 2025 as a first milestone to set
up the framework and provide the prerequisites for future developments. Also the case
of Made in China 2025 (MIC2025), the most important and most discussed strategy of
the past three years, follows this timing. The title is confusing, however, as 2025 is only
the first phase of the strategy, where only the foundations are to be laid. There are two
more phases, which last up to 2049, when the People's Republic of China will cele-
brate its 100 th birthday. By then China aims to belong to the top innovation- driven
economies in the world. The second phase foresees an upgrade of the whole Chinese
economy – and not just parts of it or certain provinces or sectors – to a similar level
(one could say at least industry 3.0, with high shares of automation and vertical integra-
tion). The horizontal integration and especially the overall increase of the productivity
level to that of the top performers, is left to the third phase. The first phase, correspond-
ingly, foresees the upgrade of parts of the economy and the generation of a (reasona-
ble) number of world- class enterprises that are able to compete with enterprises from
industrialised/Western countries.

20 http://www.ndrc.gov.cn/zcfb/zcfbtz/201710/t20171013_863534.html

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Current Science and Innovation Policies 15

The Made in China 2025 strategy itself ( Guo Fa 28) was released by the State Council
in May 2015. The Implementation rules were published in March 2017 and different
accompanying measures and guidelines – for example for the evaluation of the nation-
al demonstration zones were released as well.
It is publicly discussed and even confessed that MIC2025 was inspired by and shows
parallels to the German Industry 4.0 strategy. This does not mean, however, that China
just blindly copied the German policy approach. However, it meanwhile developed in a
different direction and is much broader now (Gausemeier and Klocke 2016). This poli-
cy, similar to a number of other policies in this context, can be seen as continuations of
the MLP or at least are based on the same approach, namely the upgrade of the econ-
omy via science and technology, so a very techno- centric, but also very technocratic
perspective. Like hardly any other policy or strategy paper by the Chinese government,
Made in China 2025 is based on a critical and r ealistic reflection of the current position
of Chinese industry or the Chinese economy in total, as well as the challenges that
China faces when turning such a strategy into reality. Because of this critical and realis-
tic reflection, the phases of the strategy have longer perspectives than the usual five or
15 year plans. The Chinese government's analysis resulted in the insight that the Chi-
nese manufacturing sector is large but not strong. It has shortcomings in terms of inno-
vation capacity, efficiency, quality of industrial infrastructure as well as quality of out-
puts and also the degree of digitalization.
MIC2025 aims at increasing the quality of the products and of the production as well as
to achieve a green economy. This means energy and material effic ient production as
well as the establishment of a circular economy. In addition, the structures and frame-
work conditions shall improve, also to increase the efficiency. This refers to public find-
ing for major projects, including equipment, as well as an upgrading of major industries.
Policy support by legislation and regulation shall be provided as well as investment
guidelines for major industries (see section 3.7 of MIC2025 on the adjustment of the
structure of the manufacturing sector). Furthermore, the aim is to set up a human capi-
tal and knowledge intensive production with well -qualified personnel and a strong ser-
vice orientation. Overall, quality and efficiency are repeatedly mentioned in this strategy
document. Furthermore, structural reforms and impr ovements of the framework condi-
tions, mainly driven by market forces and market needs, are frequently referred to. Be-
sides, a lower product quality, less established and famous trademarks, a high de-
pendency on foreign high- technology, low energy efficiency and environmental pollu-
tion, as well as an unfortunate industrial structure are seen as challenges or caveats
throughout the document.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 Current Science and Innovation Policies

The strategic tasks and priorities are manifold, which should serve an overall quality
improvement and a general change of the structures . First, innovation in product tech-
nologies are mentioned, which would be achieved by a better market orientation, and
an orientation at the big national strategic needs . Furthermore, research and develop-
ment in key technologies should contribute here. The role of universities and research
organisations, innovation alliances and the collaboration with industry are stressed. As
a first core component of the implementation, 15 innovation centres should be estab-
lished by 2020 and by 2025 there should be 40 of such centres, which address de-
mand oriented topics (for example information technology, advanced manufacturing,
new materials) in collaboration with industry. In addition, the deeper usage of infor-
mation technologies, for example industrial Internet, cloud computing, big data as well
as a general strengthening of the Internet infrastructure are mentioned, which offers an
implicit connection to the Internet P lus strategy. Joint research, n ational science and
technology programs as well as the implementation of platforms and alliances between
different actors of the innovation system (companies, universities, and research organi-
sations) are quoted as examples for innovation policy instruments.
3.2.3 Implementations of MIC2025
A status report of the implementation of MIC2025 was released in March 2017 by the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT).21 It states that by then 19 pro-
vincial manufacturing innovation cent res and 109 smart manufacturing pilot programs
have been launched. Outstanding examples are the National Power Battery Innovation
Centre in Beijing and National Additiv e Manufacturing Innovation Cent re in Xi'an. The
National Information and Optoelectronics Innovation Centre in Wuhan started in April
2018. Demonstration centres are one of the main tools of the MIC2025 strategy and
they fit into the idea of policy learning and the establishment of best practice example.
The intention is to link academic with industrial research and develop standards jointly
between science and industry.
Eight cities and five city clusters act as pilots for the implementation of the policies.
Seen from this perspective, the original targets of the MIC2025 planning are already
achieved. The document claims that r elevant agencies have improved their perfor-
mance and the collaboration and coordination with other agencies and relevant actors .
So far, eleven supporting plans have been drafted and a number of supporting
measures have been put forward. P ilot programs initiated new collaborations between

21 http://english.cd-smartindustry.com/news_show.aspx?id=245

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Current Science and Innovation Policies 17

companies, universities, and research institutes, with the aim of strengthening the ap-
plication orientation.
The responsibilities and contributions to Made in China 2025 and its implementation
are distributed among different minister ial and supporting actors, which themselves
have different focal points. The State Council acts as a coordinating organisation, while
the MIIT is in direct charge of MIC2025. Other ministries make reference to MIC2025
via their own programs, namely NDRC by the Internet Plus strategy or MOST by the
National Technology Plan. The Chinese Academy of Engineering (CAE), which was
already involved in drafting the strategy itself, is responsible for the implementation of
the demonstration centres and the pilot prog rams. They act as a kind of project man-
agement agency in this case. The CAE is an academy without own institutes, but a
strong management and consultative body. The CAE has own staff members and a
number of academicians, who are outstanding researchers with a high reputation in the
field of engineering, affiliated to universities and research institutes from all over the
country. With the MIC2025 CAE goes beyond its original mission of research and poli-
cy consultancy, as it is directly involved in policy implementation.
Figure 1: Chinese actors in the context of Made in China 2025

Source: GIZ; cf. European Chamber of Commerce in China (2017: 9)
3.2.4 Perspectives on Internet Plus and Made in China 2025
Both, with the Internet P lus strategy as well as M ade in China 2025 the Chinese gov-
ernment formulates ambitious goals, but at the same time delivers a realistic assess-

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 Current Science and Innovation Policies

ment of the current development status as well as the timeframe to catch up with the
developed industrialised countries. In particular, MIC2025 was intensively discussed in
the recent past and defines the figurehead of current Chinese innovation policy making.
In the first phase until 2025 China intends to develop multinational enterprises and in-
dustry clusters with a strong international competitive position, with a strongly in-
creased role in the national and global value chains. Up to 2035 China's manufacturing
industry in total shall be brought to a higher level. In 2049 the People's Republic in-
tends to achieve globally leading production capacities and a global competitive ad-
vantage. China should be number one by then, so the intentions. Also in this document
the intention to strengthen the market and market forces are repeatedly stressed, but
also government as a m ajor player is pointed out when it is said that the policies need
to "address the balance of government guidance and market role".22
This strategy is much more comprehensive than previous plans, which mainly targeted
the mastering and the generation of technologies. This holds for both, MIC2025 as well
as Internet Plus. Especially the latter one is going beyond most of the previous plans
and strategies as it addresses also 'soft' solutions and particularly deals with value cre-
ation outside the classical product or technology -based innovations. For a very long
time, however, 'technocrats' with a narrow view on engineering and natural science
solutions as well as the belief in manufacturing as the main vehicle of economic up-
grading governed China. Leaving these 'old habits' behind might not be an easy task.
Concerning an overall assessment of the innovation policy in China, after the inspec-
tion of the current and ongoing reforms in the science system, however, a report by
Development Solutions (2018) on behalf o f the European Commission comes to the
following conclusion: "Chinese decision-makers in many cases still tend to see indus-
trial upgrading and technological transformation as a relatively technical task of devel-
oping and installing advanced equipment, prod ucts, facilities, and infrastructures for
innovation, rather than innovation of operation and management processes" (ibid.:
129). Therefore, also in this case it needs to be seen what the future brings and if Chi-
nese policy makers are serious about widening the perspective beyond manufacturing
and product innovations.
Critics on MIC2025 from within the country point out that the needs of the company's
for connected production technologies and even for first automatisations (this would be
industry 3.0) are c urrently not visible nationwide, but general industrialisation and opti-
misation as a first step seems necessary. However, this strategy can be read in a way

22 http://english.cd-smartindustry.com/news_show.aspx?id=245

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Current Science and Innovation Policies 19

that the government is realistic about the goals and also about the needs and the time
horizon. The government is aware of the problems and challenges, which emerge from
the low development level of certain regions. For example, different to the area of elec-
tro-mobility, where a fast leapfrogging with the established manufacturing countries
was expected, Made in China 2025 as well as Internet P lus seem to be more realistic
in terms of the time frame and the current status and opportunities of China.
Derived from the document analyses alone, an assessment of the quality and the op-
erational capabilities of the centres and clusters cannot be given. Interviews with re-
searchers and policy makers in 2016 and 2017 have shown that there was a huge in-
terest of local (provincial/municipal) actors in locating demonstration centres in their
region or become part of t he clusters.23 Not all of them, however, were capable of ful-
filling the high aims and providing the scientific capabilities as well as the economic
structures. The incentives to participate are high, because the funding and investments
by the government are enormous. In 2017 the budget allocations were released 24 and
the intention is to spend 10 billion yuan (about 1.2 billion €) on about 100 projects in the
years 2018-2020. 30 million (3.8 million €) to 50 million yuan (6.4 million €) and projects
in core technology areas like robotics or integrated circuits 25 will receive even more
than 100 million yuan (13 million €) each. It needs to be seen, if all of the centres and
clusters will be successful and reach the expectations. The impact on R&I policy mak-
ing, however, is huge. On the one hand, the strategy sets the aim that researchers and
companies can follow. It offers investment security and thematic orientation. On the
other hand, it releases large budgets for technologies and implementations in the con-
text of production technologies and related software competences as well as new busi-
ness models. Furthermore, at the provincial or municipal level, further investments in
R&D and implementations will be released as well.
Critics from outside China, among others , stress the (techno)nationalism. This is
based, for example, on the following section in the MIC2025 strategy: " Build several
innovation design clusters with international collaboration, cultivate industrial design
enterprises, and encourage original equi pment manufacturers (OEMs) to build R&D
centers to transfer knowledge to domestic brands". 26 A report by the European
Chamber of Commerce in China points out: " The appearance of ‘indigenous innova-

23 see also: https://www.iotone.com/guide/iot-one-index-made-in-china-2025/g988
24 http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2017-10/12/content_33165546.htm
25 http://en.people.cn/n3/2018/0426/c90000-9453646.html
26 http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-05/19/content_9784.htm [translation by IoT -ONE;
emphasis added].

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 Current Science and Innovation Policies

tion’ – along with mentions of the need to realise ‘self-sufficiency’ – is particularly con-
cerning – it suggests that Chinese policies will further skew the competitive landscape
in favour of domestic companies" (European Chamber 2017: 1). In addition, there are
also explicit goals of local content that need to be met, according to the plan. In the
year 2020 about 40% of essential parts and materials should stem from domestic
sources and until 2025 this share should rise to 70% (Wübbeke et al. 2016). This is an
intention of import substitution, which as such is not condemnable, but the fear by most
foreign spectators is that this will be achieved by massively biased market interventions
in favour of Chinese enterprises.
3.3 The Belt and Road Initiative
The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) was first mentioned by pr esident Xi Jinping in 2013
during different visits to Central and Southeast Asian countries. The aims are high:
"The connectivity projects of the Initiative will help align and coordinate the develop-
ment strategies of the countries along the Belt and Road, tap market potential in this
region, promote investment and consumption, create demands and job opportunities,
enhance people- to-people and cultural exchanges, and mutual learning among the
peoples of the relevant countries, and enable them to understand, trust and respect
each other and live in harmony, peace and prosperity."27
In its core it is a huge infrastructure project that aims at setting up new trade routes
from China to Europe, Africa, and also to Central and South America (Pacific area). As
it will pass countries that were part of the ancient Silk Road, it is sometimes also called
"New Silk Road Initiative" 28. The main aim is to increase prosperity by trade and col-
laboration along the different routes of the Silk Road. This, however, does not only
cover goods and commodities, but explicitly also information (Information Silk Road!) –
information infrastructure like optical cables is an essential part – or services. Geo-
graphically it has one axis and two wings, as the Chinese call it. The axis is the con-
nection of China with Central and South- East Asian countries down to Oceania. The
west wing is the route to Europe and Africa, while the East Wing is the maritime con-
nection to Central and South America. However, the Chinese government invites any
interested country to join by keeping the concept open and flexible. The BRI consists of
two segments, namely the land route, which is called the Silk Road Economic Belt, and
a number of sea routes, called the Maritime Silk Road. In consequence, the infrastruc-
ture covers new roads, train tracks, or logistic centres and everything that is connected

27 http://en.ndrc.gov.cn/newsrelease/201503/t20150330_669367.html
28 http://china.org.cn/opinion/2014-06/26/content_32776912.htm

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Current Science and Innovation Policies 21

to it (bridges, power supply etc.). The Maritime Road mainly means building and mod-
ernising of harbours.
To achieve mutual benefits for countries along the Silk Road and China, collaboration
and exchange in different dimensions – NDRC calls them 'cooperation priorities – is
foreseen. These are policy coordination, connectivity of facilities (infrastructure), unim-
peded trade, financial integration and people- to-people bonds, where the latter com-
prises of student, personnel, academic and cultural exchange and collaboration. The
offer to sign trade agreements with the partners along the New Silk Road is made by
the Chinese government as well as cooperation in emerging industries. The joint explo-
ration of natural resources is addressed, but also the joint development of the use of
renewable energies.
The megaprojects are mainly developed by Chinese state- owned enterprises, but ac-
cording to a recent Deloitte report (Xu and Chen 2018), also foreign multinational en-
terprises are able to benefit from the huge infrastructure projects, among them Sie-
mens, General Electric, or ABB, to name a few. The Chinese government doe s not
only plan and develop the projects, but also offer the funds to finance them, mainly by
loans via the four big state- owned commercial banks in China ( Bank of China, China
Construction Bank, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Agricultural Bank of Chi-
na) the China Development Bank, an extra Silk Road Fund, or also the Asian Infra-
structure Investment Bank (AIIB). Current estimates expect investments of 4- 8 trillion
USD for the whole BRI (Xu and Chen 2018). The Silk Road Fund contains 40 billion
USD and the AIIB reserved a budget of 100 billion USD for the BRI project (Yu 2017).
Deloitte (Xi and Chen 2018) provided statistics according to which these two funding
sources covered about 2% of the loans and private equity investments for BRI by the
end of 2016, while the big four Chinese banks as well as the China Development Bank
provided almost 90% of the funds.
The connection of the BRI to research and innovation policy is only of indirect nature,
but several aspects are clearly relevant also in this c ontext. First, in the first dimension
the initiative foresees the policy coordination between the countries along the Silk
Road, which might also cover R&I policy. The Belt and Road Summits that were held
annually since 2015 had not yet explicitly contained sessions for research or innova-
tion. The topics as such are present in the discussions anyway. Second, academic and
student exchange is one of the aims covered by the fifth dimension (people- to-people
bond). Third, and most importantly, the infrastructur e projects will use and develop in-
novative technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 Current Science and Innovation Policies

While the positive aspects of the BRI are obvious, and the Chinese officials strictly em-
phasise the openness and collaborative approach of the BRI, still critiques arose.
"Many […] participant countr ies have doubts and fears about issues in sovereignty,
autonomy, local employment, distribution of budgets, and the general retur ns on in-
vestments" (Yu 2017: 7). One of the critical points is the fact that China does mainly
develop the projects along its own interests - which might or might not overlap with the
interests of the partner countries. The new government of Malaysia, for example, has
recently withdrawn from the BRI, stating that the foreseen projects are not in the inter-
est of the country. In addition, the countries along the Silk Road might not sufficiently
benefit not only from the building of the infrastructure, but also from the use. For exam-
ple, Kazakhstan or some other countries in Central Asia, where a new train track to
Europe passes by, cannot put own containers with own goods and commodities on the
trains as they are already fully loaded.29
Second, as the Chinese companies not only develop the project, but also provide the
funding to realise them, they also dictate the conditions for the p rojects. These condi-
tions force – more often than not – the local partner to sign a contract with a Chinese
company that then conducts the projects or individual lots. In case of Europe this di-
rectly violates the procurement rules in the European Union, given that there are no
equal chances of tenderers and no open competition (Yu 2017). In extreme cases,
China defines the project, offers the loans at favourable conditions and at their own
terms, conducts the work with Chinese (state -owned) enterprises, and finally, exclu-
sively uses the newly built infrastructu re. This is one reason to argue that BRI is an
implementation of Chinese imperialism.
Another reason is that also political interests might be put forward, for example in case
of Eastern Europe. China set up the so- called 16+1 collaboration with 11 Eastern Eu-
ropean EU member states and five Balkan countries, among them accession countries
to the EU.30 The Chinese infrastructure investments in Bosnia, for example, sum up to
almost 4 billion USD for the period 2012- 2016. In the Czech Republic it was more than
3 billion USD and in Romania and Serbia it was more than 2 billion. Hungary, Monte-
negro and Macedonia received more than one billion USD in Chinese investments un-
der BRI (Xu and Chen 2018). While several European countries are sceptical about the
Chinese i ntentions and the dependency that might occur because of the debts that
come along with the loans, Eastern European countries see the opportunities for a

29 China Contact 5/6 2018: Wildes Zentralasien, OWC -Verlag;
https://owc.de/epaper/chinacontact-5-6-2018/
30 http://ceec-china-latvia.org/about

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level 23

considerable improvement of their infrastructure. In consequence, there is a political
divide in the European Union. The fact that the political system in China is considerably
different from the one in Europe comes on top.
Third, the fact that Chinese companies develop and conduct the projects might also
mean that Chinese technologies and Chinese standards are used throughout the part-
ner countries. In this way, they might broadly spread across large parts of the world
and define the de facto standards with which others need to comply. Especially in
countries without own technological capabilities, the threshold to accept Chinese tech-
nologies might be low. In Africa or Central Asia, Chinese enterprises find markets for
their technologies and products, which would so far still fail on Western markets. These
enterprises thereby climb up the learning curve, achieve economies of scale, and set
de facto standards in certain branches or technologies. An example where this strategy
was already successful is the railway transport sector. A similar approach might work in
other sectors as well.
The motivations behind BRI are mainly economic i n nature. China intends to develop
new markets for its products and technologies. At the same time, China needs to stay
on the growth path of the past years. Moreover, that past growth considerably built on
infrastructure investments, for example in the case of R&D. While R&D expenditures in
developed countries are mainly covering the remuneration of scientists and research-
ers, the majority of the R&D expenditures in China were on R&D infrastructure and
equipment. BRI is a way to extend this infrastructure investment model as a basis of
economic growth. "China should not automatically assume that the growth through gi-
gantic infrastructure investments, which drove China’s economic success in the past, is
a panacea and embraced by all stakeholders" (Yu 2017: 7).
4 Current reforms of the R&I funding and the govern-
ance of the innovation system at the central level
4.1 Changes of the previous system
In an academy-oriented science system like it still prevails in China, a traditional focus
on basic research especially in natural sciences can be found. In the past 10 to 15
years the Chinese system, however, more and more focused on application- oriented
fields as well as engineering, in particular. From the perspective of Chinese policy
makers, these areas were more important for catching up and developing the national
innovation system. Basic research was – and still is – mainly funded by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC). In addition, t he Chinese government

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level

initiated the so called 863 Programme for the funding of high- tech fields already in the
mid 1980s, originally in areas like biotechnology, space or materials research, and in
particular information technologies. Beneficiaries of this programme were not only uni-
versities, but also non- university research organisations like the Chinese Academy of
Sciences. Furthermore, the big National Basic Research Programme , the so called
97331 Programme was dedicated 32 to universities, scientific institutes and registered
companies in mainland China, but it essentially also funded several application orient-
ed research projects, even though it was originally tailored to address basic research.
Although both programmes were rather successful and were evaluated positively, they
were discontinued in 2014, when the Chines e government started to re-organize33 the
national S&T funding scheme (Huang et al. 2016; Development Solutions Europe
2018; Schüller and Schüler-Zhou 2017), including more than hundred previously exist-
ing programmes next to 863 and 973. The main aims of this reorganisation are higher
effectiveness and even more so a higher efficiency. This will be achieved, so the ideas
underlying this reform, by clear evaluation rules and independent evaluation processes.
It is implemented via funding agencies that act l ike project management agencies. The
previously decentralised programming and especially funding decisions are now put
together in these agencies, which are coordinated by a joint inter -ministerial council
uniting all relevant public funding bodies. Under this organisational umbrella, currently
seven (originally planned were eleven so more might still follow) new project manage-
ment agencies were installed to implement and manage the programmes. In addition,
the joint council will also set up joint evaluation rules and processes, both of the appli-
cations as well as of ex-post of the projects and programmes themselves.
It seems that this change of the funding system is just one of the steps of which more
can be expected as Chairmen Xi Jinping pointed out in hi s speech at the 19 th Party
Congress in October 2017: "We will strengthen basic research in applied sciences,
launch major national science and technology projects, and prioritize innovation in key
generic technologies, cutting-edge frontier technologies, modern engineering technolo-
gies, and disruptive technologies."34

31 http://www.most.gov.cn/eng/programmes1/200610/t20061009_36223.htm
32
https://www.access4.eu/_media/MoST1_NationalBasicResearchProgramme_973Program
me_new.pdf
33 http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-01/12/content_9383.htm
34 http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/19thcpcnationalcongress/2017-
11/04/content_34115212.htm

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level 25

4.2 The governance of the R&I system
The main responsibility also in questions of research and innovation in China is with
the State Council. It presides over the other ministries and it coordinates their activities
to some extent. The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) plays an
extraordinary role within the group of ministries as it acts directly under the State
Council and oversees the economic developments and, among other activiti es, drafts
and monitors the Five- Year-Plans. It also pursues direct policies, for example like the
Internet Plus strategy. The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) is
responsible for communication infrastructure as well as the IT industry . It plays an out-
standing role in the rejuvenation of the Chinese economy as it manages the Made in
China 2025 strategy.
The layout of and the relations between the ministries have hardly changed in the re-
cent years in the organigram, but responsibilities as well as budgets have been altered.
In addition, the role of 'small leading groups', which are mostly inter -ministerial coordi-
nation groups and part of the Party organisation, have gained importance in the recent
past. Since a couple of years the reform 35 of the science system is underway (Huang
et al. 2016), which led to increased responsibilities and budget of the Ministry of Sci-
ence and Technology (MOST). The funding system was already reformed and the
funding programs are united in currently seven comm issions under Inter -ministerial
Conference, which are administratively attached to MOST, with the aim of increasing
the efficiency and coordination and to avoid duplicate research.
Since March 2014, for example, a national S&T reporting system is in operat ion that
collects all research reports of publicly funded projects in a standardised format. The
information is collected, on the one hand, to support researchers in defining their re-
search topics and to provide them a starting point for their own research , reflecting on
the research status in the particular topic. On the other hand, the information is also
used in the evaluation phase of the project applications to avoid duplicate research
projects that might fall back to what is already the current state of the art. This task is
fulfilled by the Institute for Scientific and Technological Information of China (ISTIC), a
research institute in the direct downstream of the MOST.

35 http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2014-03/12/content_8711.htm;
http://www.most.gov.cn/tpxw/201501/t20150106_117285.htm

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level

Figure 2: Layout of the science and innovation governance structure

Source: own representation based on: OECD (2008: 429); Huang (2016: 23-24); Schüler-Zhou
and Schüller (2016); Mu (2014); McCuaig-Johnston and Zhang (2015)
One of the critics of the previous system addressed the potential of corruption due to
the intransparent granting and evaluation processes ( Cao et al. 2013). The separation
of program ownership and evaluation of projects was established by the introduction of
project management agencies that manage the programs, separated from a commis-
sion that grants the projects and an evaluation system that assesses the outcomes.
The project management agencies are under the supervision of MOST and the grant-
ing commissions are fuelled by the individual ministries or related experts. A joint inter -
ministerial commission/conference coordinates and sets the operational rul es (Schüller
2018; Schüler-Zhou and Schüller 2016). "… [T]he reform unveiled in December 2014
by the State Council, focus[es] in particular on the new institutional layout and man-
agement structure, where a newly -emerged inter-ministerial joint council acts as gen-
eral coordinator among tens of government bodies, and where the daily operations of
funding programmes are delegated to a series of professional agencies, through a uni-
fied and comprehensive information management system" (Development Solutions
2018: 6).
Following the re-appointment of Xi/Li administration at the People's Congress in March
2018, the responsibilities of MOST further increased. The National Natural Science
Foundation (NSFC) as well as the State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level 27

(SAFEA) are now annexed under MOST. 36 It is expected that the attraction of foreign
talents and researchers will gain importance in the future, though these were already
addressed, for example with the 1,000 Talents Program for oversea returnees in the
last decade. Concerning the inclusion of NSFC in MOST, on the other hand, is a signal
that the already announced policy to increase the importance of basic research will be
under the responsibility of MOST. Whether the independence of the NSFC in scientific
terms will suffer from this reorganization is unclear yet, but the most probably not. The
intention of the overall reform of the funding system is to set common rules and proce-
dures to increase the efficiency and transparency. As the project management agen-
cies are administered by MOST, it is just consequential to add NSFC as well.
The government funding of S&T under this new governance structure and following the
new rules was just finished by 2017. Data for the appropriation of budgets are not yet
available for 2017. Some of the new programs, however, already started earlier and
are mentioned in official statis tics like the National Key R&D program as well as the
fund for technology transfer (see Figure 3). The 863 Program or the National Key R&D
Program of China, for example, still appears, but they will merge into the National Key
Programs for R&D. For the next release of the statistical data, a reflection of the new
structure will appear. The NSFC budget is by far the largest individual position in the
list of appropriations. The budget almost doubled compared to 2011 to a level of about
27 billion yuan (3.5 billion €). For the years 2017/2018, a further increase will be visible
in the statistics. Currently, all the other appropriations for S&T in the listed programs
sum up to about the same as the NSFC budget. Institutional funding, however, like the
CAS or the universities, are not included in these statistics.

36 https://www.natureindex.com/news-blog/chinas-science-ministry-gets-power-to-attract-
more-foreign-scientists

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
28 Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level

Figure 3: Appropriation for S&T by Central Government in the main programs
of S&T, 2016 (latest available year)

Source: S&T Statistical Yearbook (NBS and MOST 2017).
In March 2018 MOST minister Wan Gang's second term ended and a new minister,
Wang Zhigang, was appointed. Wang Zhigang is the former vice minister and Party
Secretary of MOST. On the one hand, this signals continuation in the policies and the
management of the ministry. On the other hand, this reflects the increased role of the
Party at the ministerial level. While Wan Gang was a renowned researcher and engi-
neer before he took office and not member of the Party, all leading positions within
MOST are now occupied by members of the CPC.37
4.3 The reform of the CAS
The Chinese Academy of Sciences is seen as a governmental entity similar to a minis-
try and also the president of the C AS enjoys ministerial status. The CAS is therefore
self-dependent on reforming its structures. In the late 1990s the CAS already started a
reform where it had sharpened its mission and restructured the portfolio of instit utes
(Suttmeier et al. 2006; Xu and Li 2016). Within the Knowledge Innovation Program
(KPI) that lasted from 1998- 2010 some institutes were closed, some were privatised
and the others were strengthened to meet the aims of the raising Chinese economic
and political demand for a strong scienc e system within a National Innovation System
as it was intended by the State Council to be built by then. The reforms were success-
ful and the CAS is nowadays the largest public research organisation in China. The
CAS unites 104 institutes in very different disciplines and covers the full range from

37 http://www.most.gov.cn/eng/organization/leadership/
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27
National Engineering Research Centers
S&T Basic Work
Innovation Fund for Small Technology-based…
National Major Scientific Research Program of…
National Fund for Technology Transfer and…
863 Program
Key Technologies R&D Program
National Key Basic Research Program of China
State Key Laboratory Construction Program
National Key R&D Program of China
National Natural Science Fund
x 100,000

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Concluding remarks: Chinese policies and European strategies 29

basic to applied sciences. It has more than 64,000 employees, files large numbers of
national and transnational38 patent applications every year and is responsible for large
numbers of scientific publications.
When CAS President Bai Chunli took office in 2011 he initiated the so called Innovation
2020 programme. It shall be finished by 2021. Similar to the overall reforms in the sci-
ence system, also this reform aims at increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Academy and its institutes as well as widening the evaluation criteria (Cao et al. 2013:
462). The (still ongoing) reform changes the criteria for assessment and evaluation
from mainly output indicator based measures (publications) to indicators like innova-
tiveness and contribution to society.39
With the Innovation 2020 programme, the CAS also introduced what they call the 'stra-
tegic niche', differentiating the institutes into four categories with different strategic aims
and perspectives. The four categories are: basi c research- oriented centres of excel-
lence, institutes focusing on applied research and commercialisation, big science cen-
tres, and finally regional-oriented institutes. Therefore, within the CAS the institutes will
be differentiated according to different missions in the science system, which will then
be monitored by particular performance indicators.
5 Concluding remarks: Chinese policies and Europe-
an strategies
The Chinese research and innovation system has considerably changed in the past 10-
15 years. It was adapted to new needs and demands, emerging from the overall eco-
nomic success, but also from external requirements for structural changes like digitali-
sation, new technologies or global economic framework conditions. The guiding idea of
the induced chan ges and reforms is, on the one hand, to turn China from a low -cost
economy to an innovation- driven economy. This is seen as the next evolutionary step
for the further economic development and to overcome the so called middle- income
trap. Efficiency/productivity as well as quality are seen as the vehicles to achieve this
goal. On the other hand, next to the economic stability also the social and political sta-
bility with the absolute claim of power by the Communist Party is a core task that also
affects research and innovation.

38 Transnational patent applications are defined as patent families with at least a PCT or an
EPO family member (Frietsch, Schmoch 2010). These patents are targeting international
markets and best correlate with R&D expenditures (Frietsch et al. 2017).
39 See http://english.cas.cn/about_us/introduction/201501/t20150114_135284.shtml

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
30 Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level

In governmental documents and public speeches the role of the market is repeatedly
emphasised. It should be clear by now, however, that Chinese officials do not mean a
market-liberal economic system, but a semi -capitalist economic structure with a strong
and active role of the state and explicit socialist elements. They call this the 'Chinese
Way', which is neither the one nor the other, but a 'modern socialist country' as Presi-
dent Xi called it at the 19th party congress in October 2017.
Over the past two decades of the Chinese enormous economic growth, the true belief
of several Western spectators and policymakers was that China enters the Western
development path (Fukuyama 1992). According to the role model of other Asian coun-
tries like Japan, Singapore, or also the area of Taiwan, it was expected that China's
economic development would be similar . M oving from labour to more capital -based
production and also moving from imitation to innovation strategies, with all its conse-
quences, for example like the adoption of Western intellectual property rights, stand-
ards and norms, and even societal organisations , was foreseen. Many scholars (Fuku-
yama 1992; Minzner 2018) and policymakers expected China to become a capitalist
market economy as well as the implementation of political reforms – some even antici-
pated a de mocratisation of China. In this perspective, t he deviance from this Western
role model was just a temporary phase of 'not-yet-developed' institutions.
However, there were also always scholars and spectators who took a different position.
China has been considerably different from the West as well as from other industrial-
ised countries in Asia – and China will be different at least for the coming years. "…
China should not be analysed in the same way as developed, free- market, capitalist
national economies because, simply put, it is not free, capitalist, or, as a matter of f act,
truly national." (Breznitz and Murphree 2010: 9). So on the one hand, in Western coun-
tries it is time to wave good-bye to the ideas that China assimilates. On the other hand,
also the idea of the modern economic Eldorado in Asia – the land of gold – that pro-
vides the world with low-cost products and buys high-tech goods from Western compa-
nies is also over. Sooner than later, the Chinese market will be the largest national,
homogenous market in the world. And it will keep on growing for a while, at least what
can be seen from today's perspective – at least as long as the debt crisis does not sur-
face. Chinese industry will improve its competitiveness in several sectors in the coming
years – nationally and internationally. The core question is, if they will do it with fair or
unfair means. Without any doubt, it is important to insist on fairness and non -
discrimination. At the same time one should be prepared for unfairness and discrimina-
tion – or simply stop doing business in China.
The nowadays by Westerners often demanded 'level -playing field' not only means that
China needs to accept and implement internationally agreed rules and institutions –

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
References 31

which is for sure a legitimate demand. Even more so, it means that Westerners accept
the differences and that the Chinese Way and the Chinese market economy will not be
the same like in Europe or North America. This insight and the acceptance, by the way,
then also offers a better strategic acting. Waiting for the day when China assimilates
was never a reasonable option. Reported challenges are - like in previous years - intel-
lectual property issues as well as finding and keeping qualified personnel.
6 References
AHK (German Chamber of Commerce in China) (2017): German Business in China
2017/18. Beijing: Business Confidence Survey, German Chamber of Commerce.
AmChamChina (American Chamber of Commerce) (2018): 2018 China Business Cli-
mate Survey Report . Beijing: The American Chamber of Commerce in the Peo-
ple's Republic of China.
Boutellier, R.; Gas smann, O.; von Zedtwitz, M. (2013): Managing Global Innovation:
Uncovering the Secrets of Future Competitiveness. Berlin: Springer.
Breznitz, D.; Murphree, M. (2011): Run of the red queen: Government, innovation,
globalization, and economic growth in China. New Haven and London: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Cao, C.; Li, N.; Li, X.; Liu, L. (2013): Reforming China’s S&T System, Science, 341, pp.
460-462.
Conlé, M.; Taube, M. (2010): Anatomy of Cluster Development in China: The case of
health biotech clusters, Duisburg Working Papers on East Asian Studies No. 84,
Duisburg: Institute of East Asian Studies.
Development Solutions Europe (2018). Advance EU Access to Financial Incentives for
Innovation in China. Guide for EU Stakeholders on Chinese national STI funding
programmes; FWC FPI/PSF/2015 Lot 4 – Advance EU Access to Financial In-
centives for Innovation in China. Brussels: European Union.
ECC (European Union Chamber of Commerce) (2018): Business Confidence Survey
2017. European Business in China. Beijing: EU-Chamber.
Fukuyama, F. (1992): The End of History and the Last Man. New York: The Free
Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
32 Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level

Gausemeier, J.; Klocke, F. (2016): Industrie 4.0. Internationaler Benchmark, Zukunfts-
optionen und Handlungsempfehlungen für die Produktionsforschung . Paderborn
und Aachen: Heinz Nixdorf Institut und RWTH Aachen (Ed.).
Huang, C.; Jin, X.; Li, L. (2016): RIO Country Report 2015: China. Brussels: European
Union; EUR 28009 EN; Doi: 10.2791/892481
Jung, J. (2016): China's Innovation-Driven Development Strategy and Prospects, KIEP
Opinions, December 2016. Seoul: Korea Institute for International Economic Poli-
cy (KIEP).
Kinkel, S. (2014): Future and impact of backshoring – Some conclusions from 15 years
of research on German practices , Journal of Purchasing and Supply Manage-
ment, 20 (1), pp. 63-65.
Kroll, H.; Frietsch, R. (2014): Regional structures and trends in China's innovation sys-
tem - An indicator-based account of the last decade's developments. In: Liefner,
I.; W ei, Y. (Eds.): Innovation and regional development in China. New York:
Routledge, pp. 41-72.
Liefner, I.; Wei, Y. (2014): Introduction: Innovation and Regional Development in China,
In: Liefner, I.; Wei, Y. (Eds.): Innovation and regional development in China . New
York: Routledge, pp. 1-18.
Liu, X.; Schwaag Serger, S.; Tagscherer, U.; Chang, A. (2017): Beyond catch- up - can
a new innovation policy help China overcome the middle- income trap?, Science
and Public Policy, 44 (5), pp. 656-669.
McCuaig-Johnston, M.; Zhang, M. (2015): China embarks on major changes in science
and technology, China Institute, University of Alberta , Occasional Paper Series ,
Volume 2, Issue No. 2.
Minzner, C. (2018): End of an Era: How China's Authoritarian Revival Is Undermining
Its Rise. New York: Oxford Univ Press.
Mu, R. (2014): Reform of Chinese Academy of Sciences: Evolution of Value-
orientation, presentation at the 3rd Sino- German Innovation Policy Conference ,
April 29-30, Beijing.
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS); Ministry o f Science and Technology (MOST)
(2017): China Statistical Yearbook on Science and Technology 2017. Beijing:
China Statistics Press.
OECD (Ed.) (2008): Reviews of innovation policy: China. Paris: OECD Publ.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
References 33

Prud'homme, D.; von Zedtwitz, M . (2018): The changing face of innovation in China.
MIT Sloan Management Review.
Schaff, F; Schetelig, P. (2018): Chinas Reformagenda: Zu wenig? Zu spät?, China
Contact, 7/8 2018, p. 41.
Schüler-Zhou, Y; Schüller, M. (2016): Chinas Reform der Wissenschafts - und Techno-
logiepolitik: Analyse aktueller Strategien und Programme, GIGA Working Paper,
mimeo.
Schüller, M. (2018): Chinas Aufstieg als Wissenschafts- und Technologiemacht: Chan-
cen und Herausforderungen für die bilaterale Zusammenarbeit , Vortrag am ZAK
(Zentrum für )ngewandte Kulturwissenschaften und Studium Generale) des KIT
(Karlsruhe Institute of Technology), 25th June 2018, Karlsruhe,
https://www.zak.kit.edu/6092.php.
Schüller, M.; Schüler-Zhou, Y. (2017), Reform der öffentlichen Forschungsförderung –
Implikationen für die deutsch- chinesische Kooperation, Deutsch-Chinesische
Plattform Innovation: Policy Briefs 2017 der deutschen Expertengruppe, p p.10-
13; http://www.plattform-innovation.de/.
Schwaag Serger, S.; Breidne, M. (2007): C hina's Fifteen- Year Plan for Scienc e and
Technology: An Assessment, Asia Policy, 4, pp. 135-164.
Schwaag Serger, S. (2006): China: From Shopfloor to Knowledge Factory , In: Karls-
son, M.: The Internationalization of Corporate R&D. Leveraging the Changing
Geography of Innovation. Stockholm: Elanders.
Shambaugh, D. (2016): China's Future. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Suttmeier, R.P.; Cao, C.; Simon, D.F. (2006): China’s Innovation Challenge and the
Remaking of the Chinese Academy of Sciences , Innovations: Technology, Gov-
ernance, Globalization, 1 (3), pp. 78-97.
Tagscherer, U. (2015): Science- Industry Linkage in China. Motivation, Models and
Success Factors for collaborations of MNCs with Chinese Academia, Fraunhofer
ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No.47, Karlsruhe:
Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI.
Tagscherer, U.; Frietsch, R. (2014): E -mobility in China: Chance or Daydream?,
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No.40,
Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
34 Current reforms and the governance of the innovation system at the central level

Teets, J.C., Hasmath, R. ; Lewis, O.A. (2017): “The Incentive to Innovate? The Behav-
ior of Policymakers in China”, Journal of C hinese Political Science, 22 (4), pp.
505-517.
Thomson, R.; de Rassenfosse, G. (2016): R&D Offshoring and Home Industry Produc-
tivity, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract= 2812184 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2812184.
Wübbeke, J.; Meissner, M.; Zenglein, M.; Ives, J.; Conrad, B. (2016): Made in China
2025. The making of a high- tech superpower and consequences for industrial
countries, MERICS Paper on China, Berlin: Mercator Institute for China Studies.
Xu, F.; Li, X. (2016) : The changing role of metrics in research institute evaluations un-
dertaken by the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) . London: Palgrave Com-
munications.
Xu, S.; Chen, L. (2018): Embracing the BRI Ecosystem in 2018 — Navigating pitfalls
and seizing opportunities, Deloitte Perspective. Beijing: Deloitte China.
Yu, X. (2017): China’s One Belt, One Road: A Reality Check, LSE Ideas Strategic Up-
date 17.3. London: LSE Ideas.
