
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 65
ISSN 1612-1430
Karlsruhe, April 2020

The Roles of the State in the Governance of
Socio-Technical Systems' Transformation

Susana Borrás*
Jakob Edler**

Karlsruhe, Fraunhofer ISI

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
*Copenhagen Business School

**Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI and
 Manchester Institute of Innovation Research

This is the preprint version of the paper in Research Policy:
Borrás, Susana and Edler, Jakob (forthcoming): " The Roles of the State in the Governance of
Socio-Technical Systems’ Transformation". DOI: 10.1016/j.respol.2020.103971

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents I
Contents
Abstract ....................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction .......................................................................................................... 1
2 The role of the state as contextualized, complex and dynamic
governmental action ............................................................................................ 4
3 Analytical framework and case selection .......................................................... 5
4 The four illustrative cases ................................................................................... 7
4.1 Self-regulation: Cryptocurrencies ......................................................... 7
4.2 Primus inter Pares: Smart Cities ........................................................ 10
4.3 Oligopoly: Automated vehicles ........................................................... 11
4.4 Command and Control: Nuclear power .............................................. 14
5 Summary and Discussion: The various roles of the state .............................. 16
6 Conclusion and future research ....................................................................... 18
7 References ......................................................................................................... 23

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
II Contents

Tables and box
Table 1: Illustrative cases of the four modes of governance .......................... 6
Table 2: Summary of different roles of the state across modes of
governance ................................................................................... 16
Box 1: Summary of the different roles of the state, and their
definitions ...................................................................................... 17

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Abstract 1
Abstract
The transformative turn of innovation policy has resulted in calls for a more entrepre-
neurial and directional role of the state. However, the multiple roles that the state might
play in such processes remain underexplored. This paper studies the embedded role of
the state in four distinct modes of governance in socio-technical systems. Using a
three-pillar analytical model, the paper examines four illustrative cases: cryptocurren-
cies, smart cities, automated vehicles, and nuclear power. The paper identifies 13 dif-
ferent roles of the state, indicating relevant variation across the four modes of govern-
ance. We discuss whether some roles of the state are more transformative than others,
and provide clues for policy implications, and a future research agenda. The concept
developed in the paper contributes to a more differentiated understanding of the trans-
formative roles of the state.
1 Introduction
Increasingly the purpose of innovation policy is to address specific problems. It has
been widely recognized that in order to address those challenges, innovation policy has
to give direction to innovation activities and has to support not only the generation of
innovation, but also its diffusion and use (Boon and Edler 2018). This has led to claims
that i nnovation policy has to play its part for system transformation towards a more
societally desirable outcome, and therefore policy has to be " transformative" (Weber
and Rohracher 2012; Kuhlmann and Rip 2018; Schot and Steinmueller 2018; Foray et
al. 2012). This demand on the state to develop transformative policies is normatively
reasonable. However, it needs to be based on a theoretical and empirically informed
understanding about the different roles of the state. This nuanced view is needed in
order to avoid unrealistic aspirations or simplified views about what can the state (and
thus public policy) do in the complex governance processes of socio -technical change.
Hence, the role of the state needs to be considered in the context of previous studies of
governance, and needs as well to be studied from the understanding that it is not a
unitary actor.
The literature has long discussed that the way innovations are developed and shaped,
introduced and used is co-determined by societal and economic dynamics and political
choices (Sovacool and Hess 2017; Rip 2018). These transformational processes are
complex, and therefore hard to understand ex-post. They are even harder to anticipate,
not least due to changing collective expectations (Budde and Konrad 2019; Guston
2014). There is abundant historical evidence that science and technology based inno-
vations (disruptive or not) have not managed to become part of social life, even when

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2 Introduction
there was an expectation that they might address important social challenges (Konrad
and Alvial Palavicino 2017; Daemmrich 2014). Problems like transition towards renew-
able energy sources, sustainable tr ansport systems in rapid urbanization, containing
antibiotic resistance, good elderly care in ageing societies, or cheap access to medi-
cines for neglected diseases, are challenges that continue to plague our societies.
The calls for problem-oriented or transformative STI policies have originated out of this
general frustration about the insufficiency of transformation. The basic premise of these
calls appears to be that a conscious public policy can influence directional ity of innova-
tion and, more importantly, change of socio -technical systems associated with their
use. While the limits of policy are conceded, there is nevertheless a new general opti-
mism about the entrepreneurial state that can create new markets (Link and Link 2009;
Mazzucato 2014; Mazzucato 2016) and bring about the socio- technical change need-
ed. This laudable optimism, however, threatens to undermine the very purpose it is
addressing if it is not underpinned by a sound understanding of the different roles of the
state in different governance situations in different socio- technical systems. To actively
support the transformation of systems, we need to activate the existing conceptual ba-
sis that the literature offers about the governance of socio- technical systems, under-
stood as the interplay of the different ways in which agents intentionally and deliberate-
ly interact reflexively in order to influence, promote or inhibit transformative processes.
Only if those basic dimensions are taken into consideration can we better approach the
open question about the embedded role(s) of the state 1 in governance processes (and
of transformative innovation policy) in socio-technical systems.
The literature on the governance of socio- technical change offers a useful conceptual
framework for and empirical insights into the complexity of these governance process-
es. Usually it is related to issues about the integration of social concerns associated to
the inherent uncertainties of science, technology and innovation (Fisher 2019; Stilgoe
et al. 2013; Irwin 2006). Responsible governance of science and technology is mostly
associated to specific forms of collective reflexivity, and is usually (but not only) about
issues of risk regulation and governance, and determination of ethi cal boundaries
(Lindner et al. 2016; Van Asselt and Vos 2008) . When dealing with emerging science
and technology, it is important to note that modes of tentative governance tend to co-
evolve with definitive (established) governance modes (Kuhlmann et al. 2019) . Thus,
tentative governance captures conceptually the current observable phenomenon of
creating open spaces for learning and for cautious experimentation in view of trying

1 This paper understands ‘state’ as governmental action, here including the notions of ‘gov-
ernment’ and ‘public policy’ as defined in the literature (see section 2).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Introduction 3
new approaches of co -ordination. The combination of tentative and definitive govern-
ance modes might not always be unproblematic particularly in terms of maintaining
synergies between public and private actors (Hopkins et al. 2019 ; Lyall et al. 2009) .
What is clear from the vast literature, however, is that in the majority of cases, both in
tentative and in established governance processes, the state plays a distinct role. (Lyall
and Tait 2019).
Despite all its richness and valuable insights, the conceptual governance literature still
fails to embed properly the state, and in particular to capture conceptually the various
roles that the state assumes in the very diverse ways in which socio- technical systems
and their change are governed. As the state is called back in, this gap limits our ability
to understand the transformative role(s) of the state, 'transformative' in the sense of
fostering a marked change towards an expected improvement in the nature and func-
tionality of the socio-technical systems.
This article aims at filling this gap by addressing and conceptualising the fundamental
diversity of the roles of the state vis -a-vis the bold demands that the state shall deliver
transformation. It does so by taking existing governance studies as a starting point, and
by building further on them by focusing on the diversity of the roles of the state in dif-
ferent governance contexts. Thus, the paper proceeds as follows. The next section
reviews succinctly the literature devoted specifically to the role of the state, in view of
emphasizing the embeddedness of the state in the governance of socio -technical sys-
tems. The subsequent section offers a framework on four ideal models of governance
of socio-technical systems (Borrás and Edler 2014a; b), developing it further in order to
study the various roles of the state. Section 4 examines four concrete illustrative cases
of socio-technical system changes associated with four distinct modes of governance
(cryptocurrencies, smart cities, autom ated vehicles, and nuclear energy). In analysing
the interaction of three analytical pillars (the capability of agents, the instruments to
influence change, and the social acceptance) (see section 3) these four cases serve to
identify and characterise the different roles of the state. Hence, our four cases are a
pre-study (Swedberg 2012), that is, an analysis based on consistent insights from em-
pirical observations that serve to conceptualise (and eventually theorise) about a phe-
nomenon that remains understudied (the various roles of the state in socio- technical
systems' change).
Thereafter, section 5 defines and conceptualises 13 different roles, discussing the find-
ings in relation to the existing literature. The last section of the paper considers the use-
fulness of our conceptual approach (for analytical and polic y purposes), acknowledges
some limitations, and suggests some venues for future research agenda such as study-
ing variation within each mode of governance, as well as different paces of change.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4 The role of the state as contextualized, complex and dynamic governmental action
2 The role of the state as contextualized, complex
and dynamic governmental action
The role of the state in technological development and innovation processes has been
a recursive topic since the 1950s following two main approaches, namely, one that
sees the state as mainly correcting market and system failures that li mit the develop-
ment and deployment of knowledge, technology and innovation (Martin and Scott
2000); and another approach that sees the role of the state as creating markets and
directly engaging in concrete missions to solve societal problems (Edler and Fagerberg
2017). Whereas the former sees the role of the state mainly reacting to specific system
deficiencies or 'fixing' negative externalities, the latter sees the role of the state mainly
in proactive terms ahead of developments and unfolding particular visions of socio -
economic progress (Mazzucato 2016). In fact, it would be possible to re -read the last
decades of academic discussions about the rationales of innovation policy under these
two fundamental approaches (Fagerberg 2017) , focusing on different areas of policy
intervention (Edler et al. 2016) (Borrás and Edquist 2019).
In more recent years, however, the debate about the role of the state has gained again
scholarly attention for two reasons. One reason is because scholars have demonstrat-
ed that in spite of normative views against state intervention to influence the direct ion
of technological change, historical evidence shows very clearly an active state en-
gagement, particularly in specific areas like defence, health or space. This is the case
in the USA, where several authors have made efforts to show empirically the entrepre-
neurial spirit of USA state intervention with purposeful intent and with willingness to
assume risks. For example, the "Advanced Technology Program" (Link and Link 2009),
the state-promoted inventions leading to Apple' s i-Pad (Mazzucato2014) or the Smal l
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program (Leyden and Link 2015) . The second
reason why the role of the state has gained attention during the past years has to do
with the emergence of a new political agenda around the so -called grand social chal-
lenges. The definition of the Millennium development goals by the United Nations in
2000 (thereafter Sustainable Development Goals in 2015) has successfully put those
challenges at the forefront of the political agenda of many governments and of a wide
array of civil society organizations and companies around the world. This broad political
agenda has naturally reached innovation policy, with policy reports reflecting on that
(Aho et al. 2006) , as well as a growing scholarly attention on the relation of research
and innovation policy to processes of socio- technical systems ' change (Kern 2012 ;
Edmondson et al. 2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Analytical framework and case selection 5
In spite of the recent recognition of the (new) activism of the state, the essential dichot-
omy of " state correcting market or system failures or state creating market or social
solutions" seems to prevail in much of the literature. Beyond this dichotomy, however,
there seems to be an analytical 'blind spot' about the concrete role(s) of the state which
tends to underestimate the embedded nature of state action. State action is highly em-
bedded because it operates within broader forms of collective action, the so -called
'governance', which is the ability of a society to develop and implement collective
choices (Pierre and Peters 2001) . This means that st ate action operates in a societal
and socio-technical context, developing many different forms of collaboration and inter-
action with social actors, and that the state is not always in the driving seat.
As mentioned earlier, this article understands 'state' as governmental action including
the notions of 'government' and 'public policy'. In the literature, 'government' is defined
in two general meanings. One that sees government as collective action through the
exercise of legislative, executive or judicial power; and another that refers specifically
to government solely as the executive power, comprising the (democratically elected)
politicians and the administrative branch of the executive (public administration at dif-
ferent levels). Likewise, ' public policy' is generally defined as the concrete actions and
initiatives that give concrete 'life' to the general statements/decisions of the govern-
ment. Our definition of 'state' includes 'government' and 'public policy', encompassing
different levels and forms of governmental action.
3 Analytical framework and case selection
In order to study the embedded nature of the state in the governance of socio-technical
systems, we need to characterize those systems. We propose our own definition of
socio-technical systems as " articulated ensembles of social and technical elements
which interact with each other in distinct ways, are distinguishable from their environ-
ment, have developed specific forms of collective knowledge produc tion, knowledge
utilization and innovation, and which are oriented towards specific purposes in society
and economy" (Borrás and Edler 2014a: 11). The notion of governance allows two im-
portant differentiations. First, the driver of change of socio- technical systems might be
state or non-state actors. Second, the mode of governance might differ in terms of the
type and distribution of organizational dominance, ranging from heterarchical process
with no obvious dominating centre, to hierarchical top down proc esses that are domi-
nated by a limited group of actors . Following that we suggest four distinct ideal models
of governance: self-regulation, primus inter pares, oligopoly and command and control
(see Table 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6 Analytical framework and case selection
Having defined the four ideal modes of governance we need a second step in our re-
search design looking now more concretely at the specific features within each of them.
Our analytical framework proposes to examine three specific analytical pillars, which
together allow understanding the role of the state in a more detailed way. Each of these
three analytical pillars is framed around a research question that constitute core re-
search efforts in governance studies : (1) how are the capabilities of agents to contrib-
ute to and influence change distributed in the system, and how do they interact with the
opportunity structures which are resulting from the co- evolution of new technologies
with institutional framework conditions in situations of change? , (2) what are the in-
struments used by agents to in fluence change; and (3) what is the degree of social
acceptance of the outcomes and processes of change, and what are the forms of so-
cial contestation? (Borrás and Edler 2014a).
In order to observe empirically the various roles of the state we identified four illustra-
tive cases. The selection of cases was based on extensive scanning of on- going sys-
tem transformations and was guided by the need to identify, based on this ex ante in-
formation, one case for each mode: cryptocurrencies (illustrating 'self-regulation'),
smart cities (illustrating ' primus inter pares '), automated vehicles (illustrating ' oligopo-
ly'), and nuclear power (illustrating 'command and control'). Table 1 locates those cas-
es in this scheme.
Table 1: Illustrative cases of the four modes of governance
 Driven by state actors Driven by non-state actors
Hierarchal, dominated Nuclear power
(Command and control)
Automated vehicles
(Oligopoly)
Heterarchical, non-dominated Smart Cities
(Primus inter Pares)
Cryptocurrencies
(Self-regulation)
Source: Borrás and Edler (2014a)
It is important to note that this paper has to be understood as a pre- study, in the at-
tempt of conceptualizing in an early discovery phase (Swedberg 2012) . Following
Swedberg, we understand that the study of the role of the state in socio- technical sys-
tems' change is still in its infancy. For that reason, the current literature offers very little
theoretical clues to go about it. In these situations Swedberg suggests conducting a
pre-study. Pre -studies are based on specific observations which are examples o f a
given social reality. Pre-studies serve to consistently gather insights in order to concep-
tualize (and eventually theorise) about that social reality. Hence, the methodology of
this paper should be seen as such a pre-study using 4 illustrative cases which are con-
crete observations of a much broader reality, but which serve to take the first serious

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
The four illustrative cases 7
steps into the identification and conceptualization of different roles of the state in socio-
technical systems' governance of change. Hence, the research des ign of this paper is
not a conventional inductive empirical approach (one which seeks to extract strong and
assertive conclusions from as wide an empirical basis as possible). Instead, our ambi-
tion is more humble: to take the initial steps by providing a f irst conceptualisation about
the various roles of the state.
The case descriptions are based on a combination of literature reviews and secondary
sources. Scholarly literature on the four cases was selected based on their relevance,
credibility and qualit y. Furthermore, fourteen experts in the corresponding field areas
have validated our case descriptions, suggesting additions, changes or adjustments
when necessary2. The authors of this paper remain the sole responsible for the final
case descriptions and their interpretation.
4 The four illustrative cases
4.1 Self-regulation: Cryptocurrencies
The first case is about cryptocurrencies, developed and diffused using blockchain tech-
nology - a technology that provides a secured end- to-end information chain. Crypto-
graphic algorithms create verifiable authenticity and immutability of digital documents,
allowing an automatic verification of transactions by the nodes in a chain. The technology
is potentially disruptive because it removes the need of the trusted third party in complex
transactions, making them cheaper, automated, and traceable. In the field of currencies,
blockchain has provided payment forms that are alternative to conventional currencies.
There are currently around 1600 cryptocurrencies3, most of them created after 2012. The
well-known Bitcoin remains the largest with an approximate market capitalization of 104b
USD4. There are two types of cryptocurrencies: coins (operating their own blockchain)
and tokens (using an existing open blockchain platform). Cryptocurrencies are an exem-

2 We are thankful to the following experts’ inputs in our cases: Nuclear energy: Wolfgang Eich-
hammer, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany; Andrew Stirling, SPRU, University of Sussex, UK; Mario
Ragwitz, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany; and Hideaki Shiroyama, Tokyo University, Japan. Auto-
mated vehicles: Azra Habibovic, RISE Viktoria, Sweden; Elisabeth Dütschke, Fraunhofer ISI,
Germany; Michael Krail, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany; Cryptocurrencies: Jacob Hasselbalch,
CBS, Denmark; Juan Giraldo, CBS, Denmark; Michael Friedewald, Fraunhofer ISI, Germany;
and Deanna MacDonald, BLOC, Denmark. Smart Cities: Helle Zinner Henriksen, CBS,
Denmark; Lasse Bundgaard, CBS, Denmark; John Rigby, Manchester University, UK.
3 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cryptocurrencies , accessed July 22nd, 2019.
4 www.coinmarketcap.com , accessed July 22nd, 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8 The four illustrative cases
plary case of a self-regulation mode of governance. The complex social technical system
of cryptocurrencies has developed very rapidly. It is largely decentralized and non-
hierarchical, and is exclusively driven by non-state actors (De Filippi and Loveluck 2016).
There are five groups of actors driving cryptocurrencies. Firstly, the software develop-
ers and entrepreneurs who build the new coin or token, and create products and ser-
vices supporting the infrastructure. Secondly, the " miners" who validate the transac-
tions enabling their mathematical basis, earning a small fee 5. Thirdly, the 'exchanges'
such as Binance or Coinbase which act as 'places' for trading coins. They might exert a
lot of power by choosing to list and delist differ ent coins. Fourthly, the users and buy-
ers, who acquire cryptocurrencies as ways of saving, or buying specific products. Last,
the "advocates" (celebrities, influencers, or engineers) who advertise and promote spe-
cific cryptocurrencies.
The capability of those agents is highly distributed within the system. Entrepreneurs,
'exchanges' and advocates are in a position of relative strength vis -à-vis users and
miners. Regarding the capabilities of agents to induce or inhibit change, three spec ific
forms of capabilities are needed: strong knowledge capabilities about software sys-
tems, cryptology and mathematics; physical capital in the form of strong computational
capacity; and access to financial capital.
This brings us to the next issue, the g overnance instruments to drive and direct the
change. It is important to understand that cryptocurrencies are largely shaped by the
supply and demand side of a rapidly developing system of unregulated market dynam-
ics. For that reason there are two types of governance instruments: those providing the
technical solution, and thus creating new commercial products and services; and in-
struments focusing on the demand side, mainly shaping consumer behaviour. Regard-
ing the first, the ecology of actors on each cryptocurrency agree on the rules and pro-
cedures of transaction and verification, enabling specific products and services. Re-
garding the second, advertising in social media as well as influencers and advocates
campaigns (as discursive community mobilization devises) have been a preferred in-
strument for shaping consumer behaviour. Cryptocurrencies are governed on an ethos
typically associated to software code development; therefore they are attractive to so-
cial groups that believe in alternative ways to state -dominated financial transaction
mechanisms. Its anonymity also attracts those who want to escape the legal enforcing
arm of the state (criminal activities). Yet, Facebook, Google and Twitter have restricted
their advertising (in 2018) (see below).

5 Yet, rapid technological change is transforming that, as new coins do not require miners.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
The four illustrative cases 9
The legitimacy of the social technical system around cryptocurrencies is determined by
the degree of social acceptance of its outcomes and its processes; as well as by the
forms of social contestation within (internal to) the socio-technical system. Given the digi-
tal nature of cryptocurrencies creation and use, the social acceptance of its outcomes
and processes tends to be one and the same because blockchain creates a process that
is itself an outcome. One of the main issues is how to create trust as a basis for soc ial
acceptance. Some authors claim that cryptocurrencies are "a shift from trusting people to
trusting math" (Atzori 2015: .2). There are very strong libertarian philosophical stand-
points associated to cryptocurrencies, typically organized in cyber communities who see
the normative superiority and legitimacy of these types of currencies vis -à-vis state -
controlled currencies. However the incident in 2016 (when an initial coin offering (ICO)
based on Ethereum was hacked and more than 11,000 people lost their investment) res-
onated strongly within the community creating social contestation. In any case, experts in
currency trading remain skeptical about the mid-term sustainability of social trust in cryp-
tocurrencies, given the speculative nature of most transactions6.
The role of the state in cryptocurrencies has been so far very limited. Nevertheless,
some first steps are taken in two different directions, namely regulating them; and ex-
ploring the opportunities. Some parts of conventional financial regulations already ap-
ply to cryptocurrencies' exchanges, and various states have been applying and enforc-
ing that regulation to different degrees (Girasa 2018). However, there is much 'wait and
see' as m ost governments are just acting as an observer (monitoring course of
events), and as a warner (issuing warnings urging investors to be cautious against
possible Ponzi-like schemes) 7. Beyond that, the state might also act as a mitigator
trying actively to reduce the negative effects that arise as a consequence of this socio -
technical system. Moreover, it might act as an opportunist , taking up the opportunity
arising from socio -technical change, becoming itself an active beneficiary of the new
social technical system for specific purposes. Sweden for example issued a report in
2019 about a possible e-krona8. Other countries have seen the opportunity of creating
cryptocurrencies to bypass the troubles of their currencies (like the failed Venezuela' s
"Petro").

6 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/sep/11/stable-coins-bitcoin-cryptocurrencies-
tether?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other , accessed on July 22nd, 2019.
7 "The EU Blockchain Observatory and Forum " talks about Europe staying in the front of the
new technology. Read the press release: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-18-
521_en.htm , accessed July 22nd, 2019.
8 Sweden studied the possibility of e-krona. https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/financial-
stability/payments/e-krona/ , accessed July 22nd, 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10 The four illustrative cases
4.2 Primus inter Pares: Smart Cities
The second case is smart cities (or digital cities), which is a generic label for initiatives
at city level taking advantage of digital technologies for public services like transport
and energy (typically linked to sustainability goals), and increasingly for public health
and social care. In Asia, some smart cities initiatives are creating entire new cities (An-
gelidou 2014). Yet, most often they are concrete initiatives within existing cities, typical-
ly launched in the form of pilot projects (using sensors, Internet of Things (IoT), new IT-
platforms, etc.) with a view of up-scaling to the entire city.
Smart city initiatives are a case of "primus inter pares" governance mode, a collabora-
tive mode where the state takes a prominent role. Solutions are typically supplied by
private firms, and often aim to engage users and citizens. The initiatives are largely
(co-)financed with tax money, involve aspects of public procurement, interact with exist-
ing local public service provision, and are based on access to data . City-level or city -
regional governments are those who tend to drive the initiatives, mobilise and connect
capabilities, and most importantly, have the final decision about the choices of specific
solutions.
Smart cities are not merely the introduction of digital technologies, but are characterised
by multiple and inter-connected socio-technical systems' change. Therefore, those initia-
tives are characterised by diverse actors reflecting complex urban systems. Actors usual-
ly represent different sectors in industry (with large IT infrastructure providers as well as
various SMEs as suppliers of specialised solutions), and different social groups like local
citizen associations and civil society organisations, though the latter tend to be weakly
involved. The " state" refers primarily to local governments (municipalities), and/or city -
regional departments, often indirectly encouraged by national or supranational (EU) lev-
els (Angelidou 2014). The capabilities of actors to influence agendas and the provision of
solutions differ greatly, with large private service or infrastructure providers mobilising
strong technical capabilities and network resources to lobby for their solutions, while civil
society organisations struggle to match societal interest with concrete capabilities to in-
fluence agendas. Of particular importance are lead users within cities who are able and
willing to engage with the co-generation of digital solutions and to deploy them.
Smart city projects employ a range of governance instruments to influence direction of
change. One important instrument is narratives, namely, the articulation and communica-
tion of future smart city visions. Other set of instruments have to do with forms of public
procurement, public-private partnership contracts, and related, i.e. financing of new pub-
lic infrastructure or buying in of digital service solutions, setting rules and frameworks that
allow the application of certain technologies in the context of public services.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
The four illustrative cases 11
Smart city initiatives might not succeed without a m inimum social acceptance of its
outcomes and processes. The ambitious agendas of smart cities, with their cross func-
tional portfolios and high level of transformative challenges for citizens , pose high de-
mands on legitimacy. Learning costs are high, outcom es of experiments are uncertain,
and expensive experiments might fail. Likewise the growing privacy concerns from
handling of online data might become a central theme within data collection and com-
mercialisation in the public space. For those reasons, t here are high demands (and
potential clashes) on the degree of social acceptance of the decision processes, mean-
ing that the direction of smart city developments needs to be defined in a participatory
process. In fact, the lack of roll out of initiatives has been attributed to a lack of such
participatory processes (van Winden and van den Buuse 2017) . A major challenge in
this respect is the perception of citizens that the material interest of large digital service
providers and their access to data dominate t he smart city agenda, which may over-
shadow citizen' s concerns about the outcomes of smart solutions (particularly about
personal data ). Even if societal groups affected might occasionally voice opposition,
the level of internal social contestation in smart cities initiatives tends to be rather low.
Following from the above, we can see that in the governance of 'primus inter pares' the
state might act as a facilitator, seeking actively to make the process easier supporting
specific dynamics of private and non- state agents. It might also act as a lead-user,
initiating or supporting the creation of a market by acting as lead user and co- designer
in order to find specific solutions to public needs . Thirdly, the state might perform the
role as initiator of projects, directly using its own knowledge and resources to work in
concrete ways for the transformation of the sociotechnical system in the city. In a simi-
lar vein, it is also a promoter of specific solutions , putting forward narratives and be-
coming an exponent of change in the city. As we have seen above, the state can be-
come an enabler of societal engagement, encouraging the involvement of stakehold-
ers in participatory processes to define direction of change. Last but not least, it can
also play a role as gatekeeper , since the state (the municipality and/or the state) tend
to own most part of the infrastructure, while also being the main buyer of the technolo-
gy. This means it effectively controls access for other actors, opening up or closing
down spaces for experimentation and transformation.
4.3 Oligopoly: Automated vehicles
The third case is the socio -technical system of Automated Vehicles (AV), which is an
example of oligopoly mode of governance. Automated (or autonomous) vehicles (AV)
are vehicles with some degree of self-driving capacities. According to SAE standardiza-
tion organization, there are six different levels of automated vehicles: from level 0

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12 The four illustrative cases
where the driver is in total control (conv entional driving), to level 5 where the vehicle is
completely self -driving and there is no driver (only passengers) 9. The technology is
potentially disruptive and might introduce improvements in mobility systems (mainly
optimizing the use of transport infr astructure, and accessibility gains). However, the
ease with which consumers ultimately will come to use this new technology will deter-
mine the trajectory of this new socio- technical system. During the past few years the
technology has developed rather quickly, and pilot tests have been conducted in many
cities, most notably Helsinki, Gothenburg, and Boston (Taeihagh and Lim 2018).
Automated Vehicles are a case of oligopolistic mode of governance. The development
is largely driven by few economic actors for m different sectors, mainly software-related
firms like internet based services (Google), software and hardware providers (Apple),
and providers of internet based individual transportation (Uber or DiDi). Conventional
car manufacturers (Volvo, BMW, etc.) have been following swiftly, as well as a growing
number of start-ups (like SenseTime). The socio-technical system is organised hierar-
chically because these economic actors tend to be large industrial players, concentrat-
ed due to the network externalities of digital technologies and the rapid concentration in
their respective industries during the past decade. There is naturally a competition
among these actors to provide dominant AV solutions to the market, yet, they are few
and they tend to collaborate in crucial matters like standard setting. For their part, as
we will see later, governments have not been on the driving seat for the development
of this socio-technical system, yet they have a significant presence due to their role in
conventional driving and mobility systems (see below).
The capabilities of the agents governing this social technical system are actually highly
concentrated in some few industrial actors. Those firms are either from the software
sector with strong material and knowledge resourc es, they occupy crucial positions in
the domain of internet- and data-based services; or they are from the automotive sector
seeking to adjust their traditional paradigm to the data-based autonomous model. State
actors like municipalities and national authorities (governmental actors including
transport and road safety authorities, and transport planners) for their part, are not on
the driving seat, but are following events and trying to anticipate regulatory issues.
Other actors like bicycle associations, or civil society associations representing the
elderly, handicapped, etc. are not as active shaping the new socio-technical system, as
their capabilities are lower. Hence, the distribution of agents' capabilities in the system
is concentrated in few actors (the software and automotive industries, and service pro-

9 SAE standard J3016_201806 of 2018-06-15
https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_201806/ , accessed July 22nd, 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
The four illustrative cases 13
viders). Yet, there is an important level of dependency: the AV firms depend on state
actors' regulation, authorisation and transport planning , as well as on societal ac-
ceptance (see below).
Actors use different governance instruments for the creation and change of the auto-
mated vehicles socio- technical system. One of the most relevant is the creation of
technical standards and software protocols for the communication between vehicles
(V2V) and with infrastructure (V2I). T he combination of both technologies (automated
and connected vehicles) offers additional functions for mobility solutions. Agreeing on
protocols and setting the s tandards at international level is occupying the attention of
producers. Likewise, another important governance instruments are the creation of
experimental spaces. Pilot projects and test beds have been launched by private firms
in some university campuses or cities, and have been allowed by temporary exemp-
tions from regulatory authorities. In relation to that, another key instrument is regula-
tion. Local and regional-national authorities are testing some first steps into the regula-
tory framework, which comprises issues of traffic safety and territorial planning. Last,
but not least, a paramount type of instrument is discourse-based. Producers, journalists
and engineers have developed future- oriented narratives about the advantages of au-
tomated vehicles, aiming to promote their social acceptance.
This brin gs us to the next point, about the legitimacy of this socio- technical system.
Surveys about the social acceptance of automated vehicles are somehow unclear
about the widespread of social acceptance, because one third of respondents is in fa-
vor, one third undecided, and one third skeptical (Dütschke et al. 2017). There seem to
be growing concerns about road safety issues and data privacy in machine- human
interactions (Stilgoe 2017; Habibovic et al. 2016) . However, the social contestation
remains unarticulated and with little voice. This might change with the gradual introduc-
tion of AVs in city streets and roads.
Traditionally, the field of road and vehicle safety is organized in a complex set of ar-
rangements of private and public nature, where the role of the state plays a fundamen-
tal role with its regulatory power to define the limits and forms of road safety and liabil-
ity, and its role in transport planning and infrastructure -building. For that reason, in the
process of changing the sociotechnical system tow ards automated vehicles, the state
remains an important gatekeeper . State actors have allowed the introduction of pilot
schemes in cities and roads, by experimenting within regulatory exemptions. Further-
more, the state is largely acting as a facilitator because it is in charge of the physical
infrastructure planning. Rolling out AV socio- technical system requires new classifica-
tion of driving zones, new physical traffic signs and adequate long- term transport infra-
structure investment plans. Last, but not least, the state acts as well as promoter,

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14 The four illustrative cases
pushing and acting as a champion for specific dimensions, most typically the develop-
ment of shared services (e.g. AV-shuttles).
4.4 Command and Control: Nuclear power
The fourth case concerns the governance of nuclear power , producing electricity by
means of controlled nuclear fission. The commercial use of nuclear power plants com-
menced after the Second World War following suggestions of "Atoms for Peace". Until
then nuclear energy had been solely used for weapons of mass destruction, causing
the horror of Hiroshima and Nagasaki attacks. Seen as a reliable source of electricity,
some countries began building nuclear fission reactors in the late 1950s , and it has
grown ever since, yet with a little decrease since the Fukushima accident (already up to
same level). However, this development has experienced important ups and downs
along different aspects, the most important of which are the fear of nuclear accidents;
the safety problems with nuclear waste; the high capital investment costs of nuclear
power production (mainly due to increased safety requirements) ; the envisaged scarci-
ty of uranium; and the rapid rise of new sources of renewable energy which are cheap-
er, safer and more environmentally friendly (Müller and Thurner 2017) . In 2017 there
were around 448 active nuclear power reactors in 31 countr ies, generating approxi-
mately 10% of the world's electricity (IAEA 2018). However, this is unevenly distributed
across countries.
The social technical system of nuclear power is a case of 'command and control' mode
of governance. Whereas the dynamics and types of agents of change might differ be-
tween countries (see section 6), the dynamics of change in this social technical system
are overwhelmingly driven by the state. This is so for several reasons. First of all, be-
cause nuclear power is capital intensive and has high unit costs, requiring heavy in-
vestments in large facilities with very long timeframes for recapping the investment.
This means that most nuclear power producers are state owned enterprises and run
with important public subsidies (not only direct, but also indirect in the form of compen-
sation and insurance for private actors of possible damages) (Linares and Conchado,
2013). Secondly, because the state makes decisions on issues about health and safety
concerns, which are very relevant for nuclear power (Shiroyama 2015). Last, nuclear
power is a highly salient issue in inter-national politics with well-organized inter-national
knowledge cooperation sharing expertise and data; as well as geo -political dimensions
of defence and security. Hence, this soci o-technical system is organized in a hierar-
chical way because very few actors, mainly utilities and/or directly the government it-
self, are dominating the decisions (even if with some occasional tensions).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
The four illustrative cases 15
The capabilities of the agents of change are distributed. Nuclear power production is in
the hands of few public or semi -public firms (utilities) which have very strong financial
capital and technical knowledge capabilities. Access to the electricity grid is essential,
and is typically addressed by strong relations between the government an d the utilities
and/or with regulations that guarantee priority acces s. The state has very strong capa-
bilities too in terms of financial resources, as well as knowledge resources (in public
research centres, specialized agencies, and/or the military). Likewise, civil society or-
ganizations have strong capabilities with important resources in terms of mobilization of
public opinion. It is important to mention the relevance of international associations
supporting openly the expansion of nuclear power, as well as others contesting and
opposing its deployment.
Legitimacy is a key dimension in the governance of nuclear power social technical sys-
tem. In most democratic countries there are surveys indicating the degree of s ocial
acceptance. Whereas there are different views on that, in virtually all the countries pub-
lic opinion seems to be quite sensitive to nuclear disasters, like the recent Fukushima
accident. There tends to be a historical oscillation in terms of acceptance as well, with
waves of opposition and i ndifference throughout long periods. Due to the centrality of
the state in the change of this social technical system, legitimacy is highly related to the
legitimacy of the procedures and political processes for governmental decision-making.
This is to say that, the highly political nature of changes in nuclear power is strongly
tied to the outcome and process legitimacy of the political system in question. The
strong social movements opposing and contesting the use of nuclear power have en-
joyed substantive endorsement in many Western European countries. Particularly rele-
vant are the cases where initial state decisions to phase out the use of nuclear power
have been revoked, and the state has decided to maintain current levels or to expand
the construction of further fission plants. Antagonistic positions across the aisle in favor
and against have tended to mobilize passionate debates and social controversy.
Taking everything together, the role of the state in the mode of governance of the nu-
clear power socio-technical system is very central. However, the capabilities of agents
in this socio-technical system are distributed because civil society has strong capabili-
ties too, so the state's final ability is highly dependent on legitimacy of change, and not
only on the exercise and control of the instruments of change. From the above it can be
observed that the state has several roles. It acts as a moderator of societal attitudes,
and of utilities ' interests (and their shifts); it also acts as a promoter because it is an
active proponent and exponent through specific narratives about the decisions and
direction of the socio- technical system. Likewise, it has the role as an initiator , be-
cause it identifies opportunities and put its own resources to work (among them using
large funding) into a specific direction defined in a political process. Fourth, the state

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
16 Summary and Discussion: The various roles of the state
acts as a guarantor , as the state secures actively and directly operations against fi-
nancial and/or security and safety risks. Last but not least, t he state is also a national
and international watchdog, actively ensuring that agents comply with collectively de-
fined norms (regulations and standards), not only at national level, but also at interna-
tional level (for health and safety standards, as well as for geopolitical security inter-
ests).
5 Summary and Discussion: The various roles of the
state
The analysis of cases across the four modes of governance has allowed us to identify
various roles of the state in the governance of socio- technical systems. Table 2 sum-
marizes them.
Table 2: Summary of different roles of the state across modes of governance
Mode of Governance Role of the State
Self-regulated
(Cryptocurrencies)
• Observer
• Warner
• Mitigator
• Opportunist
Primus inter pares
(Smart Cities)
• Facilitator
• Lead-user
• Initiator
• Promoter
• Enabler of societal engagement
• Gatekeeper
Oligopoly
(Automated Vehicles)
• Gatekeeper
• Facilitator
• Promoter
Command and control

(Nuclear Power)
• Moderator
• Promoter
• Initiator
• Guarantor
• Watchdog
Source: own elaboration

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Summary and Discussion: The various roles of the state 17
Box 1 summarizes the list of the 13 roles of the state identified in this paper, with their
corresponding definitions.
Box 1: Summary of the different roles of the state, and their definitions
Observer: the state monitors the course of events, following up the developments and trends in
the socio-technical system.
Warner: the state identifies potential risks to users, citizens and institutions; develops and
communicates a warning narrative around those risks.
Mitigator: the state tries actively to reduce the negative effects that arises as a consequence of
socio-technical change.
Opportunist: the state takes up the opportunity arising from socio- technical change, becoming
itself an active beneficiary of the new social technical system for specific purposes.
Facilitator: the state actively seeks to make a process easier by supporting specific dynamics
of other agents' change initiatives.
Lead-user: the state initiates market cr eation by acting as lead user and co- designer in order to
find specific solutions to public needs.
Enabler of societal engagement: the state encourages actively the involvement of stakehold-
ers in participatory processes to define direction of change.
Gatekeeper: the state actively controls access for change agents, opening up or closing down
spaces for experimentation and transformation.
Promoter: the state acts as a champion, proponent and exponent of change in the sociotech-
nical system.
Moderator: the sta te acts as an arbitrator or negotiator between different social and political
positions among agents regarding the direction of transformation of a sociotechnical system.
Initiator: the state identifies early on some opportunities, and pro- actively uses it s own
knowledge and resources to work in concrete ways for the transformation of the sociotechnical
system.
Guarantor: the state actively and directly secures operations against financial and/or security
and safety risks.
Watchdog: the state actively ensur es that individual agents in a sociotechnical system comply
with particular collectively defined norms.
This brings forward two relevant issues for discussion. Firstly, taking one by one each
of the four modes of governance, our individual cases might indicate that there are sig-
nificant differences across modes of governance in terms of the different roles that the
state take. There are indications that each of the four modes of governance exhibit s
particular mixes of different roles of the state. In other words, mixes vary across modes
of governance in a relevant manner. Naturally, there is a word of caution here, as our

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
18 Conclusion and future research
discussion is based on one illustrative case for each mode of governance, and further
empirical analysis based on several cases will further qualify our observations. In any
case, what is important here is that our four illustrative cases have provided some clear
indications that are worth considering in this pre-study given the early stage (Swedberg
2012) of studying the roles of the state in socio -technical systems ' governance of
change. Moreover, taking one by one each of the different roles, we see some roles
that cut across the modes of governance. For example, we can observe that the state
acts as a ' promoter' in 3 out of our 4 illustrative cases (Smart Cities, Automated Vehi-
cles, and Nuclear Power). Yet, what is interesting is the way in which those roles are
combined in specific mixes within each mode of governance, telling us about the com-
plexity of state role in socio-technical systems, and about the fact that the state is not a
uniform actor, but assumes several roles at once.
Secondly, it is worth considering the variation across the 13 roles of the state in terms
of their transformative nature because some of the roles of the state seem to be more
transformative than others. By 'transformative' we mean the ability of the state to delib-
erately foster a marked change in the nature and functionality of the socio- technical
systems in a direction the government assesses as societally desirable (see section 1).
Following this definition of ' transformative', the most transformative of the 13 roles are:
facilitator, lead- user, promoter, guarantor and initiator. In these five rol es the state
clearly exercises pro-active efforts to transform socio- technical systems, and aims at
mobilizing the intellectual, organizational, political and social resources in specific di-
rections in order to do so. Hence, pro-activeness and directionality are key in those
roles in which the state exhibits strong transformative intention. A second group of
roles of the state are somehow less transformative than those, simply because the
state is engaged but in less pro- active way and with no (or unclear) directionality . This
goes for the roles of gatekeeper, moderator, opportunist and enabler of societal en-
gagement. In these roles the state is less active than above, and it might not aim at
defining the direction of change (or does it ambiguously) and hence it can actually go
both ways in terms of being transformativ e or not. Last, the lowest degree of trans-
formative role are those of observer, warner, and watchdog. In this last set of roles the
state is mainly passive or re -active because it engages very little, because it does not
set any directionality at all, or because it is actually opposed to the change observed.
6 Conclusion and future research
Recent calls for more transformative and problem-oriented STI policies have tended to
severely simplify the role of the state as market correcting or market creating. As we
saw in previous sections of this paper, this simplification is partly because these recent

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Conclusion and future research 19
calls have not related to the rich literature about the governance of science and tech-
nology. In order to address that important blind spot, this paper relates to this rich lit-
erature and develops it further provid ing an informed understanding about the different
roles of the state in the governance of socio- technical systems. In our empirical treat-
ment of four illustrative cases we have identified 13 different roles. Some of those roles
are more transformative than others, and they are combined in different mixes within
each of the four modes of governance.
Therefore, the contribution of this paper is three-fold. Firstly, based on some illustrative
cases, this paper identifies at least 13 different roles of the state in the governance of
socio-technical systems. T his variation is a relevant aspect to take into consideration
when examining a specific possible role that the state might take in transformative in-
novation, as there are significant differences in the roles it might assume.
This brings us to our second contribution, namely, that some of the roles of the state
are more transformative than others, and that these might be located along a scale of
different degrees of transformative intention. As discussed in the previous section, the
variation is mainly a que stion of degree, as we suggest the roles might go from most
transformative (highly pro- active), to medium transformative (engaged but not direc-
tional), and lastly less/no transformative at all (just passive and not directional).
The third contribution of this paper is the understanding that within the spaces in each
of the four governance modes, the way in which the state can define its different trans-
formative roles depends on a number of dimensions. The 13 different roles of the state
that we have identif ied in our cases are deeply related to issues of the distribution of
capabilities inside the socio- technical system, to the choice of policy instrument s cho-
sen, and to forms of social legitimacy; not only just to the particular position of the state
as driver or not-driver in the governance of the system. Likewise, we saw specific pos-
sible mixes of roles of the state according to the mode of governance, with some roles
being present across multiple modes. We therefore conclude that we have identified
relevant patterns of the roles of the state that would need further examination with
more empirical cases.
Having established the roles of the state in different governance modes and socio-
technical system conditions, we might now consider the usefulness of the approach put
forward in this article, both for analytical and policy purposes. From an analytical per-
spective, the current approach, and its further developments should be useful as a tool
to examine the specific roles of the state in transformation processes with a multiple
step process. At a first step, researchers can analyse what type of governance mode
characterizes a specific socio- technical system. Thereafter in a second step, the re-

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
20 Conclusion and future research
searchers can consider examining in more detail the three analytical dimensions shap-
ing the nature of change of socio- technical systems suggested in this paper: the distri-
bution of agents ' capabilities, the type of policy instruments used, and the degree of
social acceptance to outcomes and processes. Understanding the governance mode
and the nature of the change process allows the researcher to look at the mixes of
roles that the state performs in that particular mode of governance, contrasting them
with those identified in this paper. These steps will provide a more embedded approach
to unveil the complexity and mixes of roles of the state in the governance of social
technical systems' change, and advance our understanding of governance processes
and patterns.
From a policy-making perspective, the current approach might be useful in the design
of transformative STI policies. Sometimes policy -making takes place by formulating
individual policy instruments in a rather isolated manner, without taking into account
various forms of state action , or the complexities of governing change in socio-
technical systems. Equally, sometimes governments formulate ambitious transforma-
tive policies across a range of missions without taking into account that instrumenta-
tion, mobilisation and coordination has to correspond to the underlying properties of the
socio-technical system. Therefore, policymakers might use this approach to reflect
about the different roles of the state in specific socio- technical systems as an interme-
diary step before defining specific policy instruments. Likewise, they might consider the
different roles of the state when defining issues of organisational coordination across
different public administration units and across different organisational stakeholders.
Transformative change responding to complex problems might require substantial or-
ganisational coordination issues, and therefore a more explicit, conscious approach to
understand governance conditions might help introducing such contextual approach to
policy-making.
Naturally, our analytical framework has some li mitations. First , the state might acci-
dentally inhibit change. Even if visions and missions are clear and well formulated, the
state might not be able to act according to the requirements of missions due to im-
portant limitations of its own organizational capacity. This brings the question of organi-
zational capacity to the fore, understanding that the transformation of sociotechnical
systems is a complex phenomena calls to consider issues of organizational capacity of
governmental actors (Borrás 2011) as well as other actors, particularly when consider-
ing introducing reflexive governance in directional processes of transformation
(Lindner, et al., 2016) and when building capacities to manage emerging knowledge-
based technologies in an anticipatory manner (Guston 2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Conclusion and future research 21
Second, it is important to understand that the state might not always invariably be
transformative. Our four cases looked at the role of the state towards socio-technical
system transformation. Yet, the concept of 'transformation' does not autom atically as-
sume that the results of transformations are positive. Our framework can be used to
look at all kinds of consequences of state roles, including non-change or change that is
against the majority of the population or against the UN 's Sustainable D evelopment
Goals (SDGs).
Regarding a future research agenda, we might suggest at least two important lines.
The contribution of this paper is to contextualize the role of the state in socio- technical
systems' governance, and in so doing it has payed attention to its variation across four
modes of governance. Hence, the first line for a future research agenda will study vari-
ation within each mode of governance, particularly studying cross-country variation,
cross-time variation, and multi -level variation. We examine these three one -by-one.
Cross-country variation within each mode of governance is important to consider be-
cause the role of the state is defined differently across states by the specificities of
constitutional, historical and cultural features of each individual state. Furthermore the
governance mode differs because countries have very different capacities, specific
technological trajectories, certain institutional settings, etc. For example, the roles of
the state in the governance of nuclear power in the UK might be different than in Ger-
many. Likewise, it would be relevant to study cross -time variation within each mode of
governance, for example the role of the state in the governance of nuclear power in the
UK in the 1950s is very different than in the UK in the 2010s. Last but not least, the
multilevel interaction between local, regional, national, and international levels of gov-
ernment within each mode of governa nce is also a crucial dimension for future analy-
sis. This is so because some socio -technical systems might be more internationalis ed
than others (in terms of the relevance of inter-national dynamics in their governance, or
their local/spatial dimension).
A second important line for future research agendas might consider issues of time and
the change of the roles the state plays over time. Understanding that some trans-
formations might be more rapid than others, we might analyse the role of the state, as
well as different dimensions of governance of social technical transformation in terms
of the different speeds and paces of change (Weber & Havas). For example, many of
the socio- technical systems ' transformations associated to digital technologies are
happening at a faster pace than others. It is worth considering the role of the state, as
well as issues of distribution of agents ' capabilities, instrumentati on, and legitimacy
related to the pace of change, as well as the negative consequences for the social
groups left behind.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
22 Conclusion and future research
All in all, our pa per aims at opening up a research agenda that takes the role of the
state in its transformative STI policy -making in a much more embedded approach, one
that looks into the diversity of roles, in a diversity of modes of governing socio-technical
system's change.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge our colleagues at the RIO (Research Innovation and
Organization) Group at the Copenhagen Business School, in particular Alan Irwin,
Signe Vikkelsø, Stine Haakonsson, Jane Bjørn Vedel, Lasse Bundgaard, David
Howoldt and Mart Laatsit, for their insightful feedback on earlier versions of this paper.
Our special gratitude to Wouter Boon, Matthias Weber and Marko Hekkert for their de-
tailed and valuable comments and feedbacks too. We are also very thankful to the four-
teen experts who commented and helped us with clarification and corrections about the
four illustrative cases in this paper. They are acknowledged in a specific footnote. The
authors of this paper remain the sole responsible.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
References 23
7 References
Aho, E.; Cornu, J.; Georghiou, L.; Subirà, A. (2006) : Creating an Innovative Europe:
Report of the independent expert group on R&D and innovation.
Angelidou, M. (2014): Smart city policies: A spatial approach, Cities, 41, pp. 3-11.
Atzori, M. (2015) : Blockchain Technology and Decentralized Governance: Is the State
Still Necessary?
Boon, W.; Edler, J. (2018) Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new
trends in innovation policy, Science and Public Policy, 45 (4), pp.,435–447.
Borrás, S. (2011): Policy Learning and Organizational Capacities in Innovation Policies.
Science and Public Policy, 38 (9), pp. 725-734.
Borrás, S. ; Edler, J. (2014a) : The governance of change in socio -technical and
innovation systems: three pillars for a conceptual framework. In Borrás, S.; Edler,
J. (E ds.) (2014): The Governance of Socio -Technical Systems: Explaining
Change. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Borrás, S. ; Edler, J. (2014b) : Introduction: on governance, systems and change. In
Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (Eds.) (2014): The Governance of Socio-Technical Systems:
Explaining Change. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Borrás, S. ; Edquist, C. (2019) : Holistic Innovation Policy: Theoretical Foundations,
Policy Problems and Instrument Choices. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Budde, B.;Konrad, K. (2019): Tentative governing of fuel cell innovation in a dynamic
network of expectations, Research Policy, 48, pp. 1098-1112.
Daemmrich, A. (2014): Anticipatory markets: Technical standards as governance tool
in the development of biodegradable plastics . In Borrás, S. and Edler, J. (E ds.)
(2014): The Governance of Socio- Technical Systems. Explaining Change
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
De Filippi, P. ; Loveluck, B. (2016): The Invisible Politics of Bitcoin: Governance Cris is
of a Decentralised Infrast ructure. Internet Policy Review, Journal on Internet
Regulation, 5 (3).
Dütschke, E.; Schneider, U.; Krail, M.; Peters, A. (2017): Akzeptanz für automatisiertes
Fahren. Die Chance auf eine nachhaltige Verkehrswende?, Internationales
Verkehrswesen, 69, 3/2017, pp. 60-63.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
24 References
Edler, J.; Cunningham, P.; Gök, A.; Shapira, P. (Eds.) (2016): Handbook of Innovation
Policy Impact. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Edler, J.; Fagerberg, J. (2017): Innovation policy: what, why, and how, Oxford Review
of Economic Policy, 33 (1), pp. 2-23.
Edmondson, D.L.; Kern, F.; Rogge, K.S. (2018): The co-evolution of policy mixes and
socio-technical systems: Towards a conceptual framework of policy mix feedback
in sustainability transitions, Research Policy, 48 (10).
Fagerberg, J. (2017 ): Innovation policy: Rat ionales, Lessons and Challenges, Journal
of Economic Surveys, 31 (2), pp. 497-512.
Fisher, E. (2019): Governing with ambivalence: The tentative origins of socio-technical
integration, Research Policy, 48 (5), pp. 1138-1149.
Foray, D.; Mowery, D.C.; Nelson, R.R. (2012): Public R&D and social challenges: What
lessons from mission R&D programs?, Research Policy, 41 (10), pp. 1697-1702.
Girasa, R. (2018 ): International Regulation. In Girasa, R. (E d.) (2018): Regulation of
Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain Technologies: National and International
Perspectives. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Guston, D.H. (2014 ): Understanding 'anticipatory governance', Social Studies of
Science, 44 (2), pp. 218-42.
Habibovic, A.; Andersson, J.; Nilsson, M.; Lundgren, V.M; Nilsson, J. (2016 ):
Evaluating interactions with non-existing automated vehicles: three Wizard of Oz
approaches. 2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV).
Hopkins, M.M.; Crane, P.; Nightingale, P.; Baden-Fuller, C. (2019): Moving from non-
interventionism to industrial strategy: The roles of tentative and definitive
governance in s upport of the UK biotech sector, Research Policy, 48 (5), pp.
1113-1127.
IAEA (2018): Energy, Electricity and Nuclear Power Estimates for the Period up to
2050. Wien: International Atomic Energy Agency.
Irwin, A. (2006): The Politics of Talk:Coming to Terms with the 'New' Scientific
Governance, Social Studies of Science, 36 (2), pp. 299-320.
Kern, F. (2012): Using the multi -level perspective on socio- technical transitions to
assess innovation policy , Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 79 (2),
pp. 298-310.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
References 25
Konrad, K.; Alvial Palavicino, C. (2017 ): Evolving Patterns of Governance of, and by,
Expectations: The Graphene Hype Wave. In : Bowman, D.M., Stokes, E. ; Rip, A.
(Eds.)(2017): Embedding New Technologies into Society: A Regulatory, Ethical &
Societal Perspective. Singapore: Pan Stanford Publishers.
Kuhlmann, S. ; Rip, A. (2018): Next-Generation Innovation P olicy and Grand
Challenges, Science and Public Policy, 45 (4), pp. 448-54.
Kuhlmann, S.; Stegmaier, P; Konrad, K. (2019): The tentative governance of emerging
science and technology—A conceptual introduction, Research Policy, 48 (5), pp.
1091-1097.
Leyden, D.P.; Link, A.N. (2015): Public Sector Entrepreneurship. U.S. Technology and
Innovation Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Linares, P. ; Conchado, A. (2013): The economics of new nuclear power plants in
liberalized electricity markets, Energy Economics, 40, pp. S119-S125.
Lindner, R.; Daimer, S.; Beckert, B.; Heyen, N.; Koehler, J.; Teufel, B.; Warnke, P. ;
Wydra, S. (2016): Addressing directionality: Orientation failure and the systems of
innovation heuristic. Towards reflexive governance, Fraunhofer ISI Discussion
Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 52. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer
ISI.
Link, A.N.; Link, J.R. (2009): Government as Entrepreneur . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Lyall, C.; Papaioannou, T. ; Smith, J. (E ds.) (2009): The limits to governance: The
challenge of policy-making for the new life sciences. Farnham: Ashgate.
Lyall, C.; Tait, J. (2019): Beyond the limits to governance: New rules of engagement for
the tentative governance of the life sciences , Research Policy, 48 (5), pp. 1128-
1137.
Martin, S.; Scott, J.T. (2000): The nature of innovation market failure and the design of
public support for private innovation, Research Policy, 29 (4–5), pp. 437-447.
Mazzucato, M. (2014): The Entrepreneurial State. Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
Myths, London: Anthem Press.
Mazzucato, M. (2016): From market fixing to market -creating: a new framework for
innovation policy, Industry and Innovation, 23 (2), pp. 140-56.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
26 References
Müller, W.C.; Thurner, P.W. (E ds.) (2017): The Politics of Nuclear Energy i n Western
Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pierre, J. ; Peters, G.B. (2001 ): Governance, Politics and the State . Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Rip, A. (2018): Futures of Science and Technology. Springer: Society.
Schot, J.; Steinmueller, W.E. (2018): Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems
of innovation and transformative change, Research Policy, 47 (9), pp. 1554-1567.
Shiroyama, H. (2015): Nuclear Safety Regulation in Japan and Impacts of the
Fukushima Daiichi Accident. In : Ahn, J.; Carson, C.; Je nsen, M.; Juraku, K. ;
Nagasaki, S.; Tanaka, S. (E ds.) (2015): Reflections on the Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Accident: Toward Social -Scientific Literacy and Engineering Resilience.
Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Sovacool, B.K. ; Hess, D.J. (2017 ): Ordering theories: Typologies and conceptual
frameworks for sociotechnical change, Social Studies of Science, 47 (5), pp. 703-
750.
Stilgoe, J. (2017): Machine learning, social learning and the governance of self -driving
cars, Social Studies of Science, 48 (1), pp. 25-56.
Stilgoe, J.; Owen, R.; Macnaghten, P. (2013): Developing a framework for responsible
innovation, Research Policy, 42 (9), pp. 1568-1580.
Swedberg, R. (2012): Theorizing in Sociology and Social Sciences: Turning to the
Context of Discovery, Theory and Society, 41 (1), pp. 1-40.
Taeihagh, A. ; Lim, H.S.M. (2018): Governing autonomous vehicles: emerging
responses for safety, liability, privacy, cybersecurity, and industry risks, Transport
Reviews, pp. 1-26.
Van Asselt, M.B. ; Vos, E. (2008): Wrestling with uncertain risks: EU regulation of
GMOs and the uncertainty paradox, Journal of risk research , 11 (1-2), pp. 281-
300.
van Winden, W. ; van den Buuse, D. (2017): Smart City Pilot Projects: Exploring the
Dimensions and Conditions of Scaling Up, Journal of Urban Technology, 24 (4),
pp. 51-72.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
References 27
Weber, K.M.; Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation
policies for transformative change: Combining insights from innovation systems
and multi -level perspective in a comprehensiv e 'failures' framework, Research
Policy, 41 (6), pp. 1037-1047.
