
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91

Unboxing innovation policy strategies:
an empirical exploration on objectives,
coordination, and capacity

Miriam Hufnagl

Place: Karlsruhe
Date: July 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Responsible for content
Miriam Hufnagl, miriam.hufnagl@gmail.com

Recommended citation
Hufnagl, Miriam (2025): Unboxing innovation policy strategies: an empirical exploration on objectives, coordination,
and capacity, (Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91). Karlsruhe: Fraunho-
fer ISI.

Published
July 2025

ISSN
1612-1430

Doi
10.24406/publica-4880

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Contents
1 The puzzling observation: the emergence of national innovation policy
strategies ......................................................................................................................... 1
2 Policy strategies as an object of study .................................................................... 4
2.1 Strategies in STI studies prior to the New Mission Era ........................................................... 4
2.2 National STI Strategies and mission-oriented innovation policies: two sides of one
coin? ...................................................................................................................................................... 6
3 Choice of cases & qualitative analyses .................................................................... 8
3.1 Choice of cases ................................................................................................................................... 8
3.2 Sample of interview partners and method ................................................................................. 8
4 National innovation strategies: productive features and excessive demand
 .......................................................................................................................................... 11
4.1 Contextualisation and motivation .............................................................................................. 13
4.2 Ideational frameworks for policy making: guiding principles and policy objectives of
the strategies .................................................................................................................................... 19
4.3 Practises of coordination .............................................................................................................. 25
4.4 Capacities for (strategic) policy making ................................................................................... 30
4.5 Perceived obstacles for (impactful) strategies and most urgent systemic challenges . 35
5 Main findings and further avenues for research ............................................... 40
A.1 Description by category of innovation policy strategies in place 2013-2014
 ........................................................................................................................................ 44
A.2 Questionnaire addressing frameworks of policy making, practices and
(strategy) capacities of actors regarding national innovation strategies of
Germany, UK and Sweden ....................................................................................... 48

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | II

List of figures
Figure 1: Timeline of national innovation policy strategies in Germany (blue),
Sweden (yellow) and UK (black) ................................................................................................. 12
Figure 2: Regional discussion fora and pilot projects of innovative public
procurement ...................................................................................................................................... 18
Figure 3: Hierarchical code-subcode-model concerning challenge or mission
orientation .......................................................................................................................................... 24
Figure 4: Simplified overview modes of cooperation........................................................................... 29
Figure 5: Sub-categories of strategic capacities .................................................................................... 31
Figure 6: Missing elements or needs for policy action mentioned by interviewees ................ 39

List of tables
Table 1: Sample of interview partners ........................................................................................................ 9
Table 2: Vision Statements of National Innovation Strategies ....................................................... 13
Table 3: Comprehensive overview of strategies and take aways ................................................... 41

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 1

“Modernity is complex (Niklas Luhmann), accelerated (Hartmut Rosa), and multiple
(Shmuel N. Eisenstadt), it is shaped by capitalism, digitalization, and globalization,
and it has vulnerabilities due to climate change, pandemics, global social inequal-
ity and threats of war and terrorism.” (Busen, Weiß 2023, p. 5)

1 The puzzling observation: the emergence of national innova-
tion policy strategies
In times of multiple crises, “vulnerabilities”, and the need for the so-called twin transition – the transfor-
mation to a more sustainable and digital economy – science, technology, and innovation (STI) are ex-
pected to contribute to solving the grand challenges of humankind. Regarding the related policies, we
observably entered an era of strategy that started in the mid-2000s. Nation states started to set up
large-scale policy strategies to support innovation-related research and development (R&D) activities,
which might generate solutions for existential problems1. But how do individual policymakers - from
formulators at ministries to implementors at agencies- perceive this development and how does it alter
their practical work? This contribution will focus on the perception and practice of individual policymak-
ers working within or close to state authorities in Germany, Sweden, and the UK by an empirical inves-
tigation on guiding principles, coordination practises and strategic capacities of the involved actors
concerning both: the formulation and enactment of STI policy strategies.
Among others, prominent examples of this policy phenomenon are the Swedish initiative Innovative
Sweden – A strategy for growth through renewal from 2004 that was replaced by The Swedish
Innovation Strategy in 2012, the British Innovation and Research strategy for growth from 2011 and
Germany’s four generations of Hightech Strategies (BMBF 2006, 2010b, 2014, 2019) with its succes-
sor: the recently introduced Future Strategy: Research and Innovation (BMBF 2023b).
This development is not only restricted to Europe. For instance, the Obama Administration also
established a national innovation strategy in 2009, “A Strategy for American Innovation: Driving
Towards Sustainable Growth and Quality Jobs,” updating it in 2011. China also joins in this under-
taking by establishing a National Medium- and Long-term Science and Technology Development
Plan (2006-2020), considered the Chinese national innovation strategy.
The conceptualization of innovation strategy policies is not limited to nation -states, however. The
release of “The OECD Innovation Strategy: Getting a Head Start on Tomorrow” in 2010 serves as an
example of the engagement of an international organisation in that respect (OECD 2010). Further-
more, the executive organs of the European Union, with their supranational institutional structures,
have been involved in formulating an innovation strategy for quite some time. One milestone of
this process was the Communication from the Commiss ion EUROPE 2020 – A strategy for smart,
sustainable, and inclusive growth (European Commission 2010) that led, among other building
blocks, to the formation of the Horizon 2020 – Framework Program for Research and Innovation
(European Commission 2011) just a year later. The aim of the latter was bringing “together all exist-
ing Union research and innovation funding, including the Framework Program for Research, the
innovation-related activities of the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Program and the
European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT)” (2011, p. 2) in a combined strategy.

1 Furthermore, these strategies often put the focus (of the wording) on innovation, integrating the policy domains of science
and technology as well, at times blurring the boundaries of the different areas from the observer’s perspective.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 2
Although all these policy strategies stem from different responsible authorities in different countries
with diverse governance settings, they have multiple aspects in common.
The first apparent feature is the commitment to support STI, which should help solve the “Grand
Challenges of our time” formulated in the Lund Declaration 2009. Accordingly, these “challenges
must turn into sustainable solutions in areas such as global warming, tightening supplies of energy,
water and food, ageing societies, public health, pandemics and security.” (Vetenskapsrådet 2009, p.
1) This objective can also be found in the US Strategy, which ought to “harness science and tech-
nology to address the “grand challenges” of the 21st century” (Exe.Off. of the President 2009, iif) .
Compared to the Lund declaration, the US challenges are vividly described as “developing solar
cells as cheap as paint, building anticancer drugs that spare healthy cells, and fitting the contents
of the Library of Congress on a device the size of a sugar cube.” (2009, p. 5) This main feature of
shifting the focus of STI policies towards an aspired more significant societal impact, however, is a
complex undertaking: “While this re-orientation towards addressing challenges, which can be em-
pirically observed, might be welcomed f rom a normative point of view, it poses significant chal-
lenges for the substance, procedural design and coordination of STI” (Lindner et al. 2016, p. 1).
Secondly, following the narrative on tackling those challenges, the innovation strategies all mention
long-term goals, spanning over legislative periods or even generations, as the titles, for instance,
Horizon 2020 and Hightech Strategy 2025, already indicate. However, adding time horizons to the
strategies' headline does not necessarily result in formulating concrete milestones, specific time-
lines, and indicators to assess progress towards tackling these challenges in the corres ponding
strategy policies.
The third apparent standard narrative of the strategies is the cross-ministerial constitution of those
goals, which implicitly and often also explicitly suggests that several ministries need to be involved
in designing, formulating, and implementing the related policy instruments. Furthermore, they draw
on existing measures and simultaneously add new policy instruments. Those inter -departmental
efforts pay tribute to the cross-cutting character of innovation itself. According to Kaiser, comment-
ing on innovation policy and its strategies of the mid-2000s, these “do not display a novel field of
political actions altogether: It is rather the extension of a more traditional understanding of inno-
vation policy as an “interchapter between industry policy as well as science and technology policy”
(Meyer-Krahmer 1989, p. 1), to a much more comprehensive policy approach (Borras 2003)” (Kaiser
2008, p. 8) . This aspired inclusiveness of programmatic strategies is also proposed by a former
OECD expert: “An innovation strategy […], has to take account of [cultural, geographical, legislative
and regulatory] conditions to ensure that any interventions combine t o contribute to the policy
goals and do not weaken one another […] with emphasis on whole-of-government policies” (Gault
2010, 92ff). More than a decade after Gault’s observation was published, the “European Commis-
sion, in close collaboration with the European Research Area Committee delegates, launched a Mu-
tual Learning Exercise on the application of a whole of government approach (WGA) to the design
and implementation of national research and innovation policies.” 2 In practical terms this means
that the above mentioned observation has turned into a policy exercise and monitoring practise
within the EU (European Commission. DG Research 2023a) to support the policy design of emerging
innovation countries such as Bulgaria (European Commission. DG Research 2023b).
Fourthly, all strategies went through an editorial process that involved actors of the political and
administrative sphere, e.g., different departments, parliament in general, and research and innova-
tion agencies, which had to activate their institutional capacity working towards a joint agreeable
document in terms of content (e.g. policy instruments and their direction) and linguistic style (e.g.
fitting narratives to instruments). A further observation is thus: through the joint editorial processes,

2 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/c6f35ad2-be33-11ed-8912-01aa75ed71a1/language-en, online last
accessed 26.11.2023

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 3
national strategies serve as means to coordinate and navigate towards compromises within the
“ingroup of policymakers”, as well as an end of communicating action towards the “receiving end”
of the associated policies like, e.g., research organisations, companies, and universities. If these ac-
tivities also involve a concise design, formulation, coordination, and implementation of the associ-
ated policy measures, which would also rely on specific strategic capacities of policymakers, is yet
an open question.
Although the “humble observation” of Borras and Edler can still be shared today, that „ how the
change in socio-technical systems and innovation systems (ST&I systems) is actually governed re-
mains understudied in the social sciences” (Borrás et al. 2014, p. 2), this contribution falls short of
comprehensively analysing the actual content and execution of the national strategies. It will instead
explore the perceptions and understandings of the “ingroup of policymakers” – representatives and
officers at the mini stries and agencies – concerning the complexity of shaping and the ability to
(possibly) orchestrate policy communities towards change. Furthermore, the observation that
“scholars in STS (science and technology studies), economics and political science disciplines have
been concerned with the complex micro- and macro-level dimensions of the relation between sci-
ence/technology and society/economics/politics and their mutually shaping interactions” (ibid.) is
shared by the author. Hence, this contribution will focus on the perception and practice of individual
policymakers (from formulators at ministries to implementors at agencies) working within or close
to state authorities, which has mostly not explicitly gained attention by the scholarly community
yet. As the term governance has raised the gaze on the meta -level for the past two decades of
policy analyses, serving– among other crucial aspects – as a general cypher for the complex inter-
play of individual and collective actors in socio -technical systems, including the politico-adminis-
trative sphere3, the perspective of policy practitioners has been slightly neglected, which poses the
question: is scholarly theory building running ahead of policy practice? Linked to the modest hope
to contribute to shortening this assumed distance between action and analyses by focussing on the
individuals’ perspective, this contribution aims to examine the following questions through an em-
pirical analysis of a solid body of fifty -three qualitative guideline-led interviews with policymakers
(ministries, research and innovation agencies, or research councils) involved:
• Why did the government decide to launch a national innovation policy strategy?
• What are the guiding principles and policy objectives underlying the national strategy as
perceived by individuals formulating and implementing the strategy?
• What patterns can be identified regarding the coordination and cooperation of the actors
implementing the strategy?
• Does the formulation and implementation of the national innovation strategy require specific
"strategic" skills and capacities from the actors, and what are they?
• Which obstacles for (impactful) strategies and most urgent systemic challenges do the in-
volved individuals identify?
The remainder of this contribution is organised as follows: a compact discussion on strategy as a
research object in policy science (drawing on literature from the period of the first occurrence of
national strategies and the current debate on MOIP, as distinct features of some strategies) in chap-
ter 2 will aid to finetune the categories for the empirical work. Chapter 3 will further elaborate on
the research design and choice of the three country cases, followed by the central part (Chapter 4),
presenting the empirical analysis and interpretation. Chapter 5 concludes the findings and points
out further avenues for research.

3 Another observation supporting this argument is “Innovation policy governance, arguably very important for the design and
implementation of effective innovation policies, is an under-researched topic, on which more work, benefitting from an inter-
disciplinary perspective (including political science/public administration), is needed” (Edler et al. 2017, p. 17).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 4
2 Policy strategies as an object of study
Reflecting on the above-mentioned questions the overall interest of this contribution is: what kind of
incidents are national STI strategies? Are they a new approach to systemic policy making, traditional
policy instruments with new headlines, simply a public relations coup or something in between?
Drawing on Swedberg (2012) like Borrás et al. (2020), in their recent work on the transformative role of
the state, this contribution can be seen as a “pre-study and early discovery phase” (Swedberg 2012, p.
10) of the phenomena of national STI policy strategy: “that is, an analysis based on consistent insights
from empirical observations that serve to conceptualise (and eventually theorise) about a phenomenon
that remains understudied (…) [like national STI strategies].” (Borrás et al. 2020, p. 2)
This pre-study is such an “attempt to understand and explain something that happens in society“ (Swed-
berg 2012, p. 14) guided by the first two rules formulated by Swedberg (p.17, original in bold and italics)
„Rule # 1 Observe – and Choose Something Interesting:
You can only theorize on the basis of observation. Anything that can stimulate to a full view of the
phenomenon should be used, from sturdy scientific facts to art in various forms. “Don’t think but
look!” (Wittgenstein)
Rule # 2 Name and Formulate the Central Concept:
Give a name to what you observe and try to formulate a central concept based on it.“
After parts of the academic literature on “strategy as an object of study” has been taken into ac-
count and categories for the analysis are formulated (2.1), these rules will serve as guidance for the
empirical investigation that will recapture public policy practices of national STI strategies.
2.1 Strategies in STI studies prior to the New Mission Era
So far, policy scholars have not yet systematically addressed documents of national innovation
strategies as an object of study but “strategic policymaking” as different models for directed
actions focusing on fostering certain technologies in different contexts. One elaborate attempt,
for instance, to develop an analytical model to explain (and support) radical innovation is Strategic
Niche Management (SNM), which is rooted in evolutionary innovation economics and operational-
ized by transition literature and works – among other aspects – with societal experiments and Social
Network Theory (i.a. Hoogma et al. 2002). The concept of SNM does – under certain circumstances
– include recommendations to policymakers about strategically supporting a certain technological
niche, although it is not yet profitable. „[Formulating] [...] a quasi-evolutionary perspective on tech-
nical change [...] Rip and Schot [argued] [...] that variation is not blind, as is assumed by many evo-
lutionary economists, but directed to some e xtent. Technology actors not only anticipate future
selection but also try to shape the selection process itself by setting up special programs in R&D
settings or demonstration projects.“ (Schot et al. 2008, p. 539)
However, the SNM approach offers helpful hints in terms of policy strategies about directionality.
This term intends to describe the circumstance, that “ transformative change not only require that
innovations be generated as efficiently and effectively as possible, but also that these innovations
contribute to a particular direction of transformative change.” (Kallerud et al. 2013, p. 2) However,
due to its rather narrow perspective on a specific technology or a technical solution (and the cor-
responding niche or technological regime according to the heuristic), the SNM approach does not
necessarily help to explain or conceptualize support for non-technological drivers and the societal
embeddedness of national strategies. A more systemic view in connection with clear goals is put

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 5
forward by transition management models (Loorbach 2007, 2010) as emphasized by Weber et al.
(2012) in their attempt to formulate different framings legitimizing policies for transformative
change: “(…) transition management is about innovation and transformation of the systemic context
itself and about strategies to direct this system transformation to wards particular goals (which in
many concrete cases is approximated by the notion of sustainability).” (2012, p. 1039)
Furthermore, since “the model of transition management tries to utilize innovative bottom-up de-
velopments more strategically by coordinating different levels of governance and fostering self -
organisation through new types of interaction and cycles of learning and action for radical innova-
tions offering sustainability benefits” (Kemp et al. 2007, p. 3) it does provide a more pronounced
perspective on actors with a focus mostly on the self-organizational part by non-government ac-
tors. According to another stream of literature focusing on innovation governance, the analytical
criteria for strategic innovation policy are the „existence of an explicit political vision and priority-
setting; Evidence that the vision and priorities are transposed to the choice, design and implemen-
tation of innovation policy instruments.”(Borrás 2009: 15) Certainly a clearly exp ressed vision and
corresponding priorities is a major aspect of national policy strategies and often stated in the doc-
uments. However, expressing visions does not necessarily mean policymakers always design and
implement new policies to address these “corresponding priorities”; they often stick to the already
existing measures: “[…]public policies, just like innovations, display irreversibility and path-depend-
ency: they are adopted not on a tabula rasa but in a context of pre-existing policy mixes and insti-
tutional frameworks which have been shaped through successive policy changes.“ (Flanagan et al.
2011:708). Accordingly, the question arises if national innovation strategies are integration con-
structs? And are they “intended to „rationalise“ multiple goals and then combine policy instruments
in new ways […]” like Rayner et al. 2009 , suggested when introducing the concept of Integrated
Strategies after working on large scale policies for (mainly) environmental protection such as Na-
tional Forest Policies or Integrated Coastal Zone Management. These programs “attempt to inte-
grate existing, and sometimes competing, policy initiatives into a cohesive strategy; to coordinate
the activities of multiple agencies and actors; and, generally, to substitute a holistic approach to a
problem for one that has decomposed policy into a set of multiple and apparently unrelated prob-
lems and solutions (Briassoulis 2004; 2005; Stead et al. 2004).” (Rayner et al. 2009, p. 101). Further-
more, policy integration was identified as a phenomenon or, better – necessity – marking the de-
velopment from environmental policy plans to the very first Sustainable Development Strategies
(Meadowcroft, 2007; Steurer, 2007), which also feature “addressing cross-sectoral challenges” just
like innovation strategies. Steurer also highlights the importance of administration in that respect:
“Both scholars and practitioners address the issue of policy integration often by discussing
particular policy instruments (such as Environmental Fiscal Reforms) or mechanisms (such
as inter-ministerial coordination structures) rather than by exploring new, more appropriate
patterns of governance or administrative narratives in general. However, since policy inte-
gration strongly depends on better coordination on the administrative level of government,
I advocate that the challenge cannot be met without an adequate administrative pattern in
place.” (Steurer 2004, p. 2).
Since most STI policy strategies also rely on “inter-ministerial coordination structures”, according
to the document analysis (see 3.1 for an overview on the strategy cases) this impetus for sound and
effective coordination routines is worth investigating when looking at the core aspects of national
strategies. Furthermore, the holistic claim of a national strategy might benefit from the individual
yet systemic perspective Raschke and Tils put forward with their groundwork publications on the
matter (Raschke et al. 2007, 2010, 2011) . They describe “Political Strategy” 4 of individual and

4 Even though the focus of Raschke & Tils lies on „political strategy“ not „policy strategy“, which in German words can be more
distinctly described as „politische Strategie“ not „Politikstrategie“, their conceptualisation is still useful in this context.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 6
collective actors as “success -oriented constructs, which rely on cross -situational calculations that
consider the goal, the means and the environment.” (Raschke et al. 2007, p. 127) These calculations
constitute furthermore “directed, systemised and calculated considerations (calculations) that aim
at desired conditions (goals) for targeted options for action (means) by taking into account the cross-
situational, relevant context (environment).“ (2007, p. 129, original in italics, own translation) Keep-
ing this definition in mind, it is also proposed that policymakers cling to a certain “orientation -
scheme [...], that guides their actions throughout the entire process of the strategy-making, there-
fore when developing strategic capability5, designing strategies and in strategic steering processes.”
(ibid., p. 80) The latter might even be the very crucial core of an innovation policy strategy since its
overall impact relies on the answer to whether or not steering processes towards solving the grand
challenges by STI activities can a) even be enacted by a single or collective core actor such as a
ministry or government cabinet and b) are carried out successfully aiming at a certain target and
direction. Supplementary, Raschke & Tils connect to the aspect of belief systems, in their words
“orientation-scheme”, which according to Sabatier & Jenkins (2010) relates to sets of priorities, val-
ues and causal assumptions, which would need to approve and incorporate the overall strategic
demands.
Another crucial aspect is the dynamic process dimension: to set up a meta -scheme for policy
measures that foster environmental innovation, Quitzow distinguishes similar elements of policy
strategies and points to the recursive process dimension and the importance of strategic capacity:
“The process of strategy development and implementation is an ongoing and iterative process,
which requires continuous and systematic review and adaptation of policy measures ( Process di-
mension of strategy)” (Quitzow 2012, p. 9)
2.2 National STI Strategies and mission-oriented innovation poli-
cies: two sides of one coin?
A key motivation for the investigation of national innovation strategies is the observation that this
policy phenomenon, first occurring around the mid-2000s appears to be the comprehensive com-
mitment to achieve both meta -targets of contemporary societies by STI policies: solving grand
challenges associated with fundamental and systemic threats like climate and demographic change
while simultaneously enabling economic growth and prosperity. Around the early 2010s, however,
the notion of new mission-oriented innovation policies (MOIP) – sometimes just referred to as mis-
sions – respectively, entered the political arena and seems to have taken over the vivid debate on
strategic policy making and policy strategies that had just gained momentum (Gault 2010). Since
MOIP and innovation policy strategies share the same motive – (a) grand societal challenge(s) –
and ambition in terms of “addressing” (ideally solving) it/them by STI to facilitate real transformative
change, it is plausible to argue that each mission is a policy strategy in its own right. MOIP – be it
fighting cancer, an example from Germany’s Hightech-Strategy 2025, or the Industrial Clusters Mis-
sion, an example from the UK strategy of 2019 6 claiming to “establish the world’s first net -zero
carbon industrial cluster by 2040 and at least one low-carbon cluster by 2030” – obviously have to
establish, train and pull together their own set of policy capacity, instruments, budgets, target
groups, and evaluation practices.
The point is: MOIP and national innovation policy strategies stem from the same core understand-
ing, that STI are mostly publicly financed to provide solutions for the most pressing challenges if

5 Strategic capability in this context is defined as the „distinct ability for target tracking […] which is not only the cognitive ca-
pacity, but also the strategic capacity for action of an (organized) collective actor [like a party or ministry]”. (Raschke et al.
2007, p. 274).
6 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5ce3c654ed915d247e03364c/industrial-clusters-mission-infographic-2019.pdf ,
last accessed online: 29.11.2023

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 7
drafted accordingly (Foray et al. 2012; Kattel et al. 2018; Mazzucato 2017; Robinson et al. 2019) .
And both types of initiatives do – more often than not – follow similar policy principles and practices
pursuing a specific direction. Nevertheless, national strategies in addition encompass more general
targets like increasing skilled labour or strengthening knowledge transfer between heterogeneous
actors to secure economic growth and prosperity. MOIPs are ideally more focused on constructively
contributing to the solution of an explicit societal challenge and are embedded in specific socio -
technological systems that they seek to change or adapt to new circumstances or conditions (Witt-
mann et al. 2021b; Wittmann et al. 2021a). MOIPs – as critical elements of most national innovation
strategies today – can therefore be interpreted as carriers of attempted directionality7.
But as Wanzenböck et al. (2020, p. 484) have recently argued, “the policy discourse about directionality
and mission-orientation insufficiently considered the contextuality of societal challenges related to dif-
ferent views on both the problem and the solution.” Following this argument it might be the case that
there is still a missing embeddedness – or better resonance – of STI policies within the group of ad-
dressees of the associated funding programmes as well as society due to the fact that the complexity
of steering towards change via STI measures has been underestimated right from the very beginning in
the mid-2000s (see 4.2. for an empirical perspective on this statement). Furthermore, Janssen et al. offer
another impulse to the MOIP debate by describing them as boundary objects:
“This entails bridging understandings of missions as a guiding principle in strategic policy de-
bates—where stakeholders engage with the MIP [Mission Innovation Policy] concept but adapt it
to their particular challenges —and the actual implementation of the mission they formulate. We
argue that to facilitate the so far troublesome operationalisation of MIPs, what is necessary is not a
very prescriptive set of design princ iples, but instead understand missions as ‘boundary objects’
(BOs) around which heteroge neous communities—comprising but not limited to policymakers —
gather and craft together shared understandings of what is at stake, what means are necessary, and
what processes should ensue.” (Janssen et al. 2023, p. 399).
This concept states a workable, flexible concept but does allow for the interpretation: missions have
simply not yet lived up to their expectations. One can think of many reasons in addition to Wan-
zenböck et al. why this promising concept does – so far – not unfold its full potential, but the
expectation and excessive demand for real transformative change by the STI activities fostered by
MOIP have been enormous right from the beginning and “their effectiveness [...] is still be proven”
(Larrue 2021, p. 12). Therefore, the empirical material and analysis of this contribution will return to
the initial phase of national innovation strategies and their missions (the period from 2006 – 2014)
to investigate where this overload, or missing expectation management towards the transformative
power of this policy field might be rooted.

7 Discussing the concept formation and current use of the term directionality would exceed the scope of this contribution. But
just like Andy Stirling in his presentation at the Eu-SPRI general conference in 2023 vividly de-mystified the term “political
roadmap process” for prioritising support for technological infrastructure (“They are always linear, what does that have to do
with a real roadmap?”), one might question the meaning and potency of the popular term directionality as a catch-all phrase
for (ideally) steering towards a holistic direction of change, somehow calling into question that policies before the era of MOIP
had a direction at all.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 8
3 Choice of cases & qualitative analyses
To try to recapture public policy practices around national innovation strategies, guideline -based
interviews and their qualitative analysis was chosen to gain two main insights. Firstly, the focus on
the perception of the practitioners in charge will serve to identify the spirit and goals of the strategy
and its underlying processes from an empirical perspective reaching beyond a document -based
analysis and the headlines of communication material. Secondly, discussing the past views and fu-
ture opportunities for strategies and their elements by interpretative reasoning and theorizing of
the learnings will help to identify recommendations not only for future policy strategies but also
for further research on the matter. Or in the words of Lowi from the early days of policy analysis:
"[...] if we can discover empirically the policy conditions underlying our political patterns, we have a
basis for better public policies as well as better political science" (Lowi 1972, p. 309).
3.1 Choice of cases
To find tentative answers, three countries have been chosen for further investigation, namely the
UK, Sweden, and Germany. The selection is based on two reasons, first the pragmatic aspect of
timing, as these countries established strategies roughly around the same time and have been re-
newing them with every change of government 8 while being members of the European Union at
the time when the interviews were conducted. The second reason is related to the strategies meta-
targets of enabling economic growth and prosperity while possibly following (slightly) different
normative assumptions considering regulatory policies and the role of the state as such. On that
account it is useful to also select the cases along the Varieties of Capitalism heuristic (Hall et al.
2001; Hall 2001; Hall et al. 2009). While acknowledging the original focus on firms and its general
contestations (Hancké 2013), according to Streeck it still enables “considering capitalism as an in-
stitutionalized social order. Conceiving of capitalism as a social order draws attention to the micro-
dynamics of its enactment and re-enactment within a specific context of instituted constraints and
opportunities.” (Streeck 2013, p. 3). Therefore, the UK is chosen as an example for a (sort of) Liberal
Market Economy which, in the aftermath of the financial crisis in 2008, is trying to recalibrate and
improve its knowledge and technology transfer from science to businesses. Sweden serves as a
small state example representing a (sort of Scandinavian social democratic) hybrid economic sys-
tem (Crouch 2013), with a prominent division of labour between the ministerial authority and ap-
pointed policy implementors in agencies. Whereas Germany is considered a (sort of) coordinated
market economy (CME). Even though STI policy strategies are not (solely) focussed on firms and
market creation, this heuristic is still helpful in choosing the cases, since the “institutional comple-
mentarities” (Hall et al. 2009) within national economies and the support and commercialization of
“the new” is crucial. Summarizing his empirical investigations, Wood, outlines why this might be
instructive for public policy: „In an LME [Liberal Market Economy], where relations between firms
are mediated by markets, the state will be more effective if it restores and ‘sharpens’ market mech-
anisms. In a CME [Coordinated Market Economy] effective policy consists in supporting the institu-
tions and networks of coordination that connect companies.” (Wood 2001, p. 274).
3.2 Sample of interview partners and method
All interviews were conducted via online calls (via Skype) and all interview partners agreed, that the
exchange was recorded and transcribed. The shortest conversation took 27, the longest 118
minutes, and all interviews took place between March 2013 and April 2014. All respondents were

8 The political systems however, UK Westminster Democracy with monarchy, Sweden parliamentary monarchy and Germany a
parliamentary democracy with a strong federal system, will not play a role in the investigation.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 9
contacted by the author by email first. German representatives were identified via the organiza-
tional charts of the ministries, e.g., the Forschungsbeauftragte (representatives for STI) of each min-
istry, or by personal recommendations of colleagues. Swedis h and British interview partners were
identified by direct inquiry via the ministries or agencies' contact offices or by personal recommen-
dation. As for the selection of the interview partners regarding Sweden and the UK, the sample
contains both representatives of the ministries in charge of the strategy documents and employees
of the agencies, responsible for formulating and implementing the corresponding policy instru-
ments, mostly Vinnova for Sweden and the Technology Strategy Board (now Innovate UK) for the
UK. Though Germany also employs agencies to implement and administer policy instruments, the
hierarchical structure of decision -making is very different from the other two cases (see 4.4 for
further elaboration) and is mainly limited to the ministries themselves.
Table 1: Sample of interview partners
Germany
17 Interviews:
3 women, 14 men
United Kingdom
18 Interviews:
6 women, 12 men
Sweden
18 Interviews:
7 women, 11 men
M i n i s t r i e s
8 x Federal Ministry of Edu-
cation and Research
 3 x Federal Ministry for Eco-
nomic Affairs and Technol-
ogy9
2 x Federal Minister for the
Environment, Nature Con-
servation, Housing, and Re-
actor Safety10
2 x Federal Ministry of the
Interior and Community
1 x Federal Foreign Office
1 x Federal Ministry of Food,
Agriculture and Consumer
Protection11

6 x Department for Business,
Innovation and Skills (BIS)12
1 x Academic, seconded to BIS
(co-author strategy)

4 x Ministry for Enterprise13
2 x Ministry of Education and
Research

A g e n c i e s , R e s e a r c h C o u n c i l s & A s s o c i a t i o n s :

7 x Technology Strategy
Board14
2 x NESTA (National Endow-
ment for Science, Technology,
and the Arts): Innovation
Agency for the Social Good
1 x Research Council
1 x PERA Int. Research Associa-
tion
8 x Vinnova (Innovation
Agency)
2 x Tillväxtanalys (Swedish
Agency for Growth Policy
Analysis)
2x Vetenskapsrådet (Swedish
Research Council)

9 In 2023: Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action
10 In 2023 Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection
11 In 2023 Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture
12 In 2023 Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy
13 In 2023 Ministry of Climate and Enterprise
14 In 2023 Innovate UK

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 10
Considering the qualitative analysis, the three focus areas
I. Frameworks for policy making – guiding principles and characteristics of the strategy,
II. Policy practices – coordination and cooperation pattern of the strategy,
III. (Strategic) capacities – skills and capacities of the involved actors,
were set deductively from the scholarly literature ( 2.1) and the strategy documents (see A.1) and
built the first hierarchical code structure. The further sub-categories (30 in total), such as process,
benefit, or monitoring as selected examples, were formulated in a second order according to the
content of interview passages marking observable recurring incidents (inductive categorization).
Furthermore, a third order of categories (around 110) was established along the material that ex-
plicitly further conceptualized the codes or quotes. One example from the segment of monitoring
is the “need for new indicators”. To ensure a focussed and systemati c analysis of the qualitative
interviews, the established methods and routines were followed (Kuckartz 2014; Mayring 2014;
Rädiker et al. 2020) , with a particular focus on the coding techniques advocated by Corbin et al.
(2015). The software MAXQDA 2022 was used for the analysis. As the potential for conceptual and
practical reflections on the gathered empirical material is vast (1512 individual quotes)15 the paper
focuses on the five core questions listed in Chapter 1 (the interview guideline can be found in the
Annex).

15 Further topics for possible future investigations include the interviewees perspectives on different policy instruments and
mixes applied, on monitoring and impact assessment, the role of advisory committees and division of labour between re-
search councils, agencies etc., agenda setting between the EU and the nation states, project and program planning, time hori-
zons and strengthening the role of companies in innovation policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 11
4 National innovation strategies: productive features and ex-
cessive demand
The practise of national innovation policy strategies dates to the mid-2000s when Sweden (in 2004:
Innovative Sweden) and Germany (in 2006: Hightech Strategy) introduced their first policy docu-
ments; while the British White Paper “Innovation Nation” (also published in 2006) was the first con-
ceptual attempt towards a policy strategy which was ultimately introduced in 2011 (Innovation and
Research Strategy for Growth). Figure 1 depicts the evolution of the strategies since 2004 and dis-
plays two observations on frequencies: firstly, German subsequent national governments introduce
a new strategy after each election with a distinct corporate design and elaborate communication
campaign; secondly, both British and Swedish governments have so far published a new strategy
every ten years (and leave the implementation and further elaboration of workable concepts and
policy instruments to agencies, notably the British Technology Strategy Board16 and the Swedish
Innovation Agency Vinnova17, both non-departmental public bodies, and research councils).

16 The British Technology Strategy Board (TSB) was established as a separate organisation in 2007 and is a non -departmental public body spon-
sored by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. In 2014 the TSB changed its name for communication purposes into Innovate UK
which is part of UKRI, but the legal name TSB still exists .
17 The Swedish agency Vinnova was established in 2001 and is a government agency under the Ministry of Climate and Enterprise, and the na-
tional contact authority for the EU framework programme for research and innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 12
Figure 1: Timeline of national innovation policy strategies in Germany (blue), Sweden (yellow) and UK (black)18

18 The star indicates the interview period between March 2013- April 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 13
Since the analytical focus of this contribution lies on the qualitative analyses on the perception and
practise of public servants in ministries and agencies, a detailed document analysis was omitted but
a comprehensive presentation of main strategy catego ries can be found in A.1.. Because the em-
pirical material was gathered between March 2013 and April 2014, the interview partners refer to
the policy practises and documents from this period (as indicated by a star on the timeline in Figure
1), notably: The German Hightech Strategy 2020 (BMBF 2010a), the British Innovation and Research
Strategy for Growth (BIS 2011) and The Swedish Innovation Strategy (Swedish Ministry of Enterprise,
Energy and Communications 2012). As a starting point for the analysis, the vision statements have
been selected to showcase the policy ambitions and foci (Table 2). All of them attribute an influen-
tial and forward -looking role of the state with the idea of market creation and growth, with the
German example advocating to “find solutions to global and national challenges” by joining scien-
tific and economic forces, t he British clearly stating intervention actions by its agency “when the
market is unable to foster innovation alone in critical technologies or sectors” and finally the Swe-
dish pointing out the creative economic potential of all regions by stating that “People in all parts
of Sweden can and want to contribute to creating value“.
Table 2: Vision Statements of National Innovation Strategies

(BIS 2011; BMBF 2010a; Swedish Ministry of Enterprise, Energy and Communications 2012)
4.1 Contextualisation and motivation
Considering the historical process and motivation to formulate and implement a national innova-
tion policy strategy most interview partners argued that there was a general supranational Euro-
pean consensus and expectation that STI should aid solving the “grand societal challenges” of our
time. To ultimately tie in with this grand narrative – particularly in the wake of the Lund Declaration
in 2009 and the Europe 2020 strategy introduced in 2010 – a new, committed and encompassing
policy statement was needed. An interviewee from Germany shares the belief that expanding the
expectation on STI contributions towards solving global challenges in (Western) European industri-
alized countries is an effect of the past 30 years prior to the turn of the century that the narrowed
Vision
Statement
we want to stimulate Germany’s enormous scientific and economic
potential in a targeted way and find solutions to global and national
challenges. Germany must continue its efforts to open up promising lead
markets through innovation, develop these markets through social
changes, and thus secure material, cultural and social wellbeing. (BMBF
2010a, p.3)
UK: This strategy is based upon an understanding that Government can be
an important driver of innovation. We will support independent bodies, like
the Technology Strategy Board, to intervene when the market is unable to
foster innovation alone in critical technologies or sectors. More commonly,
we will work with the grain of the market by getting rid of unnecessary red
tape, making public sector data more accessible and establishing a fund to
run inducement prizes in areas where innovation is needed. (BIS 2011, p. V)
Sweden is a creative country characterised by pioneering ideas and new
ways of thinking and doing in order to shape our future in a global
community. People in all parts of Sweden can and want to contribute to
creating value for people, the economy and the environment through new
or improved solutions. (Swe. Min. EEC 2012, p. 13)

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 14
view on regional environment problems was complemented by the perception of global threats
and solutions that cannot be solved by single states:
“In the 1970s we had regional environmental challenges and followed slogans like:
the sky above the Ruhr must turn blue again. […] [Nowadays], we have nearby na-
tional environmental problems like air pollution, water pollution, waste disposal rea-
sonably well under control. […] But the global environmental problems that violate
the sustainability goals are still a long way off and we can only solve them as a world
community. The discussion about global climate change, global environmental
changes have become more important, in recent years.” (GER_5, Pos. 23).
Furthermore, the understanding of innovation as – exceptions prove the rule – a result of
cross-cutting (or even systemic) activities and decades of interplay between policy and aca-
demia in connection with the associated scholarly analysis and debate about heuristics of na-
tional, regional, sector and technological systems of innovation (e.g. Braczyk et al. 1998; Carlsson
1995; Edquist 2005; Lundvall 1992; Malerba 2002; Nelson 1993) had led to a political recognition
and willingness to address the involved actors from science , society and industry in a more holistic
manner (Warnke et al. 2016). As the following selected statements illustrate, the believe in the com-
bined forces of the “overall system” is shared among the three cases, with the British ministerial
servant pointing out the need to better align their excellent research base at unive rsities with the
overall system and the lack of support for development and commercialisation aspects so far:
“And the other motivation for the strategy is, we want to improve the national en-
gagement of the overall system: UK universities are very good in engaging with found-
ing programs, they are very international within the academic system. But that’s ac-
ademic research, UK has not been very productive in innovation. It is not supporting
RnD and business, the commercialisation, technology. And yet we also have huge ge-
ographical disparity in the UK.” (UK_1, Pos. 26).
A similar, yet reverse, take is expressed by a Swedish ministerial representative, thus taking the
business focus of innovation policy as the perspective that needs to be broadened:
“So, we decided: let`s do a comprehensive innovation strategy and take the global
challenges as a point of departure. We cannot look at innovation only from the busi-
ness sector. We must put another focus, […] as a tool, as a perspective and as a venue
where different organizations, different perspectives, different resources, and compe-
tences can meet and combine to develop these new solutions that the society needs
and that will also lay the foundations for the future competitiveness. […] We received
quite some heavy criticism for not being focused enough […]. Then again, my response
to that was, that we have made a very well underpinned strategic choice for an all -
inclusive innovation strategy.” (SWE_15, Pos. 41-43).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 15

Furthermore, a kind of spill-over effect of the academic debate on the systemic nature of innova-
tion, coupled with the perception of positive experiences in other nation states was notably one of
the driving forces of the holistic narrative behind the Germ an strategy, according to a ministerial
representative who was involved in the formulation, design and implementation of the first strategy:
“I would attribute the [aspired] systemic approach of the Hightech -Strategy to two
motivations: On the one hand, there was a lot of advice from the scientific community,
[…], that innovation was increasingly understood as a holistic activity, and it became
acceptable to ask for a policy strategy in one casting [“aus einem Guss”]. All the
buzzwords of systemic policy, which had already been circulating since the nineties,
were increasingly negotiated in Germany and in some cases already played a role in
other European countries. I do not remember exactly when – among others – the Finns
started, around 2002, 2003...insofar, and this is the second reason: there were already
successful examples in the OECD.” (GER_11, Pos.10-11).
In addition to observing motivational similarities, a look at the specific national circumstances at
the time, when the first strategies were introduced, will provide insights that mirror the expectations
on the effects and long-term impacts of the strategies right from the start. Staying with the German
example, the public servant provides more anecdotal insights about consensus in cabinet and per-
sonal engagement by the chancellor at the time, that research should be given higher priority and
“[…] the policy field should receive more attention and political ambition. This upgrade
was pursued by both, Ms. Merkel and Ms. Schavan [NB: Research Minister at the time],
as a tandem. To achieve this, it had to become a policy field, which was expanded
from the narrow client base of science towards a broader public including industry. ”
(GER_11, Pos.14).
An additional perspective refers to the political consequences and task readjustment enforced by
the Federalism Reforms I and II in 2006 and 2009. These were concerning the legal and budgetary
responsibility for research and education between the German Länder and the Federal Government.
The loss of most of the already limited shared responsibility for education on Federal level is iden-
tified as another driving force for the establishment of the Hightech -Strategy by the BMBF, since
“This research ministry [BMBF] looked like a plucked chicken. Plucked most recently by the federalism
reform, among other things. Because the education sector was finally torn out of its plumage, for
good. Such a ministry – for its raison d'être alone – must reposition itself.” (GER_8, Pos. 25).
Taking the lead in a national strategy that sets out to foster technology and innovation meant
repositioning the Ministry for Research and Education as a more important actor regarding not only
the future economic development but also an elevated role by c aring for key services of general
national interest in the areas of e.g., health, energy provision and security. As one observer of the
negotiations puts it in retrospective, “they [BMBF] clearly moved from being a discussant at the table
of societal demand to a powerful actor. And we all moved from addressing issues no longer from the
supply side of new technologies. This [NB: roll out of the strategy] was really a shift towards societal
demand pull and no longer the classic technology push situation.” (GER_12, Pos. 47).
With a strong focus on the financial service sector and a relatively low amount of producing trade
the British economy, and particularly London as a financial centre, had suffered enormously in the
period of the financial crisis 2007-2010. For this reason, the British Innovation and Research Strategy
for Growth was driven by the hope to finally overcome the negative effects brought by the financial

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 16
crisis. Therefore, it put the strongest emphasis on innovation as a source for economic growth and
prosperity compared to the other two cases: “our manufacturing sector had somewhat suffered from
the focus on financial services and so in the wake of the financial crisis […] one of the objectives of the
government was the so called "re-balancing". To make non-financial sectors grow.” (UK_10, Pos. 43)
After the election in 2010 the government embarked on a radical program on a) reducing the public
sector and red tape in order to tackle the high deficit, b) introducing new instruments to bridge the
gap between science and industry to speed up commercialization with e.g. founding the Catapult
Centres and granting a bigger budget and power to the innov ation agency Technology Strategy
Board (TSB; today Innovate UK) and c) centralizing the RnD and innovation support. According to
a quarter of the British interview partners concerning the latter, the most significant changes to the
support landscape in UK was the abolishment of the Regional Development Agencies (RDA), as
these representative statements emphasise:
“Before the BIS strategy innovation was more of a place -based policy. And the RDA
were set up to reduce the differences between the regions of England, (…) and so they
were responsible for promoting innovation in a particular area. They knew what was
happening in the area and they could choose what to prioritize and where to focus
their investment. […] Now their function in relation to the European fund and the
framework programs moved to the national level and were transferred to the TSB ”
(UK_2, Pos. 8.)
“[…] the enthusiasm for cutting in the first years led the government to abolish the
RDA. There has been a major gap for the support of local innovation in England ever
since […] to my taste they destroyed the strategic capability in the areas to identify
the successful projects” (UK_6, Pos. 59; 66).
“The conservative government when it came in didn`t like the concept of regions and the
RDAs because they thought it was a European opposition to Britain.” (UK_13, Pos. 57).
The introduction of the Catapult Centres, however, was fuelled by the hope that these intermediary
structures – like the Fraunhofer Society in Germany – might quickly find co-financing by industrial
partners and help to reduce time to market of new products and process innovations. To spark the
entrepreneurial spirit of the academics and business partners alike, the
“Catapults are funded only by one third by government (the TSB) […]and they have to
find another third of that budget from contractors through business, and one third
through collaborative research projects […]. We [TSB] have a lot of interest in accessing
other government department funding, e.g., the Dep. for Transport or the Dept. for
Energy and Climate Change.” (UK_17, Pos. 188).
For Sweden, according to the European Innovation Scoreboard one of the most innovative EU states
of the past decades 19, the motivation for a national innovation strategy in addition to the grand
challenge or mission orientation seemed to be rooted in two different perceived needs for action:
first, to align and consolidate the regional with national levels of policy makin g and second, the
chance to take on a new and improved approach to innovative public procurement. According to
interview partners there had been a tradition of formulating strong region -specific strategies

19 See https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/statistics/performance-indicators/european-innovation-scoreboard_en#eu-
ropean-innovation-scoreboard-2023 and current Scoreboards online; last access 15.09.2023

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 17
whereas a national strategy taking on a systemic perspective was a new phenomenon. Conse-
quently, efforts had to be made to foster togetherness and spark a joint policy spirit and common
understanding of innovation (beyond the well know hubs in the south like Stockholm, Goteborg or
Lund/Malmö), as two representatives of the Ministry for Enterprise reported:
“We have been travelling around the country to visit different regions. We have had like 12
different council meetings in different parts of Sweden. […] And we talked about what issues
are related to the regions. We were inviting people from the universities, the local admin-
istrations, local businesses, and a very broad spectrum of participants. […] we have this very
broad approach for innovation [and] then it`s necessary to engage people around Sweden to
work with it.” (SWE_13, Pos. 60).
“When we started the work after the prime minister’s announcements, governmental en-
couragement, and the order from the minister of enterprise we decided the process should
include and should be open for all partners of societies that had not been part of the estab-
lished innovation policy discussions and networks before. So, we had to find a way of engag-
ing broadly with people in the regions within different industries and in different parts, in
different systems of society.” (SWE_15, Pos. 39).
In addition to these perceptions an interview partner, representing the Ministry for Education
and Research, concluded that, since the regional actors felt that also their local initiatives
should be slightly reorganised to better align with the national s trategy, proactive regional
debates about the strategy were essential, “ because the different regions in Sweden find that
changing collaboration should be based on a document that will lead the way. And I think for them
[regions] it`s been very important to have this document because it`s been a long tradition of regional
innovation strategy and now they face a national innovation strategy […] you`ve got to see different
points of view.” (SWE_1, Pos. 28).
Vinnova, the agency in charge of translating the strategy document into funding programmes and
further initiatives, embarked on regional policy discussions (as indicated in Figure 2) together with
the responsible Ministry and took care of the administrative roll out of the associated projects in
regards with the second and third driving forces specific for Sweden: coupling the support for in-
novative public procurement with the improvement of public services.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 18
Figure 2: Regional discussion fora and pilot projects of innovative public procure-
ment20

A representative of the agency elaborates further on the motivation for this action and the associ-
ated challenges:
“How would you go about to make sure that you enable innovation procurement? How can
you give companies the chance to offer new products? Innovative public procurement is im-
portant but yet different: You absolutely need something you could always buy, but still sort
of open up to the uncertain. […] We spend so much money on new innovation to come for-
ward and when we go into the market mode as a governmental agency, we are very very
careful with money. It`s a sort of bizarre balance to spend all that money for people to pro-
duce new things and then: who will be buying them? […] Demand in innovation is very im-
portant as well, public procurement can be a driver of change.” (SWE_12, Pos. 30; 100).
Notably, no other interview partners put such an emphasis on the topic of public procurement than
the Swedish. In addition to the strong statement above, the establishment of the strategic area
“Innovation Capacity in the Public Sector” at Vinnova underlined this focus. Communication mate-
rial of the agency also carries this spirit by acknowledging “Challenges for innovation work in the
public sector: Large sums are invested into conceptualisation and pre -studies but too little into
development, implementation and use! We define solutions instead of identifying needs! (…) Vin-
nova contributes to make the public sector a driver for both development and use of innova-
tions!”21.

20 Source: Outtake Presentation by the “Public Demand of Innovation” Division, Vinnova, slide 6
21 Source: Outtake Presentation by the “Public Demand of Innovation” Division, Vinnova, slide 7

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 19
4.2 Ideational frameworks for policy making: guiding principles
and policy objectives of the strategies
The guiding principles of policy strategies can be identified as a major element of strategy alto-
gether. The willingness to reach a certain goal is a key element and a driving force of strategies in
business contexts or concerning military and defence operations as well as policies. Regarding the
latter, one must remember that the aim to reach a certain policy goal seems to “tell only parts of
the story”. The policies are not chosen on a tabula rasa, and instruments always reflect an inherent
normativity that replicates the involved polity structure, resonates with the socio-economic context
and reveals the current government's value system, the institutional tradition, belief systems and
its way of “doing politics”.
By asking about the guiding principles, the respondents can reflect upon the underlying values,
norms, and thus the contextualization of the goals that they associate with the innovation strategy
and its instruments. Furthermore, the perception of the agency representatives should help to learn
if meta-goals like grand challenges serve as guideposts for actual policymaking (bureaucratic obe-
dience of official guidance) and receive an institutional contextualisation (March et al. 2013; Peters
2006; Schofield 2001). The main questions concerning the investigation on the ideational frame-
work guiding the national policy strategies are:
What do you think are the main characteristics that turn policies into a strategy?
What are the guiding principles and policy objectives of the strategy, in your opinion?
Concerning the first question crucial feedback was given, that around one fifth of respondents even
question the possibility of strategic guidance towards (generating) innovation all together when
stating “it`s almost an oxymoron. How can you have an innovation strategy? ” (UK_16, Pos. 27) or
stating that there is a disjunct temporal sequence:
“A strategy is above all simply designed for long term goals […]. And there is of course
a definitional contradiction in what is often called a strategy, when it is clear evidence
that these are political -static measures that are simply a reaction to somet hing.”
(GER_1, Pos. 36).
The latter of these two representative statements already points towards the single most mentioned
characteristic: a national strategy ought to follow and support a long-term perspective both, con-
cerning the aspired goals and considering the duration of the support measures:
“We need to have consistency: there is no point changing it [the strategy] every 2 to 5
years and expecting you are not to waste a lot of money on the way. You must decide
what you are doing, and you must stick with it. […] Every time they [companies] come
to us we change the tools, and we change the game. They will be confused. We have
to set out a standard set of this is how we operate.” (UK_5: 48).
Even though the time horizon is mentioned as the most crucial aspect, the interviewees raising the
issue are at a variance about the realistic time span that fulfils both: tying in with the political dy-
namics of the legislative periods as well as supporting an “overarching narrative that simply survives
elections” (second most mentioned aspect). Most of the policy practitioners are either pessimistic
(“You know, it [government] changes all the time. You cannot go long-term with policies; it would just
be a waste of time believing that. ” (SWE_1: 63); “ I do see short term policies only. ”(UK_17: 63)) or
simultaneously realistic and sceptical, considering the effectiveness of promising long -term

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 20
missions, as major pillars of strategies, corresponding with short -term policy instruments,
timebound budgets and the need to communicate successes (“[…] if we launch an initiative e.g.
within a mission it`s so much time two, three, four, even ten years before it shows any kind of effect.
And getting the politicians to understand that is quite difficult.” (SWE_13, Pos.101)) A German minis-
terial representative furthermore reflects:
“These missions with their long -time horizons have a characteristic that they must
have, but it is difficult for a political actor to deal with them: horizons that extend far
beyond the legislative period; political actors can hardly take this into account in their
work.” (GER_12, Pos. 36).
Despite the complexity of the time horizon and all associated challenges (e.g. program manage-
ment and budgetary planning, evaluation and impact assessment practises) most agree that policy
strategies first and foremost should set out and communicate “ direction and prioritization of gov-
ernment”, “display a guiding document, which is agreeable to most – no rule book ”, “create good
conditions for processes, both within the politico-administrative as well as STI communities” and “en-
courage people to want to achieve something together” by providing a certain “flexibility on how to
achieve it”.
In addition to the frequency of the mentioned characteristics, a contingency analysis revealed that
those interview partners (eight people) that mentioned more than five different characteristic ele-
ments to define strategies, also admitted being very challenged by formulating and/or implement-
ing the strategies content, while sharing vivid examples of these struggles during the interview22.
Enabling scientific freedom as a core claim
All three cases refer to scientific freedom as an important foundation of STI policy in general and
this aspect has been mentioned by around one third of the interviewees as an important framework
condition. The British Haldane principle (“is popularly use d to describe the notion that "decisions
about what to spend research funds on should be made by researchers rather than politicians" 23)
or Article 524 of the German constitution (Freedom of expression, arts and sciences) are legal man-
ifestations of this freedom and need consideration against the background of more “directionality”
or challenge-led or mission-orientation in STI funding, respectively. Con crete aspects to consider
revolve around the allocation and decision on budgets, as these two quotes exemplify:
“The point is, unlike many other countries including some in Europe, a [British] min-
istry is not really directing science and research money. Because of this [Haldane prin-
ciple] you cannot have a strategy involving research expenses which comes from the
minister or the agency to decide what`s going to be happening with the money. Be-
cause you cannot have this directionality within the science and research budget. So,
you have to be outside this budget to be guiding certain fields.” (UK_15, Pos.22).

22 Nota bene to advance more qualitative insights: This contingency might have identified a group of individuals that could be
particularly suitable for a cross-national focus group on detecting general voids of demand and reality (Anspruch und Wirk-
lichkeit) in mission-oriented innovation policies, advancing, and possibly overcoming the conceptual and practical shortcom-
ings.
23 https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmdius/168/16807.htm
24 Article 5, Absatz 3: Arts and sciences, research and teaching shall be free. The freedom of teaching shall not release any per-
son from allegiance to the constitution.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 21

“In the UK there is a very strong version of the Haldane principle. And there is endless
debate about what that actually means. But the fact on the ground is, that people
accept the research councils and the actual allocation towards certain areas of re-
search and technologies cannot be influenced by politicians.” (UK_18, Pos. 34).
Furthermore, the perspective of technology neutrality (NB: Technologieneutralität) was emphasized
by German interview partners (only) and brought forward as one of the unalterable core principles
of STI funding per se, as one interviewee states referring t o energy research: “[…] as we, of course,
allocate research funds completely neutral; the support from the federal government is completely
technology-neutral. […] There will certainly be no single technology that will be focused on individu-
ally by the bodies that conduct energy research.” (GER_13, Pos. 20) Another voice raised the issue of neutral-
ity or even non-directionality in more general terms, by mentioning “this simply contradicts the basic
attitude of the current government to single out individual technologies and promote them in this
way.” (GER_03, Pos. 50-51).
Grand Challenges and Mission-Orientation as guiding principles
Around two thirds of interview partners (38 or 71,7% of all) mentioned grand challenges (GC) or
mission orientation (MO) as a meta guiding principle of the national strategies altogether. Figure 3
presents a hierarchical code-subcode-model with relevant impressions on the matter. When asked
to elaborate further on these aspects25 the responses reflected two intertwined core complexities:
Firstly, a missing conceptualization and operationalization that turns overarching (and therefore
often overwhelming) headlines in concrete sector specific meaning as a basis for workable con-
cepts. These could provide more practical concepts proposing the allocation of political and ad-
ministrative responsibility and means to formulate, design, implement and evaluate policy instru-
ments and reflect their impact in terms of sustainability and other con tribution to solving grand
challenges.
Observers concerning the latter – missing workable concepts – mainly mention practical and or-
ganizational challenges which point out the necessity to reorganize parts of the politico-adminis-
trative work. The yellow chapter in Figure 3 explicates these needs for “deconstructing challenge-
led or mission-oriented in project funding” further. Interview partners involved in funding decisions
and research project evaluation point out a fundamental adjustment within their domains of deci-
sion making, they mention a (necessary) shift towards:
• problem – solution perspective,
• societal instead of institutional compass,
• increased interdisciplinarity and intersectoral work,
• less focus on (countable) results and indicators (e.g. publications), but more on identifying ef-
fects (e.g. application of insights),
• heterogenous addressees (of funding), increased complexity,
• beyond domain expertise needed for evaluating proposals.
Furthermore, a group of interviewees already proposed some solutions on how to deal with this
“need to break the complexity of grand challenges down in general” (see dark blue chapter for
quotes in Figure 3).

25 “How do you perceive grand challenges as a guiding principle?” and “To what extent can specific objectives, like an orienta-
tion towards “solving the grand challenges of our time”, provide added value (regarding the strategy)?”

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 22
According to those interviewees, the narrative of missions or GC must be very practically coupled
with the
• need to create a commercial opportunity,
• focus on competitiveness, growth, job creation: using incentives to twist industry towards GC,
• better resource overview & policy mixes: how much budget in one area and how does that
match with another,
• need for an institutional or organizational conduct: the policy landscape should adequately
gratify those following the challenge led approach,
• pin-pointing priorities, since there will be interlinkage and systemic effects.
However, the “vague operationalization” is also and foremost a plea for more strategic capacity (see
4.4) and a different dynamic and intellectual (and entrepreneurial) mind-set of the policy practition-
ers involved, as almost a third of respondents argued (green and partly red chapters), that men-
tioned GC as a guiding principle. Obviously, these characteristics would also tie in with a different
kind of responsibility and decision-making practise (see 4.3)
In addition, the conceptual “paring of societal and technological challenges” is a very demanding
and often neglected task, which requires a lot of “scientific, technical and sectoral understanding”
by the responsible policy practitioner. Furthermore, the much-acclaimed participatory user involve-
ment needs special attention to grasp the challenge that should be solved in practical terms, here
voiced by an agency representative:
“[…] to push our researchers and companies to think about needs from different parts
of the society not just to focus on selling their products or writing their paper, but
really embracing the research and the developing process to actually identifying needs
from health care professionals or from teachers or whoever and really working with
the user side much more profoundly [is crucial]” (SWE_6, 51).
Additionally, the obvious challenge on reconciling the paradigm of distributing funding according
to “research excellence peer review practises” with “anticipating directionality and research ad-
dressing GC” is a constant “battle”. Evidently tough, practical solutions e.g. different calls and fund-
ing schemes have been implemented. Thus, just as the traditional controversy about the societal
necessity and benefit of basic and applie d research has become more differentiated and seems
outdated, the debate on allocating funding (“excellent science vs. challenge related projects”) and
an appropriate policy mix to foster transformative cutting-edge research and driving innovation (in
technological processes as well as products and services) is in flux. However, the practical takeaway
question from the voices raised here, is the need for new programs and different indicators for
choosing projects and evaluating their output and impact.
As it has been nearly ten years since the interviews were held, this question has partly been an-
swered by new policies e.g. the Challenge-Led Program by Vinnova, but is often still a challenge to
reviewers and evaluators (among other aspects due to interdisciplinary research designs and/or the
difficulty to rate and assess the benefit of the outcome and solution contribution towards GC).
Remarkably, only German respondents (7 altogether) indicated that “challenge led” or “mission
oriented” for them individually and within their units only serves as a rhetorical cipher and not as a
(concrete) guiding principle initiating different policies than before.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 23
Naturally, the geographical perspective has also been raised as an important aspect to be
acknowledged, on the one hand associated with the practical advice that “ regional societal chal-
lenges can serve as starting point” to draft policies. On the other hand, even though global threats
are widely acknowledged as such, the following observation points out that there are of course
differently felt urgencies depending on the geographical location and scope:
“It is certainly the case that not every problem area is of interest to the same group,
but that there are countries or groups of countries that are more or less interested in
a particular problem area. The USA and Russia are less interested in climate cha nge
than other countries. Other areas such as demographics are of course of interest to
countries such as Japan, Korea or the like, which are perhaps even more affected than
we are.” (GER_6, Pos. 12).

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 24
Figure 3: Hierarchical code-subcode-model concerning challenge or mission orientation

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 25
4.3 Practises of coordination
Coordination in general encompasses nearly every aspect important for shaping the political
agenda, instruments, implementation, outcomes, and impact of policies. Scholars have been work-
ing on the subject in enormous detail since decades trying to distingu ish patterns of ‘good’ coor-
dination from empirical cases as well as building theory to contribute to grasp the coordination
puzzle; this concerns policy studies focusing on e.g. implementation (e.g. Bullock et al. 2021; Saba-
tier et al. 1979; Schofield 2001) , public administration e.g. (new) public management (Hjern et al.
1981; Lynn 2009; Naschold et al. 2000; Peters 2000), aspects concerning the role of (individual and
collective) actors e.g. as street level bureaucrats (Lipsky 1980) or within advocacy coalition frame-
works (Bandelow 2006; Sabatier 2009) and many more issues. Concerning the STI domain, analyses
of the coordination in national knowledge and innovation policies settings (Edler et al. 2008; Gries-
sen et al. 2008) and in cross-country comparisons (Edler et al. 2003; Magro et al. 2014) have been
made.
But as Braun once asked “What do we mean, exactly, when we speak of the need for coordination
with regard to political governance in general and the machinery of government in particular? What
kind of coordination do we need to be effective in innovation policy?” (Braun 2008, p. 229)
Well, even against the background of more differentiated “roles of the state in the governance of
socio-technical systems” (Borrás et al. 2020) due to more complexity and ambition in policy mixes
within mission or GC led programs and the recent appreciation of and appeal for the “entrepre-
neurial state” (Mazzucato 2013), motivating public organizations and authorities not to restrict
themselves to fixing markets but also create them (Mazzucato 2016): when looking at the division
of labour within the machinery of government and its departments, policy coordination and the
need for it, can still be defined along five objectives, suggested by Painter around 40 years ago in
1981 as quoted by Braun (2008, p. 230):
1. Avoidance, or at least minimization, of duplication and overlap.
2. Avoidance of policy inconsistencies.
3. Minimisation of conflict, both bureaucratic and political.
4. Quest for coherence and cohesion and an agreed ordering of priorities.
5. Promotion of a comprehensive or ‘whole government’ perspective against the constant
advocacy of narrow, particularistic, or sectoral perspectives.
Particularly the latter two aspects, “referring to the coherence of decision making […] [by] drawing
separated forces together in order to pursue common priorities and strategies developed on a
‘systemic’ level (the ‘whole government’ perspective),” (ibid.) lie at the center of national strategies.
As Kattel et al. (2018) observed in addition the “’normative turn’ in innovation policy that underlies
the search for next generation of innovation policies (Cantner et al. 2018; Daimer et al. 2012;
Kuhlmann et al. 2018) is based on much more ‘distributed agency’”(p.2), involving more stakehold-
ers from different sectors and strands of society. So, it seems that policy coordination is a funda-
mental requirement for the challenging and ambitious policy strategies studied here, but is it really
sought after by the actors and if so “what kind of patterns can be identified regarding the coordi-
nation and cooperation?”

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 26
Before turning to the empirical material, one furthermore needs to acknowledge that broadly two
segments of coordination have been recognized in the policy debate (Lindner 2012, p. 274 referring
to Braun 2008), that are both reflected and referred to in the answers of the respondents:
1. “Policy coordination: Coordination in this area has the objective of developing clear, con-
sistent measures and activities, the agreement on priorities and the formulation of imple-
mentation strategies.
2. Administrative coordination: Here, coordination primarily deals with the actual implemen-
tation of the goals and strategies that have been agreed upon.”
Both descriptions are analytically sound, but this clear distinction is not necessarily applicable or
up-to-date with the complex formulation and implementation practices of policy instruments
within missions for instance (which is also reflected in some r esults in chapter 4.4 on capacities).
Due to the (formative) nature of STI policies today, there is hardly a clear distinction of policy time
zones of formulation and implementation possible, still: with a view to national strategies there is
surely a distinction between publishing the document (more involvement by the hierarchy in any
case) and putting it into action. However, for agency units in UK and Sweden, where the develop-
ment of consistent policies as well as the administration of these go hand in hand, the cipher
“agency with agency” (“Agentur”/Projektträger mit Handlungs- und Gestaltungsmacht) seems ap-
propriate as this quote exemplifies:
“We [Vinnova] get a ten -page document from the ministry it really only says you
should work with supporting, stimulating, sustainable growth and building effective
innovation systems and then we have our annual budget around 200 million €. And
that is basically it. These are our guidelines. It is really up to us to develop our own
strategy and to really spend the money.” (SWE_18: 22).
Furthermore, in their cross -country analysis for coordination patterns Arnold & Boeckholt (2003,
p.27) distinguish not only the segments but also the “levels” of responsibility and actions from a
highest Level 1, involving “setting overall directions and priorities across the whole National Inno-
vation System […] through advice to government or […] a cabinet subcommittee. […] Level 2 is co-
ordination among ministries, whose sectoral responsibilities otherwise encourage them to pursue
independent policies. […] Level 3 is more operational, in an attempt to make the actions of funding
agencies into a coherent whole. This level, too, can involve administrative co-ordination […].” (ibid.)
Drawing on the document analysis (see A.1) and the interview content (remainder of this chapter)
it is recognizable that the cases differ concerning the intensity of involvement of the different levels.
With Germany mostly relying on “hierarchy-type” coordination (Level 1) with hardly any direct mi-
cro-management between the different units responsible for the concrete policies, the strategies’
overall direction is, due to the department principle (Ressortprinzip), set top -down by the leading
figures of the ministry for research (of course based on preparatory work of the ministerial staff)
and approved by cabinet decision; during the runtime advisory support was provided from a high
level committee: the Hightech Forum26, consisting of representatives of research organizations, uni-
versities as well as industry. However, no regular consultation between agencies 27 and the high -
level figures happened concerning the overall strategy and roll out of measures; hence single min-
istry units, responsible for specific policies, would consult their agency as the “administrative arm”
on a regular basis.

26 https://www.hightech-forum.de/en/about-high-tech-forum/ last access 27.11. 2023
27 In some cases, agency employees are also called as legal consultants or strategic advisors, however, the working relationship
between most agencies and ministries in Germany is not (intended to be) at eye level and the strategic decision making au-
thority of most agencies is much stronger in UK and Sweden.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 27
The situation in the UK and Sweden is quite different. In the case of UK, a kind of “super ministry
approach” was in place at the time with a view to genuine knowledge related policies and STI sup-
port: “Compared to many other countries I think in some ways the coordination situation has been
easier in the UK because BEIS is such a big department. It has all the university funding, it has skills
funding, it has challenge -led funding, it has industrial poli cy.” (UK_6: 82) With the involvement of
powerful, independent agencies such as the TSB (“Creating an independent national body [NB: TSB]
to support business innovation, I think was a very good thing”. UK_6: 70), the UK show a mix of Level
2 and 3 coordination workflows.
As already outlined above, the Swedish case is an example of strong and independent Level 3 co-
ordination after negotiations by Level 1 (high-level of cabinet) and 2 (high-level of ministries) have
been finished and comprehensive meta-guidance was given (strategy document). In other words:
once the priorities have been clearly expressed by policymakers, employing a robust independent
agency like Vinnova, which oversees operationalizing the strategy, can serve to “depoliticize” or
deconflict the policy domain while formulating and implementing the strategies instruments:
“[…] the minister of enterprise said: ‘No, no, no.’ We won`t point out anything because
we let the experts at the agency do it.” (SWE_3: 91).
“So, we are given those more general goals for the national strategy, we [at Vinnova]
then formulated our own goals so to say, more related to specific areas or more related
to specific measures. So, e.g., it could be some goals around public procurement [ ...].
So, we are trying to find ways to break down the more general goals and the more
specific ones and link activities to those internal goals within Vinnova. “(SWE_6: 29).
“The minister of enterprise is representing one party, the minister of education the
other one. And in that you see that you have kind of fundamental different views on
how things go towards innovation. Therefore, we do have a clash of sides, which
makes it hard to deal with. I mean it`s not easy to solve for us at the ministry: so,
employing an agency certainly brings progress and things forward.” (SWE_1: 80).
In addition to the identification of the involved levels of coordination, a more qualitative categori-
sation on the – simply speaking – corresponding work flow towards policy action has been coined:
the differentiation of negative and positive coordination, as well as policy integration and strategic
coordination, see Figure 4 for def initions (Braun 2008) and proposed localisation of the cases.
Whereas UK and Sweden show meandering routines of positive coordination and policy integration,
the clearest assignment of one single mode was negative coordination in Germany, according to
the answers provided, con trasting the official strategy document. Even though Edler et al. called
the German routine “cooperation within fragmentation” and have identified “a communication pro-
cess […] [as a] new means of coordination, as it creates inter-ministerial transparency and reduces
transaction costs,” between the central ministries during the formulation of the first Hightech-Strat-
egy, proposing to “interpreted [it] as an attempt to coordinate through common strategy building
across fragmented policy areas (‘soft’ external coordination) initiated at cabinet level and supported
by advisory bodies,” (Edler et al. 2008, p. 271), the empirical material allows to draw the conclusion
that this high -level attempt has not pushed towards a constructive forward looking routine but
rather the manifestation of tradition trench wars.
A central forum has been installed with the inter -ministerial committee (interministerieller
Ausschuss IMA), meeting two to four times each year, with representatives of each ministry “[…] a
so-called research officer since 1976. This research officer, who is responsible for coordinating the
R&D area for the respective ministry, is always reappointed by cabinet decision.” (GER_8, Pos. 5).

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 28
Despite a few individuals emphasizing good working relationships on an informal level (see first
bullet point below) the general spirit was described as conflictual and non-cooperative: thirty-
one single statements about negative coordination and counterproductive rivalry between po-
litical entities have been made by the 17 German interview partners. Representative illustrative
examples read as follows:
“You are most likely to be successful if not too many players are involved. That's why
there is a tendency in every ministry to deal with issues on a stand-alone basis, then
you can control everything to some extent and know your routines. […] [If you need
to interact] the classic way of doing business in the federal government is negative
coordination, the lowest common denominator survives.” (GER_11: 29_41).
“Systemic policy making for real change fails due to practical and institutional prob-
lems: a good proposal that comes from the opposition is always bad. That's the game
in politics. If we receive a proposal from the opposition in the committees where we
currently sit as government representatives, of course we cannot say that the opposi-
tion's proposal is good. Even if we are convinced that it is […] but the leadership of our
ministry would slap us in the face if we would support this statement.” (GER_5: 70).
“This dispute is constantly smouldering, and people are keeping a close eye on who
gets which topic and budget and who must go to the gallows, so to speak, if things go
wrong. And this dispute runs through many topics [of the strategy].” (GER_8: 38).
“And the strategy [metaphorically] makes this claim about coordination and says:
"People, this can only work if you all feed your contribution into this strategy. Only
then will it become a meaningful whole. […] the entire federal government does not
lack the basic understanding that the strategy is a meaningful thing, but when it
comes to the actual work, the dispute usually starts. […] These are not strategic con-
siderations but obvious power games.” (GER_12: 51_54).
In addition to the strong departmental principle (Ressortprinzip, Art.65, 2 of the German constitu-
tion), which was established in order to structure the departmental budgets and to avoid contra-
dictory action by a clear division of responsibility, the rather drastic statements reveal that the first
two generations of the Hightech Strategy were characterized by challenging cross-ministerial pro-
cesses. As respondents noted, “cooperation in demarcation” might not necessarily be a bad thing,
since this can be beneficial for decision making. However, against the background of systemic so-
lutions necessary for GC or mission-oriented strategies seems to hamper or even hinder transform-
ative policy making.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 29
Figure 4: Simplified overview modes of cooperation28

Furthermore, the following (more pragmatic) aspects were associated with supporting policy strat-
egy practise and coordination in general:
• Proximity and direct, informal contacts on working level are crucial:
“And proximity matters: the TSB and the research councils were all based in the same
hemisphere or building sector in Swindon and Camden/ London. And there were
monthly get togethers plus a multitude of personal exchange of the people who work
for the research councils and TSB, and they trust each other.” (UK_1: 54).
“The Swedish government offices are quite a small organization. We work within ten
blocks or buildings from another and we always work quite tightly together between
the different ministries.” (SWE_13: 28).
“Basically, a lot of things run informal; […] I have good contacts with colleagues at the
other ministry. Cooperation is basically based on very intensive personal dialogue. The
informal aspect, e.g., conversations over lunch, that is actually the crucial factor.”
(GER_4: 25).
• Strategy work and coordination needs prudence and long-term commitment
“We are definitely in an exciting phase of putting the best people together with a
significant budget around a joint strategy. We need sturdiness and patience. I mean
it might sound more perfect than it actually is, it`s quite messy, but again that is quite
often where innovation comes from.” (UK_9: 49).
“In any system this [better coordination] will be an ongoing project. It not likely that
suddenly the system is coherent and integrated. In any system that`s always work in
progress which is dynamic to the system - it`s always changing and developing.”
(UK_11: 25).

28 Source: Adopted from Braun 2008, p. 231 and Lindner 2012, p. 276 with insights from Bouckaert et al. 2010; Peters 2006; To-
sun et al. 2017.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 30
“[…] coordination is the most important thing; it`s a huge challenge still. And we need
to take it, everyone intends to call for quick fixes (…), but the courage to act towards
a more integrated view is essential today.” (SWE_15: 89).
• Teaming up in cash-strapped times or positive cooperation by incentives
“Well, the main incentive now for better coordination is if the finance ministry cuts
the benefits, that`s then the driver which encourages coordination between govern-
ment departments because you need a partner.” (UK_3: 109).
“We have tried to connect everything as much as possible since we are small […] we
work with the Innovation Strategy, with Horizon 2020, try to integrate many things
and resources […] we work very close together.” (SWE_16: 100).
“It can work […] if sufficient participation is assured and practised, so that the other
departments also see that there is some benefit for them, not only in terms of honor
and reputation, but also in terms of resources.” (GER_11: 14).
• Combining STI strategies with more regulation can encourage change (see also next chapter)
“You can see that some of the constellations are working with a broad set of actors:
with companies, with supplies, with academics, with users, with customers and those
who put the requirements in practice like regulatory actors. Because the latter is es-
sential if you want to change society.” (SWE_7: 27).
“The state should regulate more, of course. If you really have a strategy, you have to
do more than just say that we want to promote environmental technologies. The state
should actively promote environmental technologies, from basic research to diffusion
into the market, and then actively implement the findings.” (GER_16: 26.)
4.4 Capacities for (strategic) policy making
Particularly the role and purpose of public organizations capacity to foster change has gained a lot
of scholarly attention over the past decade (Borrás 2011; Wu et al. 2017). About ten-15 years ago
policy analysis seemed more focused on the observation of modes and routines of policy learning
(Biegelbauer 2013), described in concepts like government-learning and lesson-drawing (Etheredge
et al. 1983; Lorentzen 2009; Rose 1993), policy-oriented learning (Bennett et al. 1992; Sabatier 1987),
and the more fundamental reflexive -strategic learning (Bandelow 1999). The following pragmatic
definition of policy learning offered by Koschatzky and Stahlecker, based on an analysis of attempts
to align regional innovation - and EU-cohesion policy, illustrates why the term works on a meta -
level, but falls short of capturing the practice among policymakers and shapers involved in national
innovation strategies:
“Policy learning includes […] the creation and absorption of new knowledge among
those who are responsible for political decision making, forgetting of past routines
when necessary and the understanding of new opportunities which new policy options
offer. In this way it is related to professional expertise and proficiency in policy skills.
As the innovation itself, learning is a cumulative process (Lundvall 1992). Policy learn-
ing is thus based on already acquired competences and experiences in learning.” (Kos-
chatzky et al. 2009, p. 10).

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 31
Today the practical and scholarly debate on individual and collective policy actors’ abilities seems
much more differentiated and shifted heavily towards the more comprehensive concept of capacity
which broadly refers to “[…] the ability to perform functi ons, solve problems, and set and achieve
objectives” (Fukuda-Parr et al. 2002, p. 8) from societal to institutional and individual levels.” (van
Kerkhoff et al. 2015, p. 13). It is remarkably “transformative capacity of public sector organizations”,
that should provide practical policy guidance and, according to Borrás et al. (2023), could be subdi-
vided into the three elements of roles, skills and resources that public organizations can activate and
provide for the policy process (Borrás et al. 2023, p. 14). This ties in with the argument put forward by
policy advisors as well as scholars: the need for more reflexive governance (Lindner et al. 2016; Voß
et al. 2006) to handle complex and ‘wicked’ problems with suitable policy mixes (e.g. MOIP, sustaina-
ble development), which calls for more “dynamic capabilities” within the public sector:
“Indeed, we can argue that today innovation policy landscape is in something of a
cognitive paralysis: governments increasingly realize the “wicked” nature of some of
the most pressing problems they face and at the same time also realizing that existing
policy toolboxes (of design, coordination, and evaluation) are not enough to tackle
these challenges. In other words, governments increasingly recognize that they need
more dynamic toolkit – capabilities – at their disposal.“ (Kattel et al. 2018, p. 790).
The latter observation summarizes the question guiding this chapter: Does the formulation and
implementation of the national innovation strategy require specific "strategic" skills from the actors,
and if so, what are they?
Generally, two thirds of all respondents agreed that different strategic skills and capacities are
needed in the context of national innovation policy strategies by public actors. Twenty-nine inter-
viewees further elaborated on their personal policy practise. Figure 5 shows the clustered sub-cat-
egories of their answers and their frequencies.
Figure 5: Sub-categories of strategic capacities

Clearly the answers displayed in the following chapter all concern individual abilities, but of course
they also symbolize the entity (ministry, agencies etc.) in the need for e.g., more “ Willingness for
policy experiments”: one UK policy implementer, for instance, outlined the importance of experi-
menting with new instruments while simultaneously acknowledging the willingness of learning by
understanding and tracking impact:
“We are keen to expand the sort of experimentation within innovation policy as a way
of kind of really improving quality …]. We are going to spend more time with tracking
the trends and looking at how it [NB: accelerator program for start-ups from the US]

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 32
is unfolding and trying to understand this in more detail to really work out what the
impact has been. You know in our [policy] businesses buzz words travel a lot quicker
than evidence does.” (UK_11, Pos. 72).
The following quote by a German respondent serves as a combined answer to both aspects guiding
this chapter: she offers examples of needed skills (e.g., analytical thinking), but also points to the
fact that real strategy and directionality in policy making cannot be driven on the side: it needs real
expertise, authority, and commitment:
“It requires strategic skills, some of which are no longer available. I'm quite honest
about that. Firstly, it requires clear analytical thinking. It requires networked thinking.
It requires special communication and teamwork skills. We urgently need a str ategy
unit – every unit does, but especially in the Federal Ministry – that is headed by some-
one who can really drive in this direction and whose colleagues are suitably qualified.
Firstly, they need the expertise and authority and secondly, they need to b e able to
utilise their working hours accordingly.” (GER_15: 78).
Furthermore, two representatives of Vinnova share their view on the importance for an understand-
ing of transformative potential of a program (first quote) and its practical implications for choosing
projects for funding (second quote):
“I think it`s essential that you do formulate your goals [concerning GC]. Then it`s im-
portant to formulate an impact logic and much more clearly what sort of things you
want to achieve but then to step away from it and see: do I need to rethink this?”
(SWE_12:58).
“It's a certain wisdom or capacity we must have. It´s crucial when looking at a proposal
`is the general idea driven by a societal challenge rather than something ordinary just
addressed with new words´. I think that we`ve seen a lot of the latter in terms of pro-
posals. But they are a different kind of project to run and that requires that we have a
different understanding of how to evaluate and support this kind of projects.”
(SWE_7: 69).
Hence contributing to a national strategy and its goals by aligning funding programs and the cri-
teria for the review of proposals with the narratives of societal goals in alignment with scientific,
technological and/or entrepreneurial ones is a complex undertaking. And of course, this challenge
is not limited to (ex-ante) assumptions about the potential contribution of programs and projects
but needs formative assessment along the way. A British ministerial representative mentions that
up-to-date evaluation skills and knowledge on how to assess and understand impact beyond the
classic canon of science indicators in the departments is crucial: “[...] before you develop a program
you have to set out your evaluation plan. So, would we like more qualifications of employees in de-
partments to understand this? Yes, I think yes.” (UK_3: 129)
Predominantly British respondents (every third) stressed the importance of monitoring and eval-
uation throughout the interviews in general and clearly outlined, that a robust evidence base on
outcome, effects and impact is an important pillar of UK policy making. The inhouse expertise in
departments as well as agencies for crafting and documenting indicat ors to estimate numerical
effects was mentioned by six respondents. If this has a direct effect on adjusting and improving

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 33
policy instruments, however, was not sufficiently answered. Generally, the routines for analysis and
evaluation are well established though, since
“In the UK we`ve got reviews every 2 years, [which means] the government studies
and gets policy reviewed. Then we are going through the objectives that should have
been delivered and track progress. You look at change and you look at the objectives,
because clear objectives are the best way for organizations to coordinate [them-
selves].” (UK_18, Pos. 30).
In addition, a strong case was made by emphasizing that GC or mission orientation needs to be
connected to the absolute necessities for driving innovation to unleash its potential for change. To
do so, four respondents identified practical systemic policy knowledge paired with domain and
market expertise as a prerequisite to craft suitable research and innovation policies and provide
support during the implementation phase to give “real life advise”, here is one representative quote
by an agency employee:
“So, before drafting a policy we spent all of our time on the road listening to people,
reading about specifics. There is no use of only reading books about how innovation
is going, you have to understand the specific markets, the specific customers in the
market and specific manufacturing capabilities of who will answer to those needs and
connect all of this with the political ambition.” (UK_5: 108).
In fact, this hands -on attitude is articulated by most British interview partners and is also quite
dominant within the group of Swedish experts.
Like the abovementioned perspective, the following two quotes are characteristic examples of this
mentality as well as an indicator for another set of strategic abilities needed for current policy mak-
ing that first and foremost aims at rebalancing the economy and speeding up commercialization in
the UK, namely a spirit of optimism, business like mindset & business knowledge (reflecting the
“liberal market economy” categorisation of UK on market mechanisms and abilities of companies):
“Most important are people willing to learn. I have a team of people [at the agency]
they are mostly on the road and within companies listening to people. If you open a
meeting and say, I will be interested in your ideas? It needs people to take this oppor-
tunity. Are you on it? You need experienced practitioners, not a bunch of economists
who are next to useless.” (UK_5: 109).
“The organization we set up [NB: TSB] and the people we recruited from business to
carry out the policies, that is quite crucial; we were having conversations with busi-
nesses and for those we needed people from businesses.” (UK_7: 48).
At this point an observation needs to be expressed that is not only relevant in the context of ca-
pacity: In the German case only representatives of ministries were interviewed that, more often than
not, seem to lack the practical view on policy implementation and therefore did not contribute as
much to this chapter as the other two cases. This is undoubtedly a regrettable shortcoming of the
author. At the time though, many ministerial interview partners indicated that the German agencies
(“Projektträger”) were not essential players, since they only had to “follow orders”; in fact, they have
been described as the “administrative arm” or even “dorsal horse of ministries” by some. In retro-
spect this somewhat elitist ministry centred practise seems unfit to deal with the challenging re-
quirements of the aspired influence for transformative change by national STI strategies and the

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 34
underlying policy instruments: the “translation” of the strategies’ concepts, starting with the com-
prehension of how to turn the (theoretical) underpinning of GC or mission orientation into workable
concepts beyond policy headlines – like “fighting cancer”- seems to be “in good hands” of policy
practitioners accountable for funding, that not only carry the administrative burden, but also the
design of the content and direction of the instruments. Particularly Sweden, has made notable ef-
forts to de-conflict and de-politicize the policy area of STI by appointing agencies that are respon-
sible for the entire policy life cycle. Particularly with a view to innovation policy, separating party
politics from this policy domain in UK is even pursued as a goal, within the national strategy:
“And that was kind of the centrepiece of the strategy that came out. It was a direction
of travel, so to say: „It`s important we separate the role of government from, you know,
what we want to achieve for innovation and technology." (UK_12: 18).
The current debate in Germany on mission agencies and change agents (Jackwerth-Rice et al. 2023;
Lindner et al. 2022) and the establishment of new actors29 can be interpreted as an acknowledge-
ment of this institutional gap or missing competence and responsibility in this respect, which is
reflected in the empirical material of this contribution.
A “very” German topic though is the changing role of (citizen) participation, a significant pillar of all
three national innovation strategies. It was emphasized in the conversations on capacity as an un-
resolved challenge, ranging from practical realisation to the concern of manifesting a democracy
deficit by overhearing the “broad masses”:
“This [participation of civil society] will certainly keep us busy for many years because
there is no longer THE group that perhaps pursues different interests, but the range of
interests is so diverse. In other words, we should not see it as a coordinatio n process,
because then we will never be finished. It really is a dialogue, a communication pro-
cess.” (GER_15: 35).
“I really do see a serious problem here because, ultimately, there is still no modus
vivendi as to how the necessary infrastructure for innovation in our country, taking
into account the diverse interests of citizens and other social groups, should be organ-
ised to be able to get anything at all off the ground, I think there is still a relative lack
of imagination at the moment.” (GER_13: 69).
“So, is there a commitment that goes beyond clicking on "I like" and "I don't like"? this
is a question that I am currently asking myself. This goes hand in hand with the ques-
tion of which formats we would need for this. Quite frankly, we do not know how we
could integrate this even better into the Hightech-Strategy and develop this strand of
participation even better. In this respect, I personally am not yet sure whether I find
this generally promising or whether such a willingness will also slacken as soo n as
you demand a little more time commitment from people. The question is, of course,
do I end up generating a circle whose opinion is then seen as representative, and the
broad masses are not heard?” (GER_12: 19).
With a view to the cooperative active inclusion of professional stakeholder groups and networks
(not the public) into topic-specific policy debates, positive influence of broadening the perspective

29 E.g., SPRIND: Federal agency for disruptive innovation: https://www.sprind.org/en/ last access 22.11.2023

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 35
and possibly the constructive potential and usage of measures have been shared and exemplify the
often called for “holistic approach”:
“Then you must include the medical professionals, the care providers, the funders of
this service and perhaps some other governmental agency, the medical modern health
[facilities] and some other key stakeholders to build knowledge around this. You in-
crease the potential of the usage by thinking about implementing it.” (SWE_6: 54).
“This means taking a holistic approach to safety and security technology as well. This
included the topic of security in soccer stadiums. We sat down with the Red Cross, the
technical assistance service, etc. These players have never been involved in an in no-
vation or technology policy measure, let alone sat at the table.” (GER_11: 14).
Routines of policy learning were also mentioned by seven individuals. Nonetheless, these obser-
vations referred to the apparent element of “gaining more knowledge” and therefore provide no
real added value to the debate. In summary, the answers concerning capacity and strategic skill s
point to the observation that it is about skilful motivated individuals with authority to act in
the public service (as well as research and industry) working collectively for the common good:
“I am a big believer in people: good things will happen if you just get the right people
into the right place and then give them power and money to get on to it.” (UK_9: 45).
“It’s not about the document […] the strategy work for me: it’s a bunch of people want-
ing to achieve something together: where we have to start with creating a common
understanding on the language that we use and on who we are, that will do this
together.” (SWE_15: 119).
4.5 Perceived obstacles for (impactful) strategies and most urgent
systemic challenges
Generally, around one -third of interviewees were doubting if comprehensive national strategies,
with their mix of instruments and narratives, are the right tool to increase the impact of STI policies,
and some individuals were even doubting the effects of support instruments altogether. It is not
surprising that the larger the distance of the interviewee from the inner circle of policymakers re-
sponsible for the strategies’ instruments and decisions, the more substantial the doubts brought
forward about the effects of the strategies. However, even some policymakers from the core group
of responsible decision -makers stress the limits of policy impact (or even the insignificance of
policies for substantial change) in a very blunt way, illustrated by the following example:
“[..] but the point is: the best projects we have done have a return rate of forty cents
per pound. If you take the XX projects budget that is about 440 million pounds a year
and you get forty cents back, for the one pound you`ve spent, then you actually gen-
erate something like point 1 of percent of GDP. Overall, that`s nothing. If everything
we did is as good as the best things we did, you still would make no real difference.”
(UK_5, Pos. 76).
British public servants representing different Ministries were furthermore very outspoken about
lacking domain-specific expertise by politicians (parliamentarians and ministers alike) and were

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 36
missing a modest perspective on and expectation management about content, complexity and
pace of change that STI policies might deliver:
“Politicians are happy to commit money, but they are not coming to see what is hap-
pening, and that is something quite hard to deliver when you are talking about pro-
grams where you solve complex problems or fund research projects where you are
cutting edge. We have problems in managing the expectations of some ministers.”
(UK_1, Pos. 46).
“Government, certainly in the UK, is a simplifier. And it cannot cope with the complex.
We actually have complexity for a reason or for several reasons. And I think there are
moments when it is overtly desired to reduce the complexity.” (UK_4, Pos. 54).
“There is an artificial split between science and research and innovation and research.
And if we go back to the point, we`ve had earlier about "do politicians understand
business, the answer is: they don`t. Another question is, do the politicians understand
science? And again, the answer is no.” (UK_5: 72).
Strong statements were also made about the exaggerated expectations towards STI policy as a
fix for societal challenges in general, backed through a tendency for symbolic policy by superel-
evation and rhetoric politics; this has been observed by representatives of every country case, e.g.
“I have difficulties to see how we want to achieve this. It`s lots of nice words but how to do it, how to
do it?” (SWE_3, Pos. 10); a German voice “ we always formulate lofty goals and beautiful headlines,
but not too much happens.” (GER_9, Pos. 32); accordingly, a British interviewee states: “The problem
is really that the strategy is not big enough for the comprehensive change we announce” (UK_10, Pos.
132).
Thus, criticism towards (policy) communication that presents the outcome of research as a global
remedy has been voiced, as well. This overload of the policy domain and science and research
itself is expressed by a British agency representative “ It`s part of our job to say: research is a risk
bearer for society.” (UK_4, Pos. 40) She moreover sees a pattern of blame shifting or responsibility
avoidance by (society and) government, neglecting the impact for fundamental change through an
adequate policy mix including state-led regulation beyond STI advancements, e.g., with a view to a
comprehensive ban on non-recyclable plastic or behavioural (societal) change regarding e.g., con-
sumption patterns.
Besides the normative influence towards change, the impetus for innovation driven by regulation
is missed by some, as this statement illustrates: “ Regulation, whether it is ecological or consumer
protection-driven, is far too preoccupied with immanent issues and is not linked to the impulses for
innovation that can be triggered by regulation.” (GER_11, 68).
This observation ties in with the argument that only “the market is the driver [of real change] “(UK_7,
Pos. 16) brought forward by an agency representative, furthermore advocating for a constant dia-
logue with companies and society about the possible direction of change (or even systemic trans-
formations) by consensually negotiated regulation and standardisation that set a reliable frame-
work for decisions: “because only if we have these standards (e.g. in energy efficiency) will entrepre-
neurs or investors in general know, that it is worth investing in this or that technology or product.”
(GER_16: 55).
As already pointed out in Chapter 4.2, the ideational drivers for STI policy have become more complex,
and the systemic and mission-oriented claim imposing directionality per se is questioned by policymak-
ers, as this representative statement by a Swedish ministerial discloses: “Where should the government

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 37
put its forces on? We can't do it the soviet way, force sectors towards "this is where innovation happens". I
always said it`s something strange getting direction into this policy area.” (SWE_3, Pos. 72).
Collectively, eight major aspects were mentioned as neglected areas or missing elements in
the interview partners' perceptions30. Interestingly, around ten years after the interviews were
held, today, the national policy debates in some cases are still dominated by the aspects that
have been raised as the “most pressing ones”: Thereby, German respondents were mostly con-
cerned with a missing focus “on sustainability & energy supply” since seven of nine voices raised
these aspects. Today, the challenging rollout of the “Energie - und Wärmewende” (the c oncept-
forming neologism of a broad energy systems transition including shifting resources and changing
societal and individual demand) is one of the most pressing political challenge and controversial
policy topic in Germany.
On the other hand, the majority (six out of eight) of the voices pointing out a missing “activation of
capital & investment by businesses “are British. And indeed, the UK is still struggling today to re-
balance their economy and strengthen the ties between science and industry. Regarding the his-
torical context of the interview phase (March 2013-April 2014), another striking observation is the
EU scepticism that was expressed by half of the British interview partners. The Brexit referendum
was held only around two years after the interviews in 2016, and the exit of UK from the European
Union was finalized in January 2020 (concessions in research and innovation -related policies, e.g.,
within Horizon Europe, were successfully negotiated afterwards). Additional m ajor focus aspects
are the following, which are backed with representative quotations in Figure 6. Apart from pointing
out individual knowledge gaps on the one hand, systemic shortcomings are emphasized on the
other hand, that would need to be addressed in national multi -level governance settings across
government, ministerial hierarchies, and the involve d addressees (e.g., industry, universities, re-
search organizations) as well as in cooperation with the implementers and evaluators at agencies:
• missing interaction, transfer science towards industry (8),
• missing link regulation & frameworks directing innovation (6),
• missing skills & work force plus career options for scientists (5),
• missing understanding of SMEs needs (5),
• missing consistency, scale, direction (5),
• missing holistic practise & coordination (5).
More individual views were put forward regarding “Missing data handling knowledge and stand-
ards” (4), “missing efficiency of funding and emphasis on evaluation” (4), “missing links between
national and regional perspectives” (3), as well as “missing intern ationalization and openness”, an
aspect that two Swedish respondents worried about. With a view to the core ambition of GC, mis-
sion-orientation, and strategy – in simple terms: all comprehensive and systemic approaches that
aim at changing socio-technical systems for good, not only targeting “quick wins” – systemic short-
comings were identified as missing or underrepresented: consistency, scale, direction, coordination,
holistic practices.
All these factors have been dominating the debate of political science and other academic disci-
plines for the past decade and are core research desiderata that need empirical investigation and
validation of the STI policy studies community: a more intersec toral debate on the design of the
corresponding policy instruments and the challenges or even barriers of implementation plus an
honest account of associated misconception of the effectiveness of such policies and strategies is
needed.

30 Based on the question “What do you see as the most urgent challenge in innovation policy?” Aspects that have been men-
tioned around 5 times have been selected as key concerns.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 38
In addition, the arguments about the lack of individual skills such analytical and methodological
knowledge as well as missing domain and system expertise point out that civil servants need a
different skill set today, that is up to date with the current p olicy dynamics. In this respect more
education and training in cross thematical, strategy relevant aspects are needed and only if the
different levels, responsible for STI strategies, engage in an honest, solution orientated and forma-
tive dialogue necessary policies for the necessary change can be realised.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 39
Figure 6: Missing elements or needs for policy action mentioned by interviewees

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 40
5 Main findings and further avenues for research
The key interest of this contribution was to shed light on the question: what kind of phenomena
are national STI strategies? Since several western countries introduced national STI policy strategies
in the mid-2000s, this question had not been addressed by political science yet. Clearly, according
to the official wording they are motivated by the desire to expand the impact of the STI policy
domain towards contributing to solutions for grand challenges in addition to the initial assignment
of increasing technological progress and economic prosperity.
Nevertheless, as this empirical prestudy 31 (Swedberg, 2012) revealed, they serve several different
but also shared purposes: regarding the latter, all documents aim to shift the focus from technology
push to societal demand driven actions and try to enhance participation to broaden the stakeholder
base (e.g., interested citizens, patient groups, students, regional industry networks) in general. With
regard to the identified differences between the strategies investigated, the following “pitches”
summarize the key differentiating characteristics:
• The Grand Gesture: Germany clings to delineation as cooperation: even though holistic nar-
ratives are used and high level committed is expressed, solitary action by departments seems
to prevail
• The Grand Growth: struggling with its financial sector at the time, the UK puts its emphasis
on creating and shaping markets through tech transfer and providing evidence analyses, new
entities, such as the TSB, were created for this assignment
• The Grand Grid: for Sweden, regional participation and networks are key aspects and foster-
ing innovative public sector procurement; in combination with an impactful national agency
such as Vinnova span a net to carry the strategy
The circumstances of the introduction of the strategies also differ to some extent and were routed
in institutional reforms paired with personal engagement by the political leadership (Germany), the
hope to rebalance the economy by closer engaging with industrial partners and help to reduce time
to market of new products and process innovations (UK) and the chance to take on a new and
improved approach to innovative public procurement while aligning regional with national levels
of policy making. Table 3 describes the strategies on a comprehensive level.

31 on national R&I policy strategies drawing on original qualitative work showcasing the German, UK and Swedish strategies dur-
ing the period 2006-2014

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 41
Table 3: Comprehensive overview of strategies and take aways
 Germany UK Sweden
“Pitch” The Grand Gesture:
delineation as cooperation: holistic narra-
tives but singular actions?
The Grand Growth:
creating & shaping markets through tech trans-
fer and evidence analysis?
The Grand Grid:
regional participation and public sector
procurement as an effective net?
Top priority

• mobilizing more R&D investment by
industry in key technologies
• more engagement in social dialogue
• fostering tech transfer
• speeding up commercialisation process
• regional networks to create owner-
ship across the country
• innovative public procurement.
Top instrument

• forward-looking projects (similar to
missions)
• improving the general conditions for
start-ups, SME and venture capital
• more responsibility, budget and personnel
for the Technology Strategy Board (TSB)
• initiation of Catapult centers32 (as interme-
diary actors)
• reorganization of Vinnova;
• setup of cross-institutional challenge-
led program (competitive three stage
project funding.
Distinguishing
feature
• strong department responsibilities
(editorial process as coordination)
• agencies as administrative arms of
ministries
• role of monitoring was emphasized
• a triad of public servants for finance, plan-
ning and analysis in place in each depart-
ment unit
• agencies oversee budget and content
• regional engagement important
Summarizing
quote
“We are moving from a supply-orientation
to a demand-orientation. This approach is
also reflected in the key areas and, for ex-
ample, in our new foresight process. We
are clearly approaching topics from the
social perspective and no longer from
technology push.” (Ger_12:47)
“We [the UK] are one of the leading science per-
formance countries in the world […]. Because we
have a very strong university -based science sys-
tem, we have the big problem of how this should
be interacting with the strong industrial perfor-
mance.” (UK_10: 23)
“[…] after the prime ministers’ announce-
ments, we decided the process should be
open for all partners of societies […]. We
work with regional network partnerships
[…] I'd say they are nexuses for the change
processes.” (SWE_15: 6; 39)

32 “Catapults are physical centres with a unique combination of cutting-edge R&D facilities and world class technical expertise. There are nine Catapults, working in over fifty locations, in every region and
nation of the UK”, see https://catapult.org.uk/about-us/our-centres/ last access 16.11.2023

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 42

A general challenge mentioned by all groups of interview partners was the shortage of skilled la-
bour with the relevant expertise in technological and digital sectors. With a view to the demo-
graphic change in the countries studied, this problem potentially only got worse. Surely since the
empirical material was gathered around two legislative periods passed by and new national strate-
gies were published and implemented (see the overview in Figure 1). So, the question is valid if the
aspects raised in this empirical contribution have not been solved by now?
Of course, it is difficult to judge real progress or development from the interviewees point of view
without revisiting them or collecting similar material. Still, some encounters and document insights
provide for very few selected signs towards a different understanding of an important part of strate-
gies: missions and MOIP. With a view to UK for instance, missions have been established as a vital
part of the national policy agenda and the observed formative monitoring practises have even been
translated further into the delivery plans of each mission as well as elaborate attempts on “co-crea-
tion, co-delivery and co-evaluation of missions with industry and citizens” (Hufnagl et al. 2019, p. 3).
Furthermore, Vinnova cultivated the methodological toolbox (Hill 2022) and also put more empha-
sis on its’ challenge -led program. Germany experienced a period of prominent mission wording
(with some attempts of MOIP design and implementation) with the last two generations of the
Hightech Strategy (BMBF 2014, 2019) but did not fully live up to the expectations of the scholarly
community working on the MOIP concept with regard to coordination: “Cooperation and coordi-
nation are often complicated by interdepartmental competition. There was little evidence that mis-
sions facilitate positive exchange between different ministries going beyond a delineation of re-
sponsibilities and negative coordination. Overall, frequency and intensity of inter -ministerial or
trans-ministerial activities appear to be relatively low.” (Roth et al. 2021, p.VI) The current Future
Strategy seems to downgrade the mission concept further by formulating unspecific sub-headlines
(e.g., Developing modern technologies for a competitive, circular and climate -neutral industry) to
overarching „transformation processes” such as “Enabling a resource -efficient and circular econ-
omy-oriented competitive industry as well as sustainable mobility” (BMBF 2023b, 35ff).
Further avenues for research
Since this contribution was focussing on the national level a neglected aspect is the interplay
within multi-level governance settings between the EU-level and the member states as well as
in the federal system of Germany the interaction of the national state with the German Länder. With
a view to the EU, however, a puzzling observation was that many interview partners were convinced
that their country was THE agenda setter per se and could “direct” EU policies to best suit their
country’s interest.
The importance of communication in politics (e.g., targets, success, failure) and science commu-
nication in digital as well as traditional channels has grown since the investigation. But already ten
years ago it was seen as a major task of the document to carry the message of urgent chal lenges:
“[…] we come to the core of an essential function of such an overarching strategy. That is communi-
cation. The communication and communicability of key social issues.” (GER_8: 90)
In that respect some respondents made the critical claim that the national strategies are simply not
more than a communication tool of the government or insisted that the cross-departmental coor-
dination and cooperation has sufficiently been achieved when t he document was published, and
the editorial process finalized. Further investigation on the practical exchange and consensus
seeking (coordination) among the involved stakeholders and public relations patterns regard-
ing STI policy and national strategies are needed. Particularly, since the STI domain is complex,
and content is not easy to communicate (“I mean as a politician research and innovation policy is
nothing to get elected for. You would need to talk about schools. Talking about innovation, it`s nothing

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 43

to win an election.” (SWE_4: 37)). Insights on whether connecting STI policy to societal demands has
“more appeal to the voter” is an exciting research desiderate.
Many interview partners, however, described this plea for linking STI policy to providing solutions
to the grand challenges as a positive and motivating leitmotiv. However, the majority seems over-
whelmed by this expectation due to several interconnected reasons. First, often a missing concrete
and consensual operationalizing of the contribution to the challenge solution, that turns over-
whelming headlines in concrete sector specific meaning as a basis for workable concepts (e.g.,
breaking down “climate change” to “inventing alternative emission-free mobility concepts” etc.) is
criticized by some. Second, the need for new policy instruments and programs to support systemic
transformation also calls for different formative evaluation practises and indicators to assess
output and impact than before.
In conjunction with these observations another main lesson is the missing empirical as well as aca-
demic examination of how the community of actors responsible for strategy and policies, either in
ministry or in agencies, learns from experience and if decision makers respond when objectives are
not reached (or “simply” change the objectives)? The scholarly community has been very much
focused on patterns of policy learning (see 4.2) but not on evaluating the results of these actions.
Today, even some national strategies are referred to as “learning strategies”, like the current Ger-
man document for instance: “As a learning strategy, the Future Research and Innovation Strategy
will respond quickly and flexibly to change. To this end, progress will be monitored on an ongoing
business, experience contributed, and goals adjusted where necessary.” (BMBF 2023a, p. 3).
Reacting to change is surely smart. However, what does this statement reveal in practice? Can actors
of the STI system really rely on a formative support system by policy, based on professional moni-
toring practises? During the past generation of the Hightech-Strategy (BMBF 2019) scientific sup-
port was provided, but hardly any advice led to altering the policy practices so far (Wittmann et al.
2020; Wittmann et al. 2021c). Also, British respondents could only confirm that monitoring is hap-
pening, but not report if and how change based on analyses is initiated.
Therefore, more insights and empirical work is needed to reveal patterns of processes of changing
policies to trace if and how policy learning and counteracting is happening.
This could furthermore help to gain insights on the methods and effectiveness of evidence-based
policy advise for recalibrating policy instruments and help to close the gap – already mentioned in
the introduction – between academic theory and policy practise little by little.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 44

A.1 Description by category of innovation policy strategies in place 2013-
2014
 Germany UK Sweden
Titel

Ideas. Innovation. Pros-
perity.
Hightech-Strategy
2020 for Germany
(HTS)
Innovation and research
strategy for growth

The Swedish Innovation
Strategy
Publication
year

2010 2011 2012
Published by Federal Ministry of Re-
search and Education
Department for Business, In-
novation and Skills
Swedish Ministry of En-
terprise, Energy and
Communications
Correspond-
ing document
Action plan for Parlia-
ment (DS 17/9261)
Economics Paper: Inn. and
Research Stra.
no explicit reference
made
Agencies
(with inde-
pendent con-
figuration of
programs)
No:
German Agencies
(Projektträger) & Re-
search Councils (e.g.,
DFG) are bound to
their role of managing
& administering pro-
ject funding
Yes:
TSB Driving Innovation
(2011):
Concept to Commercialisa-
tion
A strategy for business inno-
vation, 2011-2015
Establishment of Catapult
Centers
Yes:
E.g., Vinnova’s Challenge-
Driven Innovation pro-
gram
• Future Healthcare
• Sustainable Attractive
Cities
• Information Society
3.0
• Competitive Produc-
tion

Vision/target
date

2020 This vision will not be real-
ised immediately; it will take
years of sustained invest-
ment and effort (…)
2020
Previous doc-
ument
The Hightech Strategy
for Germany (2006)
Innovation Nation White Pa-
per
(2008)
Innovative Sweden – A
strategy for growth
through renewal (2004)
Reference to
EU or other
policies
Yes, Horizon 2020
(“The Federal Govern-
ment wants to extend
Horizon 2020. Yes, Europe 2020, Horizon
2020, reference to urgent

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 45

 Germany UK Sweden
the successful ap-
proach of the HTS to
the rest of Europe.“p.9)
Anglo-US Financing Innova-
tion symposium in 2012
societal challenges (EU
Comm 2010) (p.5)
OECD 2010
Motivation -
Justification -
Aim
Individual fields of
technology are seen as
contributions to realiz-
ing important social
policy aims or as inno-
vation drivers for other
fields of technology
(“key technologies”),
while social change is
an essential prerequi-
site for the generation
of technological
knowledge. (p.4)
The Coalition Government is
putting innovation and re-
search at the heart of its
growth agenda. Innovation
is essential to competitive-
ness and higher living
standards. Through more
significant investment and
increased collaboration, we
will make sure that the UK
has a promising future.

• Meet global societal
challenges.
• Increase competitive-
ness and create more
jobs in a global
knowledge economy.
• Deliver public services
with increased quality
and efficiency (p.7)
Guiding Prin-
ciples
The Federal Govern-
ment’s innovation pol-
icy activities are
geared towards […]
five fields of action,
with the aim of tap-
ping emerging mar-
kets. (p.5) Critical key
technologies and
measures to improve
the general conditions
for innovation will be
funded to encourage
new developments in
[…] five fields of action.
This strategy sets out the
Government’s approach to
• boosting business invest-
ment in innovation and
ensuring UK success in the
global economy.
• Universities and research,
entrepreneurship, and risk
taking, more significant
connections between peo-
ple and organisations,
• a more open environment
will all be at the heart of
our approach. p.5
1. Best possible condi-
tions for innovation
2. People, businesses
and organisations that
work systematically
with innovation
3. Implementation of the
strategy based on a
holistic view p.21
Structure &
Priorities

Headlines and de-
scriptions, no process
or milestones, general
outline:
• Focus on global
challenges
• Mission-oriented
approach: Forward-
looking projects
• Key technologies
• General conditions
Headlines and listings of
planned initiatives, no pro-
cess description:
1. Discovery and Develop-
ment
2. Innovative Businesses
3. Knowlegde and Innova-
tion
4. Global Collaboration
5. New Innovation Chal-
lenges
Stating meta-targets
e.g.
Innovative regions and
environments
Goal: Sweden’s regional
innovation environments
have international appeal
Sub target: Sweden’s re-
gions are increasing their
innovation capacity based

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 46

 Germany UK Sweden
Five fields of action
(incl. “Lines of action”
summarising planned
or existing policies,
strategies)
o Climate & Energy
o Health & Nutrition
o Mobility
o Security
o Communication
➔ Emphasis on Technol-
ogy Strategy Board as
main independent
agency for innovation
➔ Introduction of Catapult
Centers as integrated
approach that brigdes
gap betw. academia and
business
➔ Focus on four emerg-
ing technologies: Syn-
thetic Biology, Energy-
Efficient Computing, En-
ergy Harvesting, Gra-
phene

on their unique condi-
tions
Sweden therefore needs
to e.g.: Develop collabo-
ration between actors on
different levels that
strengthen the regional
appeal, based on e.g.,
clusters and test and
demonstration facilities
where relevant. P.48

Monitoring No mentioning of pro-
gress monitoring in
document.
Expert Commission for
Research & Innovation
(EFI) as independent
advisory body ap-
pointed.
Note on finances: The
various measures of
the HTS are financed
within each Ministry’s
own operating budget.
p.6

The complex nature of inno-
vation and inter- actions
within the innovation system
means that monitoring pro-
gress in implementing the
Strategy needs a broad
range of indicators.
We will report on the base-
line for these commitments
in the Annual Innovation Re-
port 2012, which will be
published early next year,
and we will continue to
monitor through NESTA’s
Innovation Index (p. 89 ff)
An effective way of moni-
toring initiatives is re-
quired to develop and
adapt initiatives without
compromising the long-
term character and clarity
of ambitions. […] To ena-
ble continuous learning,
objectives that are possi-
ble to monitor over time,
as well as good analyses
for well-founded priori-
ties are needed. p.52
Implementa-
tion
Outline of “Forward-
looking projects for
Parliament (HTS Ak-
tions-plan, Drucksache
17/9261)
• Intro to challenge
e.g. climate change
• Project description
e.g. “renewable pri-
mary product alter-
natives to oil”
Our overall objective is to
increase levels of innovation
that drive growth and create
jobs in all parts of the UK,
and we need to demon-
strate that we are delivering
the programmes
and initiatives set out in this
strategy. The key milestones
The Government intends
to present an overview of
the implementation. As
the implementation of
the strategy is also a mat-
ter that concerns
many actors in society,
the Government also in-
tends

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 47

 Germany UK Sweden
• Tentative goal de-
scription e.g. stren-
thening the expan-
sion of the bio-
based economy
• Lines of action for
implementation
(mostly research
funding), contribu-
tion by diff. actors

are set out in the delivery
plan (p.91-96)
to report at regular in-
tervals on the develop-
ment of the innovation
climate in Sweden. p.51
Mission-like
concepts

forward-looking pro-
jects, reference to
stakeholder engage-
ment
(Drucksache 17/9261)
challenge-led innovation and
research programmes, often
reference for need to eco-
nomic exploitation
challenge-driven Inn. Pro-
gram; often references to
societal challenges

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 48

A.2 Questionnaire addressing frameworks of policy making,
practices and (strategy) capacities of actors regarding na-
tional innovation strategies of Germany, UK and Sweden
Opening questions:
Could you please define your role and the role of your unit/ministry/agency in the (strategizing
and) implementation process of the national innovation strategy? (Further questions to “identify”
the addressee, see last part of questionnaire)
Können Sie mir bitte Ihre persönliche Rolle und die Ihres Ministeriums/Referates in Bezug auf die
Formulierung und Umsetzung der Hightech-Strategie beschreiben?
Why did the government decide to launch a national innovation policy strategy?
Warum hat die Regierung eine nationale Innovation-Strategie eingeführt?
 Focus 1:
Frameworks for policy making:
guiding principles and policy objectives of the strategy
The guiding principles of policy strategies can be identified as a major element of strategy alto-
gether. As numerous studies have shown, the willingness to reach a certain goal is a key element
and a driving force of strategies in business contexts or concerning military and defense operations
as well as policies. Regarding the latter, one must remember that the aim to reach a certain policy
goal seems to “tell only parts of the story”. The policies are chosen, and their related instruments
always reflect an inherent normativity that replicates the involved polity structure and reveals the
current government's value system and its way of “doing politics”.
Therefore, by asking about the guiding principles, I would like the respondent to reflect upon the
underlying values, norms, and thus the contextualization of the goals that he or she associates
with the innovation strategy and its instruments. The perception of the implementers should help
to learn about the motivation/mission behind the strategy and the way in which abstract goals for
instance “the Grand Challenges” serve as guideposts for actual policymaking.
Core interest: What are the guiding principles and policy objectives underlying the national strat-
egy, and how are these perceived and actualized by the organization implementing the strategy?
Welche Leitlinien und politischen Zielsetzungen liegen der nationalen Innovationsstrategie zugrunde
und wie werden diese von der für die Implementierung verantwortlichen Organisation verstanden und
operationalisiert?
Main questions:
1.1. In your opinion, what are the guiding principles and policy objectives of the strategy?
Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die Leitlinien und politischen Zielsetzungen der Hightech -Stra-
tegie?
1.2. What do you think are the main characteristics that turn policies into a strategy?
Does the innovation strategy fulfill these criteria?
Was sind für Sie die wichtigsten Kriterien einer strategischen Policy/politischen Strategie?
Erfüllt die Hightech-Strategie diese Kriterien in Ihrer Wahrnehmung?
1.3. To what extent did introducing the national innovation strategy alter the innovation policy?
Is the strategy addressing all actors relevant for innovation?

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 49

Wie hat sich die deutsche Innovationspolitik mit der Einführung der Hightech-Strategie gewan-
delt? Inwiefern addressiert die Strategie alle für Innovationen relevanten Akteure?
1.4. To what extent can specific objectives, like an orientation towards “solving the grand chal-
lenges of our time”, provide added value (regarding the strategy)?
Inwieweit unterstützen Vorgaben wie die Orientierung an den “Lösungen der großen Heraus-
forderungen unserer Zeit” die Zielerreichung der Hightech-Strategie?

Add on questions / weitere Fragen
• If challenge-led or mission-orientation was mentioned: How do you perceive and oper-
ationalized grand challenges as a guiding principle? Wie haben Sie die großen Heraus-
forderungen als Leitprinzip verstanden und umgesetzt?
• How are the strategy objectives translated into policies/policy instruments? Can you
give me an example? Wie werden die Zielvorstellungen in konkrete Policy-Instrumente
übersetzt? Können Sie mir hierfür ein Beispiel nennen?
• In your opinion, are the targets of the strategy reasonably straight forward? Sind die
Ziele der Hightech-Strategy Ihrer Meinung nach eindeutig formuliert?
• Do you see a conflict between setting up long-term policy strategies and short or mid-
term policy planning? Sehen Sie einen Widerspruch zwischen der Etablierung langfristi-
ger politischer Strategien und kurz- bis mitterfristiger Politikplanung?
• From your experience, can you describe the process of strategizing (setting up a policy
that is strategic)? Können Sie mir aus Ihrer Erfahrung den Prozess der Strategiebildung
erläutern?
• How were the policy objectives of the strategy selected and do you think that the pri-
orities are suitable? Wie wurden die Zielsetzungen der Hightech-Strategie festgelegt
und haben Sie das Gefühl, dass die richtigen Prioritäten gesetzt wurden?
• What is “strategic” about the current national innovation policy? Was ist Ihrer Meinung
nach strategisch an der Hightech-Strategie?

 Focus 2: Policy practices:Coordination and cooperation patterns of the strat-
egy
The national innovation strategies of the UK, Sweden and Germany all pursue a “whole-of-govern-
ment” approach, according to the respective White Papers. Among other aspects, this entails that
the strategies are carried out by several ministries (or agencies) at the same time, engaging them
in a collaborative effort. Consequently, the implementation of national strategies is bound to in-
corporate practices of coordination and cooperation between the actors involved. But what form
do these practices take? How i s the practice of implementation “achieved by various dynamic ef-
fects, such as decision making, communication, bargaining, negotiation, even conflict.” (Schofield
2001: 25433)
Core interest: How are national innovation strategies implemented and what kind of patterns can
be identified regarding the coordination and cooperation of the actors involved?
Wie wird die Hightech-Strategie implementiert und welche Koordinations- und Kooperationsroutinen
bzw. Muster zwischen den beteiligten Akteuren können identifiziert werden?

33 Schofield, J. (2001): Time for a revival? Public Policy Implementation: a review of the literature and an agenda for future r esearch, in: International
Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 3 Issue 3, pp. 245–263.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 50

Main questions:
2.1. The national innovation strategy is presented as a combined effort of several ministries/units
and a top priority of the current government. How do you coordinate your unit’s actions
and policies with other units/agencies?
Die Innovationsstrategie wird als gemeinsame Aufgabe verschiedener Ministerien und als
wichtige Priorität der Bundesregierung präsentiert. Wie werden die verschiedenen Aufgaben
zwischen den beteiligten Ministerien und Referaten koordiniert?
2.2. How regularly, and concerning which issues, do you cooperate with other minis-
tries/units/agencies (contents of policies, targets, operationalization)?
Wie häufig kooperieren Sie mit anderen Referaten/Ministerien und bezüglich welcher Themen
(Inhalte, Ziele, Umsetzungsvorschläge)?
2.3. How do the goals of the national strategy influence the institutional set-up of your unit and
the way you collaborate with other entities?
Inwiefern beeinflussen die Ziele der Strategie die institutionelle Struktur (des Referats/Minis-
teriums) und die Art und Weise wie Sie mit anderen zusammenarbeiten?
2.4. Could you describe how you actually execute the policies in your ministry/unit/agency?
What works and why? What doesn’t and why?
Könnten Sie mir bitte beschreiben wie Sie/Ihr Referat die Strategie konkret umsetzt? Was
funktioniert hier gut, was weniger?
Add on questions / weitere Fragen
• Could you describe the workflow between the people/departments involved in the im-
plementation process? Könnten Sie mir den Arbeitsablauf zwischen den beteiligten Per-
sonen / Abteilungen erläutern?
• How do you avoid contradictory action/action pulling in different directions? Wie ge-
währleisten Sie, dass es nicht zu widersprüchlichen Maßnahmen innerhalb der Strategie
kommt?
• How do you avoid neglecting some areas (technologies, research topics, actors)? Wie
stellen Sie sicher, dass es nicht zur Vernachlässigung von Bereichen kommt (Technolo-
giesparten, Forschungsthemen, Akteure)?
• What are important barriers to a successful implementation? How do you deal with
those? Worin sehen Sie wichtige Hürden für eine erfolgreiche Politikimplementation und
wie gehen Sie mit diesen um?
• Are there any noticeable incentives for better coordination? Gibt es spürbare Anreize für
eine besser Absprache und Koordination unter den Beteiligten?

Focus 3:
Capacities:
(strategic) capacities of the involved actors and aspects of leader-
ship

The success and failure of public policies does not only depend on coherent formulation and im-
plementation but also on the commitment and the strategic capacities of the actors involved.
Thus, it is crucial to elaborate on the topics of leadership, management, and strategic skills when
analysing the national innovation strategies.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 51

Regarding this analysis, some scholars suggest a division between “strategy thinking” and “strat-
egy making” of the actors involved, the latter referring to the actual task of setting up and imple-
menting certain policy strategies (external strategy process), the former suggesting an analysis of
the internal strategy process. The following questions focus on the internal strategy process and
the management of this undertaking respectively.
Core interest: How is the strategic capacity of the actors involved and coherent management (lead-
ership) organized/operationalized regarding the strategy?
Wie werden die strategischen Fähigkeiten der Beteiligten eingebracht und ein kohärentes Manage-
ment der Hightech-Strategie gewährleistet?

Main questions:
3.1. Does the formulation and implementation of the national innovation strategy require spe-
cific "strategic" skills from the actors and what are they?
Erforderten die Formulierung und Umsetzung der Strategie Ihrer Meinung nach spezielle
“strategische” Fähigkeiten der beteiligen Akteure? Wenn ja, welche wären das?
3.2. What unit/department is most influential in the implementation of the strategy? Why?
Who else is a key figure/unit?
Wer hat Ihrer Meinung nach die operationale Leitung der Strategie inne und wie äußert sich
das? Wer ist weiterhin wichtig (Person/Referat)?
3.3. Do you think your unit/ministry is adequately equipped for the implementation of the
strategy in terms of workforce and qualification of employees? The time frame given? In-
formation gathering and processing (ex-ante expertise, ex post evaluation)?
Haben Sie das Gefühl, dass Ihr Referat/Ministerium für die Umsetzung der Strategie ange-
messen ausgestattet ist u.a. mit Blick auf die Anzahl und Qualifikation der Mitarbeiter/-in-
nen, dem Zeitrahmen für die Implementation sowie den Möglichkeiten Informationen einzu-
holen und zu verarbeiten (ex ante Expertise, ex post Evaluationen)?
3.4. In your opinion, what are the areas that have been most relevant in the management of
the strategy? How would you characterize the relationship between politicians and civil
servants in the implementation of the strategy?
Was sind für Sie die wichtigsten Aspekte des Managements der Hightech-Strategie?
Wie würden Sie die Beziehung/den Austausch zwischen Politikern und politischer Administ-
ration im Zuge der Umsetzung der Strategie charakterisieren?

Add on questions / weitere Fragen
• What are the easiest and the most difficult issues in the leadership and management
when implementing the strategy? Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die einfachsten und
schwersten Aufgaben mit Blick auf das Management der Hightech-Strategie?
• What are your knowledge/data sources and who do you turn to when you need exper-
tise regarding the strategy (components, technology fields, branches)? Is there an inter-
nal knowledge unit? Or do you request external expertise? Was sind Ihre wichtigsten
Informationsquellen und woher beziehen Sie relevante Expertise (bzgl. Technologie,
Branchen)? Gibt es eine interne Rechercheabteilung? Oder wird die Expertise extern an-
gefordert?

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 52

• Which other countries or country strategies serve as a benchmark? What about the role
of the EU regarding the national strategy? Welche anderen Länder und deren Strategien
dienen Ihnen zur Orientierung? Wie beurteilen Sie die Rolle der EU im Bezug auf die
Hightech-Strategie?
• What triggered the changes between the first national strategy and the revisions later
on? To the extent that this necessitated changes in particular policies: How did you go
about improving/changing them? Wie kam es zu Veränderungen zwischen der High-
tech-Strategie von 2006 und der Hightech-Strategie 2020? Anhand welcher Kriterien ha-
ben Sie Veränderungen durchgeführt?
• Who and what do you think is most important for the long-term success of the strategy?
Wer und was, denken Sie, ist am Wichtigsten für den langfristigen Erfolg der Hightech-
Strategie?
Concluding questions:
What changes, if any, do you think the introduction of the notion of “strategy” brought about in
innovation policy making?
Glauben Sie, dass sich durch “die Rede von Strategie” Veränderungen im Bezug auf die Innovations-
politik ergeben haben?
What do you see as the most urgent challenge in innovation policy?
Wo sehen Sie den größten Handlungsbedarf in der deutschen Innovationspolitik?

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 53

Literature
Arnold, E.; Boeckholt, P. (2003): Research and Innovation Governance in Eight Countries. A Meta -
Analysis of Work Funded by EZ (Netherlands) and RCN (Norway). Available at
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309617082_Research_and_Innovation_Governanc
e_in_Eight_Countries_A_Meta-
Analysis_of_Work_Funded_by_EZ_Netherlands_and_RCN_Norway, accessed 25.11.2023.
Bandelow, N. C. (1999): Lernende Politik: Advocacy-Koalitionen und politischer Wandel am Beispiel
der Gentechnologiepolitik. Berlin: Ed. Sigma. ISBN: 3894044608.
Bandelow, N. C. (2006): Advocacy Coalitions, Policy -Oriented Learning and Long-Term Change in
Genetic Engineering Policy: An Interpretist View. In: German Policy Studies, 3 (4), pp. 743 –
795.
Bennett, C. J.; Howlett, M. (1992): The lessons of learning: Reconciling theories of policy learning
and policy change. In: Policy Sciences, 25 (3), pp. 275 –294.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00138786.
Biegelbauer, P. (2013): Wie lernt die Politik? Lernen aus Erfahrung in Politik und Verwaltung.
Wiesbaden: Springer VS. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-19128-7.
BIS (2011): Innovation and Research Strategy for Growth. Departement for Business Innovation and
Skills.
BMBF (2006): Die Hightech -Strategie für Deutschland. Bonn, Berlin. Available at
https://www.fona.de/medien/pdf/die_hightech_strategie_fuer_deutschland.pdf, accessed
11.10.2019.
BMBF (2010a): Ideas. Innovation. Prosperity. Hightech-Strategy 2020 for Germany. Bonn, Berlin.
BMBF (2010b): Ideen. Innovation. Wachstum. Hightech -Strategie 2020 für Deutschland. Bonn,
Berlin: Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) - Referat Innovationspolitische
Querschnittsfragen, Rahmenbedingungen.
BMBF (2014): Die neue Hightech -Strategie. Innovationen für Deutschland. Berlin:
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) - Referat Grundsatzfragen der
Innovationspolitik.
BMBF (2019): The High -Tech Strategy 2025. Progress Report. Berlin. Available at
https://www.hightech-strategie.de/SharedDocs/Publikationen/de/hightech/pdf/the-high-
tech-strategy-2025-progress-report.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=3, accessed 17.12.2021.
BMBF (2023a): Future Research and Innovation Strategy. Available at
https://www.bmbf.de/bmbf/en/research/future-research-and-innovation-
strategy/executive_summary.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1, accessed 27.11.2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 54

BMBF (2023b): Zukunftsstrategie Forschung und Innovation. Available at
https://www.bmbf.de/bmbf/de/forschung/zukunftsstrategie/zukunftsstrategie_node.html.
Borras, S. (2003): The innovation policy of the European Union. From government to governance.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Available at
https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/kxp/detail.action?docID=4502042.
Borrás, S. (2011): Policy learning and organizational capacities in innovation policies. In: Science and
Public Policy, 38 (9), pp. 725–734. https://doi.org/10.3152/030234211X13070021633323.
Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (2014): Introduction. In: Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (Eds.): The Governance of Socio -
Technical Systems. Explaining Change. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN:
9781784710194, pp. 1–22.
Borrás, S.; Edler, J. (2020): The roles of the state in the governance of socio -technical systems’
transformation. In: Research Policy, 49 (5), Article No. 103971.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.103971.
Borrás, S.; Haakonsson, S.; Poulsen, R. T.; Pallesen, T.; Hendriksen, C.; Somavilla, L.; Kugelberg, S.;
Larsen, H.; Gerli, F. (2023): The Transformative Capacity of Public Sector Organizations in
Sustainability Transitions. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4543261.
Bouckaert, G.; Peters, B. G.; Verhoest, K. (2010): The coordination of public sector organizations.
Shifting patterns of public management. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230275256.
Braczyk, H.-J.; Cooke, P.; Heidenreich, M. (Eds.) (1998): Regional innovation systems. The role of
governance in a globalized world. London: Routledge. ISBN: 0415303699.
Braun, D. (2008): Organising the political coordination of knowledge and innovation policies. In:
Science and Public Policy, 35 (4), pp. 227–239. https://doi.org/10.3152/030234208X287056.
Briassoulis, H. (2004): Policy integration for complex policy problems: what, why and how. Berlin.
Briassoulis, H. (2005): Policy integration for complex environmental problems. The Example of
Mediterranean Desertification. Farnhem: Ashgate Publishing. ISBN: 1138259039.
Bullock, H. L.; Lavis, J. N.; Wilson, M. G.; Mulvale, G.; Miatello, A. (2021): Understanding the
implementation of evidence -informed policies and practices from a policy perspective: a
critical interpretive synthesis. In: Implementation science : IS, 16 (1 ), p. 18.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-021-01082-7.
Cantner, U.; Vannuccini, S. (2018): Elements of a Schumpeterian catalytic research and innovation
policy. In: Industrial and Corporate Change, 27 (5), pp. 833 –850.
https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty028.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 55

Carlsson, B. (Ed.) (1995): Technological Systems and Economic Performance. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands. Available at
https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/kxp/detail.action?docID=6495364.
Corbin, J. M.; Strauss, A. L. (2015): Basics of qualitative research. Techniques and procedures for
developing grounded theory. Los Angeles: SAGE. ISBN: 9781412997461.
Crouch, C. (2013): Typologies of Capitalism. In: Hancké, B. (Ed.): Debating varieties of capitalism. A
reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN: 9780199569663, pp. 75–94.
Daimer, S.; Hufnagl, M.; Warnke, P. (2012): Challenge -oriented policy -making and innovation
systems theory: reconsidering systemic instruments. In: Fraunhofer Institut für System - und
Innovationsforschung (Ed.): Innovation system revisited - Experiences from 40 years of
Fraunhofer ISI research. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, pp. 217–234.
Edler, J.; Fagerberg, J. (2017): Innovation policy: what, why, and how. In: Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 33 (1), pp. 2–23. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grx001.
Edler, J.; Kuhlmann, S. (2008): Coordination within fragmentation: governance in knowledge policy
in the German federal system. In: Science and Public Policy, 35 (4), pp. 265 –276.
https://doi.org/10.3152/030234208X310329.
Edler, J.; Kuhlmann, S.; Smits, R. (2003): New Governance for Innovation. The Need for Horizontal
and Systemic Policy Co-ordination. Report on a Workshop held at the occassion of the 30th
anniversity of the Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation R esearch (ISI),
Karlsruhe/Germany, 14/15 November 2002. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System - und
Innovationsforschung. Available at
https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/28536/1/368668401.pdf, accessed 19.11.2019.
Edquist, C. (2005): Systems of Innovation: Perspectives and Challenges. In: Fagerberg, J. (Ed.): The
Oxford handbook of innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 181 –208.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199286805.003.0007.
Etheredge, L. S.; Short, J. (1983): Thinking about government learning. In: Journal of Management
Studies, 20 (1), pp. 41–58. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.1983.tb00197.x.
European Commission (2010): EUROPE 2020 A strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.
Available at https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=celex:52010DC2020,
accessed 11.06.2023.
European Commission (2011): Horizon 2020 - The Framework Programme for Research and
Innovation. COM/2011/0808 final.
European Commission. DG Research (2023a): Mutual learning exercise on the whole of government
approach in research and innovation: first thematic report : introduction and overview of the
whole of government approaches in research and innovation. Publicati ons Office.
https://doi.org/10.2777/92395.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 56

European Commission. DG Research (2023b): New policy designs and instruments for a whole of
government approach in R&I: second thematic report. Publications Office.
https://doi.org/10.2777/927057.
Exe.Off. of the President (2009): A Strategy for American Innovation:. driving towards sustainable
growth and quality jobs. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President. Available at
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED511653.pdf, accessed 26.10.2023.
Foray, D.; Mowery, D. C.; Nelson, R. R. (2012): Public R&D and social challenges: What lessons from
mission R&D programs? In: Research Policy, 41 (10), pp. 1697 –1702.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.07.011.
Fukuda-Parr, S.; Lopes, C.; Malik, K. (2002): Capacity for development: new solutions to old
problems. London: Earthscan Publications. Available at
https://www.undp.org/publications/capacity-development-new-solutions-old-problems-
full-text, accessed 20.11.2023.
Gault, F. (2010): Innovation strategies for a global economy. Development, implementation,
measurement and management. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar; International Development
Research Centre. Available at
http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/docDetail.action?docID=10438217.
Griessen, T.; Braun, D. (2008): The political coordination of knowledge and innovation policies in
Switzerland. In: Science and Public Policy, 35 (4), pp. 277 –288.
https://doi.org/10.3152/030234208X310338.
Hall (Ed.) (2001): Varieties of Capitalism. The institutional foundations of comparative advantage.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN: 9780199247752.
Hall, P. A.; Gingerich, D. W. (2009): Varieties of Capitalism and Institutional Complementarities in
the Political Economy: An Empirical Analysis. In: British Journal of Political Science, 39 (3), pp.
449–482. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123409000672.
Hall, P. A.; Soskice, D. W. (2001): An Introduction to Varieties of Capitalism. In: Hall (Ed.): Varieties of
Capitalism. The institutional foundations of comparative advantage. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. ISBN: 9780199247752, pp. 1–68.
Hancké, B. (Ed.) (2013): Debating varieties of capitalism. A reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ISBN: 9780199569663.
Hill, D. (2022): Mission -oriented innovation - a handbook from Vinnova. About mission -oriented
approach to innovation. Available at
https://www.vinnova.se/contentassets/1c94a5c2f72c41cb9e651827f29edc14/designing-
missions.pdf?cb=20220311094952, accessed 25.11.2023.
Hjern, B.; Porter, D. O. (1981): Implementation Structures: A New Unit of Administrative Analysis. In:
Organization Studies, 2 (3), pp. 211–227. https://doi.org/10.1177/017084068100200301.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 57

Hufnagl, M.; Lindner, R.; Wittmann, F.; Roth, F. (2019): Workshop on mission -oriented innovation
policies in the UK and Germany: approaches and experiences. Berlin, 29thNovember, 2019.
Fraunhofer Institut für System - und Innovationsforschung. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/ccp/2020/Summary%20draft%20
BEIS-BMBF-ISI%20Workshop.pdf, accessed 05.10.2020.
Jackwerth-Rice, T.; Afghani, N.; Daimer, S.; Lindner, R.; Wittmann, F. (2023): Public sector
organisations as agents of transformations. https://doi.org/10.24406/publica-1664.
Janssen, M. J.; Wesseling, J.; Torrens, J.; Weber, K. M.; Penna, C.; Klerkx, L. (2023): Missions as
boundary objects for transformative change: understanding coordination across policy,
research, and stakeholder communities. In: Science and Public Policy, 50 (3), pp. 398 –415.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scac080.
Kaiser, R. (2008): Innovationspolitik. Staatliche Steuerungskapazitäten beim Aufbau
wissensbasierter Industrien im internationalen Vergleich. Baden -Baden: Nomos
Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG. Available at http://nbn -resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:bsz:31-
epflicht-1208678.
Kallerud, E.; Kallerud, E.; Sutherland Olsen, D.; Klitkou, A.; Upham, P.; Amanatidou, E.; Nieminen, M.;
Lima Toivanen, M.; Oksanen, J. (2013): Dimensions of research and innovation policies to
address grand and global challenges. Available at
https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/publications/dimensions-of-research-and-innovation-
policies-to-address-grand-a, accessed 29.11.2023.
Kattel, R.; Mazzucato, M. (2018): Mission-oriented innovation policy and dynamic capabilities in the
public sector. In: Industrial and Corporate Change, 27 (5), pp. 787 –801.
https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty032.
Kemp, R.; Loorbach, D.; Rotmans, J. (2007): Transition management as a model for managing
processes of co -evolution towards sustainable development. In: International Journal of
Sustainable Development & World Ecology, 14 (1), pp. 78 –91.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504500709469709.
Koschatzky, K.; Stahlecker, T. (2009): Cohesion policy at the interface between regional development
and the promotion of innovation. https://doi.org/10.24406/publica-fhg-294387.
Kuckartz, U. (2014): Qualitative text analysis. A guide to methods, practice and using software.
London: SAGE Publications. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446288719.
Kuhlmann, S.; Rip, A. (2018): Next-Generation Innovation Policy and Grand Challenges. In: Science
and Public Policy, 45 (4), pp. 448–454.
Larrue, P. (2021): The design and implementation of mission -oriented innovation policies. A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges. Paris: OECD.
https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 58

Lindner, R. (2012): Cross -sectoral coordination of STI -policies: governance principles to bridge
policy-fragmentation. In: Fraunhofer Institut für System - und Innovationsforschung (Ed.):
Innovations Systems Revisited – Experiences from 40 years of Fraunhof er ISI research.
Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, pp. 270–282.
Lindner, R.; Daimer, S.; Beckert, B.; Heyen, N.; Köhler, J. H.; Teufel, B.; Warnke, P.; Wydra, S. (2016):
Addressing directionality. Orientation failure and the systems of innovation heuristic : towards
reflexive governance. Karlsruhe.
Lindner, R.; Wittmann, F.; Jackwerth -Rice, T.; Daimer, S.; Edler, J.; Posch, D. (2022): Deutschland
transformieren: Missionsagenturen als innovativer Baustein zur Bewältigung
gesamtgesellschaftlicher Herausforderungen. https://doi.org/10.11586/2022146.
Lipsky, M. (1980): Street Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Services. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Loorbach, D. (2007): Transition management. New mode of governance for sustainable
development : nieuwe vorm van governance voor duurzame ontwikkeling =
Transitiemanagement. Utrecht: Internat. Books. ISBN: 978-90-5727-057-4.
Loorbach, D. (2010): Transition Management for Sustainable Development: A Prescriptive,
Complexity-Based Governance Framework. In: Governance, 23 (1), pp. 161 –183.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0491.2009.01471.x.
Lorentzen, J. (2009): Learning by firms: the black box of South Africa's innovation system. In: Science
and Public Policy, 36 (1), pp. 33–45. https://doi.org/10.3152/030234209X403262.
Lowi, T. J. (1972): Four Systems of Policy, Politics, and Choice. In: Public Administration Review, 32
(4), pp. 298–310.
Lundvall, B.-Å. (Ed.) (1992): National systems of innovation. Towards a theory of innovation and
interactive learning. London: Pinter. ISBN: 1855670631.
Lynn, L. E. (2009): Public management. Old and new. New York: Routledge. ISBN: 0415287308.
Magro, E.; Navarro, M.; Zabala-Iturriagagoitia, J. M. (2014): Behind the curtains: the invisible hand
of formal and informal coordination in innovation policy. Available at
https://www.ippapublicpolicy.org/file/paper/593c62157d9cd.pdf.
Malerba, F. (2002): Sectoral systems of innovation and production. In: Research Policy, 31 (2), pp.
247–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(01)00139-1.
March, J. G.; Olsen, J. P. (2013): The Logic of Appropriateness. In: Goodin, R. E. (Ed.): The Oxford
handbook of political science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 478 –497.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199604456.013.0024.
Mayring, P. (2014): Qualitative content analysis: theoretical foundation, basic procedures and
software solution. Available at https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-395173.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 59

Mazzucato, M. (2013): The entrepreneurial state. Debunking public vs. private sector myths. London:
Anthem Press. ISBN: 9780857282521.
Mazzucato, M. (2016): From market fixing to market -creating: A new framework for innovation
policy. In: Industry and innovation, 23 (2), pp. 140–156.
Mazzucato, M. (2017): Mission-Oriented Innovation Policy. Challenges and opportunities. London:
RSA Action and Research Center. Available at
https://www.thersa.org/globalassets/pdfs/reports/mission-oriented-policy-innovation-
report.pdf, accessed 06.12.2019.
Meyer-Krahmer, F. (1989): Der Einfluss staatlicher Technologiepolitik auf industrielle Innovationen.
Baden-Baden: Nomos. ISBN: 3789018023.
Naschold, F.; Bogumil, J. (2000): Modernisierung des Staates. New Public Management in deutscher
und internationaler Perspektive. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-322-99694-7.
Nelson, R. R. (Ed.) (1993): National innovation systems. A comparative analysis. New York: Oxford
University Press. Available at
https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&A
N=140859.
OECD (2010): The OECD innovation strategy. Getting a head start on tomorrow. Paris: OECD
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264083479-en.
Painter, M. (1981): Central agencies and the coordination principle. In: Australian Journal of Public
Administration, 40 (4), pp. 265–280. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8500.1981.tb00519.x.
Peters, B. G. (2000): Policy Instruments and Public Management: Bridging the Gaps. In: Journal of
Public Administration Research and Theory, 10 (1), pp. 35 –47.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.jpart.a024265.
Peters, B. G. (2006): The Search for Coordination and Coherence in Public Policy: Return to the
Center? Available at https://userpage.fu -
berlin.de/ffu/akumwelt/bc2004/download/peters_f.pdf, accessed 26.11.2023.
Quitzow, R. (2012). Towards a strategic framework for promoting environmental innovations .
Submission to the 10th GLOBELICS International Conference, Hangzhou, China.
Rädiker, S.; Kuckartz, U. (2020): Focused analysis of qualitative interviews with MAXQDA. Step by
step. Berlin: MAXQDA Press. ISBN: 9783948768034.
Raschke, J.; Tils, R. (2007): Politische Strategie. Eine Grundlegung. Wiesbaden: VS, Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-90410-8.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 60

Raschke, J.; Tils, R. (2010): Strategie in der Politikwissenschaft. Konturen eines neuen
Forschungsfelds. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-92209-6.
Raschke, J.; Tils, R. (2011): Politik braucht Strategie - Taktik hat sie genug. Ein Kursbuch. Frankfurt/M.:
Campus Verlag. Available at http://www.content -
select.com/index.php?id=bib_view&ean=9783593411286.
Rayner, J.; Howlett, M. (2009): Introduction: Understanding integrated policy strategies and their
evolution. In: Policy and Society, 28 (2), pp. 99 –109.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polsoc.2009.05.001.
Robinson, D. K.; Mazzucato, M. (2019): The evolution of mission -oriented policies: Exploring
changing market creating policies in the US and European space sector. In: Research Policy,
48 (4), pp. 936–948.
Rose, R. (1993): Lesson -drawing in public policy. A guide to learning across time and space.
Chatham, N.J.: Chatham House Publishers. ISBN: 9780934540322.
Roth, F.; Lindner, R.; Hufnagl, M.; Wittmann, F.; Yorulmaz, M. (2021): Lessons for future mission -
oriented policies. Final report of the Scientific Support Action to the German High -Tech
Strategy 2025 - volume 1. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System - und
Innovationsforschung ISI. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/ccp/2021/HTS2025_Begleitforsch
ung_Band_1_englisch.pdf, accessed 25.11.2023.
Sabatier, P. A. (1987): Knowlegde, Policy-Oriented Learning, and Policy Change. In: Knowledge, (8),
pp. 649–692.
Sabatier, P. A. (Ed.) (2009): Theories of the Policy Process. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Available at
https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/kxp/detail.action?docID=796119.
Sabatier, P. A. (Ed.) (2010): Policy change and learning. An advocacy coalition approach. Boulder,
Colo: Westview Press. ISBN: 9780813316499.
Sabatier, P. A.; Mazmanian, D. (1979): The Conditions of Effective Implementation: A Guide to
Accomplishing Policy Objectives. In: Policy Analysis, 5 (4), pp. 481–504.
Schofield, J. (2001): Time for a revival? Public policy implementation: a review of the literature and
an agenda for future research. In: International Journal of Management Reviews, 3 (3), pp.
245–263. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2370.00066.
Schot, J.; Geels, F. W. (2008): Strategic niche management and sustainable innovation journeys:
Theory, findings, research agenda, and policy. In: Technology Analysis & Strategic
Management, 20 (5), pp. 537–554. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537320802292651.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 61

Stead, D.; Geerlings, H.; Meijers, E. J. (Eds.) (2004): Policy integration in practice. The integration of
land use planning, transport and environmental policy -making in Denmark, England and
Germany. Delft: DUP Science. ISBN: 9040725411.
Steurer, R. (2004): Strategic public management as holistic approach to policy integration. Available
at
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228459256_Strategic_public_management_as_hol
istic_approach_to_policy_integration/link/611632721e95fe241acae624/download, accessed
29.11.2023.
Streeck, W. (2013): Introduction: Institutional Change, Capitalist Development. In: Streeck, W. (Ed.):
Re-forming capitalism. Institutional change in the German political economy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199573981.003.0001.
Swedberg, R. (2012): Theorizing in sociology and social science: turning to the context of discovery.
In: Theory and Society, 41 (1), pp. 1–40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-011-9161-5.
Swedish Ministry of Enterprise, Energy and Communications (2012): The Swedish Innovation
Strategy.
Tosun, J.; Lang, A. (2017): Policy integration: mapping the different concepts. In: Policy Studies, 38
(6), pp. 553–570. https://doi.org/10.1080/01442872.2017.1339239.
van Kerkhoff, L. E.; Lebel, L. (2015): Coproductive capacities: rethinking science-governance relations
in a diverse world. In: Ecology and Society, 20 (1). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-07188-200114.
Vetenskapsrådet (2009): The Lund Declaration. Europe must focus on the grand challenges of our
time. Available at
https://www.vr.se/download/18.3936818b16e6f40bd3e5cd/1574173799722/Lund%20Declar
ation%202009.pdf.
Voß, J.-P. B. D. K. R.; Kemp, R.; Bauknecht, D.; Voss, J. -P. (Eds.) (2006): Reflexive Governance for
Sustainable Development. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing. Available at
https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/kxp/detail.action?docID=256792.
Wanzenböck, I.; Wesseling, J. H.; Frenken, K.; Hekkert, M. P.; Weber, K. M. (2020): A framework for
mission-oriented innovation policy: Alternative pathways through the problem –solution
space. In: Science and Public Policy, 47 (4), pp. 474 –489.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scaa027.
Warnke, P.; Koschatzky, K.; Dönitz, E.; Zenker, A.; Stahlecker, T.; Som, O.; Cuhls, K.; Güth, S. (2016):
Opening up the innovation system framework towards new actors and institutions. Karlsruhe:
Fraunhofer Institut für System - und Innovationsforschung. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/cci/innovation-systems-policy-
analysis/2016/discussionpaper_49_2016.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 91
Fraunhofer ISI | 62

Weber, M.; Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for
transformative change. In: Research Policy, 41 (6), pp. 1037–1047.
Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Lindner, R.; Roth, F.; Edler, J. (2021a): Governing varieties of mission -
oriented innovation policies: A new typology. In: Science and Public Policy, 48 (5), pp. 727 –
738. https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scab044.
Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Roth, F.; Yorulmaz, M.; Lindner, R. (2021b): From mission definition to
implementation: Conceptualizing mission -oriented policies as a multi -stage translation
process. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/cci/innovation-systems-policy-
analysis/2021/discussionpaper_71_2021.pdf, accessed 30.08.2021.
Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Roth, F.; Yorulmaz, M.; Lindner, R. (2021c): Second Mission Analysis
Report of the Scientific Support Action to the German Hightech Strategy 2025: Zooming in:
Translating missions into policy instruments. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System - und
Innovationsforschung ISI. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/ccp/2021/Hightech_Strategy_20
25-second_mission_analysis_report.pdf, accessed 29.11.2021.
Wittmann, F.; Roth, F.; Hufnagl, M. (2020): First Mission Analysis Report of the Scientific Support
Action to the German Hightech Strategy 2025. Setting the stage: Positioning the missions in
the socio -technical system. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System - und
Innovationsforschung ISI. Available at
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/ccp/2020/Hightech%20Strategy
%202025%20-%20first%20mission%20analysis%20report.pdf, accessed 28.04.2021.
Wood, S. (2001): Business, Government, and Patterns of Labor Market Policy in Britain and the
Federal Republic of Germany. In: Hall (Ed.): Varieties of Capitalism. Oxford University Press,
pp. 247–274. https://doi.org/10.1093/0199247757.003.0007.
Wu, X.; Ramesh, M.; Howlett, M. (2017): Policy capacity: A conceptual framework for understanding
policy competences and capabilities. In: Policy and Society, 34 (3 -4), pp. 165 –171.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polsoc.2015.09.001.
