%1
RIETI Discussion Paper Series 24-E-042
The Welfare Effects of Government Intervention into the
Licensing of Standard-essential Patents: An analysis of the
Chinese smartphone and SoC markets
WATANABE, Mariko
Gakushuin University
KUBO, Kensuke
Keio University
The Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry
https://www.rieti.go.jp/en/

RIETI Discussion Paper Series 24-E-042
March 2024

The Welfare Effects of Government Intervention into the Licensing of
Standard-Essential Patents:
An Analysis of the Chinese Smartphone and SoC Markets *

Mariko WA TANABE
Gakushuin University

Kensuke KUBO
Keio University

Abstract
The licensing of standard -essential patents ( “SEPs”) in the cellular communications field has been a
contentious issue. In particular, Qualcomm’s licensing policies for cellular communication standards have
been the subject of several lawsuits and episodes of government intervention. We evaluate the impact of
the most drastic intervention to date: the Chinese government's 2015 decision to forcibly lower Qualcomm
royalty rates by 1.23 – 1.75 percentage points . Using a simple theoretical model, we argue that such an
intervention could have ambiguous effects on consumers. To quantify the policy's impact, we construct a
structural econometric model of the Chinese smartphone and SoC markets which allows for strategic
pricing in the two vertically-related markets. Counterfactual analysis using the estimated model allows us
to quantify the intervention’s impact on smartphone manufacturers' marginal costs and product prices. Our
simulation results indicate that the intervention caused an unequivocal i ncrease in smartphone
manufacturers' marginal costs (1.1 percent on average). However, this was more than offset by smartphone
manufacturers' incentive to lower their prices under the reduced royalty rate, leading to a slight reduction
in smartphone prices  (0.6 percent on average) . Taken together, these results suggest that the Chinese
government's intervention had the intended effect on social welfare, although its magnitude was fairly
limited.

Keywords: Patents, Competition Policy, Vertical Restraints, Semiconductor Industry, China
JEL classification:
 L42 L63  O34

The RIETI Discussion Paper Series aims at widely disseminating research results in the form of professional
papers, with the goal of stimulating lively discussion. The views expressed in the papers are solely those of
the author(s), and neither represent those of the organization(s)  to which the author(s) belong(s) nor the
Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.

*This study was conducted as a part of the “Global Intelligence Project” undertaken at the Research Institute of
Economy, Trade and Industry (RIETI). A draft of this paper was presented at the RIETI DP Seminar for this paper.
We would like to thank participants of the RIETI DP Seminar for their helpful comments. This study utilizes the
GfK China Smartphone Market Audit Data which was provided by RIETI (for 2011-2014) and Japan Scientific
Promotion Research Fund (No.17K18567 and 21K18442, represented by Watanabe, for 2015-2018).

1 Introduction
Technology standards have played an important role in the development of high-tech industries in
which key innovations are realized by multiple entities. By coalescing around a specific standard,
different firms can develop products and services that are compatible with each other, generating
significant benefits to consumers. However, when multiple entities contribute to the development of
a single standard, the issue of how to compensate each innovator arises. To avoid potential problems
of hold-up and “royalty stacking” – the phenomenon where each patent holder sets its profit-maximal
royalty rate and the summed royalty rate becomes prohibitively high – standard-setting organizations
have required contributing innovators to commit to licensing their standard-essential patents (“SEPs”)
on a fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory (“FRAND”) basis.
In the area of cellular communication, the actual meaning of FRAND has often been the subject of
legal dispute between SEP holders and the implementers of patented technology. One of the most high-
profile of these disputes, playing out in multiple jurisdictions over many years, involves Qualcomm and
its SEPs for cellular communication standards. Qualcomm has held a unique position in this industry,
as both the largest owner of SEPs and a leading supplier of microchips that enable cellular handsets
(smartphones and feature phones) to connect to cellular networks. 1 These microchips include both
standalone modem chips (called “baseband processors”) and System-on-Chips (“SoCs”), which are
integrated circuits that combine a modem with various other functions. 2
Qualcomm’s opponents have accused the firm of charging supra-FRAND royalties for its SEPs by
(i) refusing to license its SEPs to other chipmakers, instead collecting royalties from handset manu-
facturers regardless of whether or not they use Qualcomm-made chips; and (ii) employing a coercive
“no chips, no license” policy which made it difficult for handset manufacturers to dispute Qualcomm’s
licensing terms. According to the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), which sued Qualcomm in
2017, Qualcomm’s elevated royalty rates caused handset prices to increase, thereby causing harm to
consumers.3
This paper is motivated by the question of whether Qualcomm’s licensing practices actually harmed
consumers through higher handset prices. As we show using a simple vertical oligopoly model where
a supplier of components charges a royalty to manufacturers of the final product, raising the royalty
rate can either increase or decrease the final product price. This is because the increase in royalty
rate has two competing effects: (i) it reduces the marginal revenue of final product manufacturers,
incentivizing them to reduce supply by raising their prices; and (ii) it enables the supplier-licensor and
its competitors to lower the price of the component, which tends to lower the final product price.
We explore this research question in the context of the Chinese smartphone and SoC markets.
Our choice of China as the setting has two motivations. First, the Chinese government’s National
Development and Reform Commission (“NDRC”) found in 2015 that Qualcomm’s licensing practices
violated the country’s Anti-Monopoly Law. The NDRC alleged that Qualcomm’s royalty rates were
1Throughout this paper, we use the terms “handsets” and “smartphones” interchangeably. Although some of the
handsets appearing in our dataset are feature phones, a large majority of the handsets are smartphones, especially in
the more recent years.
2For the most part, we refer to these microchips collectively as SoCs or simply “chips”, but clarify the distinction
between SoCs and baseband processors whenever necessary.
3See FTC’s complaint in Federal Trade Commission v. Qualcomm Inc. (N.D. Cal. 2019), available at https:
//www.ftc.gov/legal-library/browse/cases-proceedings/141-0199-qualcomm-inc
1

unfairly high, causing rival chipmakers to lose competitiveness and raising the costs faced by handset
manufacturers. This, in turn, caused an increase in handset prices and harmed consumers, according to
the NDRC.4 Upon the NDRC’s orders, Qualcomm had to lower the royalty rates charged to smartphone
manufacturers in China. While other competition agencies such as the FTC and the Korean Fair Trade
Commission have made similar allegations, at the time of writing, the NDRC is alone in having forced
a reduction in Qualcomm’s royalty rates. Thus, the NDRC intervention presents a valuable case study
for examining whether drastic government intervention, in the form of a forcible reduction of royalty
rates, is justified on consumer welfare grounds.
The second motivation is the relatively competitive nature of the Chinese SoC market, which
allows an exogenous change in Qualcomm’s royalty rates, such as that imposed by the NDRC, to have
a palpable effect on competition. In particular, one of Qualcomm’s rival chipmakers – which we shall
call M – is a major supplier to many Chinese smartphone manufacturers, all of whom pay royalties to
Qualcomm.5,6 If, as the NDRC and other competition agencies claim, Qualcomm’s excessive royalties
had an exclusionary effect on rival chipmakers such as M, the NDRC intervention may have reversed
it to some extent, causing rival chipmakers’ profits to increase. We aim to quantify this profit increase
and thereby evaluate the intervention’s role in alleviating exclusionary effects.
To pursue these aims, we construct a structural econometric model of the Chinese smartphone and
SoC markets. The demand for smartphones is modeled using a two-level nested logit framework and
estimated from product-level market share data for individual cities. Smartphone manufacturers, all
of whom are multi-product firms, are assumed to maximize profit by choosing their product prices.
The prices of SoCs – whose identities are recorded for each smartphone model in our data – are
taken as given by the smartphone manufacturers. SoC suppliers, who are also multi-product firms,
are assumed to maximize profit by choosing their product prices, taking the derived demand from
smartphone manufacturers as given. To estimate the marginal costs of smartphone manufacturers, we
use the first-order conditions for profit maximization in the smartphone market. These marginal costs
include the cost of SoC procurement; we are unable to separate out the SoC cost from non-SoC costs
because we do not have data on SoC prices. In our analysis of the SoC market, we therefore derive
the price-cost margins of SoC manufacturers, rather than their marginal costs, using the first-order
conditions for profit maximization.
We evaluate the impact of the NDRC intervention in 2015 by conducting counterfactual simu-
lations for each market. Our counterfactual scenario consists of Qualcomm maintaining the same
royalty rates that it had in place in 2014 beyond 2015, instead of the reduced rates imposed by the
intervention. We use the estimated structural model to compute equilibrium price-cost margins in
the SoC market as well as prices in the smartphone market under the counterfactual scenario. By
comparing outcomes under the counterfactual scenario against the actual outcomes, we are able to
quantify the effect of the NDRC intervention. Our results show that SoC manufacturers’ price-cost
4See National Development and Reform Commission Administrative Sanction Decision No. 1 [2015], dated February
9, 2015; available from IPR Daily at http://www.iprdaily.cn/article_6967.html.
5Under the terms of our agreement with GfK, our data provider, we are unable to disclose the full names of the
companies that appear in our dataset with the exception of Qualcomm.
6In contrast to China, other countries tend to have SoC markets that are dominated by Qualcomm. For example,
Yang (2020) notes that in the U.S., most of Qualcomm’s rivals in the SoC market have exited by 2012 and the remaining
substantial rival, Samsung, is a vertically integrated firm whose smartphone division procures almost half of its SoC
requirements from Qualcomm.
2

margins – and by extension, SoC prices – were unequivocally increased by the NDRC intervention,
conforming with predictions from our theoretical model. The effect of the intervention on smartphone
prices varies across models in terms of sign, which also conforms with theoretical predictions. However,
we find that the quantity-weighted average price of smartphones decreased in response to the interven-
tion in every analyzed market. This translates into a small but significant increase in consumer surplus.
Relationship to Literature. The behavior of firms that act as both component supplier and patent
licensor has been analyzed theoretically by Padilla and Wong-Ervin (2017) and Kim (2020). Both
papers focus on the supplier-licensor’s decision with regard to royalty base – whether to license to
rival component suppliers or final good manufacturers – and royalty rate. Padilla and Wong-Ervin
(2017) find that a supplier-licensor’s refusal to license component suppliers (i.e., licensing only to final
product manufacturers) cannot be anticompetitive in a specific class of vertical oligopoly models.7 Kim
(2020) examines the supplier-licensor’s incentive to foreclose rival component suppliers by either suing
them for patent infringement or raising the royalty rate. He finds that the likelihood of foreclosure
varies with both the royalty base (either components or final products) and the structure of demand
and supply. In contrast to these papers, we do not focus on the supplier-licensor’s choice of royalty
base or royalty rate. Rather, we assume that the royalty is assessed on the final product, and that its
rate is exogenously determined. The exogeneity assumption is motivated by the fact that Qualcomm
and other SEP holders are bound by FRAND commitments. 8 Our focus is instead on how changes in
the royalty rate affect the prices of components and final products through the competitive interactions
among firms.
Our paper is closest, both in terms of the industry analyzed and research question, to Yang’s
(2020) empirical study of the U.S. smartphone and SoC markets. His main focus is on how a hypo-
thetical vertical integration between a supplier-licensor (Qualcomm) and a final product manufacturer
(HTC) affects innovation and welfare. In one of his counterfactual analyses, Yang (2020) assumes
that the integrated firm (Qualcomm-HTC) loses all of its royalty revenues from rival final product
manufacturers after the merger. 9 In the resulting equilibrium, the SoC prices paid by Qualcomm’s
customers are slightly higher than under the status quo, but it is not clear how much of this is due
to vertical foreclosure (“raising rivals’ costs” by Qualcomm-HTC) and how much is due to the loss
of royalty revenues. 10 In contrast to Yang (2020), we explicitly focus on the relationship between
Qualcomm’s royalty rates on the one hand, and the prices of SoCs and smartphones on the other. Our
counterfactual analysis is designed to quantify the effect of a relatively small reduction in Qualcomm’s
royalty rate that was actually enforced by government intervention, rather than the outright loss of
royalty revenues. Our paper also differs from Yang (2020) in the way the SoC segment is modeled.
7Padilla and Wong-Ervin (2017) consider a vertical oligopoly model where the quantity of final product (and by
extension, the quantity of the upstream component) is fixed. This, in effect, assumes away anticompetitive quantity
reductions.
8This assumption is also employed by Yang (2020). The various lawsuits faced by Qualcomm creates some doubt
as to whether Qualcomm’s royalty rates are FRAND-compliant, but it is nevertheless unlikely that the rates are set to
maximize Qualcomm’s profits.
9This is presumably because the integrated firm’s rivals in the downstream market move away from the cellular
standard that relies on Qualcomm’s SEPs.
10Yang (2020) also simulates a vertical integration scenario where Qualcomm-HTC maintains its royalty revenue. The
counterfactual equilibrium involves higher SoC prices paid by Qualcomm’s customers, but the increase seems slightly
smaller than under the scenario where Qualcomm-HTC loses its royalty revenue.
3

Whereas Yang (2020) models it as a dominant-fringe market with Qualcomm as the dominant firm,
we allow for strategic interaction among multiple SoC suppliers. This allows us to examine how the
royalty rate reduction affected SoC pricing by both Qualcomm and its rivals.
Previous papers that have studied the Chinese smartphone market include Fan and Zhang (2022),
which examines the price and welfare effects of a subsidy on handsets and Wang (2023), which looks at
smartphone manufacturers’ product portfolio choices. Our paper is differentiated from theirs through
our focus on the upstream SoC segment and how it relates to the downstream smartphone market
through Qualcomm’s licensing practices.
Finally, our paper builds upon the empirical industrial organization literature on vertical oligopoly.
Our basic modeling approach follows the dual-Bertrand structure of Berto Villas-Boas (2007) and Bon-
net and Dubois (2010). Our novel contribution is to incorporate the royalty rate charged by one of
the upstream suppliers, Qualcomm, into the structural model.
Road Map. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we describe the licensing
of standard-essential patents in the cellular communications area, focusing on the legal controversy sur-
rounding Qualcomm’s licensing practices and the resulting government intervention. After providing
a brief description of the Chinese smartphone and SoC markets, we motivate our empirical analysis by
presenting a simple theoretical model in which a component supplier-cum-technology licensor collects
royalties from final product manufacturers. We use the model to show that an exogenous reduction
in royalty rate may increase or decrease the final product price.
Sections 3 through 6 cover our empirical analysis. Following a description of our data in section
3, we present our structural econometric model in section 4. Section 5 describes our estimation
strategy and estimation results. Section 6 contains the results of our counterfactual analysis. Section
7 concludes.
4

2 Background and motivation
A Licensing of Standard-Essential Patents for Cellular Communications
Many high-tech industries are built upon innovations carried out by multiple entities. Such industries
often require the standardization of technologies which allows different products and services to be
mutually compatible. In the cellular communications sector, for instance, firms must coalesce around
a given standard to allow their products to communicate with each other. To this end, second-
generation (“2G”) standards including GSM and cdmaOne were developed in the 1990s, followed by
third-generation (“3G”) standards including WCDMA, CDMA2000, and TD-SCDMA in the 2000s.
Fourth-generation (“4G”) standards were introduced in the late 2000s and one of them, LTE, became
the dominant standard worldwide from the mid-2010s. 11
SEPs that cover the technologies essential to implementing a standard are typically held by several
different firms. This gives rise to two potential problems. First, individual SEP holders may gain the
ability to “hold up” the implementation of the standard by refusing to license their patents, allowing
them to demand excessively high royalties (Shapiro, 2000). This leads to the second problem, known
as “royalty stacking”, where the sum of the royalty rates of individual SEP holders becomes so high
that implementation of the standard becomes economically infeasible (Lemley and Shapiro, 2007;
Lerner and Tirole, 2004). To deal with these potential problems, the organizations that oversee the
standardization process, called standard-setting organizations (“SSOs”), often restrict the licensing
terms that SEP holders can set (Lemley, 2002).
In the case of SSOs overseeing cellular standards such as the Alliance for Telecommunication
Industry Solutions (“ATIS”), Telecommunications Industry Association (“TIA”), and the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (“ETSI”), SEP holders are required to license their SEPs on
FRAND terms.12 The meaning of FRAND has not been sufficiently clarified by the SSOs, however,
and this has led to numerous disputes involving SEP holders, their licensees, as well as antitrust
agencies.
B Antitrust Scrutiny of Qualcomm’s Licensing Practices
Our paper focuses on one particular set of disputes regarding cellular SEPs: those involving the licens-
ing practices of Qualcomm Incorporated. Qualcomm is an American firm that holds a large number of
SEPs for the 2G (cdmaOne), 3G (CDMA2000 and WCDMA), and 4G (LTE) cellular standards. 13,14
It is also a supplier of baseband processors and SoCs. While Qualcomm’s cellular SEPs cover the
technologies embodied in those chips, the company does not grant licenses for the SEPs to rival chip-
makers. Rather, Qualcomm licenses its SEPs to handset manufacturers and collects royalties from
them in terms of a fixed percentage of the handset’s net wholesale price. Qualcomm’s royalty rates
on licenses for the cdmaOne, CDMA2000 and WCDMA standards are typically five percent (subject
to discounts for specific licensees), while those for the LTE standard are between 3.5 and four percent.15
11The fifth-generation (“5G”) standard, which began deployment in 2019, is not covered in the dataset used for our
analysis.
12Federal Trade Commission v. Qualcomm Inc., 411 F.Supp.3d 658 at 671-672 (N.D. Cal. 2019).
13The cdmaOne and CDMA2000 standards are sometimes jointly referred to as “CDMA”.
14Regarding Qualcomm’s SEPs in the 3G sphere, there has been a dispute between Qualcomm and its competitors on
whether or not those SEPs cover the TD-SCDMA standard. See, for example, RCR Wireless News (2006).
15411 F.Supp.3d 658 at 673. See also Yang (2020).
5

Legal Challenges Prior to the NDRC Intervention. Qualcomm’s licensing practices were first chal-
lenged on antitrust grounds by Broadcom, another American chipmaker, in July 2005. Broadcom
claimed that Qualcomm violated the antitrust laws by falsely promising to license its WCDMA SEPs
on FRAND terms during the standardization process, only to charge excessive royalties once the in-
dustry became locked into the WCDMA standard. A federal district court ruled in favor of Qualcomm,
but the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed and remanded the case to the district
court, stating that Qualcomm’s conduct may amount to a willful acquisition of monopoly power in
violation of Section 2 of the Sherman Act. 16 The case never resulted in remedial action against
Qualcomm’s licensing practices because Broadcom and Qualcomm settled their lawsuit in 2009. 17
Similar claims against Qualcomm were made by Broadcom, Nokia, and four other firms in a
complaint filed with the European Commission in October 2005, and a formal investigation by the
competition branch of the Commission began in October 2007. However, the investigation was closed
in November 2019 before reaching any conclusion, after Qualcomm settled with each of the com-
plainants.18 Qualcomm also faced scrutiny from the South Korean and Japanese antitrust authorities
in the late 2000s. It received a fine from the Korea Fair Trade Commission (KFTC) in 2010 as well
as a cease-and-desist order from the Japan Fair Trade Commission (JFTC) in 2009. However, these
actions did not require Qualcomm to fundamentally alter its licensing practices. 19
The NDRC Intervention. The National Development and Reform Commission (“NDRC”), which
was one of the Chinese government’s competition agencies at the time, launched an investigation
into Qualcomm’s licensing practices in November 2013. In February 2015, the NDRC announced
its decision finding that Qualcomm violated the country’s Anti-Monopoly Law by abusing its SEPs
for the cdmaOne, CDMA2000, WCDMA and LTE standards, as well as its dominant position in
the markets for “baseband chips” compliant with the WCDMA and LTE standards. 20 According to
the NDRC, certain elements of Qualcomm’s licensing practices allowed it to charge excessive royalty
rates. These include: (i) using the net wholesale price of the handset as the royalty base rather than
the component price; (ii) failing to exclude expired SEPs from the bundle of licensed patents; (iii)
bundling non-wireless SEPs toghether with wireless SEPs; (iv) requiring licensees to provide royalty-
free cross-licenses of their patents to Qualcomm and its customers; and (v) conditioning the supply
of Qualcomm’s chips on an agreement not to dispute its licensing terms (i.e., the “no license, no
chips” policy). According to the NDRC’s theory of harm, elements (i) through (iv) worked to elevate
the effective royalty rate that Qualcomm could charge, while element (v) ensured that Qualcomm
maintained a strong bargaining position vis-` a-vis licensees. The NDRC claimed that the unfairly high
royalty rates charged by Qualcomm caused handset manufacturers’ costs to increase, which in turn
16Broadcom Corporation v. Qualcomm Inc., 501 F.3d 297 (3rd Cir. 2007)
17See Qualcomm Incorporated. (2009, April 26). Qualcomm and Broadcom Reach Settlement and Patent Agreement
[Press release].
18See Qualcomm Incorporated. (2010, January 27). Form 10-q. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. https:
//www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/804328/000095012310005721/a54942e10vq.htm
19The JFTC order was eventually revoked in 2019 after a successful administrative appeal by Qualcomm. See Qual-
comm Incorporated. (2019, March 14). JFTC Revokes Order, Finds Qualcomm Licensing Program Lawful[Press release].
20See National Development and Reform Commission Administrative Sanction Decision No. 1 [2015], dated February
9, 2015. While not explicitly stated in the decision, “baseband chips” include both baseband processors and SoCs.
6

caused handset prices to increase and harmed consumers. 21 The NDRC’s decision did not provide
any empirical evidence to support its claims regarding the effect of Qualcomm’s practices on handset
prices.
Unlike in other jurisdictions where it faced antitrust scrutiny, Qualcomm did not challenge the
NDRC’s findings and agreed to pay a fine of 6.088 billion Chinese RMB (approximately $992 million
at the exchange rate in February 201522.). It also agreed to alter its licensing practices in the following
manner: (a) unbundle its valid wireless SEPs from expired patents and non-wireless SEPs before li-
censing them; (b) not require licensees to grant royalty-free cross-licenses; (c) not condition the supply
of chips on an agreement to the licensing terms; and (d) lower the royalty base to 65 percent of the net
wholesale price of handsets. 23 According to legal commentators, a particularly notable aspect of the
decision was the mandated change in royalty base, which is effectively the same as a forced reduction
in royalty rates. Assuming handset prices remained constant (an assumption that we do not maintain
in our analysis), the royalty rate reduction would have caused a 35 percent decrease in Qualcomm’s
royalty revenue. This action was notable both because it was the first instance of a forcible reduction
in Qualcomm’s royalty rates, and because Qualcomm was allowed to keep using the handset price
(albeit a smaller proportion of it) as the royalty base. 24
Further Antitrust Challenges. The NDRC decision was quickly followed by a March 2015 announce-
ment by the KFTC that it was starting a new investigation into Qualcomm’s licensing practices. A
decision was announced in January 2017, finding that Qualcomm violated South Korea’s Monopoly
Regulation and Fair Trade Act and imposing a 1.03 trillion Korean won (approximately $890 million
at the exchange rate in January 2017 25) fine on the firm. The KFTC found the following elements to
be illegal: (i) refusal to license SEPs to rival chipmakers; (ii) the “no license, no chips” policy; and (iii)
requirement of royalty-free cross-licenses from licensees. The remedies ordered by the KFTC include
a requirement for Qualcomm to enter into good-faith licensing negotiations with rival chipmakers.
Qualcomm filed suit in the Seoul High Court to annul the KFTC decision but the court upheld most
of it, including the order to negotiate with chipmakers. Qualcomm’s subsequent appeal to the Supreme
Court resulted in an affirmation of the lower court’s ruling in April 2023. 26
In the U.S., the FTC brought suit against Qualcomm in January 2017, claiming that its licensing
practices for SEPs led to elevated royalty rates. According to the FTC, this acted as a “tax” on
chips made by Qualcomm’s rivals, which had the dual effect of excluding those chipmakers from the
market for baseband chips (both baseband processors and SoCs), and causing handset manufacturers
to set higher prices at the expense of consumers. The U.S. District Court for the Northern District
of California found in favor of the FTC, ruling in May 2019 that Qualcomm’s royalty rates were
unreasonably high, and that as a result, rival chipmakers were being excluded from the market.27 The
21See Section II(I) of the NDRC Decision.
22IMF, Exchange Rate Archives by Month
23See Qualcomm Incorporated. (2019, February 9). Qualcomm and China’s National Development and Reform Com-
mission Reach Resolution: NDRC Accepts Rectification Plan [Press release].
24See, for example, Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP. (2015, March 16) China’s NDRC Concludes Qualcomm
Investigation, Imposes Changes in Licensing Practices [Memorandum].
25IMF, Exchange Rate Archives by Month
26See Qualcomm Incorporated. (2023, May 3). Form 10-q . U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. https:
//www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/0000804328/000080432823000023/qcom-20230326.htm
27FTC v. Qualcomm Inc. , 411 F.Supp.3d 658 (N.D.Cal. 2019).
7

district court also found that Qualcomm had a duty to license its SEPs to rival chipmakers and that
failure to do so violated Section 2 of the Sherman Act. 28
Following an appeal by Qualcomm, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed
the district court decision in August 2020. A key element of the appellate court decision was the
finding that Qualcomm did not have an “antitrust duty to deal” with its competitors – i.e., it was
not obligated to license its SEPs to rival chipmakers.29 Interestingly, the decision did not rule out the
possibility that Qualcomm’s licensing practices had an exclusionary effect on rival chipmakers through
a “margin squeeze”, admitting the possibility that “Qualcomm uses its licensing royalties to charge
anticompetitive, ultralow prices on its own modem chips – pushing out rivals by squeezing their profit
margins”.30 Nevertheless, the appellate court rejected the FTC’s assertion of antitrust liability on the
grounds that (i) there was no evidence that Qualcomm engaged in predatory pricing in the baseband
chip market,31 and (ii) there was no evidence that Qualcomm applied discriminatorily higher royalty
rates to handset manufacturers using non-Qualcomm chips. 32
C Structure of the Chinese Smartphone and SoC Markets
The Chinese smartphone and SoC markets were characterized by the coexistence of multiple cellular
standards during the early 2010s, as can be seen from Figure 1(a) which shows the distribution of
smartphone models, and Figure 2(a) which shows the distribution of units sold. The latter figure shows
how the 2G GSM standard quickly lost market share during this period, while the three 3G standards
– CDMA2000, WCDMA and TD-SCDMA – each gained market share until they were overtaken by
LTE (4G) from 2014 onward.
Among the 3G standards, Qualcomm held a dominant share of SEPs for CDMA2000, while those
for WCDMA were more evenly held by Qualcomm and several other firms including Nokia, Ericsson,
InterDigital (a so-called “non-practicing entity” that asserts the rights on patents purchased from
other firms), and LG Electronics (Yang and Jung, 2014). TD-SCDMA is a China-specific standard
developed jointly by the Chinese Academy of Telecommunications Technology and Siemens AG. While
Qualcomm has claimed that its patents cover TD-SCDMA technology, it is not clear whether it charges
royalties on handsets that solely employ the TD-SCDMA standard. 33 For the 4G LTE standard,
Qualcomm is one of the leading SEP holders along with Nokia, Ericsson, Samsung and Huawei. 34
Figures 1(b) and 2(b) demonstrate how Qualcomm maintained a significant share of the Chinese
SoC market throughout the 3G and 4G eras. Measured in terms of the number of smartphone
models using its chips, Qualcomm’s market share has been matched by that of M; the share of other
chipmakers have remained much smaller (Figure 1(b)). The picture is somewhat different when shares
are measured in terms of the number of smartphone units sold (Figure 2(b)). Here, Qualcomm has
28The district court further found that Qualcomm’s exclusive dealing agreements with one of its customers, Apple,
violated Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act.
29See FTC v. Qualcomm Inc. , 969 F.3d 974 (9th Cir. 2020). This ruling was based on the observation that under
U.S. case law, an antitrust duty to deal is found only in circumstances where a firm’s refusal to deal is purely motivated
by exclusionary intent. See Aspen Skiing Co. v. Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp. , 472 U.S. 585 (1985).
30FTC, 969 F.3d, at 1000-1001.
31FTC, 969 F.3d, at 1001.
32FTC, 969 F.3d, at 996-997.
33See RCR Wireless News (2008) on the lack of clarity regarding Qualcomm’s royalty revenues in China from TD-
SCDMA handsets.
34See plaintiffs’ second amended complaint in In re Qualcomm Antitrust Litigation (N.D. Cal. 2023), available at
https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.cand.309826/gov.uscourts.cand.309826.899.0.pdf
8

maintained the largest share but there are two rival firms in addition to M with significant market
shares. S maintained a fairly large market share during the 3G period, while H has rapidly gained
market share from around 2015, just as 3G standards were being replaced by LTE. This period also
coincides with the NDRC intervention in February 2015.
Figures 1(c) and 2(c) describes the structure of the Chinese smartphone market. Figure 2(c) shows
that during the observed period, there were seven leading smartphone manufacturers. 35 Initially, S1
(which belongs to the same corporate group as chipmaker S) had the largest market share, but it was
gradually overtaken by the company owning brands O1 and V1, the company owning brands H1 and
H2, and A1. Smaller brands (the “Others” category) also served a large proportion of demand up to
2014. From 2015 onward, the market has become more concentrated, with only four manufacturers
– A1, the owner of brands H1 and H2, the owner of brands O1 and V1, and M1 – maintaining
significant market shares, and the combined share of smaller brands shrinking over time. Nevertheless,
the combined presence of smaller brands has remained large when measured in terms of the number
of models (Figure 1(c)). As can be seen from Figure 1(d), more than half of all smartphone models
were supplied by smaller brands whose maximum annual sales volume during 2011-2018 was less than
1 million units.
The fragmented structure of the smartphone market, as well as the vertical structure of the in-
dustry, may have contributed to the relatively competitive nature of the Chinese SoC market. Of
the seven leading smartphone manufacturers, six have procured SoCs from both Qualcomm and M,
providing both chipmakers with a large customer base. In addition, the company that owns the H1
and H2 smartphone brands is also the parent company of SoC supplier H. This has likely provided an
assured demand for the chips manufactured by H. Similarly, SoC supplier S has likely faced assured
demand for its products from brand S1, which belongs to the same corporate group.
Against this backdrop, an important question is whether, and to what extent, the NDRC’s inter-
vention affected the prices and profitability of the SoC manufacturers. Another relevant question is
how the NDRC intervention, in conjunction with changes in SoC prices, affected the prices of smart-
phones. Before addressing these questions empirically, we use a theoretical model to sort out the
economic forces that could drive such price changes.
35The seven smartphone manufacturers appearing in Figures 1(c) and 2(c) are those with the largest cumulative sales
volumes during 2011-2018. The abbreviated names appearing in the figures (e.g., A1, H1) represent “brands”. In this
paper, smartphone brands correspond to smartphone manufacturers except for the following two cases: brands H1 and
H2 are owned by the same company, and brands O1 and V1 are owned by the same company.
9

Figure 1: Distribution of Smartphone Models in China, 2011-2018
(a) By cellular standard
 (b) By SoC supplier
(c) By smartphone manufacturer
 (d) Large vs. small smartphone brands
Source: Authors’ calculations based on GfK data.
Note: “Large” brands are defined as those having maximum annual sales volume at or above 1 million units during
2011-2018; remaining brands are categorized as “small.” Brands H1 and H2 are combined because they are owned by
the same company. Brands O1 and V1 are combined for the same reason.
10

Figure 2: Distribution of Smartphones Sold in China, 2011-2018
(a) By cellular standard
 (b) By SoC supplier
(c) By smartphone manufacturer
 (d) Large vs. small smartphone brands
Source: Authors’ calculations based on GfK data.
Note: “Large” brands are defined as those having maximum annual sales volume at or above 1 million units during
2011-2018; remaining brands are categorized as “small.” Brands H1 and H2 are combined because they are owned by
the same company. Brands O1 and V1 are combined for the same reason.
11

D Theoretical Motivation
The economic rationale for the NDRC intervention was that Quacomm’s licensing practices for SEPs
led to elevated royalty rates, which in turn caused (i) an increase in smartphone manufacturers’ costs
and (ii) an increase in smartphone prices. To investigate the validity of these concerns, we use a simple
theoretical model to describe how the supplier of an intermediate product, who also receives royalty
payments from manufacturers of the downstream product, responds to an exogenous change in the
royalty rate. Both the downstream and upstream markets are assumed to be duopolies. Whereas the
downstream firms supply differentiated products (“smartphones”), the upstream product (“SoCs”)
is assumed to be homogenous. One of the upstream firms (“supplier-licensor”) holds a portfolio of
essential patents for the downstream product, and licenses it out for a royalty rate of ϕ ∈ [0, 1] on
smartphone sales. It is assumed that ϕ is determined exogenously to satisfy the FRAND requirements
stipulated by SSOs and/or courts. A change in ϕ is assumed occur as a result of intervention by a
government agency (such as the NDRC) or a court ruling.
Each downstream firm m ∈ {1, 2} supplies a single smartphone model to consumers. The demand
function for firm m’s smartphone is given by Qm(pm, pm′) = a − bpm + dpm′, where m′ = 3 − m and
b > d. For simplicity, we assume that downstream firms’ marginal cost, excluding the cost of SoC, is
zero.
Assuming that the downstream firms compete in prices, firm m’s profit maximization problem is
max
pm
[(1 − ϕ)pm − w](a − bpm + dpm′),
where w denotes the market price of SoC. Firm m’s first-order condition for profit maximization yields
the reaction function
pm = R(pm′) = a + dpm′
2b + w
2(1 − ϕ). (1)
Solving the system of equations formed by the two reaction functions, we obtain the equilibrium
downstream price for each product, expressed as a function of w:
p∗
m(w) = 1
2b − d

a + bw
1 − ϕ

, m= 1, 2. (2)
Plugging these into the demand function, we obtain the derived demand function for SoCs used in
firm m’s smartphones as
qm(w) = b
2b − d

a − b − d
1 − ϕw

.
We now turn to the upstream SoC market, where SoC suppliers are assumed to engage in price
competition so that the firm offering the lower price captures the entire market demand. (In the
event of a tie, we assume that the two SoC suppliers split the market demand evenly.) Denoting the
supplier-licensor by l and the other SoC supplier by n, n’s profit maximization problem can be written
as
max
wn
X
m=1,2
(wn − c)qr
mn(wn, wl),
12

where wn denotes supplier n’s price, c is the marginal cost of SoC supply (assumed to be common to
both firms), and the residual demand function qr
mn(wn, wl) is defined as follows (and vice versa for
qr
ml(wl, wn)):
qr
mn(wn, wl) =



qm(wn) if wn < wl,
qm(wn)
2 if wn = wl,
0 otherwise .
Standard Bertrand arguments imply that each SoC supplier has an incentive to undercut its rival’s
price, as long as it exceeds its marginal cost (including any opportunity cost). When the two firms
have the same marginal cost, the Nash equilibrium involves both firms setting wn = c so that they
earn zero profits.
The supplier-licensor’s profit includes not only its SoC profits but also royalty revenues from the
two smartphone manufacturers. It faces an extra opportunity cost, in the form of reduced royalty
income, from lowering its price. In this asymmetric environment, the price equilibrium involves the
lower-cost firm (firm n) setting a price slightly below the high-cost firm’s (firm l’s) marginal cost and
capturing the entire market demand. Since the supplier-licensor earns zero profit from SoC supply,
its profit maximization problem is simply the following royalty revenue maximization problem:
max
w
ϕ
2b − d

a + bw
1 − ϕ

× 2b
2b − d

a − b − d
1 − ϕw

.
Leaving only the multiplicative terms containing w, we can rewrite the problem as
max
w

a + bw
1 − ϕ

a − b − d
1 − ϕw

.
The first-order condition for profit maximization by the supplier-licensor is
b
1 − ϕ

a − b − d
1 − ϕw

− b − d
1 − ϕ

a + bw
1 − ϕ

= 0,
which simplifies to ad(1 − ϕ) = 2bw(b − d). Solving this for w yields the equilibrium price as
w = ad(1 − ϕ)
2b(b − d) . (3)
Equation (3) indicates that the equilibrium SoC price is a decreasing function of the royalty rate
charged to smartphone manufacturers. This implies that an exogenous reduction in the royalty rate,
such as the one imposed by the NDRC, has the effect of increasing the SoC price.
In this simple model, downstream product prices are independent of the royalty rate ϕ. This can
be seen by plugging equation (3) into (2) to obtain the following equation, which does not contain ϕ:
p∗
m = 1
2b − d

a + ad
2(b − d)

. (4)
Importantly, our independence result embodied in equation (4) suggests that the effect of a reduction
in ϕ on downstream prices is ambiguous in more complex models – for instance, one where the
upstream products are product-differentiated. This is because the reduction in ϕ has two opposing
effects. On the one hand, the resulting increase in SoC price (through equation (3)) raises smartphone
manufacturers’ marginal cost, which exerts upward pressure on smartphone prices. On the other hand,
13

the reduction in ϕ increases the marginal revenue of smartphone manufacturers, which incentivizes
them to increase supply by lowering price. This can be seen by partially differentiating equation (2)
with respect to ϕ to obtain ∂pm
∂ϕ = bw
(2b−d)(1−ϕ)2 > 0. Another interpretation of this effect is a reduction
in the “perceived marginal cost” of smartphone manufacturers. This can be seen from the downstream
firms’ reaction function in equation (1), where w
1−ϕ can be thought of as a perceived marginal cost
that increases with ϕ. The existence of these opposing effects imply that the directional impact of an
exogenous reduction on smartphone prices remains an empirical question.
As for the validity of the NDRC’s theory of harm mentioned at the beginning of this section,
there is insufficient information in the agency’s decision to conclude that Qualcomm’s elevated royalty
rates caused smartphone manufacturers’ costs to increase. On the one hand, the elevated royalty
rates are likely to have increased smartphone manufacturers’ perceived marginal costs, an effect that
has been claimed in the NDRC decision (as well as in the FTC’s complaint against Qualcomm in
the U.S. case). On the other hand, the elevated royalty rates are likely to have reduced SoC prices
(as expressed by equation (3)), both for Qualcomm chips and rival products, exerting downward
pressure on smartphone manufacturers’ marginal costs. 36 Thus, it appears that the NDRC’s claim –
that Qualcomm’s elevated royalty rates caused an increase in smartphone prices – was made without
accounting for all the economic forces at play.
36Importantly, this possibility was mentioned in the appellate court decision in FTC, 969 F.3d, at 1000-1001.
14

3 Data
Our data are sourced from GfK China’s Market Audit Survey for the Chinese smartphone market.
The original dataset covers all smartphones sold in 20 cities as well as online between 2011 and 2018.37
In our empirical analysis, we restrict attention to sales at physical stores and do not use data from
online sales.38 We also do not use data for the two cities of Shenzhen and Guangdong, because the
sales volumes in these cities were extremely large – almost 4 times their population. It is possible that
sales figures for these cities contain de facto wholesale transactions which were resold to other regions
of China or exported
The resulting dataset, which we used to estimate demand, covers 675 smartphone manufacturers,
9,593 smartphone models, 22 processor suppliers, and 438 processor models. For each smartphone
model, we have information on the number of units sold, average price, and various attributes such as
cellular standard(s), type of operating system, display size, and the identity of the SoC or processor
installed (supplier and model). Summary statistics of the data are presented in Table 1. All monetary
figures were deflated to 2011 prices using the consumer price index.
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean S.D. Min Max
Sales Units (’000) 1 .64 8 .27 0.00 1351.3
Price (RMB in 2011 prices) 1344 1322 60 27,999
cdmaOne 0 .11 0 .32 0 1
CDMA2000 0 .39 0 .49 0 1
WCDMA 0 .51 0 .50 0 1
TD-SCDMA 0 .52 0 .50 0 1
LTE 0 .44 0 .50 0 1
Display Size (inch) 4 .63 0 .84 1 6.98
OS:iOS 0 .02 0 .14 0 1
OS:Android 0 .94 0 .25 0 1
OS:Windows 0 .02 0 .15 0 1
OS:Symbian 0 .01 0 .11 0 1
OS:Other 0 .01 0 .09 0 1
Number of observations (model × city × year) 270,301
Number of markets (city × year) 168
Source: Authors’ calculation based on GfK data.
37Geographical distribution of our dataset does not fail to recover the distribution at the national level. The
Chinese Income Household Project dataset, a representative panel household survey in China, is carefully designed
to recover the distribution of income and assets in China. The 20 cities in our dataset consist of CHIPS target
provinces and nontarget one as follows: Beijing(CHIPS), Changsha(CHIPS), Chengdu(CHIPS), Chongqing(CHIPS),
Dongguan(CHIPS), Guangzhou(CHIPS), Harbin, Hefei(CHIPS), Kunming(CHIPS), Nanjing(CHIPS), Nanning, Ningbo,
Shanghai, Shenyang(CHIPS), Shenzhen(CHIPS), Shijiazhuang, Suzhou(CHIPS), Tianjin, Xiamen and Xian. We con-
ducted t-tests at the mean and variance ratios tests with regard to average wage, population, smartphone prices, and
smartphone price-wage ratio, then found no significant differences existed except a t-test of smartphone price-wage ratio.
We can regard that our geographical distribution in our dataset follows that of the CHIPS survey and, therefore, that
of a nation.
38While products sold online may compete to some extent with those sold in physical stores, we do not have information
to connect individual online purchases to specific cities. We therefore assume that online and physical stores constitute
separate markets and focus our attention on the latter.
15

4 Econometric Model
A Smartphone Demand
We assume that in each period, consumers choose whether or not to purchase a smartphone, and if
they do, the smartphone product generating the highest utility is chosen. The conditional indirect
utility uijt of consumer i purchasing product j in market t is specified as
uijt = −αpjt + β′xjt + ξjt + νijt, (5)
where pjt is the price of product j in market t, xjt is the vector of observable attributes of product
j in market t, ξjt denotes the effect of unobserved product characteristics, and νijt is an error term
specific to each consumer. xjt contains observed product characteristics as well as dummy variables
representing combinations of smartphone brands and SoC suppliers. In the following, we use the
shorthand δjt := −αpjt + β′xjt + ξjt to denote the portion of indirect utility that does not vary across
consumers, and call it “mean utility”.
We assume a two-level choice structure, where products are grouped into generations of cellular
standards, as well as into brand types within each generation (see Figure 3). To estimate the demand
system, we assume that the error termνijt has a three-component structure conforming to the two-level
nested logit model.39 Suppose that product j belongs to a cellular standard of generation g ∈ {2, 3, 4}
and that its brand is of typeb ∈ {large, small}, where a “large” brand is defined as one whose maximum
annual sales volume during 2011-2018 was 1 million units or more. Suppressing the consumer and
market subscripts for brevity, we assume that νj is structured as follows:40
νj = εg + (1 − σ1)εgb + (1 − σ1)(1 − σ2)εgbj . (6)
For notational convenience, we use the shorthand 1 − λ := (1 − σ1)(1 − σ2), and assume that σ1
and σ2 both lie on the unit interval. This implies that 0 ≤ σ1 ≤ λ ≤ 1. The product-specific error
component εgbj is assumed to be i.i.d. with a standard Gumbel distribution. The other two error
components are assumed to have specific distributions that lead to the two-level nested logit model. 41
λ represents the degree to which a consumer’s unobserved preference for smartphone products are
correlated within the same brand type for a given generation, while σ1 represents the degree to which
unobserved preferences are correlated within the same generation. 42
Under our distributional assumptions, an individual consumer’s choice probability of smartphone
product j, conditional on the consumer choosing generation g and brand type b, is derived as
39Other papers that use the two-level nested logit model include Verboven (1996), Chatterjee, Kubo, and Pingali
(2015), Bj¨ ornerstedt and Verboven (2016), and Ciliberto, Moschini, and Perry (2019).
40This notation partly follows Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985). Each error component is assumed to vary across
consumers and markets.
41Specifically, we assume εgb is distributed such that (1 − σ1)εgb + maxj′∈Jgb [δj′ + (1 − λ)εgbj′ ] is i.i.d. Gumbel with
location and scale parameters

Igb, 1
1−σ1

, where Igb is the inclusive value for brand b in generation g, as defined in
equation (8). We also assume εg is distributed such that εg + maxb′∈Bg
n
(1 − σ1)εgb′ + maxj′∈Jgb′ [δj′ + (1 − λ)εgb′j′ ]
o
is i.i.d. Gumbel with location and scale parameters ( Ig, 1), where Ig is the inclusive value for generation g, as defined
in equation (9).
42From equation (6), we see that νj is perfectly correlated within the same brand type and generation when λ = 1,
with the correlation decreasing as λ approaches zero. Similarly, νj is perfectly correlated within the same generation
when σ1 = 1, but the correlation drops as σ1 falls toward zero.
16

Figure 3: Nesting Structure of Demand Model
sj|gb =
exp
 δj
1−λ

P
j′∈Jgb exp
 δj′
1−λ
,
where Jgb is the set of all products belonging to generation g and brand type b. The probability that
brand type b is chosen, conditional on generation g being chosen, is derived as
sb|g =
hP
j′∈Jgb exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
P
b′∈Bg
hP
j′∈Jgb′ exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
,
where Bg is the set of all brand types in generation g. Finally, the probability of generation g being
chosen is
sg =
P
b′∈Bg
hP
j′∈Jgb′ exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
1−σ1
1 + P
g′∈G
P
b′∈B′g
hP
j′∈Jg′b′ exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
1−σ1
,
where G is the set of all generations. Combining these results, the unconditional market share of
smartphone product j is expressed as follows:
17

sj =
exp
 δj
1−λ

P
j′∈Jgb exp
 δj′
1−λ
 ×
hP
j′∈Jgb exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
P
b′∈Bg
hP
j′∈Jgb′ exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
×
P
b′∈Bg
hP
j′∈Jgb′ exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
1−σ1
1 + P
g′∈G
P
b′∈B′g
hP
j′∈Jg′b′ exp
 δj′
1−λ
i1−σ2
1−σ1
. (7)
Following Ben-Akiva and Lerman (1985) and Train (2009), let us define the inclusive values for
each choice level as follows:
Inclusive value for brand type b in generation g : Igb := (1 − λ) ln
X
j′∈Jgb
exp
 δj′
1 − λ

. (8)
Inclusive value for generation g : Ig := (1 − σ1) ln
X
b′∈Bg
exp
 Igb′
1 − σ1

. (9)
Igb represents the consumer’s “expected utility” after generation g and brand type b have been cho-
sen.43 Similarly, Ig represents the consumer’s “expected utility” after generation g has been chosen.44
Using these definitions, equation (7) can be rewritten as
sj =
exp
 δj
1−λ

P
j′∈Jgb exp
 δj′
1−λ
 ×
exp
 Igb
1−σ1

P
b′∈Bg exp
 Igb′
1−σ1
 × exp (Ig)
1 + P
g′∈G exp (Ig′). (10)
This representation makes clear that the unconditional market share is a product of three logit prob-
abilities: that of choosing product j from all products in Jgb, that of choosing brand type b from all
brand types in Bg, and that of choosing generation g.
After applying the steps described in Appendix A to the components of equation (10), our esti-
mating equation for the two-level nested logit model is derived as follows:
ln(sj) − ln(s0) = δj + λ ln(sj|gb) + σ1 ln(sb|g)
= −αpj + β′xj + λ ln(sj|gb) + σ1 ln(sb|g) + ξj,
(11)
where s0 is the market share of the outside good.
43The consumer’s maximal utility from purchasing a product belonging to brand type b in generation g, net of the
error components whose values are constant within the choice set, is max j′∈Jgb [δj′ + (1 − λ)εgbj′ ]. Given that the
maximand has a Gumbel distribution with parameters

δj′ , 1
1−λ

, this quantity has a distribution whose mode is
(1 − λ) lnP
j′∈Jgb
exp
 δj′
1−λ

.
44The consumer’s maximal utility from purchasing a product belonging to generation g, net of the error component
whose value is constant within the choice set, is maxb′∈Bg
n
(1 − σ1)εgb′ + maxj′∈Jgb′ [δj′ + (1 − λ)εgb′j′ ]
o
. Given that the
term in braces has a Gumbel distribution with parameters

Igb, 1
1−σ1

(see footnote 41), this quantity has a distribution
whose mode is (1 − σ1) lnP
b′∈Bg exp
 Igb′
1−σ1

.
18

B Supply
We begin by defining the set of all smartphone manufacturers byM and the set of all SoC manufactur-
ers by N. Smartphone manufacturer m’s portfolio of products is assumed to be given exogenously and
denoted by Jm. The set of all smartphones is J := ∪m∈MJm, and the total number of smartphones
is J. Similarly, SoC manufacturer n’s portfolio of products is Kn, the set of all SoCs is K := ∪n∈N Kn,
and the total number of SoCs is K. The function m(j) returns the manufacturer of smartphone j,
and n(k) returns the manufacturer of SoC k. We define an “allocation vector” a of length J, which
contains the SoC identities for each smartphone, so that if smartphone j uses SoC k, the jth element
of a is aj = k.
We assume that the allocation vector a is exogenously given, meaning that we do not model how
transaction pairings between smartphone manufacturers and their SoC suppliers are formed. 45 Mar-
ket outcomes are assumed to be determined through a static two-stage game. In the first stage, SoC
manufacturers engage in a Bertrand game to set linear prices for their products (Berto Villas-Boas,
2007; Bonnet and Dubois, 2010). In the second stage, smartphone manufacturers set the retail prices
for their products, taking the prices of SoCs as given and incorporating those prices into marginal
costs.46
Smartphone Prices. In the second stage, smartphone manufacturer m’s profit maximization problem
can be expressed as follows, where the market subscripts have been suppressed for brevity:
max
pj,j∈Jm
X
j∈Jm
[(1 − ϕj)pj − waj − mcs
j]Msj(p). (12)
ϕj is the effective per-unit royalty rate for smartphone j charged by Qualcomm, pj is the retail price
of smartphone j, waj is the price of the SoC installed in smartphone j, mcs
j is the marginal cost
for smartphone j excluding the cost of SoC, and M is market size. p is a J-dimensional vector of
all smartphone prices and sj(p) is the demand function (expressed in terms of market share) for
smartphone j. We assume the following values for ϕj:
Before 2015: ϕj =



0 if j complies only with GSM or TD-SCDMA
0.035 if j complies only with LTE (or LTE and TD-SCDMA)
0.05 otherwise
In or after 2015: ϕj =



0 if j complies only with GSM or TD-SCDMA
0.02275 if j complies only with LTE (or LTE and TD-SCDMA)
0.0325 otherwise
(13)
The first-order condition with respect to pj is
(1 − ϕj)sj(p) +
X
h∈Jm(j)
[(1 − ϕh)ph − wah − mcs
h]∂sh(p)
∂pj
= 0. (14)
45In ongoing work, we are modeling the process by which smartphone-SoC pairings are endogenously formed in the
spirit of Eizenberg (2014).
46The Chinese smartphone market is different from those in the U.S. and other countries in that the handsets are usually
not bundled with carrier contracts. We therefore follow Wang (2023) in assuming that smartphone manufacturers directly
control the retail prices faced by consumers.
19

The first-order conditions with respect to the prices of all products can be combined into the
following equation:
diag(1 − ϕ)s(p) + Ωs ◦ ∆s [diag(1 − ϕ)p − Aw − mcs] = 0, (15)
where ϕ is a J-dimensional vector of royalty rates, the diag(·) function converts a vector into a diagonal
matrix, s(p) is a vector of demands for all smartphones, and mcs is a vector containing the non-SoC
marginal costs of all smartphones. w is a K-dimensional vector containing all SoC prices, and A is
an “allocation matrix” whose elements are
A(j, k) =
(
1 if aj = k
0 otherwise . (16)
Ωs is a J-by-J “smartphone ownership matrix” whose ( j, k)th element equals 1 if k ∈ Jm(j) and 0
otherwise. ∆s is a J-by-J “smartphone response matrix” whose ( j, k)th element equals ∂sk(p)
∂pj
, and ◦
represents the element-wise Hadamard product. We denote the solution to equation (15) by p∗(w, ϕ).
By manipulating equation (15), we obtain the following expression for the vector of marginal costs
faced by smartphone manufacturers:
Aw + mcs = diag(1 − ϕ)p + (Ωs ◦ ∆s)−1 [diag(1 − ϕ)s(p)] (17)
Note that the right-hand side of equation (17) is a function of p, s, ϕ, and parameters of the demand
system. Therefore, once we have the demand parameter estimates in hand, we can use equation (17)
to calculate the implied vector of smartphone manufacturers’ marginal costs.
SoC Prices. We assume that SoC manufacturers compete in prices to maximize profits. However,
there is an important difference between Qualcomm and its rival chipmakers. Whereas Qualcomm’s
rivals maximize their profits from supplying SoCs, Qualcomm maximizes the sum of its SoC profits
and royalty revenue from smartphone manufacturers. Using the subscript q to denote Qualcomm, the
profit maximization problem of SoC manufacturer n ̸= q is expressed as
max
wk,k∈Kn
X
k∈Kn
(wk − mcc
k)
X
j∈{j:aj=k}
Msj(p∗(w, ϕ)), (18)
where mcc
k is the marginal cost of SoC k and {j : aj = k} is the set of all smartphones that use SoC
k. The first-order condition for profit maximization with respect to wk is
X
j∈{j:aj=k}
sj(p∗(w, ϕ)) +
X
h∈Kn(k)
(wh − mcc
h)
X
j∈{j:aj=h}
X
l∈J
∂sj(p∗(w, ϕ))
∂pl
∂p∗
l (w, ϕ)
∂wk
= 0. (19)
Meanwhile, Qualcomm’s profit maximization problem is
max
wk,k∈Kq
X
k∈Kq
(wk − mcc
k)
X
j∈{j:aj=k}
Msj(p∗(w, ϕ)) +
X
j∈J
ϕjp∗
j (w, ϕ)Msj(p∗(w, ϕ)), (20)
with the second term in the objective function representing the royalty revenues received for all
smartphones employing the CDMA (excluding TD-SCDMA) or LTE standard, including those that
20

do not contain Qualcomm’s chips. The first-order condition for profit maximization by Qualcomm
with respect to wk is
X
j∈{j:aj=k}
sj(p∗(w, ϕ)) +
X
h∈Kq
(wh − mcc
h)
X
j∈{j:aj=h}
X
l∈J
∂sj(p∗(w, ϕ))
∂pl
∂p∗
l (w, ϕ)
∂wk
+
X
j∈J
ϕj
"
∂p∗
j (w, ϕ)
∂wk
sj(p∗(w, ϕ)) + p∗
j (w, ϕ)
X
l∈J
∂sj(p∗(w, ϕ))
∂pl
∂p∗
l (w, ϕ)
∂wk
#
= 0. (21)
To solve for SoC manufacturers’ equilibrium price-cost margins, it is necessary to combine the
first-order conditions represented by (19) and (21) into a single equation. To do so, we define two
additional objects: a K-by-K “SoC ownership matrix” Ωc, whose (j, k)th element equals 1 if k ∈ Kn(j)
and 0 otherwise; and a “price pass-through matrix” ∆p, whose ( j, k)th element equals ∂pj
∂wk
. With
these definitions in hand, the SoC manufacturers’ first-order conditions for profit maximization can
collectively be written as follows:
A′s(p∗(w, ϕ)) + diag(Ωc(kq, :))

∆′
pdiag(ϕ)s(p∗(w, ϕ)) + ∆′
p∆sdiag(ϕ)p∗(w, ϕ)

+ Ωc ◦ (∆′
p∆sA)(w − mcc) = 0, (22)
where kq ∈ Kq denotes a specific SoC supplied by Qualcomm and Ωc(kq, :) is the kqth row of Ωc.47 By
manipulating equation (22), we obtain the following expression for the vector of SoC manufacturers’
price-cost margins:
w − mcc =

Ωc ◦ (∆′
p∆sA)
−1
×

−A′s(p∗(w, ϕ)) − diag(Ωc(kq, :))

∆′
pdiag(ϕ)s(p∗(w, ϕ)) + ∆′
p∆sdiag(ϕ)p∗(w, ϕ)

. (23)
Following Berto Villas-Boas (2007) and Bonnet and Dubois (2010), the elements of the price
pass-through matrix ∆p are calculated by applying the implicit function theorem to the smartphone
manufacturers’ first-order conditions. Denoting the left-hand side of equation (14) by fj(p, w), the
kth column of ∆p is obtained as


∂p1
∂wk
...
∂pJ
∂wk

 = −


∂f1(p,w)
∂p1
. . .∂f1(p,w)
∂pJ
... ... ...
∂fJ(p,w)
∂p1
. . .∂fJ(p,w)
∂pJ


−1 

∂f1(p,w)
∂wk
...
∂fJ(p,w)
∂wk

. (24)
The partial derivatives contained in the right-hand side of equation (24) are derived as follows:
∂fj(p, w)
∂ph
=(1 − ϕj)∂sj(p)
∂ph
+ Ωs(j, h)(1 − ϕh)∂sh(p)
∂pj
+
X
l∈Jm(j)
[(1 − ϕl)pl − wal − mcs
l ] ∂2sl(p)
∂ph∂pj
, (25)
∂fj(p, w)
∂wk
=
X
l∈Jm(j)
1(al = k)∂sl(p)
∂pj
, (26)
47Note that Ωc(k, :) takes the same value for all k ∈ Kq.
21

where Ωs(j, h) represents the (j, h)th element of Ωs, and 1(·) is the indicator function. The first and
second-order partial derivatives of market share with respect to price are derived in Appendix B for
the two-level nested logit model.
5 Estimation
A Identification of Demand Parameters
To estimate equation (11), we use the following product attributes in addition to price: display size,
cellular standard (GSM, cdmaOne, CDMA2000, WCDMA, TD-SCDMA, or LTE), and operating
system (Android, Windows, Symbian, or other). We also use fixed effects for city and year. In
addition, we use indicator variables for specific pairs of smartphone brand and SoC supplier. GSM
and cdmaOne belong to second generation (2G) of cellular standards; CDMA2000, WCDMA and
TD-SCDMA belong to the third generation (3G); and LTE constitutes the fourth generation (4G).
Each of these generations constitutes a second-level nest (see Figure 3). The first level of nests are
defined as “large” and “small” brands. We place 18 brands into the large category, and construct
a dummy variable for each. 48 The iOS operating system (for iPhones) is not captured by a dummy
variable, because it is perfectly collinear with the brand dummy for Apple.
We note that the product-specific error term ξj in equation (11) is observable to smartphone
manufacturers and consumers, and may therefore affect their decisions. This implies that ξj may be
correlated with the price variable pj as well as the conditional market shares sj|gb and sb|g. To deal
with the potential endogeneity bias caused by this, we employ two classes of instrumental variables
(IVs). The first class of IV is the number of products in each market (Bj¨ ornerstedt and Verboven,
2016; Miller and Weinberg, 2017). This variable describes the competitive conditions faced by the
firms in a market, so we expect it to be correlated with prices as well as conditional market shares.
We assume that manufacturers’ product portfolios in each market are determined before the set of
ξj, j∈ Jare observed by firms, so that the number of products is uncorrelated with ξj. This variable
(and other IVs that treat all competing products equally) has the shortcoming that it does not account
for the “closeness” between products, and hence may not accurately reflect the competitive conditions
faced by firms. To address the potential problem of weak identification, we use the second class of
instrumental variables: the “differentiation IVs” initially proposed by Gandhi and Houde (2020) and
further developed by Michel, Paz y Mi˜ no, and Weiergraeber (forthcoming). This class of IVs also
captures competitive conditions, but has the advantage that it accounts for the closeness between
products in a market.
We employ two types of differentiation IVs. The first type, which can be called “quadratic differ-
entiation IVs”, are constructed by taking the quadratic distances between products i and j in terms of
continuous attributes, and summing over the j rival products to measure the competitive conditions
faced by product i (Gandhi and Houde, 2020). In our application, we use the display size of smart-
phones as the continuous attribute. The second type, which can be called “promotion differential IVs”,
are constructed by summing over the promotion activities of rival products j that fall within a certain
distance range (in terms of a continuous product attribute) from product i (Michel, Paz y Mi˜ no, and
48The following brands are placed in the large brand category: A1, C1, G1, H1, H2, H3, H4, K1, L1, L2, M1, M2,
M3, N1, O1, S1, V1, and Z1. The baseline (omitted) brand for estimation purposes is “other brands”, which contains
all brands belonging to the small brand category.
22

Weiergraeber, forthcoming). We use the natural logarithm of the sum of the number of city-markets
in which product j is sold as a proxy for its promotion activities. The two types of differentiation IVs
are expressed as
Quadratic Differentiation IV: zq
it =
X
j∈J
(dx
ij)2,
Promotion Differentiation IV: zp
it =
X
j∈J
1(clb < |dx
ij| < cub) × nj,
where dx
ij = xi −xj measures the distance between products i and j in terms of the continuous product
attribute x. clb and cub are the lower bound and upper bound, respectively, of the distance range. In
our application, we use the following pairs for ( clb, cub):

0, maxj(dij)
3

and
maxj(dij)
3 , 2 maxj(dij)
3

. nj
is the number of city-markets where product j is sold.
We estimate equation (11), subject to instrumental variables, using the generalized method of
moments (GMM).
B Estimation Results
Tables 2 and 3 display our estimates for the two-level nested logit demand system. Starting with Table
2, the price coefficient α is -0.001 and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The parameter
λ, which represents the degree to which consumers’ unobserved utility is correlated across products
within the same brand type for a given generation, is 0.398 and statistically significant. The parameter
σ1, representing the degree to which unobserved utility is correlated within the same generation, is
also statistically significant at 0.094. As expected, the estimate for σ1 is smaller than that for λ.
Turning to the product attributes, we find that larger display size yields higher utility. We also
find that 3G standards (CDMA2000, WCDMA, and TD-SCDMA) generate higher utility than 2G
standards (GSM and cdmaOne), and that LTE generates even greater utility. Consumers are found
to prefer the Android operating standard over Windows, while the Symbian operating system is found
to generate higher utility than Android. As shown in Table 3, Apple smartphones (which exclusively
use the iOS operating system) generate greater utility than the baseline category, which is defined as
“small smartphone brands using the Android operating system and containing SoCs from suppliers
other than Qualcomm, H, M, and SP”. We cannot separately identify the brand effect of Apple and
the operating system effect of iOS.
The other coefficient estimates in Table 3 show that consumers receive higher utility from smart-
phone products supplied by large brands, relative to smaller brands in the “other brands” category.
For the smartphone brands marked with a hash symbol (C1, H1, H2, O1, and V1), consumers receive
similar utility from products containing Qualcomm SoCs and those containing SoCs from M. This
suggests that for these brands, Qualcomm is in close competition with M.
23

Table 2: Demand Estimates (1): Overall
Coefficient S.E.
price: α −0.001∗∗∗ (0.000)
ln(sj|bg): λ 0.398∗∗∗ (0.026)
ln(sb|g): σ1 0.094∗∗ (0.043)
Display size(inch) 0 .635∗∗∗ (0.031)
Cellular standard (GSM = 0 )
cdmaOne 0 .101∗∗∗ (0.016)
CDMA2000 0 .920∗∗∗ (0.047)
WCDMA 0 .967∗∗∗ (0.056)
TD-SCDMA 0 .958∗∗∗ (0.052)
LTE 1 .486∗∗∗ (0.096)
Operating System (Android = 0)
OS:Windows −0.442∗∗∗ (0.034)
OS:Symbian 0 .462∗∗∗ (0.065)
OS:Other −0.076 (0.050)
Smartphone brand dummies × processor brand dummies
(See Table 3)
Year dummies Yes
City dummies Yes
Constant −9.949∗∗∗ (0.234)
N 270,301
R2 0.586
Hansen′s J chi2(1) = 7.571 p = 0.006
Note 1: Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p <0.1, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.
Note 2: Dummy for iOS of Apple is dropped as it is identical to Apple brand dummy.
24

Table 3: Demand Estimates (2): Coefficients of Smartphone Brand × SoC Supplier Dummies
SoC supplier Qualcomm M H SP Other suppliers
Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E. Coef. S.E.
Smartphone brand
A1 6.177 (.232)
C1 1 .567# (.026) 1 .597# (.038) 2 .116 (.037) 1 .368 (.035)
G1 1 .617 (.054) 2 .167 (.029) 1 .932 (.097) 1 .810 (.083)
H1 1 .809# (.021) 1 .815# (.033) 3 .538 (.088) 1 .639 (.074) 1 .438 (.058)
H2 1 .964# (.038) 1 .815# (.052) 2 .255 (.028)
H3 2 .855 (.068) 1 .461 (.243) 3 .010 (.102)
H4 0 .916 (.059) 0 .675 (.082) 1 .463 (.098) 0 .474 (.095)
K1 0 .936# (.054) 1 .110# (.082) 1 .380 (.063) 1 .192 (.059)
L1 1 .438 (.032) 1 .815 (.022) 2 .071 (.061) 1 .631 (.053)
L2 1 .224 (.092) 1 .644 (.023)
M1 2 .107 (.025) 1 .800 (.048) 2 .989 (.104)
M2 1 .972 (.066) 1 .589 (.037) 2 .183 (.065)
M3 2 .040 (.052) 1 .740 (.223) 2 .621 (.081)
N1 3 .579 (.094) 1 .740 (.223) 2 .032 (.063)
O1 3 .063# (.056) 3 .094# (.060) 2 .306 (.191)
S1 3 .181 (.078) 2 .343 (.103) 2 .568 (.075) 3 .181 (.104)
V1 2 .925# (.047) 2 .829# (.051)
Z1 1 .042# (.044) 1 .161# (.046) 1 .628 (.089) 1 .038 (.058)
Other brands −0.017 (.015) −0.070 (.013) 0 .030 (.024) –
Note 1: Standard errors in parentheses.
Note 2: All coefficient estimates are statistically significant with p values lower than 0.01, except terms Other brands× Qualcomm
(p = 0.286) and Other brands× SP (p = p.220)
Note 3: The smartphone brands marked with # are those for which the coefficient on the brand-supplier dummy for Qualcomm is
similar to that on the brand-supplier dummy for M (in the sense that the difference between the two is less than 0.15).
25

Table 4: Estimated Own Price Elasticities
Mean S.D. Min Max
Smartphone brand
A1 −8.2 3 .2 −21.5 −0.10
H1+H2 −2.8 2 .3 −31.9 −0.24
M1 −2.4 1 .3 −10.0 −0.41
M2 −2.2 1 .1 −7.1 −0.17
O1 + V1 −3.2 1 .5 −17.1 −0.72
S1 −4.3 4 .2 −43.8 −0.35
Table 4 summarizes the estimated own-price elasticities of demand for selected smartphone brands.
The mean and standard deviation are taken over products and markets. The mean own-price elasiticity
varies between -8.2 for A1 and -2.2 for M2.
C Smartphone Marginal Costs
Using our demand estimates, we are able to calculate the implied marginal costs of smartphones, in-
clusive of SoC prices, using equation (17). Figure 4 plots the mean of the implied marginal costs, taken
separately by cellular standard and SoC source (Qualcomm or non-Qualcomm). For the three stan-
dards in which Qualcomm has a large patent portfolio and charges royalties – CDMA2000, WCDMA,
and LTE – there appears to be a slight uptick in marginal costs after 2015 for smartphones containing
Qualcomm chips, against a trend of lowering marginal costs.
Figure 4: Implied Marginal Costs for Smartphone Manufacturers
26

6 Counterfactual Analysis
A Estimating the Impact of the NDRC Intervention
The antitrust branch of the Chinese government (NDRC) found in February 2015 that Qualcomm’s
licensing practices for its SEPs covering the cdmaOne, CDMA2000, WCDMA, and LTE standards
violated the country’s Anti-Monopoly Law. As part of the remedies, Qualcomm was ordered to
effectively reduce the royalty rates it charges on smartphone sales. This is reflected in equation (13),
which shows that the effective royalty rates on smartphones compliant with the cdmaOne, CDMA2000,
and WCDMA standards were reduced from 5 percent to 3.25 percent, while those on smartphones
compliant only with the LTE standard (or only with the LTE and TD-SCDMA standards) were
reduced from 3.5 percent to 2.275 percent.
In our counterfactual analysis, we envision a hypothetical scenario where the NDRC did not
intervene in this manner. Thus, we allow Qualcomm’s royalty rates to remain at pre-2015 levels
(5 percent for smartphones compliant with cdmaOne, CDMA2000, and WCDMA; 3.5 percent for
smartphones compliant only with LTE, or only with LTE and TD-SCDMA) for the years 2015 and
beyond. We calculate the counterfactual equilibrium, for each city in 2018, by finding the vector of
price-cost margins for SoC suppliers such that the first-order conditions in equation (23) are satisfied
under the hypothetical scenario. This is shown in equation (27), where ϕcf denotes Qualcomm’s
royalty rates under the hypothetical scenario, and ∆ w is the change in SoC prices required to satisfy
SoC suppliers’ first-order conditions for profit maximization.
w + ∆w − mcc =

Ωc ◦ (∆′
p∆sA)
−1
×
n
− A′s

p∗

w + ∆w, ϕcf

− diag(Ωc(kq, :))
×
h
∆′
pdiag

ϕcf

s

p∗

w + ∆w, ϕcf

+ ∆′
p∆sdiag

ϕcf

p∗

w + ∆w, ϕcf
io
(27)
While our model allows us to identify SoC suppliers’ price-cost margins, data limitations preclude
the separate identification of SoC prices and suppliers’ marginal costs. Under the assumption that SoC
suppliers’ marginal costs are constant, however, we can identify the required change in SoC prices ∆w,
because it is equivalent to the required change in SoC suppliers’ price-cost margins. Thus, our estimate
for the NDRC intervention’s effect on SoC prices is given by −∆w, and its effect on smartphone
manufacturers’ marginal costs is given by −A∆w (recall that A maps SoCs to smartphones).
Using these results, we can calculate the change in smartphone prices caused by the NDRC in-
tervention as p∗(w, ϕ) − p∗  
w + ∆w, ϕcf 
, where p∗  
w + ∆w, ϕcf 
is the solution to the first-order
conditions for smartphone manufacturers’ profit maximization under the counterfactual, given by:
diag(1 − ϕ)s(p) + Ωs ◦ ∆s
h
diag

1 − ϕcf

p − A(w + ∆w) − mcs
i
= 0. (28)
When solving (28) for p, we estimate smartphone manufacturers’ marginal costs under the counter-
factual, A(w + ∆w) + mcs, by adding A∆w to our original marginal cost estimates obtained from
equation (17).
27

Figure 5: Changes Due to NDRC Intervention: Beijing, 2018
(a) Smartphone marginal costs
 (b) Smartphone prices
(c) Smartphone units sold
 (d) SoC price-cost margins
Source: Authors’ estimation.
Note: The histograms in panels (a) through (c) show the distribution of smartphone products, while the histogram in
panel (d) shows the distribution of SoC products.
B Results
Intervention Impact in a Representative Market. The histograms in panels (a) through (c) of Figure
5 show the NDRC intervention’s effect on the costs, prices, and quantities of smartphone products
sold in Beijing in 2018. Panel (a) reveals that, while the impact on smartphone marginal costs varied
across products, it was almost always positive. This conforms with our theoretical prediction from
Section 2D that an exogenous reduction in royalty rates causes an increase in SoC prices. The same
effect is evident in panel (d), which shows that the intervention had a largely positive impact on SoC
suppliers’ price-cost margins.
Meanwhile, panel (b) shows that the intervention’s impact on smartphone prices was mostly nega-
tive. This implies that the price-lowering effect of the royalty reduction – via a reduction in smartphone
manufacturers’ perceived marginal costs – tended to overwhelm the increase in SoC prices caused by
the intervention. As a result, for a large number of smartphone products, sales volume increased as
28

a result of the intervention, as evidenced in panel (c). These results are mirrored in the other cities
covered by our dataset.49
Effect on Welfare Measures. Table 5 summarizes our simulation results by city. Column 1 shows
that the weighted average change in smartphone marginal costs was positive in every city, ranging
from 0.871 to 1.206 percent. This confirms our theoretical prediction in Section 2D that an exogenous
reduction in the royalty rate increases the price of SoCs. Meanwhile, column 2 reveals that the
weighted average change in smartphone prices was negative in every city. While the magnitude of
price reduction was small, ranging between −0.376 and −0.736 percent (which is understandable
given that the change in royalties is small relative to smartphone prices), the consistently negative
sign supports the NDRC’s central theory of harm that Qualcomm’s elevated royalty rates caused
smartphone prices to increase.
Consumer surplus increased in every city as a result of the NDRC intervention, as is evident from
column 4. As shown in column 3, the magnitude of the consumer surplus increase, measured in per-
smartphone unit terms, varies from RMB 9.7 to 25.6 ( $1.47 to 3.87 at the prevailing exchange rate)
per year. This amounts to 0.35 to 0.92 percent of the quantity-weighted average price of smartphones
in 2018 (RMB 2,793) – a small but non-negligible increase.
With regard to the impact on firm profits, the effect on SoC suppliers’ profit (disregarding the
effect on Qualcomm’s royalty revenues for now) was positive. Column 5 shows that the combined
profits from SoC supply (including Qualcomm’s) increased in every city. This is unsurprising, given
that most SoCs experienced a price increase, and the general decrease in smartphone prices meant
that the sales volume of SoCs tended to increase. The increase in SoC profits was greater than the
increase in consumer surplus, ranging from 129 percent of the consumer surplus increase in Beijing,
to 219 percent of the consumer surplus increase in Nanning.
The overall effect on smartphone manufacturers’ profits was also positive in every city (column 6),
although it was smaller than the effect on SoC suppliers’ profits. The intervention allowed smartphone
manufacturers to earn higher profits, despite having to pay higher SoC prices and charging lower prices
for their smartphones, because their royalty payments to Qualcomm decreased substantially. This is
seen in column 7, which shows that the reduction in Qualcomm’s royalty revenue was quite large.
By summing up the results in columns 4 through 7, we obtain city-wise estimates for the NDRC
intervention’s effect on total surplus (column 8). It is positive in every city, ranging from RMB 30
million per year in Xiamen to RMB 376 million per year in Beijing.
49Histograms for the other cities are available from the authors upon request.
29

Table 5: Welfare Effects of NDRC Intervention: Changes by City in 2018
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Smartphone Smartphone Consumer surplus Overall consumer SoC profit Smartphone Qualcomm’s Total surplusmarginal cost price per smartphone surplus profit royalty revenue
City (weighted average, %) (weighted average, %) (RMB) (million RMB) (million RMB) (million RMB) (million RMB) (million RMB)
Beijing 0 .871 −0.720 23 .7 213 275 218 −360 376
Changsha 1 .182 −0.514 15 .1 24 41 30 −53 43
Chengdu 0 .964 −0.662 20 .4 73 108 84 −133 133
Chongqing 1 .176 −0.504 14 .5 43 80 60 −95 88
Guangzhou 1 .096 −0.545 15 .4 66 103 83 −134 119
Harbin 1 .050 −0.609 19 .3 42 63 50 −75 80
Hefei 1 .158 −0.521 14 .5 25 41 30 −53 42
Kunming 1 .211 −0.447 11 .8 32 64 47 −81 60
Nanjing 0 .878 −0.736 25 .6 74 97 74 −124 121
Nanning 1 .309 −0.376 9 .7 16 36 28 −42 37
Ningbo 1 .130 −0.548 16 .4 22 37 27 −47 39
Shanghai 0 .901 −0.702 22 .7 196 258 204 −338 320
Shenyang 1 .206 −0.493 14 .6 29 50 37 −66 51
Shijiazhuang 1 .153 −0.536 16 .1 20 33 25 −42 37
Suzhou 0 .948 −0.678 21 .6 45 62 48 −80 75
Tianjin 1 .058 −0.597 17 .5 70 107 82 −138 122
Xiamen 1 .152 −0.519 14 .5 18 31 22 −42 30
Xian 1 .136 −0.520 14 .8 36 61 47 −79 66
18 cities’ total 1 .085 −0.570 16 .8 1047 1551 1204 −1991 1811
Note: Changes in smartphone marginal cost (column 1) and smartphone price (column 2) are presented as quantity-weighted averages over products.
Total surplus (column 8) is calculated as the sum of columns 4 to 7.
30

Figure 6: Effect of NDRC Intervention on Smartphones: By SoC Source
(a) Smartphone marginal costs
 (b) Smartphone prices
(c) Smartphone profits
 (d) SoC profits
Note: Each dot represents a smartphone product, with simple averages taken over the 18 cities shown in Table 5.
Heterogeneous Impact on Smartphone Manufacturers and SoC Suppliers. The NDRC intervention had
a heterogenous effect on smartphone manufacturers depending on their source of SoCs. As shown in
panel (a) of Figure 6, smartphone products containing Qualcomm SoCs tended to experience a larger
increase in marginal cost (due to higher SoC prices), relative to those containing non-Qualcomm SoCs,
and as a result their prices were more likely to increase (panel (b)). As a consequence, smartphones
containing Qualcomm chips were more likely to experience a reduction in profit, relative to smart-
phones containing non-Qualcomm chips (panel (c)). These results suggest that Qualcomm had a
greater incentive than other chipmakers to increase the price of SoCs after the intervention. While the
reduction in royalty rates incentivized all SoC suppliers to increase their prices in the face of increased
derived demand from smartphone manufacturers, it appears that Qualcomm’s optimal response was
to raise its SoC prices even further, possibly to stem the fall in royalty revenue. 50
This effect can be explained using the theoretical model in Section 2D. Equation (3) shows that
the optimal SoC price for a supplier-licensor increases in response to an exogenous reduction in the
50In addition, all SoC suppliers, including Qualcomm, are incentivized to increase their prices in response to a price
increase by rivals; this strategic complementarity is a hallmark of price competition models.
31

Table 6: Impact of NDRC Intervention on SoC Suppliers’ Profits in 2018
SoC Supplier H M Qualcomm S
Change in mil. RMB
Profit from SoC supply 391 .5 82 .4 367 .8 2 .6
Royalty revenue - - −1991.5 -
Percentage change
Variable profit from SoC supply 4 .9 2 .4 3 .7 3 .5
Variable profit and royalty revenue - - −6.8 -
Note: Based on 12,502 observations in 18 cities.
royalty rate ϕ. The underlying mechanism is as follows. To begin with, the supplier-licensor sets its
SoC price w with the objective of maximizing royalty revenues, which is equivalent to maximizing
smartphone revenues (since royalties are a fixed percentage of revenues). Meanwhile, a reduction in
ϕ enables smartphone manufacturers to lower their prices, as implied by equation (2), and this tends
to increase the supply of smartphones. Given that smartphone revenues were maximized to begin
with, a supply increase would cause a reduction in smartphone revenues. The supplier-licensor tries
to prevent such a reduction by increasing its SoC price. 51
The higher SoC prices after the intervention, coupled with the tendency of SoC sales volume to
increase (as a result of lower smartphone prices), increased the profits from SoC supply. Panel (d) of
Figure 6 as well as Table 6 illustrate this effect for individual SoC suppliers. H was the largest gainer;
its variable profit (defined as revenue minus variable cost) increased by 4.9 percent as a result of the
intervention. Qualcomm’s variable profit increased as well, but this was overwhelmed by the reduction
in royalty revenue (which amounted to RMB 1.99 billion in 2018), causing the sum of Qualcomm’s
variable profit from SoC supply and royalty revenue to decrease by 6.8 percent.
The SoC suppliers’ heterogeneous response to the intervention translates into a differential impact
among smartphone manufacturers. As shown in panel (a) of Figure 7, smartphone brands H1 and H2
(which are owned by the same company) tended to experience a relatively small percentage increase
in marginal cost after the NDRC intervention, while brand M1 tended to experience a large increase.
This can be attributed to a difference in their SoC sourcing strategies. The owner of H1 and H2 has an
SoC subsidiary, called H, from which the two brands source much of their SoC requirements. 52 This
has allowed H1 and H2 to limit their dependence on Qualcomm products.53 To a large extent, H1 and
H2 were able to shield themselves from the drastic increase in SoC price by Qualcomm, so that most
of their smartphone products experienced a price reduction in response to the intervention, as seen in
panel (b) of Figure 7. As a result, H1 and H2 were able to increase their profits, as is apparent from
panel (c) of Figure 7. From the first column of Table 7, we can see that H1 and H2’s profit increase
was driven by the large reduction in royalty payments to Qualcomm; H1 and H2’s royalty payments
decreased by 32.8 percent as a result of the intervention, and other smartphone brands’ payments
51Note, from equation (2), that smartphone prices are increasing in the SoC price at the equilibrium.
52In 2018, 72.1 percent of H1’s products and 84.2 percent of H2’s products in the 4G category used SoCs supplied by
H.
53To illustrate, only 22.6 percent of H1’s products and 13.9 percent of H2’s products in the 4G category used SoCs
supplied by Qualcomm in 2018.
32

Figure 7: Effect of NDRC Intervention on Smartphones: By Smartphone Brand
(a) Smartphone marginal costs
 (b) Smartphone prices
(c) Smartphone profits
 (d) Royalty payments to Qualcomm
Note: Each dot represents a smartphone product, with simple averages taken over the 18 cities shown in Table 5.
Brands H1 and H2, and brands O1 and V1 are respectively two brands owned by the same company.
experienced a similar reduction.
By contrast, brand M1 has sourced a large share of its SoC requirements from Qualcomm. 54 This
has resulted in M1’s products experiencing a large post-intervention increase in marginal cost (panel
(a) of Figure 7), and a relatively large proportion of those products experienced a price increase (panel
(b)). As a consequence, M1’s profits fell following the NDRC intervention, and this can be seen in
panel (c) of Figure 7 as well as Table 7.
Overall, the NDRC intervention’s impact on smartphone manufacturers appears to have varied
according to the following factors: (i) whether or not the smartphone manufacturer is vertically
integrated into SoC supply (as in the case of H1 and H2), and (ii) the price range of the smartphone
manufacturer’s product portfolio. With regard to the latter factor, S1 was able to lower the price for
most of its products and increase its profit, even though its reliance on Qualcomm chips was fairly high
(panels (b) and (c) of Figure 7). 55 This is because S1’s product portfolio contains a relatively large
number of high-priced smartphones, implying that the percentage increase in smartphone marginal
54In 2018, 87.4 percent of M1’s products in the 4G category used Qualcomm SoCs.
55In 2018, 87.7 percent of S1’s products in the 4G category used Qualcomm SoCs.
33

Table 7: Impact of NDRC Intervention on Smartphone Manufacturers’ Profits in 2018
Smartphone manufacturer H1+H2 M1 M2 O1+V1 S1
Change in mil. RMB
Profit from smartphone supply 359 .8 −11.3 5 .2 197 .2 30 .8
Royalty payment −579.9 −81.1 −19.7 −654.6 −67.8
Percentage change
Smartphone marginal cost 0 .7 2 .4 1 .4 1 .3 1 .1
Smartphone price −0.8 0 .4 −0.2 −0.3 −0.7
Smartphone units sold 2 .6 −2.0 −0.7 0 .3 5 .4
Variable profit 4 .5 −0.9 1 .6 2 .0 5 .9
Royalty payment −32.8 −36.6 −35.3 −35.0 −31.3
Note: The percentage change in smartphone marginal costs and prices are quantity-weighted averages.
costs was kept low (panel (a)). 56
7 Conclusion
The effect of Qualcomm’s licensing policy for its standard-essential patents (SEPs) on market outcomes
has been the subject of intense debate and legal dispute. In particular, it has been an open question
whether the elevated royalty rates charged by Qualcomm had the effect of increasing smartphone
prices, to the detriment of consumers. Our theoretical analysis revealed that elevated royalty rates
could lead to either higher or lower smartphone prices, so that the actual effect in a specific market is
an empirical question.
The 2015 intervention by China’s antitrust agency, the NDRC, lowered the effective royalty rate
that Qualcomm charges to smartphone manufacturers by 1.23 - 1.75 percentage points. We evaluated
the effect of this policy through a counterfactual analysis based on a structural econometric model
covering the vertically related markets for smartphones and SoCs. Using our estimates for the model,
we calculated SoC suppliers’ price-cost margins and smartphone prices for each city in 2018, under
the counterfactual scenario that the NDRC did not intervene. By comparing these results with the
actual outcomes, we found that the intervention increased smartphone manufacturers’ marginal costs
by around 1.1 percent on average, and that it lowered smartphone prices by around 0.6 percent on
average.
As a result, consumer surplus increased by around RMB 1 billion in 2018 in the 18 cities covered
by our analysis. SoC suppliers’ profits (excluding Qualcomm’s royalty receipts) increased by around
RMB 1.6 billion, but the increase in Qualcomm’s SoC profits was overwhelmed by the reduction in its
royalty revenue (around 2.0 billion). Smartphone manufacturers’ profits increased by around RMB 1.2
billion, but some manufacturers experienced a reduction in profit. Total surplus increased by around
RMB 1.8 billion, so that in hindsight, the intervention can be justified on static social welfare grounds.
56Further details regarding the heterogeneous impact of the intervention on SoC suppliers and smartphone manufac-
turers are available from the authors upon request.
34

References
Ben-Akiva, M., and S. Lerman. 1985. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Application to Travel
Demand. MIT Press.
Berto Villas-Boas, S. 2007. “Vertical Relationships between Manufacturers and Retailers: Inference
with Limited Data.” The Review of Economic Studies 74:625–652.
Bj¨ ornerstedt, J., and F. Verboven. 2016. “Does Merger Simulation Work? Evidence from the Swedish
Analgesics Market.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8:125–164.
Bonnet, C., and P. Dubois. 2010. “Inference on vertical contracts between manufacturers and retailers
allowing for nonlinear pricing and resale price maintenance.” RAND Journal of Economics 41:139–
164.
Chatterjee, C., K. Kubo, and V. Pingali. 2015. “The Consumer Welfare Implications of Governmental
Policies and Firm Strategy in Markets for Medicines.” Journal of Health Economics 44:255–273.
Ciliberto, F., G. Moschini, and E.D. Perry. 2019. “Valuing Product Innovation: Genetically Engineered
Varieties in US Corn and Soybeans.” RAND Journal of Economics 50:615–644.
Eizenberg, A. 2014. “Upstream Innovation and Product Variety in the U.S. Home PC Market.”Review
of Economic Studies 81:1003–1045.
Fan, Y., and G. Zhang. 2022. “The Welfare Effect of a Consumer Subsidy with Price Ceilings: The
Case of Chinese Cell Phones.” RAND Journal of Economics 53:429–449.
Gandhi, A., and J.F. Houde. 2020. “Measuring Substitution Patterns in Differentiated-Products In-
dustries.” Working paper No. w26375, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kim, C. 2020. “Incentive to Raise Rivals’ Costs: Patent Licensing in Vertically Integrated Markets.”
Journal of Economic Theory and Econometrics 31:86–96.
Lemley, M.A. 2002. “Intellectual Property Rights and Standard-Setting Organizations.” California
Law Review 90:1889–1980.
Lemley, M.A., and C. Shapiro. 2007. “Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking.” Texas Law Review
85:1991–2049.
Lerner, J., and J. Tirole. 2004. “Efficient Patent Pools.” American Economic Review 94:691–711.
Michel, C., J.M. Paz y Mi˜ no, and S. Weiergraeber. 2023. “Estimating Industry Conduct Using Promo-
tion Data - The Evolution of Pricing Behavior in the U.S. RTE Cereal Industry.” Working paper.
Miller, N.H., and M.C. Weinberg. 2017. “Understanding the Price Effects of the MillerCoors Joint
Venture.” Econometrica 85:1763–1791.
Padilla, J., and K.W. Wong-Ervin. 2017. “Portfolio Licensing to Makers of Downstream End-User
Devices: Analyzing Refusals to License FRAND-Assured Standard-Essential Patents at the Com-
ponent Level.” Antitrust Bulletin 62:494–513.
35

RCR Wireless News. 2006. “Qualcomm’s TD-SCDMA Patent Claims Bear More Weight as
China Moves Closer to Deployments.” URL: https://www.rcrwireless.com/20060313/archived-
articles/qualcomms-td-scdma-patent-claims-bear-more-weight-as-china-moves-closer-to-
deployments.
—. 2008. “TD-SCDMA Favors Domestic Chinese Vendors: But Brand Power May Favor Global Hand-
set Firms in Slow Ramp.” URL: https://www.rcrwireless.com/20080602/chips/td-scdma-favors-
domestic-chinese-vendors.
Shapiro, C. 2000. “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and Standard Set-
ting.” Innovation Policy and the Economy 1:119–150.
Train, K.E. 2009. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation . CambridgeUniversity Press.
Verboven, F. 1996. “International Price Discrimination in the European Car Market.” RAND Journal
of Economics 27:240.
Wang, P. 2023. “Product Portfolio Choices with Product Life Cycles.” Working paper.
Yang, C. 2020. “Vertical structure and innovation: A study of the SoC and smartphone industries.”
RAND Journal of Economics 51:739–785.
Yang, S., and T. Jung. 2014. “Co-evolution of Markets for Technology and Markets for Products in
Mobile Telecommunication Standards: Examination of Essential Patents for GSM, WCDMA, and
LTE Standards.” In Proceedings of PICMT ’14: Infrastructure and Service Integration . pp. 61–67.
36

Appendix A Derivation of Estimating Equation for the Two-Level
Nested Logit Demand Model
Using the definition of the inclusive value for brand type b, the choice probability of product j,
conditional on brand type b in generation g being chosen, can be rewritten as sj|gb =
exp
 δj
1−λ

exp
 Igb
1−λ
.
Taking its natural logarithm and rearranging yields
ln (sj|gb) = δj + λ ln (sj|gb) − Igb.
Similarly using the definition of the inclusive value for generation g, the choice probability of brand
type b, conditional on generation g being chosen, can be rewritten as sb|g =
exp
 Igb
1−σ1

exp
 Ig
1−σ1
. Taking its
natural logarithm and rearranging yields
ln (sb|g) = σ1 ln (sb|g) + Igb − Ig.
We also note that ln (sg) = Ig − ln [1 +P
g′∈G exp (Ig′)] and
ln (s0) = ln
"
1
1 + P
g′∈G exp (Ig′)
#
= −ln [1 +
X
g′∈G
exp (Ig′)].
Combining these results, we obtain the estimation equation in (11):
ln (sj) − ln (s0) = ln (sj|gb) + ln (sb|g) + ln (sg) − ln (s0)
= δj + λ ln (sj|gb) + σ1 ln (sb|g).
37

Appendix B Partial Derivatives of Unconditional Market Share
First-order partial derivatives.
∂sj
∂pk
=



− αsj
1−λ

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − (1 − λ)sj

if k = j
αsj
1−λ

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + (1 − λ)sk

if k ∈ Jgb, k̸= j
αsj
1−λ

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′sb′|g + (1 − λ)sk

if k ∈ Jgb′
αsjsk
if k ∈ Jg′
∂sj|gb
∂pk
=



− α
1−λsj|gb(1 − sj|gb) if k = j
α
1−λsj|gbsk|gb if k ∈ Jgb, k̸= j
0 if k /∈ Jgb
∂sb|g
∂pk
=



−α(1−σ2)
1−λ sk|gbsb|g(1 − sb|g) if k ∈ Jgb
α(1−σ2)
1−λ sk|gb′sb′|gsb|g if k ∈ Jgb′
0 if k ∈ Jg′
38

Second-order partial derivatives.
∂2sj
∂pl∂pk
=



α2sj
(1 − λ)2

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − (1 − λ)sj

×

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

−

σ2 + σ1(1 − σ2)sb|g

sj|gb(1 − sj|gb)
−σ1(1 − σ2)2s2
j|gbsb|g(1 − sb|g)

if k = l = j
− α2sj
(1 − λ)2

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

×

σ2sl|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gbsb|g + (1 − λ)sl

−

σ2 + σ1(1 − σ2)sb|g

sj|gbsl|gb
+ σ1(1 − σ2)2sj|gbsb|gsl|gb(1 − sb|g)

if k = j, l∈ {Jgb \ j}
− α2sj
(1 − λ)2

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

×

σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gb′ sb′|g + (1 − λ)sl

− σ1(1 − σ2)2sj|gbsb|gsl|gb′ sb′|g

if k = j, l∈ Jgb′
− α2sjsl
1 − λ

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

if k = j, l∈ Jg′
− α2sj
(1 − λ)2

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

×

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + (1 − λ)sk

−

σ2 + σ1(1 − σ2)sb|g

sj|gbsk|gb
+ σ1(1 − σ2)2sj|gbsb|gsk|gb(1 − sb|g)

if k ∈ {Jgb \ j}, l= j
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + (1 − λ)sk

×

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

−

σ2 + σ1(1 − σ2)sb|g

sk|gb(1 − sk|gb)
−σ1(1 − σ2)2s2
k|gbsb|g(1 − sb|g) − (1 − λ)sk

if k ∈ {Jgb \ j}, l= k
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

×

σ2sl|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gbsb|g + (1 − λ)sl

+

σ2 + σ1(1 − σ2)sb|g

sk|gbsl|gb
−σ1(1 − σ2)2sk|gbsb|gsl|gb(1 − sb|g)

if k ∈ {Jgb \ j}, l∈ {Jgb \ {j, k}}
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

×

σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gb′ sb′|g + (1 − λ)sl

+σ1(1 − σ2)2sk|gbsb|gsl|gb′ sb′|g

if k ∈ {Jgb \ j}, l∈ Jgb′ ,
α2sjsl
1−λ

σ2sk|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gbsb|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

if k ∈ {Jgb \ j}, l∈ Jg′
39

∂2sj
∂pl∂pk
=



− α2sj
(1 − λ)2

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

×

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + (1 − λ)sk

− σ1(1 − σ2)2sj|gbsb|gsk|gb′ sb′|g

if k ∈ Jgb′ , l= j
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + (1 − λ)sk

×

σ2sl|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gbsb|g + 2(1 − λ)sl

+σ1(1 − σ2)2sk|gb′ sb′|gsl|gbsb|g

if k ∈ Jgb′ , l∈ {Jgb \ j}
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + (1 − λ)sk

×

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

− σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ (1 − sk|gb′ )sb′|g
− σ1(1 − σ2)2s2
k|gb′ sb′|g(1 − sb′|g)
−(1 − λ)(1 − σ2sk|gb′ )sk

if k ∈ Jgb′ , l= k
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

×

σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gb′ sb′|g + (1 − λ)sl

+ σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sl|gb′ sb′|g
− σ1(1 − σ2)2sk|gb′ sb′|gsl|gb′ (1 − sb′|g)
+(1 − λ)σ2sksl|gb′

if k ∈ Jgb′ , l∈ {Jgb′ \ k}
α2sj
(1 − λ)2

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

×

σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gb′′ sb′′|g + (1 − λ)sl

+σ1(1 − σ2)2sk|gb′ sb′|gsl|gb′′ sb′′|g

if k ∈ Jgb′ , l∈ Jgb′′
α2sjsl
1−λ

σ1(1 − σ2)sk|gb′ sb′|g + 2(1 − λ)sk

if k ∈ Jgb′ , l∈ Jg′
−
α2sjsk
1−λ

1 − σ2sj|gb − σ1(1 − σ2)sj|gbsb|g − 2(1 − λ)sj

if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l= j
α2sjsk
1−λ

σ2sl|gb + σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gbsb|g + 2(1 − λ)sl

if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l∈ {Jgb \ j}
α2sjsk
1−λ

σ1(1 − σ2)sl|gb′ sb′|g + 2(1 − λ)sl

if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l∈ Jgb′
−
α2sjsk
1−λ

1 − σ2sk|g′b′′ − σ1(1 − σ2)sk|g′b′′ sb′′|g′ − 2(1 − λ)sk

if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l= k
α2sjsk
1−λ

σ2sl|g′b′′ + σ1(1 − σ2)sl|g′b′′ sb′′|g′ + 2(1 − λ)sl

if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l∈ {Jg′b′′ \ k}
α2sjsk
1−λ

σ1(1 − σ2)sl|g′b′′′ sb′′′|g′ + 2(1 − λ)sl

if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l∈ Jg′b′′′
2α2sjsksl if k ∈ Jg′b′′ , l∈ Jg′′
40
