1%1
RIETI Policy Discussion Paper Series 18-P-012
The Regional Innovation System in China:
Regional comparison of technology, venture financing,
and human capital focusing on Shenzhen
MOTOHASHI Kazuyuki
RIETI
The Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry
https://www.rieti.go.jp/en/

RIETI Policy Discussion Paper Series 18-P-012 July 2018  The Regional Innovation System in China: Regional comparison of technology, venture financing, and human capital focusing on Shenzhen1 MOTOHASHI Kazuyuki (RIETI and The University of Tokyo) (Abstract) Shenzhen has become a hot spot of innovation in China. In this paper, we characterize Shenzhen’s innovation by comparing it with that of Beijing and Shanghai using patent and venture investment data. First, the role of universities and public research institutions is small in Shenzhen’s innovation system as compared to Beijing and Shanghai. In contrast, private high-tech firms, such as Huawei, ZTE, and Tencent, are leading the innovation scene in Shenzhen.  Second, we find that high-tech start-ups are geographically concentrated in the Nanshan district, particularly Yuehai Jiedao, where national-level high-tech zones are located. Recently, the number of start-ups has been increasing, and local, big firms, such as ZTE, are providing the human resources for such start-up firms.  Third, inventor-disambiguated information based on patent data allows us to look at interorganizational talent movements. We find that such movements tend to occur within short distances, such as within the same district (e.g., Nanshan district).  To sum up, Shenzhen has truly become a hot spot of high-tech entrepreneurship and innovation, but the dynamics are very much regionally bound. Therefore, it is important to become a local player in order to take advantage of innovation movements in Shenzhen by means of minority investment by corporate venture capital into local start-up firms.  
                                                        1 This paper is based on the project “Empirical Analysis of Innovation Ecosystems in Advancement of the Internet of Things (IoT)” by RIETI (Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry). In addition, financial support from the JETRO Hong Kong Office on the “Shenzhen and China Innovation Survey” is acknowledged. However, the views expressed in this paper are the authorʼs and not those of these organizations.

Keywords: Regional innovation system, China, Shenzhen, Patent data 
 
RIETI Policy Discussion Papers Series is created as part of RIETI research and aims to contribute to policy discussions in a timely fashion. The views expressed in these papers are solely those of the author(s), and neither represent those of the organization to which the author(s) belong(s) nor the	Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.

2 
 
1. Introduction 
There is growing attention on Shenzhen as an innovation hub in China. Shenzhen has 
developed as the production backyard of Hong Kong, which plays the role of the 
gateway to China for foreign investments in the electronics industry. In addition, 
domestic high-tech giants, such as Huawei and ZTE (both telecommunications 
equipment producers), as well as BYD, which has grown from a battery manufacturer 
into an automotive producer, have their headquarters there. Therefore, Shenzhen has 
been ranked as a top city in China in terms of patent applications and research and 
development (R&D) investments even since the 1990s.  
However, it has only been from a few years ago that Shenzhen has been called as a 
high-tech mecca by attracting huge amounts of venture funding for high-tech 
entrepreneurship. One of the factors behind such movements has been the 
advancement of information technology, such as the Internet of Things (IoT) and 
artificial intelligence (AI), which has opened up substantial business opportunities. In 
China, the expansion of internet businesses has created new three big giants, Baidu, 
Alibaba, and Tencent (known as BAT). Tencent is based in Shenzhen and makes 
substantial contributions to local entrepreneurship activities as a source of human and 
financial capital. In addition, production facilities concentrated in Shenzhen, or the 
Pearl River Delta area, can be connected by the internet as IoT technologies advance, 
which creates new business opportunities in the area. In addition, the diffusion of the 
smartphone platform has made entrepreneurship activities easier through the 
emergence of the business-to-consumer platform (Kimura, 2016). 
There has also been a strong policy push. The growth rate of China’s economy has 
slowed recently, and the Chinese government has changed its economic policy targets 
from investment-led, high-speed growth to the quality improvement of growth, such as 
through innovation and entrepreneurship promotion by taking care of energy and 
environmental sustainability. Among these measures, the premier, Li Keqiang, 
announced the policy of “Dazhong Chuanuyue, Wanzhong Chuanxin 
(Entrepreneurship and Innovation for Everybody)”. For example, the government 
introduced venture capital (VC) funding promotion policies, such as co-financing for 
private VC funds from local government funds (Fujita, 2017). Furthermore, internet 
companies, such as BAT, are actively inventing through their corporate venture capital. 
As a result, there are some data showing that the size of VC investments in China has

3 
 
reached $100 billion, comparable to the figure in the United States. 2  
There is no question that the booming high-entrepreneurship in China and Shenzhen 
plays an important role. However, there is no statistical evidence to show what is 
going on. This paper fills this gap by comparing the innovation activities of Shenzhen 
with those of Beijing and Shanghai. I focus on the three factors of technology, 
funding, and human capital, which are important for understanding the regional 
innovation ecosystem. Specifically, the state of technological development can be 
captured by a patent database. The patent database can be used for analyzing high-tech 
talents since inventor records help us to understand the invention process at the 
individual engineer level. VC financing is analyzed using another dataset, called IT 
Juzi, the information platform of venture firms, VCs, and entrepreneurs.  
The structure of this paper is as follows. The next section provides information on 
State Intellectual Property Office (SIPO) patent database and a general description of 
technological development in China. The body section of this paper then compares 
Shenzhen with Beijing and Shanghai by using the patent database as well as VC 
financing information. Finally, the paper concludes with a summary and policy 
implications. 
2. Innovation Activities in China and the Patent Database 
2-1. Measuring innovation by patent data 
Patent databases are extensively used in empirical studies on innovation, and the 
development of databases has spread all over the world. Motohashi (2008) describes the 
use of the SIPO database for measuring technological development in China. In this 
paper’s analysis, the dataset is extended to patents published by December 2016. The 
following items are available from the patent publication information:  
 Date of application (reflects the timing of invention). 
 Title of the invention and technology classes by International Patent Classification 
code. 
 Name of the applicant (name of firm, university, etc. as the applicant of the 
invention; this information allows us to aggregate patent statistics by the type of 
                                                   
2 “VC Investment in China close to 10 trillion yen! Where is it from?”, 21 July 2017, 
JBPRESS.

4 
 
applicant, such as firm patents versus university ones).  
 Address of the applicant (allows us to aggregate patent statistics by location, such 
as from Beijing or Shenzhen). 
 Name of the inventor. 
The patent statics reflect the state of innovation activities in detail, but there are some 
drawbacks as well (Nagaoka et al., 2012). First, not all inventions are patented. Under 
the patent system, information on patent applications is published within 18 months of 
application. Therefore, there are some strategic reasons for which a firm might not file a 
patent for its invention and keeps it as a trade secret. In general, product innovations are 
more likely to be patented compared to process innovations since inventions embodied 
in new products can be more easily imitated by reverse engineering than process 
innovations, where the invention can be kept secret easily. In addition, it has been found 
that patent rights are effective for protecting inventions of some particular products, 
such as drugs, but this is not always the case for others (NISTEP, 2004).  
In addition, it should be noted that there is great heterogeneity in the quality of patents. 
For example, when we compare two firms with the same R&D investment size from the 
pharmaceutical and electronics industries, the number of patent applications will have a 
one or even two-digit order of difference (in general, electronics firms have greater 
numbers of patents). The number of very high-quality patents may also be very small 
even within the same firm (Nagaoka et al., 2012). Therefore, the simple patent counts 
may not represent innovation performance very well, and the numbers must be weighted 
by patent quality, typically the number of forward citations.  
2-2. Trend of patenting in China 
Unfortunately, citation information does not exist in the SIPO patent database, so we 
use the simple patent counts in this paper.  
Figure 2-1 compares the number of patent applications for domestic applicants and 
foreign applicants. The number of applications from foreign applicants, mainly foreign 
firms, dominated until 2005, but the number of domestic applicants surpassed foreign 
applicants on that year and increased rapidly after 2010.3 It should be noted that the 
                                                   
3 It should be noted that the decrease in 2016 occurs because of data truncation. Since 
the publication of application information takes place within 18 months after the

5 
 
number of domestic patent applications can be explained by the local government policy 
to subsidize patenting activities since the 2000s. Dang and Motohashi (2015) analyze 
such policies and find that the impacts are estimated to increase patent applications by 
30%. Therefore, even if there had not been such a policy, the application number in 
2014 would have still been over 500,000 (767,000/1.3). Therefore, the increase in 
domestic patent applications reflects the improvement of technological capability in 
China. On the other hand, the number of foreign applications is stable after 2006. Since 
large firms in developed countries carefully select the inventions to be patented 
worldwide, a stable number of patent applications from such big players may explain 
the trend of foreign applications in China.  
 
Figure 2-1: Number of patent applications by applicant type (domestic versus foreign) 
Figure 2-2 shows the share of patent applications by applicant type (individuals, firms, 
universities, and PRIs) for domestic applications. Until 2000, individual inventors 
dominated over institutional ones, such as firms and universities, but the number of firm 
                                                   
application date, the data published until the end of 2016 contain all applications by 
June 2015 but not all patents applied after that.

6 
 
applications increased in these 10 years. The increase in institutional applicants over 
individual ones can be explained by the diffusion of the employee invention system. In 
terms of the comparison between private (firm) and public (university and PRI) patents, 
private ones outnumbered those of public ones in 2005 by 1.5 times (31,562 and 19,366, 
respectively), but the ratio increased to 3 in 2015 (432,334 and 152,836, respectively). 
Therefore, the role of private firms has become important in the development of China’s 
innovation system.  
However, it should be noted that the role of the public sector, such as universities and 
PRIs, is large compared with other developed nations. For example, the number of 
public sector applications in Japan comprises about 1% of total applications. In 
addition, the share of patent applications by both firms and universities (joint 
applications) in China was 1.7% in 2014, which was significantly larger than in other 
countries. Therefore, universities and PRIs still play a relatively large role in China’s 
technology development.  
 
Figure 2-2: Share of patent applications by type (domestic applicants only) 
Finally, Figure 2-3 shows the geographical distribution of patent applications. Here the 
most detailed level of administrative distinction (district level for cities with districts 
and city level for others, about 4,000 districts and cities) is used, and the size of the

7 
 
circles reflects the number of patent applications.  
There are three big clusters found in the coastal area i.e., Beijing (Zhongancun, centered 
around the Haidian district), the Shanghai/Yangze River Delta including Suzhou and 
Hangzhou, and the Shenzhen/Pearl River Delta including Guangzhou. In addition, some 
other clustering areas are found in-land, such as in Chengdu, Chongqing, Xian, and 
Wuhan, but the sizes are relatively small compared to the large three coastal clusters.  
 
Figure 2-3: Regional distribution of patent applications 
3. The Regional Innovation Ecosystem: Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen 
3-1. Concept of the regional innovation ecosystem 
The innovation ecosystem is a hot topic in innovation studies. IoT technology diffuses 
in the market, business fields become interconnected with one another, and the focus of 
open innovation is shifting from one-to-one collaboration in a particular business to the 
creation of an ecosystem involving multiple players across various industry fields. For 
example, the traditional business structure of the automotive industry is a hierarchal one 
where a car manufacturer is located at the top, and a number of parts companies are 
found in the downstream. However, as car sharing systems, such as Uber, become 
popular, car manufacturers become incorporated as part of a system of components in a

8 
 
larger transportation service system. In order to respond to such competitive forces 
outside the car industry, an automotive firm needs to create its own ecosystem of 
transportation services with other complementary service providers, such as parking 
services and even railway transportation service providers, to create seamless 
transportation services over a long distance. In addition, autonomous driving technology 
is an essential technology component in such services. Therefore, it is also important to 
create collaborative networks with start-up firms that are strong in particular 
technologies, such as sensor and image recognition by using artificial intelligence. The 
innovation ecosystem is such that firm networks involve various players, and the 
participants have mutually beneficial relationships (Keidanren, 2017).  
Then, can such ecosystems, or networks of players, be effectively formed in a regionally 
bounded area? The answer is obviously yes, since business interactions are easily made 
within short distances as compared to parties separated by long distances. Formally, 
there are some economic externalities in the agglomeration of innovative activities. The 
previous literature discusses two types of externalities (Fujita, 2009). The first one is the 
Marshall, Arrow, and Romer type, which suggests that homogeneous types of 
management resources, such as talents and technologies, contribute to positive 
externalities in agglomeration. For example, the co-location of firms within the same 
industry attracts human resources for the specific industry from outside. In addition, 
knowledge spillovers can occur more easily among the same types of industry (Jaffe, 
1986) and where geographical distances are smaller (Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 
1993). Therefore, a firm has greater incentive to locate in a place where a large number 
of firms with the same type of technology are located. As a consequence, economic 
externalities by technology spillovers are generated by homogeneous technology and 
industry agglomeration.  
On the other hand, there is another school that stresses clusters of diverse knowledge for 
agglomeration externalities. This is called the Jacobs type, named from the seminal 
work by Jacobs (1969). According to Schumpeter, innovation occurs in new 
combinations of different ideas. Therefore, diversity in terms of technology, industry, 
and talents in a particular area can be a source of economic externality in 
agglomeration. One example of this is Florida’s (2007) concept of “creative capital”. 
Florida argues that creative ideas and innovation are generated in the urban 
environment, which attracts “creative class” people from outside. Therefore, one of the 
important factors for cities to be innovative is to allow diversity, such as through the 
social acceptance of different cultures, ethnicities, or LGBT people (Florida, 2007).

9 
 
It should be noted that the MAR externality and the Jacobs one do not contradict each 
other, and both types can be found at the same time empirically (Beaudry and 
Schiffauerova, 2009). In general, MAR externalities are observed at the macro level, 
while Jacobs externalities are relevant at the micro level. In addition, it has been found 
that MAR externalities are important in the short term, but Jacobs externalities appear in 
the long term. For example, Silicon Valley attracts many of the same types of firms in 
the computer and software industries at the macro level. However, a micro look reveals 
that quite diverse people in terms of ethnicity are working there. In addition, a diverse 
mix of firms has allowed a flexible evolution from the semiconductor industry to an 
internet technology cluster in the long-term perspective.  
Moreover, the MAR type of externality tends to be discussed in the context of an 
uncompetitive economic environment where a large firm dominates the market, while 
the Jacobs type fits a competitive environment activated by entrepreneurial dynamics. 
But, reality reflects both types of mechanism of market development. Again, in Silicon 
Valley, a major driver of innovation is, of course, entrepreneurship activities. At the 
same time, we cannot deny the importance of anchor companies, such as Intel and HP in 
the computer era, and, more recently, Google and Apple in playing an important role for 
driving innovative entrepreneurship in the region.  
It is obvious that economic and innovation activities are geographically concentrated. In 
China, we have already seen that inventions are clustered around three big coastal areas, 
Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen. Therefore, the next question is how such innovation 
agglomeration is formed. Particularly, we analyze the existence of agglomeration 
externalities by looking at technology, human resources, and VC finance. These three 
factors are important for understanding the regional ecosystem, that is, the state of 
interactions among various innovation system players, such as big firms, start-up firms, 
universities, high-tech talents, and venture capitals, within a certain geographical 
boundary (Asheim and Coenen, 2006). In this section, we focus on three cities, Beijing, 
Shanghai, and Shenzhen, to understand the mechanism of innovation agglomeration and 
the differences between them. 
3-2. Comparison of Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen using patent data  
First, we use the patent data to show the structural characteristics of technological 
development in Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen. We extract the patents where the 
applicants are located in the three cities. In total, about 1 million patents (Beijing:

10 
 
448,452; Shanghai: 287,092; and Shenzhen: 261,992) out of 6.2 million are used. 
Beijing can be characterized as the center of China’s public research organizations, 
where Beijing University, Tsinghua University, and numerous Chinese Academy of 
Science (CAS) Research Institutes are located. Therefore, the presence of publicly 
funded research is supposed to be large. In addition, a lot of foreign multinationals have 
research centers in the city. 
Shanghai is a center of commercial activities, and large domestic firms as well as 
multinationals are actively engaged in business activities in the city. Shanghai’s city 
government promotes the policy for a “Global Innovation Hub”, with a package of 
incentives for foreign firms to set up research centers in the Pudong area, where a 
concentration of life science and electronics research activities can be found. Not only 
private firms but also universities and public research institutes are active in this area. 
Shanghai Jiaotong University and Zhejiang University are competing at the top rank in 
terms of university patent applications.  
In Shenzhen, however, there are almost no public research organizations. Therefore, top 
universities outside this area, such as Beijing University and Tsinghua University, have 
set up their branch schools in the city. In contrast, Shenzhen can be characterized as 
having a concentration of big, high-tech firms. Actually, all of the top three patent 
applicants in China (Huawei, ZTE, and Foxconn) are located in Shenzhen. In addition, 
high-tech entrepreneurship has become quite active recently, as will be shown in detail 
later.  
Figure 3-1 shows the shares of patent applications by applicant type. In Beijing and 
Shanghai, the share of firm applicants is around 70%, while that of Shenzhen is 95%. 
The share of university applicants is relatively large in Beijing, while the presence of 
public research institutes is greater in Shanghai.

11 
 
 
Figure 3-1: Share of patents by applicant type (individual applicants excluded) 
Figure 3-2 shows the composition of technology in patent applications. In Beijing, the 
share of electronics and information technology is large, but there are also a substantial 
number of chemical patents. The pattern is more diversified for Shanghai, where large 
numbers of drug/medical and machinery patents are also found. In contrast, patent 
applications in Shenzhen are quite focused on electronics and information technology.  
The Appendix table shows the index of revealed comparative advantage (RCA, the ratio 
of the share by technology class in each city to the same share for all of China) by mode 
detail technology classification (WIPO base 33 classes). In Beijing, the RCA index is 
high for “clock, controlling, computer (2.15)”, “nuclear physics (1.81)”, “electronics 
circuit, communication tech. (1.66)”, and “measurement, optics, photography (1.58)”. In 
Shanghai, the comparative advantage is found not only in such electronics fields but 
also in the life science field, such as “genetic engineering (2.21)”, “organic chemistry, 
pesticides (1.56)”, and “biotechnology, beer, fermentation (1.41)”. In Shenzhen, the 
RCA index for “electronics circuit, communication tech.” and “nuclear physics” is very 
high (more than 4), and that of “clock, controlling, computer” is over 2. But the 
advantage is quite concentrated in these small number of fields.4 
                                                   
4 A high RCA for nuclear physics is explained by the existence of the China General 
Nuclear Power Group in Shenzhen, which operates nuclear power plants all over 
China.

12 
 
 
Figure 3-2: Share of patents by technology field  
The pattern of electronics concentration in Shenzhen can be explained by the large 
patent applicants, such as Huawei and ZTE, but it is found that such a pattern does not 
change very much even if the two firms are excluded from the sample. Then, how about 
the presence of small applicants? Figure 3-3 shows the share of patent applications by 
small applicants (less than 1,000 applications in total). In all three cities, the share is 
increasing, showing that the presence of small applicants or high-tech SMEs is 
becoming greater. But the increase in speed is highest in Shenzhen. This reflects the fact 
that high-tech entrepreneurship has become active in the city.

13 
 
 
Figure 3-3: Share of small applicants (less than 1,000 applications)  
 
3-3. Comparison of venture investments in Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen 
Here we look at the situation of venture investment using IT Juzi data. IT Juzi, is a 
research company based in Beijing Zhongguancun, providing information on venture 
investment (e.g., information on investors, investees, the size of investment, and the 
round stage) from public information. Similar kinds of data can be found in the United 
States from Crunch Base and Thomson Venture Expert. The dataset used in this section 
covers all investment deals in China until 2016 (26,823 items of investment data for 
8,506 venture companies) available from IT Juzi. The number of venture companies in 
Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen, and other areas in China was 3,405, 1,727, 849, and 
2,506, respectively. Figure 3-4 shows the trends in the investment rounds for each 
region. Most investments were made between 2014 and 2016, and the number of 
investments in Beijing, Shanghai, and Shenzhen increased until 2015 but went down in 
2016.

14 
 
 
Figure 3-4: Number of VC invents by venture firm location 
Next, we look at the differences in investment structure by city. Figure 3-5 shows the 
shares of each investment round. Angel investment and the A round of investment 
account for the majority when looking at the number of times for each investment 
round. The share for angel investment is highest in Beijing, followed by Shanghai, 
Shenzhen, and others. Since the geographical proximity to the investee company is 
relatively more important for such early-stage investment, the availability of angel 
investments is higher in the three big cities compared to the rest of China.  
We also find that the share of A round investments is high in Shenzhen. Since IT Juzi 
provides categorical information on investment size, we can see that the relative 
investment size for Shenzhen is smaller compared to that for Beijing and Shanghai.

15 
 
 
Figure 3-5: Number of investments by VC round 
Next, we linked the roughly 8,500 companies covered by IT Juzi with the patent data by 
applicant name. About 20% of the enterprises were linked. The companies that could 
not be linked were supposed to be the ones that did not file patent applications. Looking 
at this by city, the ratio of patent application companies among Shenzhen venture 
companies was highest, at 30.5% (Figure 3-6). Meanwhile, the proportion of patent 
applications by Beijing and Shanghai venture companies was about 17%. This is 
because many of Shenzhen’s venture companies are electronics hardware related ones. 
On the other hand, in Beijing and Shanghai, a relatively large number of companies 
based on business model innovation, such as sharing services by Didi Chuxing and 
Mobike. 
 
Figure 3-6: Results of linking IT Juzi and patent data 
 
 # of firms Patent firm Share # of patents
Beijing 3,405 611 17.9% 26,751
Shanghai 1,727 299 17.3% 4,704
Shenzhen 849 259 30.5% 15,296
Others 2,506 604 24.1% 19,987
Total 8,487 1,773 20.9% 66,738

16 
 
3-4. Mobility of high-tech talents 
It is important to look at the mobility of human resources in considering the interactions 
between large companies and start-ups to understand agglomeration externalities. 
Particularly, for the establishment and growth of high-tech ventures, how to secure 
talented people with technology is important, and the large company must be a major 
supplier of such people. Huawei, for example, attracts excellent students from all over 
China, and excellent talent is attracted to Shenzhen. Once the personnel have gathered 
in Shenzhen, if spinning out from Huawei and waking up a venture company, the 
probability of establishing in Shenzhen is high. Networks cultivated through business 
are considered to have high local characteristics. In this section, we analyze the state of 
researcher talent migration using the result of the inventor identification from the patent 
information (matching foreigners and inventors with the same name and for multiple 
patents; that is, whether the inventors are the same person) (Yin and Motohashi, 2017). 
Figure 3-7 shows the state of inventor mobility at the province level. It shows the net 
number of inventors moving into an area, i.e., the number of those moving in minus 
those moving out. Red shading indicates the provinces where the number of researchers 
increased (inflow exceeded the outflow), while the blue shading denotes the provinces 
where researchers decreased (outflow exceeded the inflow). In general, researchers 
tended to move from the provinces (cities) where the patenting activities are 
concentrated, such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangdong, to the surrounding provinces, 
especially East Chain areas such as Jiangsu province and Zhejiang province. Some 
inland provinces in the south, such as Sichuan, gained inventors. In contrast, outflows of 
inventors dominated inflows in northeastern provinces such as Liaoning, Jilin, and 
Heilongjiang.  
In terms of the inflows and outflows of researchers (inventors) in Beijing, Shanghai, 
Shenzhen, a detailed look at the mobility patterns shows that people in Beijing are 
gathering from all over China. Shanghai is strongly connected with its surrounding 
areas, such as Jiangsu province and Zhejiang province. The fact that Shanghai is 
overflowing is due to the fact that the ecosystem of innovation has spread to other parts 
of the Yangtze River Delta. Finally, for Shenzhen, there are a substantial number of 
inflows from Beijing, but a large number of outflows can be observed to the 
surrounding cities of the Pearl River Delta.

17 
 
 
Figure 3-7: Inventor mobility at the province level 
4. The Start-up Ecosystem in Shenzhen 
In this section, we look at Shenzhen in more detail, focusing on inventor mobility and 
its relationship with the formation of the start-up ecosystem in the city. First, Figure 4-1 
shows the regional distribution of patenting in Shenzhen (each circle corresponds to the 
address of a patent applicant, with the size proportional to the number of patent 
applications). While the area of Shenzhen is not large for the average city size of China, 
there are some clusters of patent applications within Shenzhen. First, the concentration 
of patents is found in the Nanshan district, centered around ZTE and Ocean King 
Lightning (海洋王). Second, Longgnag district, where Huawei has its headquarter, 
attracts a number of patent applicants, too. Third, there is a cluster of patenting close to 
the border with Hong Kong.

18 
 
 
Figure 4-1: Geographical distribution of patent applicants in Shenzhen 
Next, let us take a look at patenting activities by start-up firms. Here, we define a start-
up firm as a firm that started a patent application in 2010 or after. Of these 44,274 
patents, the numbers for the two large districts, Nanshan and Baoan, are 17,973 and 
16,111, respectively. Therefore, we can see that high-tech start-up activities are 
concentrated in these two districts.  
 
Figure 4-2: Number of start-up patent applications by district

19 
 
Nanshan district, particularly YueHai Jiedao, is covered with national-level high-tech 
parks and can be called the center of the start-up ecosystem in Shenzhen. ZTE and 
Tencent have their headquarters in this area, and public research organizations, such as 
Shenzhen University, and research centers of major universities from all over China are 
located there as well. Foxconn has its headquarters in the Baoan district, and Shenzhen 
airport is also located there. It should be noted that the Guangming district is now 
separated from Baoan (since 2007), so a more detailed investigation is needed to 
understand the start of the start-up ecosystem there.  
Next, we look at the mobility of inventors in Shenzhen. Here we focus on those who 
moved to Shenzhen to see where they came from. Such cases totaled 11,537 
observations in the patent data. Figure 4-3 classifies all samples into two-by-two 
categories, i.e., by type of firm, whether a venture firm or other firm (called a large 
firm), and whether being before or after moving. For example, venture–venture shows 
those who moved from a venture firm to another venture firm. For each category, the 
share by the original location is presented. For the cases of moving from a large firm to 
a venture firm, the geographical proximity is the highest (about 80% of moves occur 
within Shenzhen). In such cases, local business contacts are important for inventors to 
start up their own firms. In contrast, for the case where the former position is a venture 
company, the inventor may already have certain business relationships for her/his 
business already, so it is easier to break away from the geographical restrictions. On the 
other hand, for the case of an inventor moving to a large firm, the location initiation 
comes from a firm in Shenzhen instead of from the inventor. Therefore, the original 
location should be diverse. In addition, the case of moving from a large firm to a large 
firm may be an intra-firm transfer, such as moving from a Huawei research institute in 
Beijing to the Huawei headquarters in Shenzhen.

20 
 
.  
Figure 4-3: Original locations and movements of inventors by type of mobility 
Finally, we look at the geographical proximity of the venture ecosystem in more detail. 
Figure 4-4 shows the original locations of inventors moving to venture firms in 
Shenzhen at the district level. For example, about 65% of engineers who moved to a 
venture firm in the Nanshan district came from within the same Nanshan district. For 
the similar case for the Baoan district, the share is even higher at around 80%. 
Therefore, we find that human mobility associated with high-tech entrepreneurship is 
very geographically bound, so the venture ecosystem must be investigated within a 
narrow area.

21 
 
 
Fig 4-4: Original locations of inventors and movements at the district level  
5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we compared the regional innovation systems of Beijing, Shanghai, and 
Shenzhen using patent data and venture investment data. Unlike in Beijing and 
Shanghai, the presence of universities and public research institutions is small in 
Shenzhen. Meanwhile, large communication equipment makers such as Huawei and 
ZTE, and IT companies such as Tencent, actively engage in R&D activities. Therefore, 
Shenzhen can be characterized by a private firm centered innovation system. In 
Shenzhen City, R&D venture companies are concentrated in the Nanshan district, 
particularly in Yuehai Jiedao, where the national-grade, high-tech zone is located. These 
high-tech ventures have grown rapidly in recent years, and large local companies such 
as ZTE and Tencent play a major role as a source of high-tech talent. Moreover, it is 
found that the mobility of patent inventors is occurring within a very narrow area. 
In addition, VC investments in Shenzhen are relatively small in size compared to in 
Beijing and Shanghai, and there is a large share of early-stage investment, such as A 
round investment. This is mainly attributed to the characteristics of innovation in 
Shenzhen, which is close to the market and puts more emphasis on speed instead of 
deep and long R&D investment. The role of universities and public research institutes in

22 
 
Shenzhen’s innovation system is small, and the founders of venture companies are also 
mainly from companies. A comparative study of the science parks of Tsinghua 
University in Beijing and Shenzhen shows that there are many science-based companies 
in Beijing (Tsinghua Science Park), while a market-oriented entrepreneurship model is 
dominant in Shenzhen’s Tsinghua University Research Institute (Mao and Motohashi, 
2016). Therefore, due to the smaller size of investments, so-called “unicorn companies” 
with a market capitalization of more than $1 billion, are not started in Shenzhen.  
From the analysis of inventor mobility using patent data, we find that inventors’ 
movements to venture firms are regionally bounded, and more than half of such cases 
occur within the district level. In the Nanshan district, where venture companies are 
concentrated, local high-tech companies, such as ZTE and Tencent, are important 
suppliers of human resources.  
Thus, in Shenzhen, both large high-tech firms and the dynamics of high-tech 
entrepreneurship are important for forming the regional innovation ecosystem. That is, 
large firms attract high-quality talent from all over China, and the substantial spinoffs 
from such firms locate their businesses in Shenzhen. However, while this paper 
contributes to clarifying the pattern of regional agglomeration of innovation, it has not 
reached the stage of showing the process of such agglomeration. For example, the 
Yuehai Jiedao in the Nanshan district is an area covered by a national-level high-tech 
park. As such, it is natural to see many high-tech start-ups located there. Therefore, 
further study is needed to understand the complementary relationships between large 
firms and start-ups in more detail. 
It is also necessary to consider whether the region’s innovation system is open to other 
regions. This point is important from the perspective of whether multinationals, like 
Japanese companies, could adopt the innovation dynamism here. In this paper, we found 
that the entrepreneurship ecosystem is regionally bounded and not so open to the 
outside world. Therefore, in order to capture the dynamism of innovation in Shenzhen, 
being an insider is important. As many companies in Silicon Valley do, it seems to be 
effective to build a network with venture firms by creating corporate venture capitalist 
in Shenzhen.

23 
 
References 
Asheim, B. and L. Coenen (2006), Contextualizing Regional Innovation Systems in a 
Globalizing Learning Economy: On Knowledge Bases and Institutional 
Frameworks, Journal of Technology Transfer, 31: 163-173 
Beaudry, C. & Schiffauerova, A., 2009. Who’s right, Marshall or Jacobs? The 
localization versus urbanization debate. Research Policy, 38(2), 318–337 
Dang, J. and K. Motohashi (2015), Patent statistics: A good indicator for innovation in 
China? Patent subsidy program impacts on patent quality, China Economic 
Review, 35, 137-155, September 2015 
Florida, R (2007), The Flight of the Creative Class: The New Global Competition for 
Talent, Harper Collins Publishing, February 2007 
Fujita, T (2017), Start-up boom in China and Trend of Venture Finance, RIM 2017, vol 
64. Japan Research Institute (in Japanese) 
Jacobs, J.(1969), The Economics of Cities, Knopf Doubleday Publishing 
Jaffe, A. (1986) Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from 
Firms' Patents, Profits, and Market Value, American Economic Journal, 76(5), 
984-1001  
Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M.and R. Henderson (1993), Geographic Localization of 
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 108(3), 577–598 
Kimira, K (2016), China, Shenzhen’s Startups and their Ecosystem, IDE JETRO, 
2016,August (in Japanese) 
Kobayashi, N. (2009), A Historical Survey of Studies in Regional Industrial 
Agglomeration, Keizaigaku Ronkyu, 63(3), Kuansei Gakuin University (in 
Japanese)  
Mao, H. and K. Motohashi (2016), A Comparative Study on Tenant Firms in Beijing 
Tsinghua University Science Park and Shenzhen Research Institute of Tsinghua 
University, Asian Journal of Innovation and Policy, 5(3), December 2016

24 
 
Motohashi K (2008), Assessment of technological capability in science industry linkage 
in China by patent database, World Patent Information 30(3), 225-232, 
September 2008 
NISTEP (2008), Innovation Survey in Japan, NISTEP Report 110, 2004 December  
Yin D. and K. Motohashi (2018), Inventor Name Disambiguation with Gradient 
Boosting Decision Tree and Inventor Mobility in China (1985—2016), RIETI-
Discussion Paper, March 2018

25 
 
Appendix: Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA) Index  
 
Beijing Shanghai Shenzhen
Agriculture 0.40 0.50 0.08
Food Stuffs 0.23 0.34 0.11
Personal and Domestic Articles 0.10 0.46 0.22
Health and Amusement 0.44 0.85 0.48
Drugs 0.50 0.62 0.10
Separating, Mixing 1.38 0.97 0.23
Machine tools, Metal working 0.45 0.88 0.33
Casting, Grinding, Layered Product 0.37 0.71 0.49
Printing 0.30 0.55 0.28
Transporting 0.52 0.75 0.32
Packing, Lifting 0.40 0.78 0.38
Non organic chemistry, Fertilizer 1.06 1.10 0.30
Organic chemistry, Pesticides 0.99 1.56 0.25
Organic molecule compounds 0.88 1.27 0.45
Dyes, Petroleum 1.33 0.99 1.11
Biotechnology, Beer, Fermentation 1.01 1.41 0.22
Genetic Engineering 1.30 2.21 0.44
Metallurgy, Coating metals 0.96 1.12 0.40
Textile 0.24 1.12 0.09
Paper 0.30 0.62 0.09
Construction 0.74 1.12 0.24
Mining, Drilling 2.75 0.65 0.07
Engine, Pump 0.48 0.71 0.21
Engineering elements 0.48 0.72 0.32
Lighting, Steam generation, Heating 0.51 0.76 0.93
Weapons, Blasting 1.05 0.35 0.20
Measurement, Optics, Photography 1.58 1.29 1.01
Clock, Controlling, Computer 2.15 1.23 2.09
Display, Information Storage, Instruments 0.87 0.93 1.31
Nuclear physics 1.81 1.47 4.03
Electronics components, semiconductor 0.99 1.29 1.31
Electronics circuit, communication tech. 1.66 1.01 4.09
Others 1.47 2.64 0.65
