%1
RIETI Discussion Paper Series 21-E-026
Chasing Two Hares at Once? Effect of Joint Institutional
Change for Promoting Commercial Use of University
Knowledge and Scientific Research
KWON, Seokbeom
University of Tokyo
MOTOHASHI, Kazuyuki
RIETI
IKEUCHI, Kenta
RIETI
The Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry
https://www.rieti.go.jp/en/

RIETI Discussion Paper Series 21-E-026
March 2021

Chasing Two Hares at Once? Effect of Joint Institutional Change for Promoting Commercial Use
of University Knowledge and Scientific Research*

Seokbeom Kwon (University of Tokyo)
Kazuyuki Motohashi (RIETI)
Kenta Ikeuchi (RIETI)

Abstract
Stimulating the university’s scientific research while encouraging the commercial use of the resulting
knowledge is one of the foremost missions o f science policymakers. The present research examines
the short-term impact of joint institutional changes for facilitating the commercial use of university
knowledge and stimulating scientific research activities through the introduction of a research
performance evaluation system on university scientists ’ research outcomes. Our empirical analysis is
based on Japan ’s national university reform in 2004, which introduced institutional measures to
support the income-generating activities of academic staff while implementing a regular evaluation of
their performance. Our analysis of over 5000 scientists in Japan ’s national and private universities
finds that this joint institutional change increased the research productivity of national university
scientists without significant change in research quality. Also, we find evidence showing that the
reform encouraged more of them to engage in research that serves as a knowledge input for developing
technological applications. These short-term effects are specific to the scientists who were in the Life
Science domain and those who were inactive in developing technical applications before the reform.
Contributions to the literature on how an institutional change to encourage commercial use of
university knowledge affects science and implications for science policy are discussed.

Keywords: University corporatization; University policy; Pasteur Quadrant; Commercialization
JEL classification: D02, I23, O34, O38

The RIETI Discussion Paper Series aims at widely disseminating research results in the form of professional
papers, with the goal of stimulating lively discussion. The views expressed in the papers are solely those of
the author(s), and neither represent those  of the organization (s) to which the author(s) belong(s) nor the
Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.


*This study is conducted as a part of the Project “Digitalization and Innovation Ecosystem: A Holistic approach”
undertaken at the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI). The authors would like to thank
Professor Nagaoka and RIETI discussion paper seminar participants for their helpful comments. The authors also
acknowledge support from JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number JP18H03631.)

1

1. Introduction
Although universities play a pivotal role in technological innovation by serving a locus of basic science
and knowledge spillover  (Nelson, 1993) , university knowledge  is often difficult to be  utilized for its
embryonic stage of development  (Jensen and Thursby, 2001; Thursby and Thursby, 2003) . The
underutilization of university knowledge  is a salient public policy issue because universities’ research is
often supported by the public research funds  for its positive  externality to innovation  and economic
growth (Jaffe, 1989; Youtie and Shapira, 2008).
To foster the use of university knowledge, a range of public policy measures has been attempted. The
Bayh-dole act in the U.S. and similar law s in other countries are  an example. The p rovision of  tax
exemptions or subsidies to firms that collaborate with universities for R&D  (Szücs, 2018; Veugelers and
Cassiman, 2005) is another example. Yet, these efforts were accompanied by a long-standing controversy
over their consequence in science.
Most of all, encouraging commercial use of university knowledge may induce university scientists to
allocate fewer resources for fundamental research while increasing their efforts toward applied research
(Henderson et al., 1998). Such resource diversion may result in decreased fundamental research activities
by leading university scientists to pursue the research that can bring more economic profits (see, Lach and
Schankerman, 2008) while undermining their efforts to basic science (Cohen et al., 1998; Partha and David,
1994).
 Also, emphasis on generating profit from university knowledge may  weaken the scientific reward
system that has been a key driver for scientists to disclose and disseminate their knowledge (Rhoten and
Powell, 2007) in exchange for peer’s recognition of the contribution to the science (Merton, 1973; Partha
and David, 1994).
This concern has drawn  a large  volume of empirical studies on how institutional change for
encouraging commercial use of university knowledge shapes university research, or more broadly, science
for the recent decades. Yet, the conclusion remains somewhat indefinite.
Some researchers find evidence showing that pursuing commercial use of university knowledge does
not necessarily impede (Mowery et al., 2004; Nelson, 2001) but can be compatible with (Shibayama, 2012)
or even complementary to  stimulating fundamental research (among others, Agrawal and Henderson,
2002; Azoulay et al., 2009; Fabrizio and Di Minin, 2008; Goldfarb et al., 2009; Van Looy et al., 2006) .
Azoulay et al. (2009)  explained that such compatibility/complementarity presents because commercial
technology development could be a “byproduct” of scientific research  while the collaborative research
between academic and industrial scientists for technology development can inspire the academic

2

scientist’s fundamental research later.  In contrast, others found that the institutional change diverted
university scientists’ efforts from diffusing their knowledge or deter them from engaging in basic research,
which slows down the cumulative process of science (e.g., Agrawal and Henderson, 2002; Murray and
Stern, 2007).
The presence of the  mixed empirical findings  is perhaps due to  the complementarity and
substitutability between pursuing commercial use of university knowledge and provision of incentive for
fundamental research coexist. To this complication, how to mitigate the probable substitution effect is an
important policy inquiry.
Several organizational measures to incentivize scientists’ engagement in scientific research activities
and disclosing/diffusing their scientific findings can be considered. For instance, formalizing evaluation of
individual scientists’ performance using their research outcomes (e.g., number of publications, research
impact, etc.) can enhance the universities’ research strategy (Hicks, 2009) while stimulating individual
scientist’s research activities. Yet, because the performance-based evaluation may induce the scientist’s
strategic behavior (e.g., gaming the metric ) in resource allocation for research  (Frost and Brockmann,
2014; Geuna and Martin, 2003; Smith, 1993; Yamamoto, 2004) , whether and to what extent such
institutional device functions as a complementary measure to the policy for encouraging commercial use
of university knowledge remains as an empirical question.
Exploring the answer is not obvious because most of the relevant institutional changes were mainly
for encouraging commercial use of university knowledge with no explicit consideration of the
countermeasure to mitigate the induced dissuasion of scientists from basic research . Even if the
policymakers recognize its importance and usefulness, placing it into practice  is subject to another
challenge in reality due to the complications in university governance (Goldfarb and Henrekson, 2003) or
conflicts among the stakeholders of the university policy (Argyres and Liebeskind, 1998).
Existing studies offer partial clues by focusing on analyzing the case of the U.S. where the
government’s role in university gove rnance is relatively weak or continental Europe where higher
education systems have been traditionally governed by governmental authority. Accordingly, the question
of how the institutional change toward encouraging commercial use of university knowledge and the
introduction of the performance evaluation system at individual universities, which needs the joint
initiatives of the government and individual universities, have been remained largely unaddressed. This
gap is particularly acute to stakeholders of university research  in some countries where transformed (or
will transform) the university governance system (e.g., Japan, South Korea) based on such joint initiatives.

3

The present study takes a step toward bridging this gap by addressing the above-briefed challenges
to examine how if at all,  a joint institutional change for facilitating commercial use of university
knowledge and the introduction of university policy for stimulating scientific research affect the
university scientists’ research outcomes.
Our empirical analysis is based on  Japan’s university reform in 2004. By this reform , the status of
national universities of Japan changed from governmental organizations to corporate entities. The goal of
this change was to enhance the efficiency of national universities’ operation s by conferring more
autonomy and flexibility in the management (Kang and Motohashi, 2020; Motohashi and Muramatsu,
2012; Oba, 2007; Yamamoto, 2 004). As it transformed the legal status of the national universities to
corporate entities, the reform was accompanied by  various organizational changes for encouraging
income-generating activities of academic staff, which placed substantial emphasis on the commercial use
of the university knowledge. At the same time, this reform enabled the national universities of J apan to
regularly evaluate individual  scientists’ performance, which was expected to encourage their scientific
research activities.
The case of the policy change in Japan in 2004 is also useful for formulating a research design for a
causal analysis because the reform was close to an exogenous event to the individual university scientists.
There were long-standing politics and debate across stakeholders in the national university reform along
with repeated setbacks and the advance of the discussion as the dominant political party changed
(Christensen, 2011; Yamamoto, 2004). Accordingly, the timing of the reform was difficult to be expected
by individual university scientists  beforehand, which mitigates the concern of the typical endogeneity
issue in making causal inferences on the impact of the reform.
Our data consists of over 5000 scientists in Japan’s national or private universities, who were active
in research from 2000 to 2008 . Given that the reform  was specific to  the national universities  and the
institutional change was an exogenous event to the individual scientists , we consider the scientists in
national universities as the treatment group and the counterpart  in the  private universities as the
comparison group.
Our panel difference-in-difference (DiD) analysis finds that, for a short period, the reform positively
influenced university scientist’s research productivity with no significant change in the research impact .
Also, after the reform, more national university  scientists engaged in research that serves knowledge
inputs for developing technological applications than private university scientists did.  Further analysis
revealed that the observed findings were particular to the scientists in the Life Science domain. It was also
shown that the impact was specific to those who were not active in developing technical applications

4

based on their knowledge before the reform. These findings suggest that the impact of such institutional
changes unlikely to be even across the science domain and may depend on the individual’s prior interests
in the commercial use of their knowledge.
The contribution of our study is twofold. First, we extend the strain of literature on how institutional
change toward facilitating the commercial use of university knowledge affects science. Our study expands
the scope of the previous discussion to the science-policy options that may be worthy of consideration as
a supplementary measure when commercial use of university knowledge is institutionalized.
Second, in addition to  revealing individual scientist’s strategic tradeoff between the volume and
quality of research in responding to the institutional change, we provide more nuanced policy implications
by showing that the impact of such institutional change may differ by  various factors including research
domain and scientist’s prior interest in the commercial use of scientific knowledge.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we provide background information
about the national university reform in Japan. Then, we review empirical studies on how the institutionally
encouraged commercial use of university knowledge shapes the scientist’s research activities  and the
scholarly works on the performance  evaluation of individual university researchers  and its probable
consequences in their behaviors. Section 3 illustrates our empirical research design, and section 4
presents the data. In section 5, we illustrate the econometric model for the analysis of the data. Section
6 reports the analysis results and  section 7 discusses the implications of the findings with concluding
remarks.

2. Background
2.1. National University Reform of Japan in 2004
Following the New Public Management (NPM) movement (Christensen, 2011) , the Japanese
government enacted a law that changes  the status of national universities of Japan from governmental
organizations to corporate entities in April 2004. The primary purpose of this reform was to promote inter-
university competition by relaxing the governmental restriction on the operation of national universities.
Toward this end, the change expanded the autonomy and flexibility in the management of national
university operations. The chan ge of national universities’ status to the “corporate” entities was
accompanied by various measures for economizing their operating cost and promoting the income -
generating activities of the academic staff in the national universities.
For instance, by steadily reducing the central government’s institutional fund, scientists in the national
universities were encouraged to seek external research funds including funding from private sectors or

5

competitive funding (Kneller, 2003; Shibayama, 2011; Watanabe, 2011) , which later influenced on
invention and research activities of the university scientists (e.g., Kang and Motohashi, 2020; Wang et al.,
2018). As a result, the number and size of university -industry joint research projects dramatically
increased.
Also, the governmental restriction on national universities’ patent ownership and their enforcement
were substantially relaxed (Motohashi and Muramatsu, 2012) . Before the reform, national universities
could o wn patents for some exceptional cases (Shimoda,  2004). By the reform, national universities
became free to own patents, and as a result, there was a four- fold increase in the number of patent
applications filed by the national universities after four years from the reform (Motohashi and Muramatsu,
2012).
Along with this change, the operations of Technology Licensing Offices (TLOs) of the national
universities were reinforced to support the university scientists’ income-generating activities (Oba, 2007;
Woolgar, 2007).
Another notable organizational change  was the introduction of the regular perf ormance review of
academic staff. To enhance the efficiency in human resource management, some national universities
began evaluating the performance of faculties, researchers, and administrative staff. With this change,
the national universities could equip with a system to design their internal policy for managing the human
resource more flexibly. Some national universities used the evaluation result to relocate faculty positions
within the institute. Although there are some variations across the universities, by and large, the number
of research papers published, external funding acquisitions, contribution to society through such as
collaboration with industry, etc. have been incorporated as the criteria for the performance evaluation.
These changes by the national university reform of Japan were expected to enhance the operational
efficiency of the national universities while fostering the research activities of university scientists as we
as the commercial use of the research outcomes.

2.2. Commercialization of University Knowledge and Its Consequence in Science
This section provides an overview of the prior studies on the association between university scientists’
activities for seeking the commercial value of research  and their research activities. A large volume of
studies focused on investigating the relationship between the patenting activities of university scientists
and the scientists’  research outcomes, considering academic patenting as a proxy for the interest of
university scientists in the commercial use of their knowledge.

6

Henderson et al. (1998) examined the probable consequence of the increased patenting activities of
US universities after the Bayh-dole act in 1980 in the average technical importance of university patents.
Their analysis showed that  before the mid-1980s (around the Bayh-dole act), the US university patents
were more cited and cited by subsequent patents in a wide range of technology domains than random-
sampled patents. Yet, this finding disappeared in the later period.  Based on the findings, the author s
argued that  in contras t to the expec tation, the Bayh-dole act in the U.S. w as not effective in driving
university scientists to develop commercially valuable inventions , which may suggest th at promoting
academic patenting may not be effective to shift the academic scientists ’ interest toward commercial
inventions.
Nelson (2001) and Mowery et al. (2004) extend this conclusion by shedding light on the effect of the
Bayh dole act on the research activities of the university scientist s. Their studies using the case of the
University of California, Stanford University, and Columbia University  showed no evidence on which the
Bayh-dole act diverted university scientists from basic research. Although there was a surge in patenting
and licensing of universities after the Bayh-dole act, these were mainly caused by prior time trends rather
than the consequence of the act.
Agrawal and Henderson (2002) more directly examined the relationship between university scientists’
patenting activities and their research performance. Through quantitative and qualitative analysis on the
patenting activities of faculty of the department of mechanical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), the study showed that only a minor portion of the faculty patented on their research
outcomes. More interestingly, the analysis  found no systematic correlation between  the MIT faculty’s
patenting activities and  the number of publications, but it was positively associated with the citation
impact of the research papers. These findings suggest that university scientists’ patenting activities may
not divert their endeavors from fundamental research.
Fabrizio and Di Minin (2008)  advanced this conclusion with empirical evidence showing that the
university faculty’s patenting is complementary to their research publication activities. By using inventor
name information in the NBER patent dataset in conjunction with a manual web search of inventor’s
personal information (e.g., affiliation), they analyzed the correlation between faculty’s patenting and two
measures of their research activities - number of published research papers and the citation rate of the
papers. Their analysis revealed that faculties published more research papers after they file patents. Yet,
the citation rates of the research papers were not either significantly, or negatively correlated with the
number of patents the faculty filed. These findings agree on the conclusion that academic patenting
activities are not substituting for fundamental research activities.

7

The study by Azoulay et al. (2009)  extends this conclusion. Their analysis using the data on Ph.D.
degree re cipients in biomedical fields found that the scientists’ patenting activities are positively
associated with their research productivity and the citation rate (moderately). More interestingly, the
analysis revealed a positive relationship between the extent to which a scientist’s research paper contains
patentable ideas and the scientist’s patenting activity. From the findings, it was concluded that academic
patenting is a complementary activity to basic  research, and it shifts the research of academic scientists
to the area of commercial interest.
Through an Event History Analysis on the patenting activities of material science researchers in
universities or public research organizations of Italy , Calderini et al. (2007)  showed that academic
scientists’ hazard to file patents  increased with the number of publications and their citation s rates on
average. Their additional analyses revealed that the relations take inverted U-shapes, indicating that the
association between scientist’s commercial interest in their research and scientific research activities may
not be in linear relationships.
Besides, some studies focused on the impact of academic patenting on the dissemination of university
knowledge. In theory, scholars argued  that academic patenting hampers university knowledge
dissemination by inducing the so-called tragedy of anticommon s (Argyres and Liebeskind, 1998; David,
2004; Henderson et al., 1998; Nelson, 2004)  because the patent protection  restricts the access to the
outcome of university research  with an excessive cost for acquiring them, which could discourage
innovation in return.
Subsequent studies empirically tested this concern.  For example,  Murray and Stern (2007)
investigated whether patenting on  scientific discoveries restricted the knowledge dissemination by
analyzing the patent-paper pair data. By utilizing the time difference between the timing of research paper
publication and patent grants, they estimated the change in the citation rate to the patent-paired research
papers after the corresponding patent is granted. Their analysis showed that after a patent is granted, the
citation rate to the corresponding research paper decreased by 10 to 20 percent, implying that the
patenting on research hampers the scientific knowledge flow.
A study by Rosell and Agrawal (2009)  attempted to shed empirical light on how the increasing
patenting activities of universities associates with the narrowness  of the dissemination of university
knowledge. They estimated the diversity of entities whose inventions became the knowledge input for
university inventions (inflow) and the breadth of the entities whose inventions were influenced by the
university inventions (outflow) over time. Their analysis using the US universities’ patents revealed that
the inflow and outflow of the university knowledge  measured by patent ci tations decreased over time.

8

They conclude that the knowledge dissemination by the university has narrowed down by the increased
academic patenting.
Interestingly,  Magerman et al. (2015)  draw the opposite conclusion. Their analysis of patent-paper
pairs in biotechnology showed that the citation rate of the publications having patent pairs was greater
than those without the patent pairs . Their author-level analyses further showed that the H -indices of
authors having publication-patent pairs were greater than their counterparts . These findings suggested
that academic patenting may not hamper knowledge dissemination in the biotechnology domain.

2.3. Performance Evaluation and Its Impact on Scientists’ Behavior
Evaluating the performance of academic staff in universities takes an important part in examining the
socio-economic and scientific impact of university research while being an important ground for designing
the university policy . By evaluating the university researcher’s performance, stakeholders of university
policy are informed about the public value that the university contributes, the research projects that need
supports, and the ways that the impact of university research is delivered  (Penfield et al., 2014) . Yet,
scholars in public administration and management suggest that the evaluation of scientists’ performance
may distort their incentive for research and, eventually, result in unintended consequences. According to
Smith (1993) and follow-on studies (e.g., Bevan and Hood, 2006; Heinrich and Marschke, 2010; Van Thiel
and Leeuw, 2002), the introduction of performance evaluation system into public organizations may lead
the employees to concentrate on tasks that are directly related to the performance evaluation criteria, to
purse the tasks for their narrow purpose  instead of pursuing the organizational goal, while trying not to
be an “outlier” from the evaluation perspective. As a result, the employees are disincentivized for bringing
innovative ideas into the job place.
In the university context, a similar concern has been raised. In the U.K., it has been a widely perceived
concern that university research performance evaluation leads the scientists to selectively engage in
research projects of which the economic impact is visible and relatively easy to be credited in evaluated
while dissuading them from the curiosity-driven research projects.1 This concern led to a petition against
legalizing the university performance evaluation in the U.K, later. Scholars in the science policy domain
provide some supportive evidence by showing that the novel research projec ts are often recognized as

1 See, Statement on the research excellence framework proposal by University and College Union (2011). Available
at https://www.ucu.org.uk/media/3600/Statement-on-the-Research-Excellence-Framework-
proposals/pdf/ucu_REFstatement_finalsignatures.pdf

9

“risky project” under the research performance evaluation criteria (Butler, 2003; Hicks, 2012) and, thus,
biased against in funding decision (Boudreau et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017).
Yamamoto (2004) argued that the introduction of the regular performance evaluation for academic
staff in the national universit ies of Japan may dissuade the scientists from novel /innovative research
projects that require a longer time to invest to concentrate on the research subject that they can publish
(relatively) easily and quickly.
Alvesson and Sandberg (2013)  made a somewhat similar argument by dis cussing why the impactful
research in management studies decreases although there has been substantial growth in the volume of
published research papers. They  argued that the institutional condition that universities assess the
performance of university researchers with their number of publications is one of the reasons. Under this
evaluation criterion, the faculty and researchers are incentivized to invest their resources in maximizing
the number of publications rather than investing their resources in conducting highly impactful research.
Frost and Brockmann (2014)  provide qualitative evidence of this argument by  interviewing German
university faculty. Their study showed that the outcome-related performance indicator and evaluation of
the faculty performance in German universities based on it led the faculty to behave strategically to meet
the performance review criteria with less concern about the quality or impact of their research outcomes.
Geuna and Martin (2003) situate this concern in the research funding allocation practice. They argue
that when the performance- evaluation result is linked to the allocation of research findings , it may
“homogenize” the research and universit y activities by motivating the scientists to choose research
projects that likely to safely receive the research funding. Also, it may drive the scientists to find “safe
ground” in being evaluated for their performance, which will cause so-called “publication inflation” while
discouraging their engagements in innovative/risky research projects.
As a relevant study, Tapinos et al. (2005) focused on the relationship between the introduction of the
performance measurement system and the setting of organizational direction (i.e., organizational mission,
strategic goal, etc.) in the university context. Their study based on the case of the University of Warwick
in the U.K. reveals that the university performance measurement systems enabled the top managers in
the University of Warwick to identify their strengths and weakness in achieving academic excellence. Also,
the individual employees at the University of Warwick interpreted the university’s direction based on the
way that their performances are evaluated. This study suggests that the introduction of the performance
review system for evaluating the academic staff in the universities may impact on setting the direction of
the university and it, in return, influence s on individual academic staffs ’ behavior by leading them to
interpret the university’s organizational setting.

10

In the next section, we describe our empirical research design to examine how  joint institutional
change for promoting commercial use of university knowledge and the research activities affect the
university scientist’s research activities.

3. Data
3.1. Sample
Our sample consists of  scientists in national or private universities of Japan , who  were active in
publishing original research articles in SCIE journals from 2000 to 2008. Our empirical strategy is a short-
term comparison of national and private universit y scientists  in their research productivity, research
quality, and whether  the research outcome serves as a knowledge input for developing techno logical
applications. Because the reform was specific to the national universities, w e consider scientists  in the
national universities as the treated group whereas the scientists in the private universities as the
comparison group.

3.2. Identifying the Researchers and Retrieving the Researcher-Level Information
By considering an original research article as a body of new scientific knowledge and its first author
as the key scientist who contributed to the research, we start by selecting the first authors of the journal
papers, who were affiliated to either national or private universities of Japan  before the reform . Our
sampling strategy is to choose the university scientists who continued scientific research while staying in
the same university during the period between 2000 and 2008.
Individuating Scientists in Japan: One of the empirical challenges in conducting scientist-level analysis
is to precisely identify the scientists and individuate their information. We address this challenge by using
the JGlobal Data that is a registry of researchers in Japan. This data is provided by the Japan Science and
Technology Agency, linking the Identifier of scientists  in public research organizations or u niversities in
Japan to their Clarivate’s Web of Science  (WoS) indexed SCI(E) journal papers. Although this registry is
based on self-registration, the coverage is surprisingly high. Our crosscheck using the WoS authorship
information indicates that about 80% of the first authors of SCI(E) journal papers published in Japanese
universities appeared in the JGLOBAL data.
Affiliation Data: National Institute of Science and Technology Policy (NISTEP) of Japan provides data
that links WoS-indexed journal papers  to the authors’ affiliation information  when the affiliated
organizations are in Japan. We identify the university scientists in Japan by using this data.

11

Metadata of SCI(E) J ournal Papers: Next, from the WoS core collection  database, we retrieve
metadata of the SCI(E) journal papers that were published from 2000 to 2008 by the university scientists
identified above.
Non-patent literature  Citation Data: One of the variables  that we employ in analysis  measures
whether a scientist of interest published research papers that were cited by patents. We obtain the paper-
patent citation information from the Clarivate WoS patent citation information.
Academic Inventor: To identify the scientists who were involved in patenting as inventors, we used
the WoS author name-patent inventor name matching data provided by Ikeuchi and Motohashi (2020).
We start with the scientist who published research paper s as the first author in 2004.  This is to
narrowly identify the scientists  who were in Japan’s national or private universities around the reform
timing. As a result, 9665 university scientists were identified. Among these, we select the scientists  who
have published research papers from 2000 through 2003 as well as from 2005 to 2008, without changing
the affiliation. This strategy allows us to choose the active university scientists in research who stayed in
the same universities from  2000 to 2008.  Our data contains 5679 university scientist s in total. Among
them, 4529 (80%) scientists were in the national universities (treated group) and 1150 (20%) were private
university scientists (comparison group).

4. Measures
4.1. Dependent Variables
We use three dependent variables. The first variable is the number of SCI(E) journal papers published
by each scientist in the sample  (nPubs). This variable is to measure the research productivity  of the
scientist.
The second dependent variable is  the mean value of the  paper-age-normalized citation counts that
accrued to the research articles published by the scientist in question, considering the citation impact as
a measure of the research quality.  We take the natural log value of it  with the addition of 1
(ln(PerYrCite+1)) to take into account the right-skewed distribution of this variable.
The third dependent variable is the measurement of the extent to which university scientist’s research
serves a knowledge input for developing technological application s. Patents are granted for
technologically novel, non-obvious, and industrially useful inventions, while patent’s citation to research
paper can be considered as a paper  trail of knowledge flow from scientific research to  technical
applications (Narin et al., 1 997; Narin and Noma, 1985; Verbeek et al., 2002) . Following this notion, we
consider that scientific knowledge in a research article contributed to developing technological

12

applications if the research article  was cited by patents.  To rule out an obvious mechanical re lationship
that is driven by the fact that scientists in national universities were encouraged to file patents after the
reform and those patents cite the scientist’s own research works (i.e., self-citation), we count the nonself-
patent citations only. Our third dependent variable CiteFrmPat is a binary variable that takes the value 1
if the focal scientist published at least one research paper that was cited by patents, 0 for otherwise.

4.2.  Independent Variables
In our analysis, we fit our data to the scientist-fixed effect (FE) panel DiD model. Toward this end, we
first generate a binary variable that takes the value of 1 for the scientists in national universities of Japan,
0 for the private universit y scientists (National). Then, we create another binary variable that takes the
value of 1 for the observation for the post-reform period (Post04). Last, we generate the interaction term
between National and Post04 (NationalxPost04). The regression coefficient of  NationalxPost04 is the
DiD estimator that quantifies the causal impact of the reform.

4.3. Control Variables
Several control variables are employed in regression to rule out  probable spurious relationship s
between the dependent and independent variables. First, we control for scientist’s research network size.
In Japan, the national university serves as the main venue for basic science  (Kneller, 2003; Oba, 2007;
Shibayama, 2011). Thus, it is plausible that scientists in national universities may have a broader research
network than those in private universities. Meanwhile, the research network size relates to the scientist’s
research activities as explored by a myriad number of studies. To rule out the research network size effect,
we introduce the number of coauthors of the focal scientist’s research articles. Because this variable is
mechanically dependent upon the number of  papers that the focal researcher published , we use  the
“average number of coauthors” per paper (AvgCouathors).
Next, we control for scientist’s cross-disciplinarity in research. In Japan, national universities are often
established with diverse academic disciplinary whereas private universities specialize in certain academic
fields in general. Accordingly, scientists in national universities  may have greater opportunities to
communicate and collaborate with researchers in various science disciplines. Given that combination of
existing knowledge in a variety of fields in a novel way is one of the sources of scientific creativity (Uzzi et
al., 2013) while the research collaboration across the disciplines grows over time, scientists in the national
university might have engaged more in cross-disciplinary research than the scientists in private
universities while it could drive the differential pattern in the dependent variables as time goes. To capture

13

this compounding effect, we control for the cross-disciplinarity of scientists’ research by using the number
of associated research areas (WoS Subject categories) to each scientists’ research papers (BreadthRes).
By the university reform , the governmental restriction on national universities ' ownership over
intellectual property right s such as patents was substantially relaxed . As a result, scientists in national
universities are likely to increasingly appear as the inventor in patents. Indeed, our data show that after
the reform 50% more national university scientists  filed patents than before the reform. Meanwhile ,
scientists who involve in the patenting process are perhaps  those who  have a particular interest in
developing technical applications using their research and this personal tendency could associate with the
nature of the research the scientist 's conduct. For instance, scientists who are active in patenting may
have a strong self- motivation f or commercializing the research outcomes  than others . To take into
account this, we introduce a binary variable that takes the value of 1 for scientists who filed patents as an
inventor, and 0 otherwise (InventorDummy).
Studies found that scientists’ career age is associated with their research activities. For instance, Zeng
et al. (2019) showed the extent to which a scientist switches research topics increases with the career age
at decreasing rate. It is also plausible that the higher the career age of a scientist, the more the established
research environment and the higher the career status in general. As studies discussed, the status of
university scientists (i.e., professorship) is  likely to associate with the extent to which the scientist ’s
research activity is influenced by external components such as funding source  (Arora and Gambardella,
2005; Goldfarb, 2008; Wang et al., 2018) . Meanwhile, because the mandatory retiree age is longer for
academic staff in private universities  than the national universities , the average academic age of
researchers in private universities co uld higher than that for the scientists  in national universities. This
probable systematic difference may generate a  heterogeneous distribution of the academic age of
scientists in national and private universities . To rule out this probable compounding effect, we control
for scientist’s career age fixed effect (Age FE). In our data, the career age of a scientist in the pre-reform
term is calculated as the year difference between 2004 and the earliest year of publication. For the post-
reform period, the academic age is calculated into the year difference between 2008 and the earliest year
of publication of the scientist.
We control for the extent to which the journals where a scientist published papers are related to the
applied research fields . We measure this based on the journal commercial impact factor (JCIF) that
quantifies the extent to which papers published in a  journal are cited by patents. We create a binary
variable JCIFDummy that takes the value of 1 if the journals where the scientist of interest published the

14

research papers have positive JCIFs. We obtain this data from the recently disclosed data Marx and Fuegi
(2019).
Last, CiteFrmPat is mechanically correlated with the number of research papers  that a scientist
published. To rule out the probable compounding effect driven by this mechanical relationship, we control
for nPubs in addition to the other control variables in regressing CiteFrmPat.

4.4. Descriptive Analysis
Table 1 presents the summary statistics of the key variables for the treated and comparison groups.
The data shows notable changes in the average of nPubs and CiteFrmPat for national university scientists
after the reform —the average of nPubs  and CiteFrmPat increased for the national university scientists
after 2004 more than those for the private university scientists. This observation suggests that the reform
might have boosted national university scientists’ research productivity and the extent to which their
research outcomes serve knowledge input for technological application development.
[Insert Table 1 about here]

A comparison of the average change in  AvgCouathors shows that, after the reform, the size of the
research collaboration network increased  more for national university scientists  than for private
university scientists. As expected, the mean of InventorDummy for national university scientists became
larger than that for private university scientists after 2004.
Table 2 presents the pairwise correlation among the variables. The absolute values of all the
correlations are below 0.5. No critical multi-collinearity issue is indicated.
[Insert Table 2 about here]

Figure 1 displays  the top 10 science disciplines of the  national and private  university scientists .
Scientist’s discipline was operationalized into the most frequently appeared  Web of Science Research
Area (WoS RA) of research papers that the scientist published from 200 to 2004.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]

Chemistry is the most populated field both for national and private universit y scientists followed by
Life Science. For a macro-level comparison, we aggregate the research areas into three groups based on

15

the WoS categorization scheme2— Life Science & Biomedicine, Physical Science, and Technology. Figure
2 profiles the distribution. In national universities, Physical Science was the most populated field and Life
Science follows. However, Life Science was the most prominent area among private university scientists
and Physical Science follows.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]

Figure 3 visualizes the mean values of the three dependent variables from 2000 to 2008 for each group
of university scientists. Figure 3-(a) presents that the average of nPubs of national university scientists is
greater than that of the private university scientist before the reform. This difference appears to be
widened after the reform.
[Insert Figure 3 about here]

Figure 3-(b) compares the mean values of ln(PerYrCite+1)  between the two groups of scientists.  In
both pre- and post-reform periods, the mean value for national university scientists is greater than that
for private university scientists. Whether the observed difference in the pre-reform period changes in the
post-reform period is not evident.
Figure 3-(c) compares the mean of CiteFrmPat. The mean values of the national university scientists
are seemingly overlapped with that of private universit y scientists in the pre -reform period. Yet, from
2005, the mean for national university scientists becomes greater than that for private university scientists
and this difference persists.

4.5. Regression Model
We fit our data to the two -term panel Difference -in-Difference (DiD) model.  The variables are
calculated by aggregating scientists’ research articles published in 2000-2003 (pre-reform) and 2005-2008
(post-reform), respectively. We control for the scientist -fixed effect to eliminate the effect of scientist-
level time-invariant characteristics. The following equation presents our main regression model.
𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 = 𝛽𝛽1𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖 × 𝑃𝑃𝑁𝑁𝑃𝑃𝑁𝑁04𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝛽𝛽2𝑃𝑃𝑁𝑁𝑃𝑃𝑁𝑁04𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝛾𝛾1𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝐴𝐴𝑁𝑁ℎ𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝛾𝛾2𝐵𝐵𝑜𝑜𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁ℎ𝑅𝑅𝐵𝐵𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
+ 𝛾𝛾3𝐼𝐼𝑁𝑁𝐴𝐴𝐵𝐵𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑜𝑜𝐼𝐼𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝛾𝛾4𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐵𝐵𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝛾𝛾5𝐽𝐽𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝑒𝑒𝐼𝐼𝐴𝐴𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝛾𝛾6𝑁𝑁𝑃𝑃𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 + 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 + 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡


2 Because the research papers published by the university scientists in our sample are limited to those published in
SCI(E) journals, the research areas of scientists in our data do not include Social Sciences or Arts & Humanities.
https://images.webofknowledge.com/images/help/WOS/hp_ research_areas_easca.html

16

Where 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 is the term for scientist -fixed effect and 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 is an idiosyncratic error. We choose to fit our
data to the conditional negative binomial model for regressing nPubs. For ln(PerYrCite+1) and CiteFrmPat,
we use the OLS regression model s. Note that 𝑁𝑁𝑃𝑃𝐴𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡  is introduced as a control variable  only when
regressing CiteFrmPat. To take into account the heteroskedasticity, we use the robust standard.

5. Results
5.1. Difference-in-Difference Analysis
Table 3 presents the main regression results. The DiD regression results without control variables are
reported in the first three columns. The estimation results with the full set of control variables are shown
from the fourth to the sixth columns.
[Insert Table 3 about here]

The results indicate that scientists in the national universities of Japan  published more research
papers than comparable private university  scientists after the reform . According to our estimation, a
national university scientist published 1.14 more research papers than a comparable private university
scientist. The coefficients of NationalxPost04 are statistically insignificant at the 0.1 significance level for
ln(PerYrCite+1). We found no evidence showing that the reform influenced the average research quality
of national university scientists.3
Meanwhile, a national university scientist ’s research papers were more likely to be cited by patents
than a comparable private university scientist after the reform. According to the estimation presented in
the third and sixth columns, 3 ~4% more national university scientists’  research papers were cited by
patents than private university scientists , and this was statistically significant at the  (at least)  0.1
significance level. We found modest evidence showing that the reform induced more national university
scientists to engage in research that serves the knowledge input for developing technological applications.

5.2. Multi-Term DiD with Matching
The key assumption of DiD for causal inference is that the time trend of outcome variables for treated
and comparison groups are parallel in the pre-treatment period. To ensure this assumption is not severely
violated, we conduct an additional analysis using a matched sample of scientists in national and private
universities of Japan . Our matching variables  are all the three dependent variables and the control

3 We also tested whether the maximum value of the paper age-normalized citation has changed after the reform
for robustness check. Our analysis finds no evidence on the change in the citation impact.

17

variables that were measured pre-reform period (i.e., from 2000 to 2003) . Our matching combines the
exact matching for the binary variable s and the nearest  neighborhood matching for the continuous
variables.
For each of the national university scientists, we search for private university scientists that have the
same ResearchArea, AcademicAge, InventorDummy, JCIFDummy, and nPubs  in 2004 as the national
university scientist. Among the matched private university scientists , we select one who is  the nearest
neighborhood, calculated based on the Euclidean distance for BreadthRes, AvgCouathors, ln(PerYrCite+1)
measured for the period between 2000 and 2003 . This matching procedure reduced our sample size to
2966 (1483 scientists in national and private universities, for each). Because our matching criteria include
all the covariates, we run regression without control variables. We fit our matched sample of university
scientists to the multi-period DiD regression model as follows.
𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 = � 𝛽𝛽𝑗𝑗 × 𝑌𝑌𝑅𝑅𝑗𝑗,𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 × 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
03
𝑗𝑗=00
+ � 𝜃𝜃𝑗𝑗 × 𝑌𝑌𝑅𝑅𝑗𝑗,𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 × 𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑁𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
08
𝑘𝑘=05
+ � 𝛾𝛾𝑗𝑗 × 𝑌𝑌𝑅𝑅𝑗𝑗,𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
03
𝑗𝑗=00
+ � 𝜂𝜂𝑗𝑗 × 𝑌𝑌𝑅𝑅𝑗𝑗.𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
08
𝑗𝑗=05
+ 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 + 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡
Where 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖  is the term for scientists  fixed effect, 𝑌𝑌𝑅𝑅𝑗𝑗.𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡  is a binary variable taking the value of 1 if the
datapoint corresponds to observation is for year j, and 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡 is an idiosyncratic error. Table 4 reports the
regression result using the matched scientist sample.
[Insert Table 4 about here]

The coefficients  𝛽𝛽𝑗𝑗  are, by and large , not far from  0. Especially, 𝛽𝛽02  and 𝛽𝛽03  (i.e., just before the
reform) are statistically insignificant at the 0.1 significance level except for the CiteFromPat. For the
CiteFrmpat, the coefficient of YR03xNational was significant at the 0.1 significance level.
In the first column, the coefficient  of YR05xNational is positively significant at the 0.1 significance
level and the coefficient of YR06xNational is positive and statistically significant at the 0.01 significance
level. However, the coefficients of YR07xNational and YR08xNational are statistically insignificant at the
0.1 significance level. The short-term positive effect of the reform on research productivity is confirmed.
In the second column, the coefficients of all the interaction terms from YR05xNational to YR08xNational
are statistically insignificant at the 0.1 significance level.  Consistent with our main regression analysis
results, there is no evidence showing that the reform affected  the average research quality of national
university scientists . In the third column, the coefficients of YR05xNational and YR07xNational are

18

positive and statistically significant at the  0.01 and  0.05 significance levels, respectively . Yet, the
coefficient of YR08xNational  is statistically insignificant at the 0.1 significance level. The short-lived
positive effect of the reform on the extent to which research outcome serves knowledge input for
technological application development is confirmed. All in all, our additional analysis yields consistent
findings with the main regression  analysis while additionally revealing that the observed impact of the
reform was rather short-lived. We discuss the probable reason in the discussion section.

5.3. Selection by Scientist Mobility
We used the data that includes the university scientists who were active in publishing while staying in
the same universities from 2000 to 2008. Yet, the use of this data could cause a sample selection for the
differential mobility of scientists. By the national university reform, the status of scientists in the national
universities changed to non-civil servants, which could lead some of the national university scientists to
leave the universities. By triggered mobilization of national university scientists, our sample may retain
the national  university scientists who decided to stay  in the same universitie s even after the reform
whereas private university scientists were unlikely to be subject to this self-selection issue. To empirically
check whether the scientist’s mobility differs between the national and private universities after the
reform, we conducted a  simple exercise by  using the samples of university scient ists who were in the
national or private universities of Japan before 2004. Then, we identify the scientists who changed their
affiliations after 2004  by referring to author affiliation information  in the research articles  that were
published after the reform.
Our data shows that about 6.1% of the national university scientists moved to different institutes after
the reform, whereas 5.5% of private university scientists did so. The difference was 0.6% point. Our t-test
indicates that this difference is statistically insignificant at the 0.1 significance  level (t=0.89, the p-value:
0.37). There is no evidence of  the differential mobility of scientists between the national and private
universities.

5.4. Selection by Performance Evaluation
Our sampling strategy selected the scientists who published at least one research paper before as well
as after the reform. A probable bias by this sampling strategy is that it could disproportionally exclude the
national university scientists who were not “ active” in research in the post-reform period compared to
the private university scientists because the academic staff’s performance evaluation was  implemented
in the national universities  after the reform . To test if this selection bias was behind our findings , we

19

examine whether a national university scientist less likely to be retained than a private university scientist
when applying our sampling strategy. We start by identifying all the university scientists who published at
least one research paper from 2000 to 2003. Then, we investigate how many of the national and private
university scientists  are excluded when we restrict our sample to  those who also published research
papers in the post-reform period.
Our test shows that 80.2% of private universit y scientists and 80.5% of the national university
scientists remained in the data. The t-test result presents that the difference is virtually zero (p-value=0.79,
t=-0.26), indicating no evidence of the selection bias.

5.5. Heterogeneous Effect
5.5.1. By Previous Experience in Patenting
Our main analysis found that the national university reform in Japan  enhanced university scientists’
productivity while stimulating them to engage in research  that contributes to developing technological
applications without deteriorating their research quality.
Which scientists were particularly influenced by the reform? Was the reform influential to scientists
who were not previously active in utilizing their knowledge for technical application  or effective to
researchers who were active in developing technical applications before the reform, or both? We believe
that exploring the answer to this question can draw more nuanced policy implications to understand “how”
the joint institutional changes shape the university research overall. If the impact was specific to  the
scientists who were already active in developing technical applications,  it implies that the scope of the
policy impact was somewhat targeted for helping those who had an interest in the commercial use of
their knowledge.  In contrast, if the impact was specific to scientists who were inactive in developing
technical applications beforehand , it indicates that the  change induced spreading the culture of
commercialization among university scientists.
Considering that an academic researcher’s patenting is  a revealed interest of the researcher in
developing the technological applications, w e operationalize a scientist’s  activeness in developing
technological application s before the reform  by employing the information of  whether the scientist
appeared in patent applications as an inventor from 2000 to 2003.
Then, we run separate regression for the group of scientists who were and were not appeared as
inventors of patents before the reform, respectively.  Table 5 and Table 6 present  the regression results
for each group of scientists.
[Insert Table 5  and Table 6 about here]

20


In Table 5, the coefficients of the Post04xNational are statistically insignificant at the 0.1 significance
level. In contrast, in Table 6,  the coefficients of Post04xNational are positive and statistically significant
at the 0.01 significance level for nPubs and the 0.05 significance level for CiteFrmPat. These findings imply
that that the impact of the reform was specific to the national university scientists who were inactive in
developing technological applications before the reform.

5.5.2. By Research Field
Because the extent to which scientific knowledge has  a close interface with technical application
differs by the domain of research , the impact of the university reform in Japan is likely to differ by the
research field. In the meantime, the field-level difference may also associate with the degree and the way
that individual scientists respond to the institutional environment change. For instance, in some field s,
individual scientist’s performance  and reputation  are evaluated based on their scientific research
achievements (e.g., research paper publication, citations, etc.) while, in other fields, t he impact of
research realized through commercialization the knowledge, establishing startups, and the collaboration
with the industrial partners , etc., could be  also importantly  considered. To elucidate  the probable
heterogeneity by the research domain , we conduct an additional analysis by dividing the scientists in to
three research domains – Life Science, Physical Science, and Technology. 4In our data, 2175 , 2599, and
905 scientists were in the Life Science, Physical Science, and Technology domain, respectively.
Table 7 to Table 9 report the regression results for the scientists in each of the three domains. In Table
7, the signs and statistical significances of the interaction terms NationalxPost04 are consistent with the
main regression results in Table 3. In Table 8, the coefficient of NationalxPost04 is positive and statistically
significant at the 0.1 significance level only for the nPubs. The rest of the regression shows no statistically
significant coefficients of the interaction term s at the 0.1 significance level.  For the scientists in the
Technology domain (Table 9), all the coefficients of the NationalxPost04 are statistically insignificant at
the 0.1 significance level.
[Insert Table 7, Table 8, and Table 9 about here]

Our separate regression analyses by the research domain find that the impact of the university reform
in Japan was specific to the scientists in the Life Science domain.

4 See section 4.4 for the details of field categorization and scientists grouping.

21

In sum , we showed that  the joint  institutional change for encouraging the commercial use of
university knowledge as well as promoting the research activities of university scientists (1) stimulated
their research productivity, and led more of them to (2) engage in research that serves knowledge inputs
for technological application development . Yet, (3) These effects were specific to scientists who were
inactive in developing technological applications before the reform and those who were in the Life Science
domain.

6. Discussion and Conclusion
The present study examined how university research is shaped by the joint institutional changes for
promoting the commercial use of university knowledge and scientific research by university scientists. Our
empirical analysis was based on Japan’s national university reform in 2004. The reform changed the status
of national universities to corporate entities, and as a result, various institutional measures for supporting
scientists’ “income-generating activities” were implemented. Also, as a result of the reform, the national
universities of Japan could devise a system for evaluating the academic staff’s research performance.
To estimate the causal effect of this joint institutional change, we conducted a DiD analysis using the
novel data on scientists in Japan’s national and private universit ies. Our analysis found that the reform
enhanced the research productivity of the national university scientists. This reform also induced more
national university scientists to engage  in the research that later served as a knowledge input for
developing technical applications. Additional analysis revealed that the observed effects were specific to
the scientists who were previously inactive in developing technological applications and those who were
in the Life Science domain.
 Our first two findings  imply that encouraged commercial use  of the university knowledge could
improve their research productivity while helping them to pursue the research that has commercial value
when an institutional device for promoting their research activities is supplemented.
Our analysis results also suggest that such institutional changes may direct university scientists to
engage more in research that has a closer interface with  technical application development. Given that
this effect was particular to those who were inactive in developing technical applications before the
reform, we argue that the reform has drawn more scientists to consider the commercial value of their
research.
We also observed that the impact of the joint institutional changes was specific to the scientists in Life
Science, which indicates the substantial field -level heterogeneity in the way and the extent to which
individual scientists respond to such external environment change for their research activities. This finding

22

is aligned with the prior studies that showed the complementary relationship between scientific research
activity and effort toward commercial use of the resulting knowledge in the Life Science domain (Azoulay
et al., 2009; Magerman et al., 2015) . In the meantime, our findings suggest that the presence of the
complementary relationship is unlikely to be omnipresent but depends on research fields, which calls for
accounting for such field-level heterogeneity in further relevant policy and scholarly discussion.
The concept of Pasteur Q uadrant (Stokes, 1997) is useful for  reasoning our findings. Stokes (1997)
explains that scientists can pursue the quest for a fundamental understanding of scientific principles while
considering the potential “use” of the resulting research outcomes (i.e., Pasteur domain). Scientists in the
Life Science domain  are often positioned in this environment as they pursue  fundamental scientific
understanding while the research outcome is often turned into practical  applications such as
pharmaceutical products, medical devices, etc . (i.e., the duality of knowledge) . To the scientists in this
domain, the joint institutional change for promoting commercial use of their  knowledge and for
implementation of a performance evaluation system  might have functioned to simulate their research
activities while leading more of them to actively consider the commercial use of the research outcomes.
In our analysis, we could not find evidence of the changed quality/impact of research by the reform.
This does not conclude  the absence of reform’s effect on  the average research quality/impact because
our analysis was only for the short -term effect  (i.e., for four years after the reform) . Instead, this
observation suggests that there is no empirical evidence supporting the concern that the reform could
divert scientist’s effort for basic science and retrograde the quality of research as a consequence.
In our multi -term DID analysis presented in Table 4, we additionally found that the impact  of the
reform on national universit y researchers fades away as time goes . Although there could be many
probable explanations, we argue that the emergence of the spill-over effect of the reform over time could
be one of the reasons. As the national and private universities researchers likely to be interconnected in
the research community (e.g., research collaboration), the impact of the reform to the national
universities’ researchers could have diffused to the private university researchers as time goes and, hence,
the observed differences  between national and private universities in their research performance
indicators after the reform have faded away.
The contribution of our study is twofold. First, our study expands  the scope of  the long- standing
discussion about how institutional change to facilitate the commercial use of university knowledge affects
science. The previous studies focused on empirical examination on whether promoting commercial use
of university knowled ge diverts scientists from engaging in fundamental research. In addition to these
studies, our study empirically showed that a joint introduction of an institutional measure for incentivizing

23

the university scientists ’ research activities may be worthy of consideration to  mitigate the probable
unintended consequence of promotion of the commercial use of university knowledge in science.
Second, our finding that the impact of the reform was specific  to scientists who were previously
inactive in developing technological applications provides a more nuanced university policy implication.
Studies have found that the institutional environ ment where university scientists locate in shapes  the
scientists’ commercial endeavors (Bercovitz and Feldman, 2008; Owen -Smith and Powell, 2001) . Our
study contributes to advancing this conclusion by empirically showing that national-wide university policy
change for establishing a supportive institutional environment for the commercial endeavor of university
scientists along with incentivizing their scientific research activities can stimulate “more” university
scientists to consider the commercial potential of the university knowledge while not deteriorating their
research activities.
The present study has limitations that we wish the future study to address. First, for the lack of data,
we could not untangle the effect of the institutional change for promoting commercial use of university
from the effect of institutionalizing the research performance evaluation. We believe that elucidating how
each of the changes worked and to what extent they become complementary to one another is helpful to
elaborate on the underlying dynamics.
Second, studies suggested that scientists’ characteristics such as age, gender, socio-economic status,
etc. are associated with their research outcomes (e.g., Bercovitz and Feldman, 2008; Wang et al., 2018) .
For the lack of data, our study could not explore what characteristics of individual scientists moderate the
impact of the reform. Exploring the moderators can provide nuanced implications for designing a better
university policy to promote science and the commercial use of its knowledge.
Third, the joint institutional change by the national university reform in Japan could influence the
mobility of the researchers as we discussed in section 5.3 (i.e., change in entry and exit of the researchers.)
Because researchers’ mobilization is a channel for knowledge transfer (Criscuolo, 2005) and an important
fact of inducing research collaboration (Kato and Ando, 2017) , examining how the reform might have
impacted the researchers ' mobility and their performance (e.g., Payumo et al., 2018)  could provide
additional implications for  a more comprehensive  evaluation of the impact of the national university
reform in Japan.

24

FIGURES

Figure 1. Top10 Research Area


Figure 2. Distribution of the Aggregated-Level Research Area
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Share (%)
national private
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
PhysicalSciences LifeSciences Biomedicine Technology
Share (%)
national private

25


Note: (a): nPbus, (b):ln(PerYrCite+1), (c): CiteFrmPat, -- Policy Window
Figure 3. Time Trend of Means of Dependent Variables

26

TABLES
Table 1. Summary Statistics
All (00-08) National Univ Researchers (n=4529)   Private Univ Researchers (n=1150)
Variables mean s.d min max Obs.   mean s.d min max Obs.
nPubs 8.06 10.24 1 304 9058  7.02 8.18 1 116 2300
ln(PerYrCite+1) 1.05 0.58 0 4.26 9058  0.90 0.53 0 3.64 2300
CiteFrmPat 0.44 0.50 0 1 9058  0.42 0.49 0 1 2300
AvgCoauthors 3.02 2.18 0 45 9058  3.34 2.28 0 38 2300
BreadthRes 3.50 2.23 1 17 9058  3.27 2.12 1 14 2300
InventorDummy 0.20 0.40 0 1 9058  0.15 0.35 0 1 2300
Age 10.02 6.62 1 27 9058  10.94 6.97 1 27 2300
JCIFDummy 0.95 0.23 0 1 9058   0.96 0.19 0 1 2300

Pre2004(00-03) National Univ Researchers (n=4529)   Private Univ Researchers (n=1150)
Variables mean s.d min max Obs.   mean s.d min max Obs.
nPubs 6.95 9.30 1 304 4529  6.48 7.38 1 71 1150
ln(PerYrCite+1) 1.02 0.58 0 4.08 4529  0.86 0.51 0 3.58 1150
CiteFrmPat 0.42 0.49 0 1 4529  0.43 0.50 0 1 1150
AvgCoauthors 2.79 1.77 0 16 4529  3.03 1.69 0 9 1150
BreadthRes 3.41 2.08 1 15 4529  3.27 2.01 1 14 1150
InventorDummy 0.16 0.37 0 1 4529  0.14 0.35 0 1 1150
Age 8.02 6.31 1 23 4529  8.94 6.68 1 23 1150
JCIFDummy 0.94 0.25 0 1 4529   0.97 0.18 0 1 1150

Post2004 (05-08) National Univ Researchers (n=4529)   Private Univ Researchers (n=1150)
Variables mean s.d min max Obs.   mean s.d min max Obs.
nPubs 9.18 10.99 1 287 4529  7.56 8.88 1 116 1150
ln(PerYrCite+1) 1.09 0.58 0 4.26 4529  0.94 0.54 0 3.64 1150
CiteFrmPat 0.46 0.50 0 1 4529  0.42 0.49 0 1 1150
AvgCoauthors 3.25 2.50 0 45 4529  3.64 2.71 0 38 1150
BreadthRes 3.59 2.36 1 17 4529  3.27 2.22 1 14 1150
InventorDummy 0.24 0.42 0 1 4529  0.15 0.36 0 1 1150
Age 12.02 6.31 5 27 4529  12.94 6.68 5 27 1150
JCIFDummy 0.96 0.21 0 1 4529   0.96 0.19 0 1 1150

27

Table 2. Correlation
  nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat AvgCoauthors* BreadthRes InventorDum Age JCIDum
nPubs 1.00
ln(PerYrCite+1) 0.13 1.00
CiteFrmPat 0.35 0.38 1.00
AvgCoauthors -0.26 0.10 -0.10 1.00
BreadthRes 0.44 0.17 0.32 -0.08 1.00
InventorDummy 0.19 0.05 0.14 -0.09 0.17 1.00
Age 0.41 -0.05 0.16 -0.14 0.24 0.17 1.00
JCIFDummy 0.12 0.16 0.19 0.00 0.15 0.05 0.08 1.00
Mean 7.85 1.02 0.44 3.09 3.45 0.19 10.20 0.95
S.D 9.87 0.57 0.50 2.20 2.21 0.39 6.70 0.22
Min 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0
Max 304 4.26 1 45 17 1 27 1
Obs. (Scientist) 5679 5679 5679 5679 5679 5679 5679 5679
Obs. (Panel) 11358 11358 11358 11358 11358 11358 11358 11358
*The value is 0 for the scientists who published research articles only as a solo author in 2004.

28

Table 3. Panel DiD Estimation
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
NationalxPost04 0.122*** -0.0111 0.0392** 0.0703*** -0.0148 0.0365*
 (0.0274) (0.0180) (0.0187) (0.0232) (0.0180) (0.0187)
Post04 0.135*** 0.0777*** -0.0342** 0.395*** 0.0761*** -0.0376
 (0.0247) (0.0160) (0.0168) (0.0397) (0.0206) (0.0242)
BreadthRes    0.141*** 0.0191*** 0.0222***
    (0.00404) (0.00384) (0.00412)
InventorDummy    0.00651 0.0386* 0.00408
    (0.0255) (0.0220) (0.0222)
AvgCoauthors    -0.155*** 0.0203*** -0.00751**
    (0.00611) (0.00467) (0.00322)
JCIFDummy    0.362*** 0.191*** 0.0605***
    (0.0467) (0.0275) (0.0191)
nPubs   0.0180***   0.0146***
   (0.00104)   (0.00111)
Constant 1.653*** 0.987*** 0.295*** 2.320*** 0.690*** 0.209***
 (0.0355) (0.00371) (0.00798) (0.155) (0.0636) (0.0680)
Observations 11,358 11,358 11,358 11,358 11,358 11,358
Number of Scientists 5,679 5,679 5,679 5,679 5,679 5,679
R-squared  0.015 0.059  0.040 0.070
Adjusted R-squared  0.0149 0.0585  0.0378 0.0678
Age FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Scientist FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Sample All All All All All All
Model NBREG OLS OLS NBREG OLS OLS
Robust standard errors in parentheses (Standard error for the negative binomial regression)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

29

Table 4. Multi-Term DiD Estimation using Matched Scientists Sample
 (1) (2) (3)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
YR00xNational -0.220*** -0.250*** 0.00674
 (0.0570) (0.0695) (0.0161)
YR01xNational 0.0325 -0.120* -0.0189
 (0.0547) (0.0692) (0.0173)
YR02xNational -0.0200 -0.0147 -0.0290
 (0.0487) (0.0668) (0.0177)
YR03xNational -0.00163 -0.0625 -0.0310*
 (0.0443) (0.0602) (0.0182)
YR05xNational 0.0733* 0.0499 0.0499***
 (0.0432) (0.0612) (0.0189)
YR06xNational 0.128*** 0.0957 0.0229
 (0.0449) (0.0631) (0.0188)
YR07xNational 0.0711 0.0499 0.0425**
 (0.0463) (0.0642) (0.0186)
YR08xNational -0.0228 -0.0708 -0.00202
 (0.0475) (0.0621) (0.0185)
YR00 -0.869*** -1.744*** -0.239***
 (0.0383) (0.0486) (0.0114)
YR01 -0.941*** -1.664*** -0.155***
 (0.0385) (0.0484) (0.0123)
YR02 -0.599*** -1.261*** -0.126***
 (0.0340) (0.0451) (0.0122)
YR03 -0.328*** -0.747*** -0.0910***
 (0.0309) (0.0400) (0.0128)
YR05 -0.256*** -0.864*** -0.106***
 (0.0304) (0.0419) (0.0130)
YR06 -0.381*** -1.197*** -0.0978***
 (0.0319) (0.0426) (0.0130)
YR07 -0.437*** -1.422*** -0.147***
 (0.0326) (0.0444) (0.0130)
YR08 -0.454*** -1.525*** -0.135***
 (0.0329) (0.0424) (0.0134)
Constant 2.676*** 3.015*** 0.244***
 (0.0967) (0.0178) (0.00666)
Observations 26,694 26,694 26,694
Number of Scientists 2,966 2,966 2,966
R-squared  0.140 0.045
Adjusted R-squared  0.140 0.0445
Scientist FE YES YES YES
Sample Matched Researchers Matched Researchers Matched Researchers
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

30

Table 5. Regression with Scientists having Experience in Patenting before the reform (from 2000 to 2003)
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
NationalxPost04 -0.0542 -0.0293 -0.0121 -0.0582 -0.0385 -0.0233
 (0.0660) (0.0508) (0.0476) (0.0557) (0.0517) (0.0476)
Post04 0.301*** 0.0798* 0.0180 0.437*** 0.0880 0.0817
 (0.0602) (0.0463) (0.0434) (0.0874) (0.0539) (0.0558)
BreadthRes    0.132*** 0.0313*** 0.0359***
    (0.00869) (0.00943) (0.00961)
AvgCoauthors    -0.177*** 0.0342** -0.0262**
    (0.0172) (0.0159) (0.0102)
JCIFDummy    0.366** 0.0927 0.0707
    (0.159) (0.0923) (0.0568)
nPubs   0.0136***   0.00835***
   (0.00173)   (0.00184)
Constant 1.685*** 1.038*** 0.407*** 1.943*** 0.675*** 0.172
 (0.0808) (0.00952) (0.0190) (0.367) (0.158) (0.142)
Observations 1,794 1,794 1,794 1,794 1,794 1,794
Number of Scientists 897 897 897 897 897 897
R-squared  0.010 0.056  0.053 0.098
Adjusted R-squared  0.00880 0.0546  0.0386 0.0840
Scientist FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Age FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Sample Inventor bf04=1 Inventor bf04=1 Inventor bf04=1 Inventor bf04=1 Inventor bf04=1 Inventor bf04=1
Model NBREG OLS OLS NBREG OLS OLS
Robust standard errors in parentheses (Standard error for the negative binomial regression)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

31

Table 6. Regression with Scientists having No Experience in Patenting before the reform
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
NationalxPost04 0.155*** -0.00767 0.0462** 0.102*** -0.00696 0.0451**
 (0.0301) (0.0193) (0.0203) (0.0253) (0.0192) (0.0202)
Post04 0.104*** 0.0774*** -0.0421** 0.374*** 0.0724*** -0.0571**
 (0.0270) (0.0170) (0.0183) (0.0456) (0.0228) (0.0270)
BreadthRes    0.144*** 0.0170*** 0.0186***
    (0.00457) (0.00420) (0.00459)
AvgCoauthors    -0.153*** 0.0185*** -0.00563*
    (0.00654) (0.00481) (0.00340)
JCIFDummy    0.360*** 0.201*** 0.0548***
    (0.0488) (0.0288) (0.0203)
nPubs   0.0195***   0.0165***
   (0.00128)   (0.00139)
Constant 1.648*** 0.977*** 0.273*** 2.460*** 0.717*** 0.231***
 (0.0396) (0.00402) (0.00895) (0.181) (0.0708) (0.0779)
Observations 9,564 9,564 9,564 9,564 9,564 9,564
R-squared  0.016 0.061  0.042 0.071
Adjusted R-squared  0.0160 0.0606  0.0393 0.0683
Number of Scientists 4,782 4,782 4,782 4,782 4,782 4,782
Scientist FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Age FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Sample Inventor bf04=0 Inventor bf04=0 Inventor bf04=0 Inventor bf04=0 Inventor bf04=0 Inventor bf04=0
Model NBREG OLS OLS NBREG OLS OLS
Robust standard errors in parentheses (Standard error for the negative binomial regression)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

32

Table 7. Regression with Scientists in Life Science domain
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
NationalxPost04 0.208*** -0.0237 0.0570** 0.148*** -0.0169 0.0584**
 (0.0408) (0.0278) (0.0274) (0.0347) (0.0280) (0.0275)
Post04 0.0432 0.0970*** -0.0565** 0.583*** 0.0778** -0.0927**
 (0.0353) (0.0233) (0.0235) (0.107) (0.0356) (0.0422)
BreadthRes    0.144*** 0.0124** 0.0142**
    (0.00609) (0.00584) (0.00619)
InventorDummy    -0.0556 0.00519 0.0326
    (0.0483) (0.0411) (0.0394)
AvgCoauthors    -0.113*** 0.0210*** -0.00429
    (0.00731) (0.00601) (0.00430)
JCIFDummy    0.327*** 0.193*** 0.0660*
    (0.0711) (0.0452) (0.0338)
nPubs   0.0287***   0.0245***
   (0.00225)   (0.00256)
Constant 1.875*** 1.038*** 0.278*** 3.687*** 0.751*** 0.319**
 (0.0696) (0.00637) (0.0128) (0.520) (0.128) (0.138)
Observations 4,350 4,350 4,350 4,350 4,350 4,350
R-squared  0.018 0.076  0.051 0.089
Adjusted R-squared  0.0175 0.0749  0.0446 0.0830
Number of Scientists 2,175 2,175 2,175 2,175 2,175 2,175
Age FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Scientist FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Sample LifeSci LifeSci LifeSci LifeSci LifeSci LifeSci
Model NBREG OLS OLS NBREG OLS OLS
Robust standard errors in parentheses (Standard error for the negative binomial regression)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

33

Table 8. Regression with Scientists in Physical Science domain
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
NationalxPost04 0.0691* 0.00692 0.0186 0.0541 0.000494 0.0215
 (0.0415) (0.0258) (0.0302) (0.0341) (0.0257) (0.0303)
Post04 0.194*** 0.0524** -0.0229 0.293*** 0.0579** -0.0385
 (0.0378) (0.0230) (0.0278) (0.0526) (0.0293) (0.0348)
BreadthRes    0.138*** 0.0206*** 0.0234***
    (0.00634) (0.00611) (0.00670)
InventorDummy    0.0256 0.0517* -0.00135
    (0.0345) (0.0302) (0.0311)
AvgCoauthors    -0.223*** 0.0169** -0.0104*
    (0.0112) (0.00840) (0.00548)
JCIFDummy    0.543*** 0.263*** 0.0463
    (0.0858) (0.0500) (0.0353)
nPubs   0.0157***   0.0130***
   (0.00128)   (0.00137)
Constant 1.553*** 1.004*** 0.331*** 1.829*** 0.630*** 0.259***
 (0.0481) (0.00526) (0.0116) (0.198) (0.0924) (0.0931)
Observations 5,198 5,198 5,198 5,198 5,198 5,198
R-squared  0.012 0.057  0.040 0.072
Adjusted R-squared  0.0112 0.0565  0.0347 0.0665
Number of Scientist 2,599 2,599 2,599 2,599 2,599 2,599
Age FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Scientist FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Sample PhysicalSci PhysicalSci PhysicalSci PhysicalSci PhysicalSci PhysicalSci
Model NBREG OLS OLS NBREG OLS OLS
Robust standard errors in parentheses (Standard error for the negative binomial regression)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

34

Table 9. Regression with Scientists in Technology Domain
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
VARIABLES nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat nPubs ln(PerYrCite+1) CiteFrmPat
NationalxPost04 -0.0279 -0.0109 -0.00836 -0.0156 -0.0386 -0.0192
 (0.0818) (0.0607) (0.0489) (0.0684) (0.0595) (0.0478)
Post04 0.276*** 0.0837 0.0387 0.519*** 0.0744 0.0700
 (0.0765) (0.0578) (0.0451) (0.116) (0.0592) (0.0636)
BreadthRes    0.145*** 0.0443*** 0.0256**
    (0.0103) (0.00968) (0.0108)
InventorDummy    0.0298 0.0572 -0.00176
    (0.0616) (0.0535) (0.0548)
AvgCoauthors    -0.230*** 0.0130 -0.00118
    (0.0211) (0.0145) (0.0111)
JCIFDummy    0.225** 0.0902* 0.0595*
    (0.0894) (0.0466) (0.0304)
nPubs   0.0145***   0.0112***
   (0.00230)   (0.00266)
Constant 1.608*** 0.813*** 0.186*** 3.142*** 0.652*** -0.00181
 (0.0866) (0.00884) (0.0192) (0.491) (0.126) (0.150)
Observations 1,810 1,810 1,810 1,810 1,810 1,810
R-squared  0.019 0.058  0.070 0.077
Adjusted R-squared  0.0181 0.0562  0.0552 0.0620
Number of Scientists 905 905 905 905 905 905
Age FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Scientist FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Sample Technology Technology Technology Technology Technology Technology
Model NBREG OLS OLS NBREG OLS OLS
Robust standard errors in parentheses (Standard error for the negative binomial regression)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

35

REFERENCES
1. Agrawal, A., Henderson, R., 2002. Putting patents in context: Exploring knowledge transfer
from MIT. Management science 48, 44-60.
2. Alvesson, M., Sandberg, J., 2013. Has management studies lost its way? Ideas for more
imaginative and innovative research. Journal of Management Studies 50, 128-152.
3. Argyres, N.S., Liebeskind, J.P., 1998. Privatizing the intellectual commons: Universities and
the commercialization of biotechnology. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 35,
427-454.
4. Arora, A., Gambardella, A., 2005. The impact of NSF support for basic research in economics.
Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 91-117.
5. Azoulay, P., Ding, W., Stuart, T., 2009. The impact of academic patenting on the rate, quality
and direction of (public) research output. The Journal of Industrial Economics 57, 637-676.
6. Bercovitz, J., Feldman, M., 2008. Academic entrepreneurs: Organizational change at the
individual level. Organization science 19, 69-89.
7. Bevan, G., Hood, C., 2006 . What’s measured is what matters: targets and gaming in the
English public health care system. Public administration 84, 517-538.
8. Boudreau, K.J., Guinan, E.C., Lakhani, K.R., Riedl, C., 2016. Looking across and looking
beyond the knowledge frontier: Intel lectual distance, novelty, and resource allocation in
science. Management science 62, 2765-2783.
9. Butler, L., 2003. Explaining Australia’s increased share of ISI publications —the effects of a
funding formula based on publication counts. Research Policy 32, 143-155.
10. Calderini, M., Franzoni, C., Vezzulli, A., 2007. If star scientists do not patent: The effect of
productivity, basicness and impact on the decision to patent in the academic world.
Research Policy 36, 303-319.
11. Christensen, T., 2011. Japanese university reform —hybridity in governance and
management. Higher Education Policy 24, 127-142.
12. Cohen, W.M., Florida, R., Randazzese, L., Walsh, J., 1998. Industry and the academy: uneasy
partners in the cause of technological advance. Challenges to research universities 171, 59.
13. Criscuolo, P., 2005. On the road again: Researcher mobility inside the R&D network.
Research Policy 34, 1350-1365.
14. David, P.A., 2004. Can" open science" be protected from the evolving regime of IPR
protections? Journal of Institutio nal and Theoretical Economics (JITE)/Zeitschrift für die
gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 9-34.
15. Fabrizio, K.R., Di Minin, A., 2008. Commercializing the laboratory: Faculty patenting and the
open science environment. Research Policy 37, 914-931.
16. Frost, J., Brock mann, J., 2014. When qualitative productivity is equated with quantitative
productivity: Scholars caught in a performance paradox. Zeitschrift für
Erziehungswissenschaft 17, 25-45.
17. Geuna, A., Martin, B.R., 2003. University research evaluation and funding: An international
comparison. Minerva 41, 277-304.
18. Goldfarb, B., 2008. The effect of government contracting on academic research: Does the
source of funding affect scientific output? Research Policy 37, 41-58.
19. Goldfarb, B., Henrekson, M., 2003. Bottom -up ve rsus top -down policies towards the
commercialization of university intellectual property. Research Policy 32, 639-658.

36

20. Goldfarb, B., Marschke, G., Smith, A., 2009. Scholarship and inventive activity in the
university: complements or substitutes? Economics of Innovation and New Technology 18,
743-756.
21. Heinrich, C.J., Marschke, G., 2010. Incentives and their dynamics in public sector
performance management systems. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 29, 183 -
208.
22. Henderson, R., Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg,  M., 1998. Universities as a source of commercial
technology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965 –1988. Review of Economics
and statistics 80, 119-127.
23. Hicks, D., 2009. Evolving regimes of multi-university research evaluation. Higher Education
57, 393-404.
24. Hicks, D., 2012. Performance-based university research funding systems. Research Policy 41,
251-261.
25. Ikeuchi, K., Motohashi, K., 2020. Linkage of Patent and Design Right Data: Analysis of
Industrial Design Activities in Companies at the Creator Level. Research Institute of Economy,
Trade and Industry (RIETI).
26. Jaffe, A.B., 1989. Real effects of academic research. The American economic review, 957 -
970.
27. Jensen, R., Thursby, M., 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licensing of university
inventions. American Economic Review 91, 240-259.
28. Kang, B., Motohashi, K., 2020. Academic contribution to industrial innovation by funding
type. Scientometrics, 1-25.
29. Kato, M., Ando, A., 2017. National ties of international scientific collaboration and
researcher mobility found in Nature and Science. Scientometrics 110, 673-694.
30. Kneller, R., 2003. University -industry cooperation and technology transfer in Japan
compared with the United States: Another reason for Japan's economic malaise. U. Pa. J.
Int'l Econ. L. 24, 329.
31. Lach, S., Schankerman, M., 2008. Incentives and invention in universities. The RAND Journal
of Economics 39, 403-433.
32. Magerman, T., Van Looy, B., Debackere, K., 2015. Does involvement in patenting jeopardize
one’s academic footprint? An analys is of patent -paper pairs in biotechnology. Research
Policy 44, 1702-1713.
33. Marx, M., Fuegi, A., 2019. Reliance on Science: Worldwide Front -Page Patent Citations to
Scientific Articles. Boston University Questrom School of Business Research Paper.
34. Merton, R. K., 1973. The sociology of science: Theoretical and empirical investigations.
University of Chicago press.
35. Motohashi, K., Muramatsu, S., 2012. Examining the university industry collaboration policy
in Japan: Patent analysis. Technology in Society 34, 149-162.
36. Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R., Sampat, B.N., Ziedonis, A.A., 2004. Ivory tower and industrial
innovation: University -industry technology transfer before and after the Bayh -Dole Act.
Stanford University Press.
37. Murray, F., Stern, S., 2007. Do formal intelle ctual property rights hinder the free flow of
scientific knowledge?: An empirical test of the anti -commons hypothesis. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization 63, 648-687.

37

38. Narin, F., Hamilton, K.S., Olivastro, D., 1997. The increasing linkage between US technology
and public science. Research Policy 26, 317-330.
39. Narin, F., Noma, E., 1985. Is technology becoming science? Scientometrics 7, 369-381.
40. Nelson, R.R., 1993. National innovation systems: a comparative analysis. Oxford University
Press on Demand.
41. Nelson, R.R., 2001. Observations on the post -Bayh-Dole rise of patenting at American
universities. Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 13.
42. Nelson, R.R., 2004. The market economy, and the scientific commons. Research Policy 33,
455-471.
43. Oba, J., 2007. Incor poration of national universities in Japan. Asia Pacific journal of
education 27, 291-303.
44. Owen-Smith, J., Powell, W.W., 2001. To patent or not: Faculty decisions and institutional
success at technology transfer. The Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 99-114.
45. Partha, D., David, P.A., 1994. Toward a new economics of science. Research Policy 23, 487-
521.
46. Payumo, J.G., Lan, G., Arasu, P., 2018. Researcher mobility at a US research -intensive
university: Implications for research and internationalization strateg ies. Research
evaluation 27, 28-35.
47. Penfield, T., Baker, M.J., Scoble, R., Wykes, M.C., 2014. Assessment, evaluations, and
definitions of research impact: A review. Research evaluation 23, 21-32.
48. Rhoten, D., Powell, W.W., 2007. The frontiers of intellectual property: Expanded protection
versus new models of open science. Annu. Rev. Law Soc. Sci. 3, 345-373.
49. Rosell, C., Agrawal, A., 2009. Have university knowledge flows narrowed?: Evidence from
patent data. Research Policy 38, 1-13.
50. Shibayama, S., 2011. Dist ribution of academic research funds: a case of Japanese national
research grant. Scientometrics 88, 43-60.
51. Shibayama, S., 2012. Conflict between entrepreneurship and open science, and the
transition of scientific norms. The Journal of Technology Transfer 37, 508-531.
52. Shimoda, R., 2004. Intellectual Property Management of National University Corporations-
Shift to Institutional Ownership and its New Challenges. Journal of Intellectual Property
Association of Japan 1, 43-51.
53. Smith, P., 1993. Outcome ‐related Performance Indicators and Organizational Control in
the Public Sector 1. British journal of Management 4, 135-151.
54. Stokes, D.E., 1997. Pasteur's quadrant: Basic science and technological innovation.
Brookings Institution Press.
55. Szücs, F., 2018. Research sub sidies, industry –university cooperation and innovation.
Research Policy 47, 1256-1266.
56. Tapinos, E., Dyson, R., Meadows, M., 2005. The impact of the performance measurement
systems in setting the ‘direction’in the University of Warwick. Production Planning & Control
16, 189-198.
57. Thursby, J.G., Thursby, M.C., 2003. University licensing and the Bayh-Dole act. Science 301.
58. Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M., Jones, B., 2013. Atypical combinations and scientific
impact. Science 342, 468-472.

38

59. Van Looy, B., Callaert, J., Debackere, K., 2006. Publication and patent behavior of academic
researchers: Conflicting, reinforcing or merely co-existing? Research Policy 35, 596-608.
60. Van Thiel, S., Leeuw, F.L., 2002. The performance paradox in the public sector. Public
performance & management review 25, 267-281.
61. Verbeek, A., Debackere, K., Luwel, M., Andries, P., Zimmermann, E., Deleus, F., 2002. Linking
science to technology: Using bibliographic references in patents to build linkage schemes.
Scientometrics 54, 399-420.
62. Veugelers, R., Cassiman, B., 2005. R&D cooperation between firms and universities. Some
empirical evidence from Belgian manufacturing. International Journal of Industrial
Organization 23, 355-379.
63. Wang, J., Lee, Y.-N., Walsh, J.P., 2018. Funding model and creativity in science: Competitive
versus block funding and status contingency effects. Research Policy 47, 1070-1083.
64. Wang, J., Veugelers, R., Stephan, P., 2017. Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale
for users of bibliometric indicators. Research Policy 46, 1416-1436.
65. Watanabe, S.P., 2011. Impacts of university education reform on faculty perceptions of
workload. Asia Pacific journal of education 31, 407-420.
66. Woolgar, L., 2007. New institutional policies for university–industry links in Japan. Research
Policy 36, 1261-1274.
67. Yamamoto, K., 2004. Corporatization of national universities in Japan: revolution for
governance or rhetoric for downsizing? Financial Accountability & Management 20, 153 -
181.
68. Youtie, J., Shapira, P., 2008. Building an innovation hub: A case study of the transformation
of university roles in regional technological and economic development. Research Policy 37,
1188-1204.
69. Zeng, A., Shen, Z., Zhou, J., Fan, Y., Di, Z., Wang, Y., Stanley, H.E., Havlin, S., 2019. Increasing
trend of scientists to switch between topics. Nature communications 10, 1-11.
