
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
EXPORT CONTROLS AND THE US-CHINA TECH WAR
Policy challenges for Europe
By Noah Barkin | MERICS Visiting Academic Fellow
March 18, 2020

MERICS
CHINA
MONITOR
PERSPECTIVES

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 2
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
MAIN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 With the rollout of export controls on emerging technologies starting in
2020, the United States has opened a new front in its confrontation with
China. This marks a shift from defensive measures to more offensive tools.
 Over the past year, the US has engaged in an aggressive campaign to
convince European partners to ban Chinese suppliers from their 5G net-
works. Its push to curb the transfer of sensitive technologies to China risks
becoming a new source of transatlantic tension in the years ahead.
 In a world of deeply integrated, global supply chains, European govern-
ments view export controls as a blunt instrument for tackling the risks
tied to new technologies. They are skeptical about the US administration’s
aims, seeing controls as part of a broader push to contain China.
 Despite this scepticism, European countries can neither ignore the US
push nor refuse to engage with Washington as it presses ahead with its
plans. On the contrary, Europe must formulate its own, considered approach to
the transfer of sensitive technologies. Affected member states must coordi-
nate their work more effectively and consider giving the European Commission
a broader mandate, as they have done on investment screening and 5G.
 The EU faces unique structural hurdles in responding to the US push to re-
strict emerging technology transfers. Despite a years-old legislative push to
reform the EU’s dual-use regulations, the bloc still has a weak mandate on ex-
port controls and limited scope to ramp up its scrutiny of emerging technologies.

 The EU and its member states are not well positioned to address highly
complex policy questions at the nexus of technology and security. While
officials in some member states have begun to wrestle with these questions,
there is a lack of high-level political attention, hindering progress, and leaving
the bloc vulnerable.
 The United States has been reaching out to allies on a bilateral basis and
in various ad-hoc and established forums, including multilateral regimes
like the Wassenaar Arrangement, to get their buy-in. But there is a risk
that Washington loses patience with Europe and other allies if they move too
slowly and goes down a unilateral path. This could expose European companies
to secondary sanctions.
 Those EU states that are most affected should consider creating new
structures to address risks at the intersection of trade, technology and
security. They should formalise coordination and information exchange with
other EU governments and ensure this exchange is grounded in a European
process involving the Commission, which needs a more robust mandate to
tackle the growing emerging technology challenge.
 States should accelerate efforts to bring outside experts from business
and academia into the policy discussion. And they need to establish a more
regular, structured dialogue on emerging security challenges with partners
outside of Europe, particularly in Asia.
EXPORT CONTROLS AND THE US-CHINA TECH WAR
Policy challenges for Europe
By Noah Barkin | MERICS Visiting Academic Fellow

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 3
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020

Player or playground?
EU must develop own approach to emerging tech challenge
© MERICS
CONTESTED ISSUES
US – EU – CHINA
5G
EMERGING TECHNOLOGY EXPORTS
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
RESEARCH COLLABORATION
0 0

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 4
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
1. Export controls open new front in
US-China tech war
“The EU has the option of becoming a player,
a true geo-strategic actor, or being mostly the playground.”
—— Josep Borrell, High Representative of the EU for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy1
On January 3, 2020, the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) at the US Depart-
ment of Commerce unveiled the first in a series of proposed rules to limit the
export of emerging technologies2. The announcement did not garner much in the
way of public attention. After all, it was highly technical in nature (the technology
in question was software to automate the analysis of geospatial imagery). But
symbolically, the move was significant: it was the first shot from a new front in
the Trump administration’s accelerating technology war with China.
Over the past two years, the United States has unveiled a dizzying array of
new legislation aimed at China. The Foreign Investment Risk Review Modern-
ization Act (FIRRMA) of 2018 and the Executive Order on Information and Com-
munications Technology and Services (ICTS) of 2019 can be seen as defensive
measures designed to shield US companies, technology and critical infrastructure
from Chinese investors and suppliers. But the Export Control Reform Act (ECRA)
– together with the administration’s liberal use of the Entity List, an export black-
list targeting end-users rather than products – has set the stage for a more offen-
sive approach: a campaign to prevent China from obtaining vital technologies that
the United States suspects could be used for military purposes 3.
While emerging technologies have always been part of the discussion on
export controls, ECRA, signed into law by President Donald Trump in August 2018,
signals a new, more intense focus on this area as part of the administration’s ag-
gressive “whole of government” response to China’s rise as an economic, military
and, increasingly, geopolitical power. ECRA grew out of a Department of Defense
report in early 2018, which described intense Chinese government efforts in Sili-
con Valley to acquire advanced technologies4.
In explaining the new focus on restricting exports of these technologies,
US government officials have highlighted China’s “Military-Civil Fusion” (MCF)
strategy under President Xi Jinping. “Simply put, in the context of MCF, it is im-
possible to rely upon any Chinese promise of purely peaceful or civilian end
use if the technology in question has value to China’s security services or its
military,” Christopher Ford, Assistant Secretary of State for International Security
and Non-proliferation said in September 2019 5. Because China has blurred the
lines between the civil and military spheres as part of an overarching strategy,
the administration’s argument goes, a broader interpretation of what constitutes
dual-use technologies is warranted.
There are divisions within the US government about the extent to which
export controls can and should be used to limit the transfer of new technologies
to China6. Memories are still fresh of efforts in the 1990s to restrict the export
of satellite technology, a campaign that backfired spectacularly when US man-
ufacturers simply moved their operations abroad 7. But the broad push enjoys bi-
partisan support in the US Congress and is likely to remain a pillar of US policy,
regardless of who is sitting in the White House.
Three months after ECRA was signed into law, the BIS unveiled a list of 14
broad technology categories (see exhibit 1) that it said would be evaluated for
possible national security risks.
Exhibit 1
Initial focus
Washington eyes export controls in confrontation with China
US list of 14 emerging technologies
Source: U.S. Federal Register – Review of Controls for Certain Emerging Technologies
© MERICS
Artificial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning
technology
Quantum information
 and sensing
technology
Additive
manufacturing
(3D printing)
Advanced computing
technology
Position, Navigation
and Timing (PNT)
technology
Data analytics
technology
Brain-computer
interfaces
Advanced
Materials
Biotechnology
Microprocessor
technology
Logistics
technology
Robotics
Advanced
surveillance
technologies
Hypersonics

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 5
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
It spent a year analyzing these technologies and seeking feedback from industry,
experts and allies. After issuing its first rule proposal on January 3, the US campaign
is poised to accelerate in 2020 as the United States rolls out additional export
controls and ramps up pressure on allies, including those in Europe, to follow its
lead. It has signaled that its initial focus will be on artificial intelligence, quantum
computing and 3D-printing. Later it is expected to turn to so-called foundational
technologies like semiconductor manufacturing equipment and design tools.
The case of Dutch company ASML (see case study/box 1) shows that the
United States has already begun heaping pressure on allies to restrict exports
of certain goods to China 8. Recent signals that Washington is considering reduc-
ing the 25 percent US content threshold above which it can require a US export
license from foreign companies suggests a much more aggressive approach going
forward9. Indeed, after an intense, aggressive US lobbying campaign in 2019 to
convince European allies to exclude Chinese suppliers from their 5G networks,
the debate over restricting transfers of sensitive technologies has the potential
to become an even bigger and more enduring source of transatlantic tension in
the years ahead.
2. Europe views US export restrictions with
skepticism
“Historically, export controls have been an instrument of economic
warfare. They have depended on a clear-cut idea of an enemy.
Europe doesn’t perceive China as the enemy. But it still has to think
about this. The US is moving fast. It forces Europe to take a position”
—— Mario Daniels, Georgetown University10
The US push to restrict exports of sensitive technologies to China has significant
implications for European states and industry and will confront the EU with a se-
ries of difficult choices beginning in 2020. The EU shares many of Washington’s
concerns about China, from its aggressive pursuit of western technology and vast
surveillance state, to its growing military ambitions and human rights record. Yet
while a rough European consensus has emerged in recent years on the use of de-
fensive measures to shield companies and critical infrastructure from acquisitive
Chinese rivals, there is a healthy skepticism in European capitals about Washing-
ton’s use of offensive economic tools, such as export controls, to counter China.
First, export controls are seen by many in Europe as a blunt, antiquated in-
strument for curbing technology transfers in a world where supply chains are
deeply integrated and global. The fear is that they will inhibit innovation and
disrupt value chains, doing self-inflicted damage to home-grown companies and
industries.
Second, there are concerns that the US effort is being driven not by a fear
that western technology could be used by the Chinese for military purposes, but
rather by a desire to contain China’s technological rise more generally. This is not
a goal that European countries support. Unlike officials in the Trump administra-
tion, they do not see themselves in a zero-sum competition with China and are
reluctant to take steps that amount to a form of economic warfare. Third, there
is a fear, particularly in European industry, that the US push is part of an “America
First” industrial policy meant to shore up US companies and industries at the ex-
pense of foreign rivals.
Despite these misgivings, Europe cannot afford to ignore the US campaign
nor refuse to engage with Washington and other allies on what in some cases
may be legitimate concerns relating to the spread of sensitive technologies to
an authoritarian China. On the contrary, whether European countries ultimately
decide to go along with the United States in restricting the export of certain tech-
nologies or to push back against these new controls, Europe needs to formulate
its own approach to this issue – as it has tried to do on foreign direct investment
from China and security risks related to the rollout of 5G mobile networks. If it
fails to do so, the risk is an “every country for itself” approach which opens up new
divisions between European states and undermines the leverage of the EU as an
actor on trade matters.
Although emerging technology questions may not have been at the front
of new European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen’s mind when she
promised to make the EU executive a geopolitical force, it is likely that they will
end up being at the very heart of this challenge 11. As in 2019, when the Trump
administration pulled out of the Iran nuclear deal, European companies face a risk
of extra-territorial sanctions from Washington if they continue to export technol-
ogies that are subject to US controls. Without its own considered strategy and
without the tools to implement it, Europe risks being thrust onto the defensive.
Export controls
are seen by many
in Europe as a
blunt, antiquated
instrument

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 6
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
3. Europe faces internal challenges in
responding to US tech push
“We have taken more than three years to discuss just one of the
14 technology categories on the US list and we can’t even agree on that.”
—— Paul Diegel, senior policy adviser, European Parliament 12
European states and the European Union face a number of internal challenges,
both short and longer term, in responding to US export controls on emerging tech-
nologies. They need to move beyond a years-long impasse over the reform of
their own export control rules, raise technology considerations to the top of the
political agenda and think creatively about moving beyond old, siloed structures
to tackle the growing nexus between technology and security.
3.1 MOVING BEYOND THE LEGISLATIVE IMPASSE
The Trump administration’s new focus on restricting exports of sensitive technol-
ogies has come at an awkward time for the EU, which has been bogged down for
years in a legislative effort to reform its own dual-use export control regime. This
process was fueled not by concerns about China, but rather reports that cyber-
surveillance technology – one of the 14 categories on the BIS list of emerging
technologies – originating from Europe had been used by authoritarian regimes to
suppress democratic uprisings during the Arab Spring.
The failure to clinch a deal on this narrow technology grouping after nearly
3.5 years of negotiations has raised doubts about whether Europe will ever be
united or nimble enough to tackle the array of more complex questions that loom
in the escalating US tech war with China. Therefore, moving beyond this legisla-
tive impasse in the first half of 2020 – a task which could be complicated by travel
restrictions linked to the coronavirus epidemic – should be a top priority for the EU
and its member states.
While the EU has a mandate from its members to negotiate trade deals on
their behalf, its powers in the realm of export controls remain limited. Until now,
the bloc has been a rule-taker rather than a rule-maker. The EU adopts one-for-
one controls that are agreed in multilateral regimes like the Wassenaar Arrange-
ment, but it does not have the power to add controls itself 13. Nor does it have a
formal mandate to explore dual-use risks tied to emerging technologies.
Addressing these deficiencies is essential if the EU is to engage with allies
and defend the interests of its member states in the intensifying debate over
technology transfers. In a worst-case scenario for Europe, the US could come out
with a full-fledged list of US export controls in 2020 and Europe would be pow-
erless to deliver a collective response. Then US secondary sanctions could come
into play. Against this backdrop, the least bad option for the EU may be to break
its multi-year deadlock and conclude a limited deal under the Croatian presidency
Exhibit 2
High-tech sales to China have nearly tripled in a decade
EU high-tech exports to China 2008 – 2018 (EUR Million)
Source: Eurostat
© MERICS
41,717
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
50,000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 7
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
of the EU in the first half of 2020, even if it stops short of giving the Commis-
sion the greater autonomy it is seeking. The bloc could then pivot quickly during
Germany’s presidency in the second half of the year to a focused appraisal of
emerging technology risks.
The Commission, building on a series of informal workshops it has organized,
could be given a coordinating mandate, like the one it received for investment
screening and 5G. Still, if the Commission does not get the greater autonomy on
export controls that it has sought, the EU will remain reliant on the multilateral
regime process and struggle to respond to the US push in a joined-up manner.
3.2 PUSHING TECHNOLOGY TRANSFERS UP THE POLITICAL PRIORITY LIST
“On content, the emerging technology issue is very similar to 5G
and investment screening. But as far as the political attention goes
there is a big difference. This simply isn’t a top priority.”
—— Senior official from a large EU member state14
Although officials in some European member states have begun to wrestle with
the question of restrictions on emerging technologies, progress has been hin-
dered by a lack of political attention at the highest levels. This was not the case
for investment screening. In early 2017, the German, French and Italian govern-
ments, unsettled by a flurry of Chinese acquisitions on the Continent, asked the
European Commission to take a closer look at Europe’s foreign investment rules.
The Commission produced a proposal half a year later, and by the end of 2018 an
agreement had been clinched between the Commission, Parliament and Council to
centralize scrutiny of foreign investments.
The comparatively slow progress on reform of the EU’s dual-use export con-
trol regime shows that giving the European Commission more powers in this do-
main is not at the top of the political priority list. The irony, as several European of-
ficials pointed out, is that technology leakage via exports is greater than with FDI.
While the United States sees export controls and FDI screening as closely linked,
complementary tools, European politicians are only slowly waking up to potential
risks tied to technology exports. In Europe, the discussion has focused mainly on
human rights violations in relation to cyber-surveillance and, more recently, trade
with entities in China’s western Xinjiang region.
Complicating the discussion at the EU level is the fact that only a handful of ad-
vanced technology-producing states (Germany, France, the Netherlands, Sweden
and Finland among them) will be directly affected by US controls.
Therefore, the issue is not a priority for the majority of member states. This
will make it difficult to develop an EU consensus on emerging technologies and
puts the burden on bigger member states, like Germany and France, to use their
clout to push the issue higher up the EU agenda. In order to avert a situation
where Europe must scramble to react to US actions, these states will need to
drive the discussion forward in 2020.
3.3 TACKLING THE TECHNOLOGY-SECURITY NEXUS
“You need to create the structures to deal with the nexus of trade
and security. It is difficult enough to do this at the national level.
Just imagine how tough it will be in the EU.”
—— Senior official from a Benelux country
In a world where questions about technology, trade and security are ever more
closely intertwined, member states and EU institutions must ensure they have
the structures in place to address this nexus. Europe’s fraught debate over 5G has
shown that countries like Germany still have a ways to go in this regard.
In Berlin, ministries with conflicting interests that are run by members of
rival parties, have struggled to conduct a balanced, fact-based discussion that
addresses complex questions about technology, economic competitiveness and
national security in a holistic way. In Brussels, Commission President Ursula von
der Leyen must ensure that her team of commissioners – notably those focused
on trade, industrial policy and digital challenges – are working seamlessly with the
European External Action Service to address these questions.
Inter-ministerial working groups have been set up in countries like Germany
and the Netherlands to address emerging technology questions. And since late
2019, the European Commission has been arranging voluntary workshops for
member states to help them get a better understanding of the security questions
related to new technologies like artificial intelligence, quantum computing and
additive manufacturing.
Only a handful of
EU member states
will be directly
affected by
US controls

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 8
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
But for now, this is soft coordination without a clear political mandate or
direct flow into policymaking channels. Old, siloed structures that treat economic
and security issues separately are ill-suited for tackling a new nexus that is likely
to grow in importance in the years ahead, spurred on by the US focus on restrict-
ing the export of sensitive technologies to China.
Against this backdrop, the idea of setting up national security council-type
structures in member states like Germany and at the EU level warrants a closer
look15. Allies on the front line of the US-China technology war can offer valuable
lessons. Japan, for example, is creating an economic statecraft function within its
own National Security Secretariat, which will include officials seconded from key
ministries as well as outside experts. Japanese ministries are setting up units to
address emerging security challenges that would feed into this new body 16.
4. US reaches out to allies but could shift
to unilateral course
“The Americans are very impatient. And the multilateral regimes
are slow. I’m not sure the system will be able to swallow the level
of ambition that we are seeing in Washington”
—— Senior EU official
The choice of whether to follow the US lead in restricting exports of emerging
technologies to China will be thrust upon European countries in 2020 – whether
they are ready or not. Some, like the Netherlands, are feeling the heat even before
new controls are in place (see case study/box 1). What remains unclear is whether
Washington will have the patience to build what US officials have called “coali-
tions of caution” in relation to China, or go down a more unilateral path, pressing
ahead independently with controls and using the threat of secondary sanctions
to coerce allies to follow suit as the administration did after pulling out of the Iran
nuclear deal.
The early signs are that US officials in the State Department and Commerce
Department are keen to establish a dialogue with allies and, where possible,
move in unison. In September 2019, the State Department hosted a three-day
Multilateral Action on Sensitive Technologies (MAST) conference at which 15
advanced industrial nations, many of them European, compared notes on technol-
ogy transfer threats. In early December, US officials met with a similar grouping
of “like-minded” countries on the margins of the annual Wassenaar Arrangement
plenary meeting in Vienna. At that meeting, US officials talked with allies about
focusing, in three-month intervals, on “sprint groups” of priority technologies.
But despite these signals, European officials are skeptical that Washington
will have the patience to forge a consensus in Wassenaar, a painstaking process
that can take several years. A more likely scenario, supported by the recent pro-
liferation of meetings, is that Washington will try to secure the backing of a tar-
geted group of allies, in Europe, Japan and elsewhere, for its emerging technology
controls and press them to act outside of the multilateral regime. Individual Eu-
ropean countries that decide to go along with the United States could introduce
new controls at the national level. Or they might push back if they believe the US
Case Study: ASML
Perhaps no case highlights the risks for European countries of the accelerating US technology war with
China better than that of ASML, a Dutch company that makes the machines required to manufacture the
world’s fastest semiconductors. ASML is alone among its competitors in producing the most advanced
machines that use a chip-making process called extreme ultraviolet lithography. These allow circuits to
be etched onto silicon wafers in much smaller sizes, yielding faster, more powerful microprocessors.
ASML sells its EUV lithography machines, which weigh 180 tons and cost about USD 150 million, ,
to the world’s biggest chipmakers – Intel, Samsung and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company
(TSMC). The technology is considered “dual-use” under the Wassenaar Arrangement, and thus requires a
license for export.
In 2018, ASML received an order for its EUV lithography machine from a Chinese customer,
Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp (SMIC). The Dutch government subsequently came un-
der intense pressure from Washington to block the sale17. It has refused to grant ASML an export license
and the company has been unable to deliver the machine to SMIC. In January, the Chinese ambassador to
the Netherlands expressed concern that the Dutch were “politicizing our trade relationship under Amer-
ican pressure” and said the move would harm bilateral ties.
ASML’s machine is in many ways unique in the world of sensitive technologies – a large, expensive tool
that is vital to China’s ambitions of becoming a high-tech manufacturing power. Very few emerging technol-
ogies will share all of these characteristics. Still, the ASML case is a flashing-red alarm for European countries,
warning them of the pressures they could come under across a range of technologies in the years ahead.
Box 1

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 9
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
proposals go too far. Either way, the process could turn into a nightmare for the
European Union, with member states pursuing their own paths and the EU itself
unable to act, because under its current legislation, it cannot add controls that
haven’t been approved by a multilateral regime.
Longer term, European officials are concerned about the future of the Was-
senaar Arrangement. They worry that its approval process may be too slow to
keep pace with the rapid pace of technological change. And they see a risk that
the United States will lose interest in the arduous process of consensus building
within the regime if it can convince advanced technology producing countries to
move outside of Wassenaar, either through persuasion or the threat of secondary
sanctions.
The concerns mirror those surrounding US efforts to undermine the func-
tioning of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). A breakdown of the multilateral
approach to export controls would raise new questions for the European Union,
whose own controls are wholly reliant on decisions taken in the regimes. To avoid
this, Europe should seek a more regular, structured dialogue on technology & se-
curity issues with partners outside of Europe, particularly those on the front-line
of the US-China tech war, like Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
5. Conclusions: Europe must ramp up
emerging technology focus
“Either you make your rules or you take them. It is neither in the
interests of the EU nor the US to have rule takers only on this side of
the pond. We should not sit on the fence.”
—— Sandra Gallina, Deputy Director General,
DG Trade, European Commission18
The rollout of new US rules to restrict the export of sensitive technologies to
China risks becoming a new source of tension in the transatlantic relationship in
2020 and will confront Europe with a series of complex policy challenges. Despite
Europe’s concerns that Washington’s push is driven in part by a desire to contain
or slow China’s technological rise, a goal it does not share, EU member states and
the European Commission will need to develop their own considered approach to
emerging technologies.
If Europe fails to do so, the US campaign could deepen divisions between
EU states, undermine the Commission’s role as an actor on trade and threaten the
multilateral approach to export controls that has been the basis of EU action for
decades.
While the United States has been reaching out to allies in ad-hoc and es-
tablished forums like the Wassenaar Arrangement, there is a risk that it loses pa-
tience with allies and shifts to a more unilateral approach, threatening them with
extra-territorial sanctions if they refuse to comply with new US controls aimed at
China. For the EU, this goes to the heart of the challenge to become a geopolitical
force in a world of heightened competition between the United States and China.
The EU must take action soon if it wants to assert itself as a sovereign actor
in this new arena.
First, member states should consider giving the European Commission a for-
mal mandate to explore risks tied to emerging technologies, as they have done in
recent years in the areas of investment screening and 5G. In doing so, it will be
important not to let stubborn divisions over a multi-year push to reform the EU’s
dual-use export control regime get in the way.
Second, leaders from Europe’s biggest states will need to make the issue
of emerging technology risks a political priority, ensuring that soft coordination
taking place at the national and European level is formalized and is feeding into
policymaking channels.
Third, member states and the EU will need to explore creating new struc-
tures to help them cope with policy challenges at the nexus of technology, trade
and security. Increasingly, this will involve bringing in expertise from outside of
government and even rethinking what kind of people they recruit into govern-
ment. Allies like Japan, which is setting up new functions in its ministries and na-
tional security apparatus to tackle emerging security challenges, can offer valu-
able lessons in this regard.
Rapid advances in technology that require quick policy responses will con-
tinue to be a challenge for the European Union, a grouping of 27 member states
that operates by consensus and can therefore be slower in responding to new
developments. Indeed, the blurring of lines between technology and security call
into question a core premise on which the EU is based, namely that centralized
rules can govern economic considerations – for example for trade, competition
and monetary policy – while foreign and defence issues should be left primarily to
member states. In a world of intensifying US-China competition, the EU will find
it difficult to paper over these internal contradictions. Instead it must tackle them
head-on.
There is a risk
that the US loses
patience with allies

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 10
CHINA MONITOR | March 18, 2020
 1 | From a letter sent by Josep Borrell, High Representative of the EU for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, to EU foreign ministers before chairing his first Foreign Affairs Council on
Dec 9, 2019 https://www.auswaertiges-amt.de/en/aussenpolitik/europa/aussenpolitik/
maas-borrell/2286592. Accessed Jan 9, 2020
 2 | ECRA was approved in August 2018. Three months later, BIS unveiled a list of 14
emerging technology sectors subject to review for possible export controls. It sought
public comment and after a year of study unveiled its first proposed rule on January 3, 2020.
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/19/2018-25221/review-of-con-
trols-for-certain-emerging-technologies. Accessed Jan 9, 2020 https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2020/01/06/2019-27649/addition-of-software-specially-designed-to-
automate-the-analysis-of-geospatial-imagery-to-the-export. Accessed Jan 9, 2020
 3 | Another pillar of this campaign, which is not the focus of this report, is the government’s
closer scrutiny of research collaboration and academic exchanges.
 4 | Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh. “China’s Technology Transfer Strategy: How Chinese
Investments in Emerging Technology Enable a Strategic Competitor to Access the Crown
Jewels of US Innovation” https://admin.govexec.com/media/diux_chinatechnologytransfer-
study_jan_2018_(1).pdf. Accessed: Jan 10, 2020
 5 | Christopher Ashley Ford remarks “Bureaucracy and Counterstrategy: Meeting the China
Challenge” Sept 11, 2019. https://www.state.gov/bureaucracy-and-counterstrategy-meet-
ing-the-china-challenge/. Accessed: Jan 10, 2020
 6 | Ana Swanson, The New York Times, Oct 23, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/23/
business/trump-technology-china-trade.html. Accessed Jan 10, 2020
 7 | Kurtis Zinger, „An Overreaction that Destroyed an Industry: The Past, Present and Future
of US Satellite Export Controls” Oct 26, 2014. http://lawreview.colorado.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2015/07/13.-86.1-Zinger_Final.pdf. Accessed Jan 24, 2020
 8 | For an excellent analysis of the Dutch and broader European challenge tied to US export
controls on emerging technologies see: “The US-China trade-tech stand-off” by Brigitte Dek-
ker and Maaike Okano-Heijmans at Clingendael https://www.clingendael.org/sites/default/
files/2019-08/Report_US-China_stand-off.pdf. Accessed Jan 24, 2020
 9 | Reuters “Trump administration moves toward blocking more sales to Huawei: sources” Jan
15, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-huawei/trump-administration-moves-to-
ward-blocking-more-sales-to-huawei-sources-idUSKBN1ZD2VD. Accessed Jan 23, 2020
10 | Conversation with the author on Dec 16, 2019
11 | The von der Leyen Commission: for a Union that strives for more” Sept 10, 2019.
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_5542. Accessed Feb 21, 2020
12 | Speech at the EU’s Export Control Forum in Brussels on Dec 13, 2019
13 | The Wassenaar Arrangement is a multilateral export control regime that was set up in the
1990s and now counts 42 members, including every state in the EU, the United States,
Japan, India, Turkey and Russia. For more information see: https://www.wassenaar.org/
about-us/. Accessed Feb 16, 2020
14 | The author spoke with numerous officials in European member states and EU institutions in
the five-month period between November and January. Some requested anonymity because
they were not authorized to speak publicly.
15 | Speech by Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer on Nov 7, 2019. https://www.bmvg.de/de/aktu-
elles/speech-federal-minister-of-defence-security-policy-147072. Accessed Jan 23, 2020.
Julianne Smith, Berlin Policy Journal, “A Question of Statecraft” Jan 3, 2019.
https://berlinpolicyjournal.com/a-question-of-statecraft/. Accessed Jan 23, 2020.
Luigi Scazzieri, Centre for European Reform, “Is a European Security Council a Good Idea?”
Dec 2, 2019. https://www.cer.eu/in-the-press/european-security-council-good-idea.
Accessed Jan 23, 2020
16 | Based on conversations with Japanese officials and media reports: https://www.nippon.com/
en/news/yjj2019091800615/japan-national-security-secretariat-to-form-economic-divi-
sion.html. Accessed February 16, 2020
17 | Reuters “Trump administration pressed Dutch hard to cancel China chip-equipment sale”
Jan 6, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-asml-holding-usa-china-insight/trump-ad-
ministration-pressed-dutch-hard-to-cancel-china-chip-equipment-sale-sources-idUSKBN-
1Z50HN. Accessed Jan 23, 2020
18 | Speech at the EU’s Export Control Forum on Dec 13, 2019
YOUR CONTACT FOR THIS ISSUE OF
CHINA MONITOR PERSPECTIVES
Noah Barkin, MERICS Visiting Academic Fellow
noahbarkin@protonmail.com
EDITOR
Claudia Wessling, Director Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64
10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: kommunikation@merics.de
www.merics.org
LAYOUT AND GRAPHICS
Alexandra Hinrichs, Graphic Designer, MERICS
DESIGN
STOCKMAR+WAL TER Kommunikationsdesign
ISSN: 2509-3843
The publication series “China Monitor Perspectives” provides MERICS
fellows with the opportunity to present their current research. The views
represented in the paper are the author’s alone, and do not represent the
views of any institution with which he is affiliated.
