
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
1
MERICS Report
From opportunity to risk
Francesca Ghiretti | February 2023
The changing economic security policies in Australia, China,
the EU, Japan, South Korea, the UK and the US

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
 Traditionally, economic security policies have been defensive and dealing with aspects of trade and investment
that can threaten national security. For example, the export of weapons or the investment by a foreign entity in
another country’s military production.
 Current policy developments are developing offensive1 policies and merging economic security with resilience.
All to make sure that not only countries are not exposed to security risks, but also that their economies are resistant to
shocks and weaponization by third countries.
The scope of what is
considered “economic
security” is expanding
This expansion is mainly
triggered by China and an
erosion of rules-based
globalization
 The erosion of the international rules-based order and of its institutions (including the impossibility to bring forward
necessary reforms such as that of the WTO) and the perception of a zero-sum competition between the US and China
are incentivizing actors to adopt an approach to economy that prioritizes protection of own interests over collective gains.
 China’s heavy subsidization of its enterprises, sweeping industrial policy, strategic use of foreign policy to
advance economic goals and weaponization of economic linkages to pressure third countries are driving the
expansion of economic security measure.
“Economic security” is one
of the most dynamic policy
arenas, not only of like-
minded action and
coordination
 Between 2017 and 2022, actors unilaterally strengthened defensive and offensive economic security policies.
Since 2017 defensive policies such as inbound foreign direct investments (FDI) screening, export controls, cybersecurity
and data protection, and offensive policies such as sanctions and supply chain resilience have been strengthened.
 Past economic security policy debates mainly regards the improvement of actors’ resilience. Developments in
2023 will include debates about polices on further strengthening supply chains resilience, how to deter and respond to
economic coercion, screening of outbound investments and institutionalization of the economic security agenda.
1 “Offensive” means any policy that does not exclusively elaborate a defensive response to a threat, but a policy that has or includes a proactive agenda
Governments are advancing “economic security” to adjust to a shifting
geopolitical and geoeconomic environment

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
Notes: *Minor restrictions in place for foreign banks, weapons manufacturing, and narcotics, but they are residuals of processes of economic opening and not
full-fledged policies to screen outbound investments.
**Criteria used to assign colors can be found in the Appendix.
Source: MERICS
Economic security measures are proliferating – with different intensity
Legend
Strong
Moderate
Weak
Under discussion
None
CHINA US EU UK JAPAN AUSTRALIA
SOUTH
KOREA
Inbound investment screening
Outbound investment screening * *
Export controls
Procurement restrictions
Sanctions
Anti-coercion policy
Supply-chain resilience policies
Data protection and cybersecurity
Institutionalization
Industrial strategy

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
Managing interdependence for security reasons has been a long -standing
feature of China’s economic policy but is currently in overdrive
SELECTED POLICIES ECONOMIC SECURITY FOCUS
China Government
Procurement Law
(中华人民共和国政府采购法)
The revised draft of the law adds to the scopes of the policy that of
maintaining national security. It also foresees the establishment of
a security review system to review government procurements that
may have an impact on national security.
Foreign Trade Law
(中华人民共和国对外贸易法)
The state can impose import and export quotas and licensing for
goods and technologies, and the items involved can only be imported
or exported only after approval from the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
Foreign Investment Law
(中华人民共和国外商投资法)
It sets up a review mechanism for foreign investments that
includes a security-specific review system to screen investments
that may have an impact on national security.
Personal Information
Protection Law (PIPL)
(中华人民共和国个人信息保护法)
Data Security Law
(中华人民共和国数据安全法)
They regulate data export, storage, protection and localization.
The Data Security Law establishes a classification of data on its
potential impact on national security.
Draft Foreign Relations Law
(中华人民共和国对外关系法)
The draft law seeks to create a legal framework to “safeguard
China’s sovereignty, security, development interest [..]”.
KEY DRIVERS OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC SECURITY
POLICYMAKING
1) Increased perception of a hostile external
environment. The perception of a zero-sum
competition with the US and the need to
“resolutely win the battle of key core technologies”
(坚决打赢关键核心技术攻坚战).
2) View of economic security as a cornerstone of
China’s national security. “Political security [..] is
the “bedrock” (根本). Economic security is the “basis”
(基础). Military, cultural and social security are the
“guarantees” (保障)”.
3) Desire to create comprehensive legal
frameworks. The legal formalization of practices
and the strengthening of China’s legal frameworks
are a key element of China’s governance under Xi
Jinping (“rule by law”). To some extent this is also a
respond to international requests for legal
transparency and certainty.
Sources: MERICS, NPC Observer, MOFCOM, China Law Translate

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
The Export Control Law embodies
China’s focus on economic security.
Upholding national security and
national interest is the main scope of
the provisions included in the law.
EXPORT CONTROL LAW
(ECL)
CHINA’S ADMINISTRATIVE
MEASURES FOR
ENTERPRISE OUTBOUND
INVESTMENTS
(AMEOI)
The AMEOI is an example of a policy
adopted with a double intent.
(i) increase overview and scrutiny over
outbound investments, (ii) provide a
regulatory framework to an under-
regulated practice.
CHINA‘S ANTI -FOREIGN
SANCTIONS LAW
(AFSL)
The AFSL illustrates how China has
been adopting policies to prepare
itself to a „worst case scenario“ in a
geopolitical climate perceived as
hostile.
Sources: MERICS, NPC Observer, China Law Translate
It is China’s first comprehensive export
controls legal framework. It
establishes “controlled items”,
which includes dual-use, nuclear and
military goods, services and
technologies.
The list in non-exhaustive. the State
Council and the Central Military
Commission can add other items
It has jurisdiction outside of China
by including responsibilities and
penalties for foreign importers.
Sensitive regions: (i) countries without
diplomatic ties to China; (ii) areas facing
unrest; (iii) sanctioned areas. Sensitive
industries include military equipment;
weapons; telecommunications;
media; energy; and real estate.
Companies operating in China
complying with foreign sanctions
against China can be sanctioned by
China. And entities affected by foreign
sanctions can sue for compensation.
It provides criteria for enterprises and
improves control investments made by
state-owned enterprises and their subsidies.
SOEs must receive SASAC‘s approval before
notifying an investment to the National
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).
It provides the legal basis for sanctions
that China was already adopting
(interference in internal affairs) and for a
new counter-sanctions regimes.
Beijing’s economic security toolbox is expanding rapidly , too

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
OBSTACLES AND SOLUTIONSFRONT RUNNING POLICIESSTATE OF AFFAIRS
The US-led Mineral Security Partnership brings
together global partners in a framework that seeks
to strengthen the supply of critical material. It
includes Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Sweden, the
United Kingdom, and the European Commission.
Most governments are still mapping vulnerabilities and planning how to address them
Following the pandemic of Covid-19 and the
subsequent supply chains disruptions, most
countries have commenced a process to assess
vulnerabilities in their supply chains and adopt
policies to manage them.
The EU made a first assessment of its
strategic dependencies in 2021, followed
by a second in-depth evaluation of five areas
in 2022: rare earths, chemicals, solar panels,
cybersecurity and IT software.
Like-minded responses I: Supply chain resilience
Japan’s Economic Security Promotion Act.
Includes a six-step item-specific process to ensure
the security of critical items: (i) designation of
critical items, (ii) action plan for each item, (iii)
companies formulate operation plan, (iv) application
by company, (v) government approval, (vi) funding.
Obstacles: Lack of business participation.
 A common obstacle faced is the necessity to get
the businesses on board with policies that limit
their space of maneuver.
Solutions:
Introducing incentives.
 South Korea is opting for a system of incentives
in the form of financial assistance to companies
to stockpile and diversify.
 Japan is also offering similar incentives to
companies who present strategies to increase
their resilience to economic disruptions.
 Link products groups together to increase
resilience in case of disruptions of supply chains.
South Korea has been identifying
overdependencies from foreign countries with
a quantitative focus.
If Korea’s dependency for a specific item is >50%
then it will monitor the item and include it in a list
of items for an early warning system in case of
supply disruption. The country identified around
4000 items, and it has been further expanding the
criteria for the assessment, adding another 200
items. The full list is not publicly available as Seoul
prefers to plan how to manage such vulnerabilities
(i.e., stockpiling and diversification) without
advertising them.
Coordination with partners

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
OBSTACLES AND SOLUTIONSFRONT RUNNING POLICIESSTATE OF AFFAIRS
There is no formal ongoing coordination
between partners beyond unofficial exchanges
to, for example, find a common definition of
economic coercion.
The EU and the US are the only ones proposing large-encompassing regulation against economic coercion
Economic coercion has been on the rise. China has
been one of the main perpetrators and the adoption
of unofficial and opaque measures makes it difficult
to pursue cases via the WTO. Countries are thus
considering alternative solutions.
The EU’s Anti-Coercion Instrument (ACI)
proposes a framework for the European Commission
to assess and respond to economic coercion against
the EU and its member states. It does not include
compensation for targeted actors.
Like-minded responses II: Protection against economic coercion
The US Countering Coercion Act (2022).
Proposed by US Senators Chris Coons and Todd
Young, the Act focuses on helping third countries
and coordinating with partners to provide a united
response to economic coercion.
The Act would give the President a series of tools
to use to promptly support countries hit by
economic coercion (i.e., decrease duties and
expedite export licensing to reduce the impact of
economic coercion on targeted countries).
The EU Anti-Coercion Instrument.
The main scope of the legislation is to deter such
behaviors. It envisions a two-steps approach.
1) Solve the issue diplomatically seeking a
retraction of the coercive measures.
2) If it does not work, the Commission can adopt
measures such as trade and investments
restrictions.
Obstacles:
Most countries do not opt for ad-hoc
policies against economic coercion.
 Australia, Japan and South Korea have been
subjected to China’s economic coercion but do
not have similar instruments in the pipelines.
The UK too is not adopting an anti-coercive
instrument.
Solutions:
Establishing a multilateral system
with voluntary buy-in by countries.
 Create a platform and process to propose,
discuss and adopt responses multilaterally.
The action could be like that adopted in
response to economic coercion by China
towards Australia or Taiwan (i.e., buy more of
the banned products) or include potential
voluntary financial compensation.
Coordination with partners

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
OBSTACLES AND SOLUTIONSFRONT RUNNING POLICIESSTATE OF AFFAIRS
Most countries are yet to officially consider the adoption of a policy to screen outbound investments
All the actors selected have been adopting or
strengthening their inbound investment screening
and the EU’s regulation is due for reviewing in
2023.
The European Commission has included a
debate on a potential outbound investments
screening mechanism in its work program for
2023.
Like-minded responses III: Outbound Investment Screening
The US National Critical Capabilities Defense
Act (NCCDA).
US senators Bob Casey (and John Cornyn - proposed
the NCCDA. The White House has signaled support
in an executive order in September 2022. But the
debate on screening outbound investments
emerged already in 2018 when the US was working
on the Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act (FIRRMA).
The US is an innovator in proposing a new
outbound investments screening mechanism that
would impose new restrictions to the outflow of
capital. The proposed NCCDA seemed to be going
beyond the screening of direct investments and
include any US capital invested in China, Russia,
North Korea, Iran, Cuba, and Venezuela that could
not only potentially pose a threat to US security,
but also contribute to those countries’ innovation.
Obstacles:
Diversity of legal systems and
policy objectives.
 The NCCDA proposed a screening of outbound
US capital, not just foreign direct investments
(FDI) because US concerns are not limited to
FDI. Furthermore, the NCCDA discriminates
against a list geographical areas.
 An EU equivalent would be more interested in
FDI, and it is likely to remain country-agnostic.
Solutions:
Focus on sectors of common
concern.
 The sectors identified by the EU as “sensitive
ecosystems” provide a good starting point to
identifying common ground for coordination on
the target areas of an outbound investment
screening.
The US is the only actor analyzed here to have
proposed a fully-fledged policy to screen outbound
investments. With the EU officially dealing with the
matter in 2023 and other countries such as Japan
and South Korea weighing the usefulness of such a
policy, more coordination can be expected in 2023.
Coordination with partners

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
OBSTACLES AND SOLUTIONSFRONT RUNNING POLICIESSTATE OF AFFAIRS
The Trade and Technology Council (TTC) has
function as platform for Transatlantic coordination
and the Quad and 2+2 for multilateral and bilateral
coordination amongst partners in the Indo-Pacific.
But beyond the G7, there is no platform that unites
economic security agendas from the two areas.
Japan and South Korea are frontrunners of institutionalization of the economic security agenda
Lack of funding is a core issue of economic security
institutionalization, but even countries with more
funding at their disposal struggle with it. The US too
has an economic security agenda scattered between
Commerce Department, Treasury and others.
The EU’s economic security agenda is
scattered amongst different agencies and
lack an ad-hoc point of coordination. DG
Trade is in the lead for large part of the
economic security agenda, but not all of it.
Like-minded responses IV: Institutionalization
South Korea’s Foreign Economic Security
Strategic Committee and economic security
think tank within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
It represents a whole of government approach, and
it led by the Deputy Prime Minister as Head of the
Committee. The new government is seeking to
institutionalize such an effort as part of the Supply
Chain Basic Law currently under discussion. The law
would establish a Supply Chain Stability Committee
under the office of the President.
Obstacles:
Economic security crosscuts
different competencies.
 The different competencies were previously
dealt with by separate divisions/agencies. An
efficient economic security agenda requires
cross-sectoral competencies’ coordination.
Solutions:
Institutionalization of economic
security.
 Appointment of point of contact/coordinator for
economic security.
 Establishment of ad hoc processes to coordinate
all the policy efforts related to economic
security, which includes the involvement of
other specialized agencies and ministries that
contribute to the economic security agenda.
Japan appointed a Minister for Economic
Security.
The Minister functions as institutional
representative of a multi-stakeholder agenda
where the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
together with other ministries such as that of
education and the National Security Council
shape and enact the economic security agenda.
Coordination with partners

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
NATIONAL SECURITY VS OPEN ECONOMY UNILATERAL VS MULTILATERAL CHINA-SPECIFIC VS COUNTRY-AGNOSTIC
• Economic gains and security costs
cannot be neatly separated.
Countries whose economies were largely open
are now pricing in security considerations
and introducing new restrictive measures
(i.e., the EU, US, UK and Australia). Countries
who were opening their economies have
adapted the process to a more selective
approach that considers where to open up and
where to protect assets (i.e., South Korea and
Japan).
• Institutionalization of economic
security offers a solution.
One way to offer a balanced synthesis of
economic and security drivers is to have a point
of contact for economic security. The second
step should be to develop an agency where
personnel includes economy and security staff
as well as staff with knowledge in economic
security.
• Actors face the dilemma of adopting
unilateral policies that may boost
home economy but have undesired
effects on partners
.
The US Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) and industrial
policies focused on semiconductors (i.e., the EU’s
Chips Act, the US’ CHIPS and Science Act , Japan’s
Economic Security Promotion Act and South
Korea’s Chips Act) compete with one another
rather than seeking synergies.
• A truly multilateral initiative for
economic security is needed.
The TTC, the Quad, and the G7 offer existing
spaces to coordinate policymaking but are
exclusive. initiatives such as the Mineral Security
Partnership should grow in number and be
embedded in a broader multilateral framework of
collaboration for collective economic security,
similar to the Indo-Pacific Economic Forum but
conceptualized and led multilaterally.
• China-related considerations drive
the economic security policymaking.
But approaches differ.
The US explicitly views relations with China
increasingly through the prism of national
security threats, which influences the content
of policies. Many other actors’ approaches to
China come to a different assessment of the
balance of risks and opportunities.
• Country-agnostic policies should
remain the main approach.
The downsides of a country-agnostic approach
are a) partners may worry that a policy will be
used against them; b) policies require more
energies and capital because they are not
geographically targeted. The main advantage is
that it leaves more room for maneuvering for
the country adopting the policy without
necessarily sacrificing effectiveness.
Liberal-democratic governments face three critical tensions in designing
their economic security policies

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
 The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy is a fitting conceptual framework for EU’s economic security policymaking. It is
present in the Commission work to assess EU’s strategic dependencies and it can inform an approach to economic security
that places resilience at its center, rather than just national security.
 Open Strategic Autonomy should thus be used for policies, new and under review. For example, to screen inbound and
outbound investments in/by strategic companies/sectors that do not pose immediate national security threats but
increase EU’s vulnerabilities and weaken the block’s resilience.
NATIONAL SECURITY VS
OPEN ECONOMY
UNILATERAL VS
MULTILATERAL
 The fragmentation of the economic security agenda not only occurs amongst countries but also within them .
With the notable exception of Japan, and partially South Korea, other countries see the economic security agenda
scattered amongst different agencies according to the policy issue area.
 The Commission should have a dedicated unit for economic security with a head in charge for coordination within
the EU.
 The EU should proactively drive and/or contribute to the establishment of the creation of a multilateral
platform and process to coordinate the economic security agenda of Transatlantic and the Indo -Pacific partners.
DIFFERENT CHINA
STRATEGIES
 Pressure to produce policies directly targeting China is likely to grow. To improve the EU’s position in such a debate
without sacrificing collaboration and coordination with partners, the EU could elaborate a China strategy that is better
actionable and better delineates priorities.
 A more actionable and clearer China Strategy does not mean adopting ad -hoc economic security policies for
China. Instead of targeting China, the EU can continue focusing on issue-areas like it has done in the past. Such an
approach still reduces the risks posed by China without leading to unnecessary diplomatic escalations.
How the EU strikes a balance regarding these tensions will have global
implications

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
