
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
December 2021 ∙ Jan-Peter Kleinhans & John Lee
China’s rise in
semiconductors
and Europe
Recommendations
for policy makers

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
2
Executive Summary
Semiconductors are on the mind of many European policy makers, not least because
of the intensifying US-China technology rivalry and the chip shortages that forced
most European car makers to temporarily stop production from 2020. As a result,
the European Commission is working on an EU Chips Act, a draft of which is sched-
uled to be ready in mid-2022. Europe’s semiconductor industry has not received this
level of attention from policy makers in a long time, and the EU has now a window of
opportunity to substantially invest in its semiconductor ecosystem and strengthen
international partnerships. The only questions are what, how and where?
In our previous report of June-2021, “Mapping China’s semiconductor ecosystem in
global context” , we argued that Europe is already highly dependent on Chinese com-
panies in certain value chain steps and that this dependence will likely grow over
the short-term future. As China is now considered from a European viewpoint to be
an “economic competitor” and “systemic rival” as well as a “cooperation partner” ,
these dependencies must be assessed across different dimensions of the national
interest: national security, technological competitiveness and supply chain resil -
ience. Based on these assessments, we argue that EU’s forthcoming semiconductor
strategy should include three focus areas.
First, substantially investing in EU’s dwindling chip design ecosystem, focusing on
improving conditions for start-ups, small and medium-sized enterprises and spin-
offs from research institutions. This should include lowering entry-barriers to chip
design, investing in chip design infrastructure and improving access—in terms
of speed, level of bureaucracy and amount—to funding, private and public equity.
 China already has a substantially stronger chip design ecosystem than Europe in
several areas and can scale faster due to heavy investment in chip design by China’s
hyperscalers, Internet of Things and mobile technology companies. Under these
conditions, Europe will increasingly depend on Chinese designed chips.
Second, Europe needs to strengthen its position in back-end manufacturing ( as-
sembly, test and packaging ), going beyond existing strengths in research & develop-
ment. While front-end fabs from leading companies such as Intel, TSMC or Samsung
receive much attention from policy makers, the concentration in Asia of back-end
capacity has direct national security implications for Europe. Furthermore, back-
end manufacturing, especially emerging advanced packaging processes, are in-
creasingly important to the development of high performance and energy-efficient
chips. China has significant global market share in back-end manufacturing, expos-
ing Europe to a variety of risks.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
3
Third, Europe needs to strengthen its collective capacity to continuously map and
assess the global semiconductor value chain, to understand interdependencies,
evaluate bottlenecks and identify potential shortages over the long-term. Ad hoc
assessments are not a sound basis for strategic planning for this highly complex
and intertwined industrial value chain. One possibility would be to increase the re-
sources and scope of the newly established Observatory for Critical Technologies
but just as important would be strengthening partnerships with like-minded part-
ners, notably the US and East Asian economies.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
4
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 2
Introduction 6
1. Chip design:
setting the course upstream in the value chain 8
 What China is doing 8
 How this affects Europe’s competitiveness and security 11
 What Europe should do 12
2. Back-end manufacturing:
a neglected process step with high potential 14
 What China is doing 14
 How this affects Europe’s competitiveness and security 16
 What Europe should do 16
3. Value chain resilience:
visibility through multilateral partnerships 18
 What China is doing 18
 How this affects Europe’s competitiveness and security 20
 What Europe should do 21
4. Conclusion 24
References 26

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
5
This joint project between Stiftung Neue Verantwortung ( SNV ) and the Merca-
tor Institute for China Studies ( MERICS ) was made possible by the generous
support of the German Federal Foreign Office. The views expressed in this
paper do not necessarily represent the official positions of the ministry.
The authors would like to thank ( in alphabetical order ) Niccolò Fantini
 ( MERICS ) and Julia Hess ( SNV ) for their help preparing this report.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
6
Introduction
The global semiconductor shortages since 2020 have led to significant spillover
damage for various industry sectors. Together with the ongoing US-China compe-
tition in critical technologies, this has brought the semiconductor industry to the
attention of many policy makers. Several European member-state governments
and the European Commission are devising long-term strategies to strengthen their
 domestic semiconductor industries, manage national security risk and improve the
resilience of this critical and transnational value chain.
Semiconductor manufacturing, especially subsidizing the construction of front-end
fabrication plants ( “fabs” ), is at the core of several governments’ strategies, includ-
ing that of the European Union ( EU ). However, to address the EU’s increasing depen-
dence on the fast growing semiconductor ecosystem of China, a country that has
been defined in EU strategic policy as an “economic competitor” and “systemic rival” ,
merely subsidizing semiconductor manufacturing will not suffice. 1 Instead, the EU
needs to take a whole-ecosystem approach that considers all steps of the value
chain and is not confined to a narrow set of policy prescriptions, such as the subsidy
measures that have dominated the policy discussion to date. This cannot be done
solely by strengthening Europe’s ecosystem but needs to utilize strategic partner -
ships, especially with East Asian economies that play a critical role in the semicon-
ductor value chain today, such as Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, Singapore or Malaysia.
Our previous report of June 2021 ( “ June report” ), Mapping China’s Semiconductor
Ecosystem, assessed China’s semiconductor industry across three strategic dimen-
sions of the national interest: technological competitiveness, national security and
supply chain resilience.2 Following on from these assessments, in the present paper,
we argue that European policy makers should include in semiconductor strategies
three areas that are neglected in current debates but crucial to Europe’s technolog-
ical competitiveness and security: chip design; assembly, test and packaging ( ATP );
and increased visibility and tracking of the whole value chain.
In the first section, we review China’s development of significant chip design ca-
pabilities, including the competitive advantage of Chinese hyperscalers, mobile
and consumer electronics companies that are all heavily investing in their own
chip design units and Chinese start-ups. Potentially, this trend will result in Europe
becoming increasingly dependent on Chinese-designed chips in the absence of a
strong European chip design sector, with potential national security implications
and negative impacts on the competitiveness of European firms in industries that
depend on semiconductors.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
7
In the second section, we assess the link between the value chain’s final manufac-
turing step ( ATP ) and national security, as this step in the value chain provides the
most opportunities for a malicious actor to compromise a chip. The EU depends
heavily on ATP capacity within China, as Chinese companies have gained significant
market share in this labor-intensive process step. We argue that this dependence
has potentially significant national security implications and, furthermore, threat-
ens the EU’s long-term technological competitiveness in the semiconductor indus-
try as a whole.
In the third section, we do not focus on a particular step in the value chain but rather
on the importance of value chain transparency as the first step in strengthening
the resilience of the global semiconductor industry. Europe needs to invest in its
own capacity to understand and track this dynamic supply chain, including in co-
operation with like-minded partners. A better awareness of developments within
the global semiconductor value chain is especially relevant not only in periods of
increased geopolitical and trade tensions with China but also in light of natural di-
sasters that are increasing in frequency and severity and will continue to disrupt
the semiconductor value chain, in addition to pandemic-related lockdowns, human
error and unpredictable surges in market demand.
In each of the three sections, we provide recommendations for European policy
makers on how to strengthen the EU’s semiconductor ecosystem and thus protect
European interests with respect to China’s growing prominence in the global semi-
conductor industry, and the growing international political pressures that stem from
US-China competition. We conclude by revisiting the larger geopolitical context and
the stakes involved in this most foundational of technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
8
1. Chip design: setting the course
upstream in the value chain
Chip design is the step in the semiconductor value chain that involves the highest
value added ( 50% ), and therefore, the greatest proportionate revenue capture,
compared with wafer fabrication ( 24% ) and assembly, test and packaging ( 6% ).
 So-called “fabless” chip design companies typically spend more than 25% of their
revenue on research and development.3 Pursuit of performance and efficiency gains
has required chip designs to become increasingly specialized and application spe-
cific. General-purpose processors are no longer suitable for compute-intensive
tasks such as machine learning, network traffic management and many others.4 This
increases the importance of the chip design step in the semiconductor value chain
as a whole. Historically, the US has had the strongest chip design ecosystem, with
U.S. chip design companies accounting for 64% of the global market. 5 Chip design
is talent-intensive and relies on close business relationships with semiconductor
fabrication firms that manufacture the chips. In this section, we explore how China’s
quickly growing and vibrant chip design ecosystem creates potential challenges for
Europe’s technological competitiveness and national security.
What China is doing
Although the proportion of revenue that Chinese chip design firms spend on R&D is
comparable to their foreign counterparts, Chinese firms’ typically small revenues
next to global industry leaders like the U.S. chip design giant Nvidia mean much
smaller numbers.6 However, this picture is changing significantly with the entry of
cash-rich Chinese hyperscalers ( large internet platform-based service providers
that diversify into other verticals, such as Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent ) in the chip
 design market and the increasing availability of state-led and private venture invest-
ment,7 as reflected in the growing list of cutting-edge chip designs being announced
by Chinese firms ( Table 1 below ).8
In terms of the general business environment for Chinese chip design firms, they
are well positioned to exploit the relatively low barriers to entry and high revenue
returns of this production step, given the ready availability of in-house and venture
capital, a large and growing domestic talent pool, and the concentration in China
of growing industries that require new semiconductor designs. 9 In the automotive
sector, for instance, according to one estimate, Chinese car brands will offer L1–L3
autonomous driving functions in 75% of their vehicles by 2030.10 This creates a large
market for Chinese firms designing specialized processors for cars, examples of
which are given at Table 1 below.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
9
Chip design start-ups like Cambricon and Enflame are targeting China’s growing
market for artificial intelligence ( AI ) applications. Internet platform giants such as
Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent, like their U.S. counterparts Google, Amazon and Face-
book, are designing their own chips to optimize delivery of digital services such as
cloud computing and to exploit their advantages in accumulated data sets that can
support AI training. Even China’s large home appliance manufacturers are investing
in chip design start-ups and in-house units, aiming to improve their own products
and so become more competitive.11 By one estimate, the value of China’s chip design
market grew 23% from 2019–2020, and will grow 20% over 2021–2026, even allow-
ing for the effects of the global coronavirus pandemic.12
Most of the Chinese chip design sector’s products remain, in performance terms, in
the middle to lower end of the global market. However, the resources now invested
are resulting in a growing number of high-performance designs that will support
Chinese firms’ competitiveness across an increasing range of industries, especially
within China’s domestic markets but also increasingly in international markets. By
one estimate, whereas five years ago Huawei was the only Chinese firm designing
cutting-edge chips, today “maybe 10 or 12 companies in China… can do designs at
5nm ( cutting-edge process nodes ) moving to 3nm next year or after that. ” 13 Table
1 below provides a partial list of chip designs announced by Chinese firms during
2021, with associated industry applications.
Company and chip model Function Industry sectors
Alibaba: Yitian 710 Network performance Cloud computing
Tencent: Zixiao Network performance Cloud computing
Tencent: Xuanling AI-enabled image and natural
language processing
Image recognition, voice and
translation assistance
Tencent: Canghai Video format conversion Visual media
Baidu: Kunlun 2 Network performance,
 AI-enabled processing
Cloud computing, image
 recognition, voice and translation
assistance, automotive
Cambricon: Siyuan 290 AI training and processing
acceleration
( multiple )
Enflame: CloudBlazer T20 AI training ( multiple )
SiEngine: SE1000 Intelligent connected vehicle
services
Automotive
Jingjia Micro: JM9 Graphics processing Desktop computing
Horizon Robotics: Journey 5 Autonomous driving ( Edge AI ) SoC Automotive
Table 1:
Selected chip models
and potential industry
applications, 2021
announcements

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
10
U.S. export controls targeting specific Chinese firms have damaged some business
lines for these companies and the market share of China’s leading chip design house
( Huawei’s HiSilicon ) but have not had an observable negative impact on China’s larg-
er chip design ecosystem.14 They might boost this ecosystem by dispersing the cap-
ital and human resources previously amassed by HiSilicon and incentivizing large
Chinese companies to invest in domestic firms that are trying to plug the capability
gaps Chinese industry suffers from elsewhere along the value chain.15
Chinese industrial policy expressly aims to use demand generated by China’s larger
economy to drive the development of Chinese firms’ capabilities in chip design and
other semiconductor value chain segments. 16 As observed in the June report, this
is a “two-track approach of targeting mature markets and emerging technologies, ”
aimed at supporting Beijing’s goals for strategic emerging sectors and digitalization
of China’s wider economy.17 The size and growth of China’s markets continue to pull
in foreign industry leaders, despite rising risk from foreign export and investment
controls alongside growing political pressure within China to conform to Chinese
national development priorities.18
For example, in October 2021, the Japanese firm Rohm, a leader in power manage-
ment semiconductors ( a category in which European firms are still competitive ), an-
nounced a joint venture with a Chinese firm to design and build silicon carbide-based
power modules. The partnership targets China’s fast-growing electric vehicle sector,
with mass production scheduled to start in 2022.19 Silicon carbide is among several
compound materials that represent a potential new frontier in advancing semicon-
ductor performance and have been identified by the Chinese and U.S. governments
as priorities for strategic technology development.20
Chinese firms are also focused on employing RISC-V open-source instruction set
architecture.21 This is a non-proprietary body of intellectual property ( IP ) that pro-
vides an alternative “blueprint” for customized chip design to the proprietary ar -
chitectures owned by the United Kingdom ( UK ) and U.S. firms ARM, Intel and AMD.
 RISC-V’s development is promoted by a transnational industry association that re-
located from the US to Switzerland expressly to avoid U.S. export controls. 22 More
than half of the RISC-V association’s board of directors are connected to Chinese
companies and research institutions.23
Chinese firms and institutions have been developing RISC-V IP ( such as processor
cores ) that can be licensed by other actors as a basis for their own chip designs. 24
Chinese actors have also announced RISC-V-based chip designs that meet perfor -
mance benchmarks at the global technical frontier. 25 Chinese authorities are pro-
moting use of RISC-V through such measures as sponsoring industry consortiums
and subsidizing RISC-V based chip development.26

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
11
For cutting-edge chips, Chinese fabless companies rely on foreign foundries,
such as TSMC in Taiwan and Samsung in South Korea, for contract manufacturing.
 However, these foundries are facing growing pressure from U.S. political and regula-
tory actions to cut off their Chinese customers. How effective such pressure will be
in restricting the development and market expansion of Chinese chip design firms
 depends on whether the U.S. government adopts wider reaching measures. 27 At
present, fabrication firms like Taiwan’s TSMC and South Korea’s Samsung ( the only
two entities worldwide that are capable of manufacturing the most recent genera-
tions of semiconductors ) have retained Chinese customers that are not individually
subject to U.S. export controls.
How this affects Europe’s competitiveness and security
The growing and relatively advanced Chinese chip design capabilities described
above have potentially far-reaching implications for Europe’s technological compet-
itiveness and member states’ national security. China’s chip design ecosystem will
continue to grow much faster than Europe’s28 because of China’s vibrant chip start-
up scene and its vertically integrated companies, such as hyperscalers, mobile and
Internet of Things ( IoT ) companies all heavily investing in in-house chip design units.
Technological competitiveness: It will potentially be harder for European semicon-
ductor companies to compete with internal chip design units of vertically integrated
companies in the Chinese market. The domain expertise of a vertically integrated
company is utilized during chip design to gain a competitive advantage. 29 Chinese
hyperscalers ( Alibaba, Tencent ), smartphone companies ( Huawei; BBK Electronics,
the conglomerate behind OnePlus, Oppo, Vivo and Realme ) and consumer electron-
ics companies ( Xiaomi ) can utilize their domain expertise to develop highly special -
ized, high-performing and efficient chips, making it potentially harder for companies
without such chip design capabilities to compete. Additionally, Chinese firms might
favor domestic chip design solutions over foreign ones, as Chinese firms can work
more efficiently with local firms in product co-design and manufacturing because
there is less risk of interruption by foreign export controls. The rising “computer -
ization” of a growing range of industries is allowing Chinese firms with access to
chip design capabilities to expand horizontally into new sectors, such as automotive.
Other factors being equal, these Chinese firms will increasingly be able to outcom-
pete foreign rivals that lack access to a comparable chip design ecosystem.
National security: Increasingly sophisticated chip design capabilities within China
do not impact only Europe’s technological competitiveness. Those capabilities are
utilized by the Chinese military for supercomputers simulating missile trajecto-
ries, as one example. 30 Chinese industry’s development of chip design capabilities

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
12
has direct military utility, because this gives China’s military access to potentially
more powerful and efficient chips, which is of concern to the U.S. government and
 requires consideration by the EU and member states in defense planning.31 Leading
Chinese firms such as Alibaba and Baidu are partnered with Chinese state-owned
conglomerates to provide big data analysis, cloud computing, spatial navigation and
other chip design-driven capabilities for military purposes.32
What Europe should do
Except for Europe’s incumbent semiconductor companies such as Infineon, NXP and
STMicroelectronics and telecommunication vendors Ericsson and Nokia, Europe’s
chip design ecosystem is lacking. European car manufacturers were slow to invest
in their own chip design capabilities, 33 and the EU lacks large consumer electron-
ics and mobile technology companies with the resources and incentives to devel -
op such capabilities, or that can provide the market demand for other companies
to them. For these reasons, Europe needs to invest substantially in its chip design
start-ups to grow an ecosystem long-term.
• Provide more, quicker and less bureaucratic funding to chip start-ups by
 expanding the European Innovation Council’s ( EIC ) Accelerator with a semicon-
ductor-specific stream in the work program; by evaluating and then streamlining
the bureaucratic process for and general design of Important Projects of Common
European Interest ( IPCEI ) to make them quicker and more accessible to small-
and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ); by making funding under the Key Digital
Technologies ( KDT ) Partnership34 more accessible for start-ups and SMEs ( in KDT
Partnership’s predecessor the European Components and Systems for European
Leadership ( ECSEL ) Joint Undertaking, less than a quarter of the participating
companies were SMEs35 ); by incentivizing spin-offs from research and technology
organizations ( RTOs ) and universities through more favorable license costs ( RTOs
have an economic incentive to receive high license fees, but these high spin-off
costs make the start-up less attractive for investors ).
• Invest in chip design infrastructure and lower barriers to entry. Chip design is
always based on a specific manufacturing process, making it significantly more
complex and expensive than traditional software development. That is why start-
ups often depend on universities and RTOs for significantly lower license fees
for chip design software and access to fabs ( e.g., through EUROPRACTICE36 and
ASCENT+37 ). Lowering entry barriers to chip design should be a key policy goal.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
13
• Invest in open-source architectures, such as RISC-V. The RISC-V ecosystem is
gaining a lot of momentum because of its openness, its viability for many differ -
ent applications and sectors ( from automotive to AI, IoT and high-performance
computing ) and the looming acquisition of ARM by Nvidia ( which, from the view-
point of most other chip design firms, threatens to transfer ownership of the
underlying IP to a competitor ). Some of Europe’s semiconductor companies and
RTOs,38 industry associations 39 and member states’ research ministries 40 rec -
ognize this window of opportunity for Europe to position itself as a frontrunner
in this new ecosystem. The RISC-V ecosystem is still in its infancy when com-
pared to ARM’s rich IP ecosystem, but European semiconductor companies and
RTOs are actively developing RISC-V chips and IP . To strengthen Europe’s pres-
ence in this field and become a frontrunner, especially in relation to China, more
coordination and long-term investment are necessary. This includes dedicated
 research funding through Horizon Europe, industry alliances that focus on de-
veloping RISC-V for specific verticals ( such as automotive and industrial IoT ) and
more coordination on the European level. A continuous mapping of the RISC-V IP
landscape in collaboration with industry, similar to the European Commission’s
Rolling Plan for ICT Standardization,41 could provide a gap analysis and better co-
ordinate different industry and research efforts.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
14
2. Back-end manufacturing: a neglected
process step with high potential
Historically, back-end manufacturing ( assembly, test and packaging ) was a labor-
intensive value chain step that involved limited innovation, small value added and
low profit margins. Accordingly, ATP was predominantly outsourced to Asian coun-
tries such as Taiwan, China and Malaysia ( thus, the alternative acronym OSAT, “out-
sourced semiconductor assembly and test” ). In the past, packaging simply meant
that after the wafer was fabricated ( front-end manufacturing ), the individual chips
were cut out of the wafer, tested and encapsulated so they could be soldered into
smartphones, cars or any other device. However, because of the exploding costs of
progressing cutting-edge wafer fabrication to continually increase performance,
companies started investing in innovating new packaging processes, such as
 heterogeneous integration and 3D stacking. Over the past several years, it has be-
come clear that these “advanced packaging” approaches play a crucial role in ensur-
ing energy efficiency and chip performance. With the increased level of innovation
in advanced packaging approaches comes a potential increase in value added and
profit margins for this step in the value chain. In this section, we provide an overview
of China’s role in back-end manufacturing processes and why Europe should invest
in its own packaging capabilities.
What China is doing
ATP is the one production step in the semiconductor value chain where Chinese
firms hold a globally significant market share ( Figure 1 below ).42 More than 60% of
global ATP capacity is located in Taiwan and China, including Western companies’
back-end fabs located in these jurisdictions.43 In 2019, China was the biggest ( 25% )
market worldwide for semiconductor packaging materials.44
Figure 1:
Market share of
world’s 10 largest
OSAT firms, 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
15
“Advanced” packaging techniques still account for a minority share of revenue for
Chinese OSAT leaders, estimated at around 20% in 2019.45 However, these firms are
conducting significant R&D activity in advanced techniques and beginning to deploy
them in business operations. 46 JCET, for example, now the third largest packaging
firm globally by sales, employs advanced techniques such as 2.5D and 3D ( hetero-
geneous ) packaging.47 These techniques are being utilized by Chinese chip design
firms in delivering cutting-edge products, showing synergies between technical
progress in different production steps within China. 48 The three largest Chinese
OSAT firms ( Figure 1 above ) are all reportedly planning secondary public offerings to
raise capital to invest in capacity expansion and advanced packaging techniques.49
Chinese OSAT companies will also benefit from local concentration of the printed
circuit board ( PCB ) industry, which is increasingly closely related to the semicon-
ductor value chain’s back-end, as performance demands in consumer electronics
drive PCB vendors to pursue miniaturization. 50 The global PCB supply chain is now
concentrated in China, and Chinese suppliers are growing their market share. 51 In
2019, China accounted for more than half the global market for chemicals used in
PCB production and was the fastest-growing market followed by Taiwan and South
 Korea.52 Taiwanese PCB industry leaders are expanding operations in mainland China,
in tandem with local growth in manufacturing of consumer electronics, self-driving
cars, network equipment and other products.53
The PCB industry is central to security concerns surrounding the potential for the
semiconductor value chain’s back-end to be exploited for espionage. In 2018 and
2021, Bloomberg reported that an additional chip had been installed on server moth-
erboards manufactured in China and was found to be transmitting data to China
from networks in U.S. companies and government agencies. 54 Although  the accu-
racy of both reports was denied by the U.S. firms involved and widely criticized by
experts, the reports highlight the potential implications for corporate and national
security of outsourcing to and relying on Chinese ATP capacity.55 The PCB industry’s
strategic importance was noted in the Biden administration’s 2021 semiconductor
supply chain review.56
Advanced packaging is being promoted by Chinese industry experts and probably
receiving attention at senior levels of China’s political leadership as an alternative
to the increasing technical difficulty of shrinking fabrication nodes that is implied
by Moore’s Law.57 Such “node shrinkage” is a critical bottleneck for China’s semicon-
ductor industry, and advanced packaging is being pursued as an alternative pathway
for improving performance, for example, at China’s leading foundry SMIC. 58 U.S. ex-
port controls against SMIC, and SMIC’s inability to acquire certain advanced ma-
chinery from Dutch equipment maker ASML, has increased the urgency for Chinese
industry to develop such alternative technical pathways, simply to keep pace with
global technological progress and mitigate risk from foreign measures aimed at de-
coupling from China’s economy and supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
16
How this affects Europe’s competitiveness and security
As of 2019, Europe had less than 5% of the global ATP capacity and, like the rest of
the world, heavily depends on back-end manufacturing in China. 59 This comes with
potential national security and technological competitiveness risks for Europe.
National security: Compared to the two previous process steps, chip design and
wafer fabrication, packaging processes provide a resource-efficient ( skills, cost,
time ) attack vector to compromise a chip to implement a “kill switch” or hardware
backdoor.60 Although such hacking of a computer on the chip level with a hardware
backdoor is significantly more resource-intensive than utilizing software exploits,
the advantage of hardware backdoors is their persistence and that they are signifi-
cantly harder to detect. As government agencies and the military will unavoidably
rely to some extent on commercial semiconductor manufacturing, and thus untrust-
ed sources, ensuring supply chain security and trustworthiness of fabs ( front-end
and back-end ) becomes a challenge. One strategy is “Split Manufacturing”: relying
on untrusted foundries for wafer fabrication but using trusted back-end fabs for
assembly, test and packaging. 61 This also means that expanding Europe’s wafer
fabrication does not alleviate the national security threat if those wafers are then
shipped to China for assembly, test and packaging.
Technological competitiveness: Advanced packaging processes play a critical role
in increasing the performance and energy efficiency of future chips. Chinese com-
panies are not yet at the forefront of advanced packaging technology, but they are
investing in this area, and the Chinese ATP ecosystem has high potential for upgrad-
ing. Senior-level Chinese authorities are likely focused on advanced packaging as
a strategic priority: for example, senior Chinese economic planners were briefed
in mid-2021 on “potential disruptive technologies” for advancing semiconductor
 performance in the “post-Moore era. ”62 If competitive advantage in future chip man-
ufacturing is increasingly linked to advanced packaging techniques such as hetero-
geneous integration, European manufacturing will also need to compete ( and thus
invest ) in these areas.
What Europe should do
European RTOs such as imec in Belgium, CEA-Leti in France and Fraunhofer in
 Germany have extensive expertise in advanced packaging and well-established
research ties with industry. Similarly, European manufacturing equipment vendors
such as ASM International, Aixtron, BESI and AT&S have leading positions in the ATP
equipment market. What is lacking is actual packaging capacity, which has been
almost entirely outsourced to East and South Asian economies.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
17
• Use IPCEI and the proposed Semiconductor Fund to invest in packaging capaci-
ty in Europe. Although European policy makers have focused a lot on subsidizing
front-end fabs, as articulated in the Joint Declaration on Processors and Semi-
conductor Technologies63 in December 2020 and the 2030 Digital Compass 64 in
March 2021, future subsidies and industrial policy measures should also target
back-end manufacturing. The relevance of ATP capacity in Europe has been rec-
ognized in the soon-to-be-established ( at the time of writing ) European Alliance
on Processors and Semiconductor Technologies.65
• Diversify ATP capacity geographically through international partnerships.
 Europe will continue to rely substantially on back-end manufacturing in Taiwan
and China due to lower labor costs and economies of scale. However, other
countries, such as Malaysia and Singapore, are already important ATP regions.
 Infineon, NXP and STMicroelectronics have substantial back-end manufacturing
in Malaysia. This provides an opportunity for Europe to strengthen these part-
nerships through strategic investments and research collaborations to diversi-
fy back-end manufacturing geographically and strengthen the resilience of the
back-end manufacturing value chain. At the same time, European policy makers
must be aware of local conditions with potential security implications, for exam-
ple, the Malaysian government’s institutionalized collaboration with Huawei on
cybersecurity issues.66

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
18
3. Value chain resilience: visibility through
multilateral partnerships
The global chip shortages that started in 2020 put into question the health and resil-
ience of the semiconductor value chain at the transnational level. With high levels of
division of labor between countries, long manufacturing cycle times and economic
pressure to run fabs close to full capacity, semiconductor manufacturing is suscep-
tible to external shocks and does not cope well with demand surges. 67 The severe
spillover damage to other sectors led to a flurry of attention from policy makers in
Brussels, Washington DC, Tokyo, Seoul, Taipei and many other capitals. From task
forces to consultation processes and information requests, governments are trying
to figure out what roles they can play to strengthen the resilience of this vital supply
chain. Furthermore, some measures that would meaningfully increase the resilience
of semiconductor manufacturing might conflict with measures that would promote
technological competitiveness or national security vis-à-vis China. In this section,
we provide an overview of what China is doing to better map, understand and man-
age this value chain and why Europe needs to invest in its own analytical capabilities
for assessment and management.
What China is doing
Chinese official policies for the semiconductor sector, including the reported prior -
ities of China’s national-level strategic investment fund for this industry, stress the
importance of a whole-value-chain approach.68 Tangible support measures such as
tax incentives and loan facilitation are targeted at multiple production steps ( chip
design, manufacturing equipment, front-end fabrication and others ), reflecting a
focus on boosting the capabilities and hence resilience of the whole value chain in
China.69 Conversely, the impact of the semiconductor sector on other industries is
watched by Chinese authorities, as reflected in the action taken by China’s national
market regulator described below.
The extent of visibility that Chinese authorities have of activity in China’s semi-
conductor industry is unclear. However, China has set up senior-level national
 bureaucratic steering groups to guide the development of this sector and strate-
gic investment funds at national and provincial levels that deal exclusively with
the semiconductor sector and have links to government agencies. 70 This suggests
that Chinese authorities have institutional channels through which to monitor and
receive detailed information across China’s semiconductor industry, and through
which to compel provision of information or other cooperative action from compa-
nies when this is seen to be necessary.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
19
China’s wider legal and institutional framework provides authorities with tools
for increasing their visibility of industry activity and compelling cooperation from
 private entities, including foreign actors. For example, China’s 2021 Data Security
Law allows authorities to obtain data “as necessary to safeguard national security, ”
in accordance with relevant regulations. China’s counter-sanctions law provides for
extraterritorial jurisdiction and reciprocal punitive measures against foreign entities
regarding actions that injure Chinese interests ( whether public or private ), including
compliance with foreign government measures that are perceived to discriminate
against Chinese entities.71
Visibility of the value chain supports Chinese authorities’ proactive stance toward
supply constraints in the global semiconductor sector and its effects on other in-
dustries in China. For example, in August 2021, China’s market regulator established
special teams to investigate price-gouging behavior in the market for automotive
semiconductors, responding to price monitoring and reporting clues. 72 The investi-
gation results were publicized, and fines up to 1 million RMB ( 370,000 EUR ) were
issued to offending firms.73 Chinese fabrication firms were also reportedly instruct-
ed to prioritize domestic customers over foreign ones during the nationwide power
supply constraints imposed by Chinese authorities in late 2021, with potential neg-
ative implications for transnational supply chain resilience.74
Sub-national governments in China are involving themselves intimately in the man-
agement of the semiconductor industry: for example, by working with enterprises
to identify key suppliers, factor bottlenecks, information deficiencies and other
development constraints.75 Such “supply chain mapping” goes with the promotion
of enterprise partnerships along the whole length of the value chain ( including in
some cases, the appointment of individual firms to lead the implementation of guid-
ance from the authorities ) and the development of “integrated innovation ecologies
uniting industry, academia and research. ”76 The goal is technological upgrading and
achieving breakthroughs in key bottlenecks for local industry.
How much such involvement by government authorities helps rather than hinders
business activity, and how much is coordinated between jurisdictions around China,
is unclear. However, it suggests that Chinese authorities will have an increasingly
comprehensive understanding of the local semiconductor industry within their ju-
risdiction and how it will be impacted by specific developments, such as imposition
of export controls by foreign governments or business activity by foreign firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
20
How this affects Europe’s competitiveness and security
As we argued in the June report, the transnational nature of the semiconductor value
chain means that its overall resilience depends on the existing international division
of labor. Interdependencies with China are not just an existing fact but can also sup-
port transnational resilience by adding global industry capacity, as described below.
However, policy makers must also recognize that there are different types of inter -
dependencies, and that some ( especially in the most strategically important tech-
nologies ) are not in Europe’s long-term interests.77 The challenge is to find a balance
between mitigating negative consequences from growing dependence in some fields
on China’s semiconductor ecosystem and simultaneously strengthening the resil -
ience of the semiconductor value chain as an interdependent transnational whole.
This mixed approach aligns with the EU’s “Open Strategic Autonomy” concept, with
its emphasis on combining the benefits that come from openness with assertive
measures to protect European interests and shape the international environment.78
This approach will require policy makers to decide about trade-offs between differ -
ent interests that arise from interdependencies in the semiconductor value chain,
as we described in the June report. 79 A measure that strengthens the resilience of
the global value chain might negatively impact European member states’ nation-
al security. For example, increased wafer fabrication capacity within China would
make the value chain more resilient in times of skyrocketing demand—as was
the case in 2020–2021. At the same time, being dependent on the semiconductor
 manufacturing capacity of a state described in EU policy as a “systemic rival” comes
with various potential national security risks.80
To better understand these complex interdependencies, identify chokepoints in the
value chain that could be “weaponized” and provide an analytical basis for policy-
making, governments around the world and the European Commission have initiated
a range of supply chain transparency initiatives.
• In addition to the 100-Day Review, 81 the U.S. government set up a Supply Chain
Disruptions Task Force to address shortages in semiconductors and other sup-
ply chains in the short-term. 82 Additionally, there are plans to set up a Critical
Supply Chain Resiliency Program ( CSCRP ) at the U.S. Department of Commer -
ce,83 and the Bureau of Industry and Security ( BIS ) is supporting these initiatives
with requests for information.84 However, the mixed response from foreign firms
and governments to these highly intrusive BIS requests illustrates how resil -
ience is best served by a cooperative international approach, rather than uni-
lateral approaches to visibility and risk mitigation of national dependencies on
foreign actors in semiconductors. 85 ( The Biden administration has said it could

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
21
use the Defense Powers Act to compel further disclosures, 86 and submissions
from TSMC and Samsung reportedly omitted detailed client data. The Taiwanese
and South Korean governments publicly expressed concern about the negative
effects on their companies of disclosing such information.87 )
• As part of a broader partnership announcement, the US and South Korea will “ex-
plore the creation of a U.S.-ROK Supply Chain Task Force. ”88 Similar to the EU-US
Trade and Technology Council, this body will presumably work to reconcile sep-
arate preferences on issues relating to the semiconductor value chain—for in-
stance, U.S. opposition to South Korean firm SK Hynix’s plans to employ Dutch
equipment maker ASML ’s most advanced technology at its fabrication plant in
China, a facility that produces around 15% of the world’s supply of DRAM mem-
ory chips.89
• At the Quad Leaders’ Summit, Australia, India, Japan and the US agreed to estab-
lish a Semiconductor Supply Chain Initiative to map and assess the semiconduc-
tor ecosystem, identify vulnerabilities and strengthen resilience. 90 This comes
against the backdrop of India’s push to establish itself as a hub for global elec-
tronics manufacturing, but also of continuing obstacles to this goal that would
be more easily resolved through international cooperation.
• A core theme of the newly established EU-US Trade and Technology Council is
“rebalancing of global supply chains in semiconductors with a view to enhancing
respective security of supply. ”91
Governments are trying to figure out what roles they can play to strengthen the re-
silience of the semiconductor value chain, which predominantly consists of private
companies and is characterized by a transnational division of labor.
What Europe should do
Europe, like its democratic partners, faces two challenges when it comes to the
 resilience of the transnational value chain. First, what role can European govern-
ments play in strengthening the resilience of the value chain? Second, in which
areas does collaborating with China to strengthen resilience have to be balanced
against national security and technology competitiveness risks?
Taking the US as a point of comparison, the Biden administration has decided that
“government has a unique ability to solve coordination challenges and serve as a
trusted source of data” within the semiconductor value chain, especially when the
supply chain is disrupted and shortages occur.92

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
22
Based on experience with critical infrastructure and cybersecurity regulation, it will
most likely take many years, if not a decade, for governments to identify effective
and efficient ways for involvement in the semiconductor value chain and how best
to strengthen it. To address the various challenges described above, Europe should
focus on raising policy makers’ visibility of the whole value chain. Priority should
also be given to coordinating with governments of non-EU countries whose firms
are important actors in the value chain over meaningful strategies for government
involvement in this issue.
• Substantially expand the EU Observatory of Critical Technologies at the Joint
Research Center. One-time assessments 93 and ad-hoc task forces are not ade-
quate policy tools for continuously mapping and assessing such a complex and
fast-moving global value chain. The EU Observatory of Critical Technologies94 has
the potential to provide a sound analytical base for policy makers to balance
 national security risks against increased supply chain resilience when cooper -
ating with China. Considerable expertise exists in member states’ export control
units that the Observatory of Critical Technologies should closely collaborate with.
To be of most use to policy makers, the Observatory should have dedicated teams
of experts for each critical technology, provide regular reports on the health of
the global semiconductor value chain and map technological developments that
might impact European member states’ security.
• Establish a supply chain resilience working group within the European Alliance
on Processors and Semiconductor Technologies. In collaborating with the Alli-
ance on supply chain resilience issues, the European Commission has the op-
portunity to work with industry on questions such as information sharing.95 Thus
far, it is unclear what the right type, level of detail and frequency of information
sharing between the chip industry and governments is. The U.S. BIS request for
comments described above received resistance from industry and foreign gov -
ernments because it was asking for highly detailed confidential business infor -
mation.96 Together with the Alliance, the European Commission could develop a
process for information sharing to be able to continuously assess the health of
the supply chain.
• Leverage the EU-US Trade and Technology Council ( TTC ) to establish best
 practices for information sharing. Working Group 3—Secure Supply Chains
 within the TTC has a dedicated track on semiconductors. In addition to its
planned activities97 the working group should also facilitate exchange between
both governments on best practices for information sharing with the semicon-
ductor industry. This forum should be used to anticipate U.S. measures targeting
China’s semiconductor sector, such as the current legislative proposal to screen
outbound U.S. investments in critical technology sectors, beyond the current

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
23
scope of U.S. export controls or the investment review agency CFIUS.98 The forum
could also work with U.S. policy makers to ensure that European interests are
protected and that the partnership is “balanced and of equal interest to both
sides”—what the TTC’s first joint statement in October declared to be the basis
for trans-Atlantic cooperation on this issue.99
• Join or establish like-minded partnerships to cooperate on value chain resil -
ience. As the semiconductor value chain will continue to be defined by transna-
tional division of labor and high geographic concentration of certain production
steps, collaboration with like-minded governments to increase resilience will
be critical. Europe could join some of the described initiatives or forge its own
bi- and multilateral partnerships with countries such as Japan, Malaysia, Singa-
pore or South Korea. Taiwan’s critical role in the semiconductor value chain also
makes it an important party to engage, particularly as the US steps up engage-
ment with Taipei on this issue. 100 This will create political challenges vis-a-vis
Beijing that will require astute management.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
24
4. Conclusion
The European Commission has defined China as a “negotiating partner, ” “econom-
ic competitor” and “systemic rival. ” These three aspects of relations with China
should inform Europe’s approach to strategic policy for semiconductors—a founda-
tional technology for the accelerating digitalization of society and of international
 economic relations. When envisioning how best to strengthen the resilience of the
transnational semiconductor value chain, partnering with China’s growing semi-
conductor ecosystem can be a viable option for some areas but must be weighed
against risks.
In some fields, such as assembly, test and packaging, much global capacity is
 located in China and is increasingly owned by Chinese firms. This has benefits from
the viewpoint of transnational resilience, but also raises national security issues
described above, and potentially advantages China in international competition to
continue improving semiconductor performance. In other areas, such as chip design,
it is clear that Europe is at a competitive disadvantage relative to China and must
critically assess potential future dependence on a systemic rival. Our previous re-
port published in June 2021, Mapping China’s Semiconductor Ecosystem in the Glob-
al Context, made clear that China has the ambition to become a much more capable,
though not self-sufficient, actor in the value chain.101
Europe needs to invest in its semiconductor ecosystem not simply because of com-
petition with China but also to ensure that in the future Europe has the capacity to
develop and shape technology to address various social objectives. European policy
makers have a host of tools at hand to positively influence and strengthen this in-
dustry. However, to date, policy debates about the IPCEI Microelectronics and the
forthcoming EU Chips Act have mainly resolved around subsidizing front-end manu-
facturing. This focus is insufficient, and Europe should broaden its scope to address
capabilities in other value chain steps where Europe currently lacks capacity—
notably chip design and packaging.
International forums such as the EU-US Trade and Technology Council ( TTC ) should
be used to identify areas of meaningful cooperation with partner governments,
whether this includes China or involves alignment against China where necessary.
The dominant role in the semiconductor value chain of Taiwan, South Korea and
 Japan, and these economies’ close integration with that of China, means they will
likely be indispensable partners in a long-term strategic approach to this industry.
Most importantly, European authorities must maintain their focus on the semicon-
ductor value chain beyond the immediate issues of responding to the global chip
shortage, passing the EU Chips Act and establishing a modus vivendi with the US in

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
25
the TTC. European authorities should continue to map, monitor and raise their visibil-
ity of this critical value chain to provide an analytical basis for long-term measures
to support and develop European capabilities. China has consistently supported its
semiconductor industry over decades, adjusting its approach as required, which
over time has helped Chinese industry to significantly improve its capabilities and
gain influential market share in some fields. Upgrading Europe’s semiconductor
ecosystem and regaining advantageous positions in the value chain will require a
sustained and well-informed approach from policy makers.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
26
References
1 McKinsey. 2020. “Semiconductor design and manufacturing: Achieving leading-edge capabilities” . https:/ /www.
mckinsey.com/industries/advanced-electronics/our-insights/semiconductor-design-and-manufacturing-achie-
ving-leading-edge-capabilities
2 John Lee and Jan-Peter Kleinhans. 2021. “Mapping China’s semiconductor ecosystem in global context: Strate-
gic Dimensions and Conclusions” . MERICS and Stiftung Neue Verantwortung. https:/ /merics.org/en/report/map-
ping-chinas-semiconductor-ecosystem-global-context-strategic-dimensions-and-conclusions ( hereafter “Lee
and Kleinhans, June 2021” ).
3 Antonio Varas, Raj Varadarajan, Jimmy Goodrich and Falan Yinug. 2021. “Strengthening the Global Semiconductor
Supply Chain in an Uncertain Era” . BCG and SIA. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/
BCG-x-SIA-Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Value-Chain-April-2021_1.pdf
4 Neil C. Thompson and Svenja Spanuth. 2019. “The Decline of Computers As a General Purpose Technology: Why Deep
Learning and the End of Moore’s Law are Fragmenting Computing” . https:/ /ssrn.com/abstract=3287769
5 IC Insights. 2021. “Chinese Companies Hold Only 5% of Global IC Marketshare” . https:/ /www.icinsights.com/news/
bulletins/Chinese-Companies-Hold-Only-5-Of-Global-IC-Marketshare/
6 Stewart Randall. 2021. “SILICON | Are Chinese chipmakers spending enough on R&D?” . TechNode. https:/ /technode.
com/2021/09/10/silicon-are-chinese-chipmakers-spending-enough-on-rd/
7 Stewart Randall. 2021. “SILICON | Are Chinese chipmakers spending enough on R&D?” . TechNode. https:/ /technode.
com/2021/09/10/silicon-are-chinese-chipmakers-spending-enough-on-rd/
8 Kate O’Keeffe, Heather Somerville and Yang Jie. 2021. “U.S. Companies Aid China’s Bid for Chip Dominance Despite
Security Concerns” . Wallstreet Journal. https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-firms-aid-chinas-bid-for-chip-domi-
nance-despite-security-concerns-11636718400
9 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 21-24.
10 Sina. 2020. “CITIC Securities: Autonomous driving car chip—Who is in the first echelon in China?” . https:/ /finance.
sina.com.cn/stock/hyyj/2020-09-25/doc-iivhvpwy8790568.shtml ( CN ); Gregor Sebastian. 2020. “European car -
makers fuel Chinese innovation” MERICS. https:/ /merics.org/en/opinion/european-carmakers-fuel-chinese-inno-
vation
11 Zeyi Yang. 2021. “Chinese companies are making their own semiconductors” . Protocol. https:/ /www.protocol.com/
china/chinese-companies-make-own-semiconductors; Min News. 2021. “Meituan enters the semiconductor, the
‘core’ territory of the Internet giant!” . https:/ /min.news/en/economy/8c10b3c4b873e74b4cd1d21323f2b2bf.html
12 FORWARD ( Qianzhan ) Business Information Co. Ltd. 2020. “2021–2026 Integrated Circuit Industry and Market De-
mand Forecast and Investment Strategic Planning Analysis Report” . 58–62. ( CN )
13 Mark Lapedus. 2021. “China Accelerates Foundry, Power Semi Efforts” . SemiEngineering. https:/ /semiengineering.
com/china-accelerates-foundry-power-semi-efforts/
14 Min News. 2021. “Some people are happy and some are worried: HiSilicon has fallen out of the top 15 in global
semiconductor revenue, and Qualcomm and MediaTek have increased by more than 50% year-on-year” . https:/ /min.
news/en/economy/924f9b594a6cf1523d5d816a0fb65e29.html
15 Cheng Ting-Fang and Lauly Li. 2021. “US-China tech war: Beijing's secret chipmaking champions” . Nikkei Asian Re-
view. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/The-Big-Story/US-China-tech-war-Beijing-s-secret-chipmaking-champi-
ons
16 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 15, 18-20.
17 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 22.
18 MERICS. 2021. “Decoupling—Severed Ties and Patchwork Globalisation” . Report by European Chamber of Com-
merce in China in partnership with MERICS. https:/ /merics.org/sites/default/files/2021-01/Decoupling_EN.pdf
19 Shannon Cuthrell. 2021. “ROHM Forms New Joint Venture for SiC Power Devices” . EEPower. https:/ /eepower.com/
news/rohm-forms-new-joint-venture-for-sic-power-devices/
20 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 17; White House. 2021. “Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American
Manufacturing, And Fostering Broad-Based Growth” . 100-Day Reviews under Executive Order 14017. https:/ /www.
whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-supply-chain-review-report.pdf
21 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 30-33.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
27
22 Stephen Nellis and Alexandra Alper. 2019. “U.S.-based chip-tech group moving to Switzerland over trade curb
fears” . Reuters. https:/ /www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-semiconductors-insight-idUSKBN1XZ16L
23 RISC-V. NN. “RISC-V Board of Directors” . https:/ /riscv.org/about/board-of-directors/
24 Stewart Randall. 2019. “China’s chipmakers could use RISC-V to reduce impact of US sanctions” . TechNode. China's
chipmakers could use RISC-V to reduce impact of US sanctions · TechNode; Jean-Luc Aufranc. 2021. “XiangShan
open-source 64-bit RISC-V processor to rival Arm Cortex-A76” . https:/ /www.cnx-software.com/2021/07/05/xiang-
shan-open-source-64-bit-risc-v-processor-rival-arm-cortex-a76/
25 China Money Network. 2021. “Chinese Chip Firms Bet On RISC-V To Counter US Bans And Grab New Markets” .
https:/ /www.chinamoneynetwork.com/2021/03/06/chinese-chip-firms-bet-on-risc-v-to-counter-us-bans-and-
grab-new-markets
26 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 31-32.
27 Paul Triolo. 2021. “The Future of China’s Semiconductor Industry” . American Affairs Spring 2021 / Volume V, Number
1. https:/ /americanaffairsjournal.org/2021/02/the-future-of-chinas-semiconductor-industry/
28 IC Insights. 2021. “Chinese Companies Hold Only 5% of Global IC Marketshare” . https:/ /www.icinsights.com/news/
bulletins/Chinese-Companies-Hold-Only-5-Of-Global-IC-Marketshare/
29 Digits to Dollars. 2020. „Apple Si—The Surprise Twist—It’s Not About Money“ . https:/ /digitstodollars.
com/2020/11/30/apple-si-the-surprise-twist-its-not-about-money/
30 Ellen Nakashima and Gerry Shih. 2021. “China builds advanced weapons systems using American chip technolo-
gy” . The Washington Post. https:/ /www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/china-hypersonic-missiles-ameri-
can-technology/2021/04/07/37a6b9be-96fd-11eb-b28d-bfa7bb5cb2a5_story.html
31 U.S. Department of Commerce. 2021. “Commerce Adds Seven Chinese Supercomputing Entities to Entity List for
their Support to China’s Military Modernization, and Other Destabilizing Efforts” . https:/ /www.commerce.gov/news/
press-releases/2021/04/commerce-adds-seven-chinese-supercomputing-entities-entity-list-their
32 RWR Advisory. 2021. “Examples Of Chinese Military Ties To Alibaba, Tencent, And Baidu” . https:/ /www.rwradvisory.
com/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/RWR-Fact-Sheet-1-12-2021.pdf
33 Christoph Hammerschmidt. 2021. “Volkswagen plans own chip development” . eeNews Automotive. https:/ /www.
eenewsautomotive.com/news/volkswagen-plans-own-chip-development
34 European Commission. 2021. “Key Digital Technologies: new partnership to help speed up transition to green
and digital Europe” . https:/ /digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/news/key-digital-technologies-new-partner -
ship-help-speed-transition-green-and-digital-europe
35 Deloitte. 2020. “Study on the impact of ECSEL funded actions” . https:/ /www.ecsel.eu/sites/default/files/2020-07/
Long_study_web.pdf
36 Europractice. NN. “Who we are” . https:/ /europractice-ic.com/about/who-we-are/
37 ASCENT+.NN. “European Nanoelectronics Access” . https:/ /www.ascent.network/home/about/
38 VDE. 2021. “Hidden Electronics III: Call for Action on Electronics from Germany and Europe” . http:/ /www.vde.com/
he-iii
39 ZVEI. 2021. “Semiconductor Strategy for Germany and Europe: The current situation, analysis, and goals” . https:/ /
www.zvei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Presse_und_Medien/Publikationen/2021/November/Halbleiterindustrie_
fuer_Deutschland_und_Europa/Semiconductor-Strategy-for-Germany-and-Europe.pdf
40 German Federal Ministry of Education and Research. 2020. “Microelectronics. Trustworthy and sustainable. For Ger-
many und Europe” . The German Federal Government’s Framework Programme for Research and Innovation 2021–
2024. https:/ /www.bmbf.de/SharedDocs/Publikationen/de/bmbf/pdf/microelectronics-trustworthy-and-sustain-
able-for-germany-und-europe.html
41 European Commission. 2021. “Rolling Plan for ICT Standardization 2021” . https:/ /joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/
rolling-plan-ict-standardisation/rolling-plan-2021
42 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 52-54.
43 Semiconductor Industry Association. 2021. Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and
Advanced Packaging Supply Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 79. https:/ /www.regu-
lations.gov/comment/BIS-2021-0011-0080, 35. Infineon, NXP and STMicroelectronics all operate back-end fabs in
China, similar to many other Western IDMs and foundries.
44 IHS Markit. 2019. “Electronic Chemicals: PCB Chemicals and Semiconductor Packaging Materials” . https:/ /
ihsmarkit.com/products/pcb-chemicals-semiconductor-packaging-materials.html

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
28
45 Litho World. 2019. “Current Status of the Integrated Circuit Industry in China ― IC Manufacturing Industry” . https:/ /
doi.org/10.33079/jomm.19020409
46 FORWARD ( Qianzhan ) Business Information. 2020. “2021–2026 Integrated Circuit Industry and Market Demand
Forecast and Investment Strategic Planning Analysis Report”; Litho World. 2019. “Current Status of the Integrated
Circuit Industry in China—IC Manufacturing Industry” . https:/ /doi.org/10.33079/jomm.19020409
47 JCET Group. 2021. “2.5/3D Integration“ . https:/ /www.jcetglobal.com/en/site/TechInfo_1; China Electronic News.
2021. “Giants compete for Chiplets: Advanced packaging technology is gaining momentum” http:/ /www.ce.cn/cysc/
tech/gd2012/202109/07/t20210907_36889622.shtml ( CN ); Henrik Bork and Michael Eckstein. 2021. “Neue Ära:
China setzt auf Advanced Packaging und Testing” . Elektronik Praxis. https:/ /www.elektronikpraxis.vogel.de/neue-
aera-china-setzt-auf-advanced-packaging-und-testing-a-1016761/ ( DE )
48 China Semiconductor Industry Association. 2021. “China’s largest computing chip unveiled, breaking the packaging
limit” . http:/ /www.csia.net.cn/Article/ShowInfo.asp?InfoID=103401 ( CN ).
49 Henrik Bork and Michael Eckstein. 2021. “Neue Ära: China setzt auf Advanced Packaging und Testing” . Elektro-
nik Praxis. https:/ /www.elektronikpraxis.vogel.de/neue-aera-china-setzt-auf-advanced-packaging-und-tes-
ting-a-1016761/
50 IHS Markit. 2019. “Electronic Chemicals: PCB Chemicals and Semiconductor Packaging Materials” . https:/ /
ihsmarkit.com/products/pcb-chemicals-semiconductor-packaging-materials.html; Pinsheng Electronics. 2021.
“Substrate-like PCB—The highlight in the future PCB industry” . https:/ /www.quick-pcba.com/pcb-news/sub-
strate-like-pcb-technology.html
51 Macquarie Research. 2019. “China PCB sector: Growing dominance in the 5G era” .
52 IHS Markit. 2019. “Electronic Chemicals: PCB Chemicals and Semiconductor Packaging Materials” . https:/ /
ihsmarkit.com/products/pcb-chemicals-semiconductor-packaging-materials.html
53 Evertiq. 2021. “Taiwanese PCB industry reaches new high in 2020” . https:/ /evertiq.com/news/49669; Lauly Li and
Cheng Ting-Fang. 2021. “Taiwan’s PSA weighs Asia expansion to catch 5G and EV boom” . Nikkei Asian Review. htt-
ps:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/Technology/Taiwan-s-PSA-weighs-Asia-expansion-to-catch-5G-and-EV-boom; Jay
Liu and Willis Ke. 2021. “Compeq to expand HDI production capacity at China plant in 2022” . Digitimes. https:/ /www.
digitimes.com/news/a20211105PD205.html
54 Jordan Robertson and Michael Riley. 2018. “The Big Hack: How China Used a Tiny Chip to Infiltrate U.S. Companies” .
Bloomberg. https:/ /www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-10-04/the-big-hack-how-china-used-a-tiny-chip-
to-infiltrate-america-s-top-companies; Jordan Robertson and Michael Riley. 2021. “The Long Hack: How China Ex-
ploited a U.S. Tech Supplier” . Bloomberg. https:/ /www.bloomberg.com/features/2021-supermicro/
55 Makena Kelly. 2018. “Another US intel chief casts doubt on Chinese spy chip story” . The Verge. https:/ /www.thev-
erge.com/2018/10/19/17999712/apple-amazon-hack-china-spy-chip-dan-coats; Patrick Kennedy. 2018. “In-
vestigating Implausible Bloomberg Supermicro Stories” . https:/ /www.servethehome.com/investigating-implau-
sible-bloomberg-supermicro-stories/; Sebastian Moss. 2021. “Years later, Bloomberg doubles down on disputed
Supermicro supply chain hack story” . https:/ /www.datacenterdynamics.com/en/news/years-later-bloomberg-dou-
bles-down-disputed-supermicro-supply-chain-hack-story/
56 White House. 2021. “Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, And Fostering Broad-
Based Growth” . 100-Day Reviews under Executive Order 14017. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/up-
loads/2021/06/100-day-supply-chain-review-report.pdf
57 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ) 17, 53–54; China Electronic News. 2021. “Giants compete for Chiplets: Advanced pack-
aging technology is gaining momentum” . http:/ /www.ce.cn/cysc/tech/gd2012/202109/07/t20210907_36889622.
shtml ( CN ).
58 Iris Deng. 2021. “China must pursue chip assembly, packaging breakthroughs to catch up with semiconductor lead-
ers, experts say” South China Morning Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3136688/china-must-pur-
sue-chip-assembly-packaging-breakthroughs-catch; Che Pan. 2021. “SMIC urges China’s chipmakers to embrace
advanced packaging as Moore’s Law slows nanometre node progress and US sanctions bite” . South China Morn-
ing Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/article/3119174/smic-urges-chinas-chipmakers-embrace-ad-
vanced-packaging-moores-law
59 Antonio Varas, Raj Varadarajan, Jimmy Goodrich and Falan Yinug. 2021. “Strengthening the Global Semiconductor
Supply Chain in an Uncertain Era” . BCG and SIA. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/
BCG-x-SIA-Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Value-Chain-April-2021_1.pdf
60 Andrew Huang. 2019. “Supply Chain Security: If I were a Nation State… ” . Presentation at BlueHat IL 2019. https:/ /
www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqQhWitJ1As

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
29
61 Tiago D. Perez and Samuel Pagliarini. 2020. “A survey on split manufacturing: Attacks, defenses, and challenges” .
https:/ /doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3029339
62 State Council of the People’s Republic of China. ‘Liu He chaired the 18th meeting of the Leading Group on Reform of
the National Science and Technology System and Construction of the Innovation System. ’ 2021 http:/ /www.gov.cn/
guowuyuan/2021-05/14/content_5606512.htm ( CN ).
63 European Commission. 2020. “ Joint declaration on processors and semiconductor technologies” . https:/ /digi-
tal-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/joint-declaration-processors-and-semiconductor-technologies
64 European Commission. 2021. “2030 Digital Compass: the European way for the Digital Decade” . https:/ /eur-lex.eu-
ropa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52021DC0118&from=en
65 European Commission. 2021. “Alliance on Processors and Semiconductor technologies” . https:/ /digital-strategy.
ec.europa.eu/en/policies/alliance-processors-and-semiconductor-technologies
66 ASEAN Today. 2012. “Malaysia and Huawei open Southeast Asia’s first cybersecurity center to support 5G growth” .
https:/ /www.aseantoday.com/2021/02/malaysia-and-huawei-open-southeast-asias-first-cybersecurity-center-
to-support-5g-growth/
67 Jan-Peter Kleinhans and Julia Hess. 2021. “Understanding the Global Chip Shortages” . https:/ /www.stiftung-nv.de/
sites/default/files/understanding_the_global_chip_shortages.pdf
68 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 20.
69 State Council. 2020. “Some Policies to Promote the High-Quality Development of the Integrated Circuit and Soft-
ware Industry in the New Era” . http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2020-08/04/content_5532370.htm ( CN )
70 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 13-16.
71 Katja Drinhausen and Helena Lagarda. 2021. “China’s Anti-Foreign Sanctions Law: A warning to the world” . MERICS.
https:/ /merics.org/de/kurzanalyse/chinas-anti-foreign-sanctions-law-warning-world
72 State Administration for Market Regulation. 2021. “General Administration of Market Supervision opens investigation
into autochip distributors suspected of price gouging” . http:/ /www.samr.gov.cn/xw/zj/202108/t20210803_333318.
html ( CN )
73 Reuters. 2021. “China regulator targets auto chip distributors with price-gouging probe” . https:/ /www.reuters.
com/technology/china-regulator-investigate-auto-chip-distributors-suspicion-price-gouging-2021-08-03/; STCN.
2021. “10 yuan chips sold for more than 400 yuan, three major distributors fined 2.5 million” . https:/ /news.stcn.
com/sd/202109/t20210928_3720851.html
74 Cheng Ting-Fang and Lauly Li. 2021. “China prioritizes local chip needs during global crunch” . https:/ /asia.nikkei.
com/Business/Tech/Semiconductors/China-prioritizes-local-chip-needs-during-global-crunch
75 ‘ Jiangmen City Bureau of Industry and Information Technology. “Concerning the issuance of the ‘work plan on ensur-
ing the stability of industrial and supply chains’” . 2021. http:/ /www.jiangmen.gov.cn/bmpd/jmsgyhxxhj/ywfl/ghyyx-
jck/content/post_2071311.html ( CN )
76 Chongqing Municipal People’s Government. 2021. “Chongqing implements ‘one chain, one policy’ to build and
strengthen ( industry ) chains” . http:/ /www.cq.gov.cn/zwxx/jrcq/202110/t20211028_9898592.html ( CN )
77 European Commission. 2021. “Strategic dependencies and capacities” . Commission Staff Working Document.
SWD( 2021 ) 352 final. https:/ /ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/strategic-dependencies-capacities.pdf
78 European Commission. 2021. “Trade Policy Review—An Open, Sustainable and Assertive Trade Policy” . https:/ /tra-
de.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2021/february/tradoc_159438.pdf
79 Lee and Kleinhans ( June 2021 ), 10–11.
80 European Commission. 2019. “EU-China—A strategic outlook” . JOIN( 2019 ) 5 final. https:/ /ec.europa.eu/info/sites/
default/files/communication-eu-china-a-strategic-outlook.pdf
81 White House. 2021. “Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, And Fostering Broad-
Based Growth” . 100-Day Reviews under Executive Order 14017. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/up-
loads/2021/06/100-day-supply-chain-review-report.pdf
82 White House. 2021. “FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announces Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force to
Address Short-Term Supply Chain Discontinuities” . https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releas-
es/2021/06/08/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-supply-chain-disruptions-task-force-to-ad-
dress-short-term-supply-chain-discontinuities/
83 White House. 2021. “When the Chips Are Down: Preventing and Addressing Supply Chain Disruptions” . https:/ /www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/blog/2021/09/23/when-the-chips-are-down-preventing-and-addressing-supply-
chain-disruptions/

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
30
84 Bureau of Industry and Security. 2021. “Risks in the Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain” . 86 FR 14308. https:/ /www.federalregister.gov/d/2021-05353; Bureau of Industry and Security. 2021. “Notice
of Request for Public Comments on Risks in the Semiconductor Supply Chain” . 86 FR 53031. https:/ /www.federal-
register.gov/d/2021-20348
85 Debby Wu. 2021. “World’s Top Chipmakers Provide Data to U.S. as Deadline Arrives” Bloomberg. https:/ /www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-11-07/tsmc-withholds-customer-specific-data-in-answering-u-s-request
86 Eric Martin and Sohee Kim. 2021. “All Major Chipmakers Pledge to Give U.S. Requested Data” . Bloomberg.https:/ /
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-11-08/chipmakers-pledge-to-give-u-s-requested-data-raimondo-says
87 Reuters. 2021. “TSMC says it did not release any detailed customer data in response to US request” . https:/ /www.
reuters.com/technology/taiwans-tsmc-says-it-has-responded-us-chip-data-request-2021-11-08/
88 White House. 2021. “FACT SHEET: United States—Republic of Korea Partnership” . https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/05/21/fact-sheet-united-states-republic-of-korea-partnership/
89 Stephen Nellis, Joyce Lee and Toby Sterling. 2021. “Exclusive: U.S.-China tech war clouds SK Hynix’s plans for a
key chip factory” . Reuters. https:/ /www.reuters.com/technology/exclusive-us-china-tech-war-clouds-sk-hynixs-
plans-key-chip-factory-2021-11-18/; The Korea Herald. 2021. “US’ restriction on SK Hynix plan in China ‘legitimate’:
US trade chief” . http:/ /www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20211122000854
90 White House. 2021. “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit” . https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/state-
ments-releases/2021/09/24/fact-sheet-quad-leaders-summit/
91 European Commission. 2021. “EU-US Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement” . https:/ /ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_21_4951
92 White House. 2021. “When the Chips Are Down: Preventing and Addressing Supply Chain Disruptions” . https:/ /www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/blog/2021/09/23/when-the-chips-are-down-preventing-and-addressing-supply-
chain-disruptions/
93 European Commission. 2021. “Strategic dependencies and capacities” . Commission Staff Working Document.
SWD( 2021 ) 352 final. https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52021SC0352&from=EN
94 European Commission. 2021. “Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence and space industries” . https:/ /ec.eu-
ropa.eu/info/sites/default/files/com-2021-70_en_act_part1_v8_en.pdf
95 European Commission. 2021. “Alliance on Processors and Semiconductor technologies” . https:/ /digital-strategy.
ec.europa.eu/en/policies/alliance-processors-and-semiconductor-technologies
96 The Korea Times. 2021. “Samsung set to follow TSMC to provide chip info to US” . https:/ /www.koreatimes.co.kr/
www/tech/2021/11/133_318419.html
97 European Commission. 2021. “EU-US Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement” . https:/ /ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_21_4951
98 Kate O’Keeffe, Heather Somerville and Yang Jie. 2021. “U.S. Companies Aid China’s Bid for Chip Dominance Despite
Security Concerns” . Wall Street Journal. https:/ /www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-firms-aid-chinas-bid-for-chip-domi-
nance-despite-security-concerns-11636718400
99 European Commission. 2021. “EU-US Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement” . https:/ /ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_21_4951
100 South China Morning Post. ‘Taiwan looking at semiconductor cooperation with Eastern European nations’ . 2021.
https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3157433/taiwan-looking-semiconductor-cooperation-eastern-eu-
ropean-nations; South China Morning Post. ‘US-China tech war: Beijing calls on Washington to stop further dia-
logue with Taipei on supply chain resilience, semiconductors’ . 2021. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/artic-
le/3157268/us-china-tech-war-beijing-calls-washington-stop-further-dialogue
101 Lee and Kleinhans, June 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
31
About the Stiftung Neue Verantwortung
The Stiftung Neue Verantwortung ( SNV ) is an independent, non-profit think tank
working at the intersection of technology and society. The core method of SNV is
 collaborative policy development, involving experts from government, tech com-
panies, civil society and academia to test and develop analyses with the aim of
 generating ideas on how governments can positively shape the technological trans-
formation. To guarantee the independence of its work, the organization has adopted
a concept of mixed funding sources that include foundations, public funds and cor -
porate donations.
About MERICS
MERICS has established itself as the go-to European think tank on China. With
about 20 full-time international researchers, from all over Europe, the United States,
Australia and Singapore, MERICS is currently the largest European research insti-
tute focusing solely on the analysis of contemporary China and its relations with
 Europe and the wider world. Our experts cover a range of scientific qualifications
and methodological skills. It plays an active role in informing European public
 debates on China and in providing senior decision-makers across Europe with in-
depth China-related insights critical to their portfolios.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
32
About the Authors
Jan-Peter Kleinhans is director of the “Technology and Geopolitics” project. Currently
his work focuses on the intersection of global semiconductor supply chains and
geopolitics. Previously Jan-Peter worked on 5G security and presented his work at
the German parliament's committee on foreign affairs and the NATO parliamentary
assembly. After joining SNV in 2014 Jan-Peter analyzed why the market failed to
produce reasonably trustworthy consumer IoT devices. He explored if and how stan-
dardization, certification and market surveillance can create economic incentives
for IoT manufacturers to produce secure and trustworthy IoT devices. He is Fellow
of the Transatlantic Digital Debates 2016 and studied communication sciences in
Uppsala, Sweden and business informatics in Darmstadt.
John Lee is a former Senior Analyst at MERICS, where he coordinated work in the
research cluster on China’s use of digital technologies. John’s main areas of research
focus are China’s semiconductor ecosystem, cyberspace and data governance, and
 future digital networks encompassing next-generation telecommunications and the
 Internet of Things. John’s academic background includes strategic studies, political
science and international relations, history and international law. He holds Masters
degrees from the King’s College London Department of War Studies and from the
Australian National University. John previously worked for the Australian Depart-
ment of Defence and Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade.
Contact the Authors:
Jan-Peter Kleinhans
jkleinhans@stiftung-nv.de
John Lee
johnlee@eastwestfutures.com

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Policy Brief
December 2021
China’s rise in semiconductors and Europe
33
Imprint
Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e. V.
Beisheim Center
Berliner Freiheit 2
10785 Berlin
T: +49 ( 0 ) 30 81 45 03 78 80
F: +49 ( 0 ) 30 81 45 03 78 97
www.stiftung-nv.de
info@stiftung-nv.de
Design:
Make Studio
www.make-studio.net
Layout:
Jan Klöthe
This paper is published under CreativeCommons License ( CC BY-SA ). This allows
for copying, publishing, citing and translating the contents of the paper, as long as
the Stiftung Neue Verantwortung is named and all resulting publications are also
published under the license “CC BY-SA” . Please refer to http:/ /creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ for further information on the license and its terms and
conditions.
