
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
JUNE 2023
UPDATING THE EU ACTION PLAN ON CHINA
De-risk, Engage, Coordinate
FRANÇOIS CHIMITS, FRANCESCA GHIRETTI, GRZEGORZ STEC
AT A GLANCE
 The EU’s China policy needs recalibration: Since the unveiling of the EU -China
Strategic Outlook in 2019, the EU has made significant progress in developing a range
of defensive policies. Yet the bloc now needs to update the Strategic Outlook’s action
points to reflect changes in China and on the global stage.
 Update, not redraw: The new action plan can continue to be guided by the three-pronged
approach (cooperation partner, economic competitor, systemic rival), but should account
for the growing weight of the latter two components in EU-China relations.
 We propose three baskets of policy action:
 De-risk: mitigate the EU’s strategic dependence on and vulnerabilities to China
 Engage: establish a baseline for cooperation with China in areas
of common interest
 Coordinate: increase synergy on China-related knowledge within
the EU and among partners
 Build up own capacity to act: An updated action plan on China would expand
autonomous measures to ensure that European strategic interests can be secured, even
when China or other partners do not embrace the EU’s proposals for multilateral solutions.
 Seek cooperation but prepare for lack thereof: An updated plan should continue to
seek cooperative measures with China while being aware of Beijing’s readiness to use
talks as means for strategic stalling.
 Create structures to boost European unity towards China: It is needed more than
ever. Systematizing alignment processes among European institutions, member states
and relevant stakeholders can help to improve internal alignment.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 3
Updating the EU’s China policy: Key lessons from
implementing the 2019 Strategic Outlook
 Improve internal coordination on China: The EU’s approach to China – as partner,
competitor and systemic rival – in the 2019 Strategic Outlook brought cohesion to its
position. But member states and EU institutions diverged in their implementation of
some of the Strategic Outlook’s 10 action points. New structures should help define
priorities and goals and coordinate member states’ communication with China.
 Strengthen autonomous measures and boost r esilience: The EU has been most
successful with implementing its action plan when acting autonomously, especially
developing new policy tools. The updated plan should therefore complement
collaborative initiatives with options for independent actions should collaboration not
bear fruit. This will boost the EU’s international bargaining power. To bolster resilience,
the EU should also close technical and political loopholes that limit the efficiency of its
policy tools.
 Expand coalitions to steer China towards rules-based multilateralism: Beijing has
shown limited support for rules-based multilateral solutions to global challenges or for
constructive reforms to the international system. Instead, it has been building its
influence within multilatera l bodies on issues that directly impact its interests and
prioritizing unilateral and bilateral measures (e.g., on pandemic response or climate
crisis). Furthermore, it promoted an alternative, state-led “true multilateralism” that it
defines through its G lobal Development, Security, Civilization and Data Security
Initiatives. The lack of substantive contribution to discussions on reform of multilateral
institutions might even indicate Beijing engages some of those conversations with the
objective of strategic stalling.
 Coordinate common concerns and vigorously invest in engaging the Global South,
beyond traditional, like -minded partners. The multilateral system needs reform
that accommodates both the EU’s principles and interests as well as developing
countries’ concerns – to effectively compete with alternative offers and have a chance
of overcoming inertia.
DE-RISK, ENGAGE, COORDINATE: UPDATING THE EU’S CHINA
POLICY
Significant developments in China and on the global stage in recent years call for an update
to the action plan included within the EU’s 2019 Strategic Outlook on China. This key
policy document established a common approach to relations with China – engaging it as
a partner for cooperation and negotiation, economic competitor and systemic rival. While
the overall flexible approach of the Outlook remains useful, the action points themselves
require an update to respond to the new political reality and to factor in the lessons
learned from how member states implemented the Strategic Outlook’s 10 action points.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 4
Since 2019, China has become more centralized, securitized, and assertive. The 20 th
National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) signaled further party -led
centralization, securitization that expands into the economy, as well as increased use of
laws as a weapon against rivals (e.g., China’s new anti -espionage law or Hong Kong’s
National Security Law). The party state has asserted its market -interventionist and
assertive foreign policy course that runs counter to the spirit of the rules-based
international order, as well as to European hopes that economic ties would bring the PRC
closer to its own set of norms and preferences.
Beijing has become more confrontational in the Taiwan Strait and more ambitious in
controlling international discourse and promoting visions of an alternative international
order (e.g., through Global Development, Security, Civilization and Data Security
Initiatives). Meanwhile, the geopolitical situation has become more volatile due to the
Covid-19 pandemic, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the intensifying Sino -American
competition that is fueling bifurcation of the international order. Beijing’s unwillingness
to confront Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine in particular tests its credibility as a
viable partner for the EU.
The EU already began to respond to these changes in its October 2022 European External
Action Service (EEAS) paper on China, European Commission President Ursula von der
Leyen’s de-risking proposal in March 2023 and China discussions durin g the May 2023
Gymnich meeting of the EU Foreign Affairs Council. The EU -China summit and the
European Council discussions in June 2023 will be key to developing a more coordinated
position on China. The task is even more urgent as the recent flurry of dip lomatic
exchanges between China and the member states necessitates creating a more
coordinated EU position on China policy. The upcoming European Parliament elections
and the new term of the European Commission in 2024 also merit the need over the
coming months to agree on a tactical action plan on China to prevent disruptions to EU
China policy in the course of electoral transitions.
PAYING HEED TO THE INCREASING IMPORTANCE OF
COMPETITION AND RIVALRY
The new EU action plan should focus on defining the tactical level of the EU’s China policy
and recognize the increased importance of systemic rivalry and economic competition,
even as the EU maintains its approach to China as partner, competitor and rival. A new
set of action points will help the EU execute its China policy around three objectives:
 De-risk China relations – Mitigate strategic dependencies and vulnerabilities that
China could exploit
 Engage China and partners – Establish a baseline for constructive engagement
with Beijing and strengthen the rules-based international order through working
with a variety of partners
 Coordinate internal resources and cooperation with partners on China – Create
structures for improved policy planning, knowledge exchange and increase China
literacy among stakeholders

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 5
Key ways to DE-RISK
1. Create an EU risk assessment framework with corresponding response
measures
De-risking is the guiding concept proposed by the European Commission to manage and
reduce the EU’s economic dependencies and vulnerabilities – such as recent supply-chain
tensions or reliance on imports of critical raw materials from specific locations. It offers a
broad conceptual basis for multiple policies and approaches, including the risk
assessments of partners now proposed in the EU’s economic security strategy. Although
de-risking the economic relationship is the main focus of this section, de -risking is about
more than just economic interactions. De -risking is also about reducing the risks to
European values and to democracy.
Aligning methodologies that are also applied consistently by member states, the EU can
assess the risks posed by China (and other countries) without discriminating against
China but letting the results of the assessment indicate that certain aspects of the
relationship with China pose high risks for the EU. The risk criteria would be as objective
as possible but must be inform ed by experience. The risk assessment would underline
Beijing’s track record of economic coercion and non -market practices as well as the EU
impact of its goal of technological self -sufficiency, all elements that increase the risk of
disruption. To ensure success, European firms in strategic sectors (already identified by
the European Commission in reports published in 2021 and 2022) would disclose their
degree of exposure to the Chinese market in terms of investment, revenue, profits and
value-chains where public information is insufficient. The EU’s early warning system
(currently under development) could then be finetuned based on this information.
The risk assessment will enable the EU, member states and the business community to
first collect comparable data on existing risks, their impact, and ability to manage them.
Second, it would allow for the adoption of a much -needed common language for the
identification of such risks and how to manage them, and thus align different policies and
their implementation that match shared objectives of de-risking. During that process, the
characteristics of different goods should be considered in shaping the best risk -
management approach (i.e., for smaller goods stockpiling may be the answer). The
assessment outcomes will help prioritize and coordinate measures (also for member
states) such as diversifying, stockpiling, recycling, connecting local industries in strategic
sectors or developing domestic capacities, as well as helping to identify potential gaps in
the existing toolbox. The results of the risk assessment should be considered during the
development and coordination of strategies – like in the implementation of the
Commission’s Global Gateway program, trade agreements or other bilateral agreements.
2. Build a nd strengthen global networks to reduce dependency on China
Building new economic ties and strengthening existing ones will help reduce strategic
dependencies on China . Beijing has long understood that engagement with developing
economies is key to the fut ure of its economic prosperity and power. Besides
strengthening relationships with traditional partners such as the G7, the EU should focus
on its relationship with developing economies. Free Trade Agreements (FTA), the new

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 6
format of the Trade and Technolo gy Council (TTC), Global Gateway and other bilateral
arrangements can help the EU diversify and solidify its own supply chain as well as global
supply chains. This helps to avoid indirect dependencies on China via third countries and
promote standards that are respectful of human, labor and environmental rights – rights
that are at the core of the EU’s value system.
Although bilateral engagements are the fastest and most efficient way to manage
vulnerabilities, they risk overlooking indirect dependencies. The Commission has already
adopted a principle not to depend heavily on one source. Strengthening plurilateral
engagement would further contribute to safeguarding effective diversification while
maintaining a degree of openness.
3. Create EU guidelines on informed subnational and non- state engagement
Chinese actors’ direct engagement with city or local -level European authorities and
institutions such as universities and research centers has been unfolding with minimal or
limited scrutiny and often with little awareness from European sub -national actors over
the underlying risks in this engagement, limiting the EU’s supranational strategic
awareness. When the EU drafted its Strategic Outlook in 2019, there was little
conversation about China’s interference in civil society. Since then, the EU has increased
its awareness and ability to respond, although more work is required. For example, efforts
of the EEAS in tracking Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference (FIMI )
originating from Chin a are still to be explicitly mandated by the Council, which could
unlock additional resources and improve involvement of member states in responding to
China-related FIMI cases.
National security is a competence of each member state. However, foreign interference in
one member state has repercussions for others. For this reason, the EU should draft
guidelines and recommendations (e.g., actionable checklists) as policy blueprints that
member states could divulge to local authorities, institutions and civil society engaging
with partners from high-risk countries. The approach would be rooted in the idea of
boosting democratic resilience through a whole -of-society approach with the EU
guidelines acting as suggestions for member states to sensitize local actors to FIMI related
challenges and empower them to respond autonomously. The level of risk associated with
each partner would be identified via the proposed risk assessment, defined through
criteria that can be applied to any actor. This should include guideli nes on knowledge
security, information security related to media partnerships and publishing/broadcasting
of information, and expansion of the 2022 toolkit on mitigating foreign interference in
research and innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 7
Key ways to ENGAGE
1. Boost strateg ic communication and response preparedness on strategic
issues
The consistency of messaging between member states is key prerequisite for an effective
EU diplomatic strategic deterrence towards China. Agreeing on a set of common messages
on key issues of interest – like China’s positioning towards Russia’s invasion of Ukraine or
the tensions in the Taiwan Strait – will help the EU reduce its vulnerability in strategic
communication and boost diplomatic deterrence ability. In that context, the EU should
also consider bolstering its capacity for common response and communication in some
extreme scenarios to ensure its preparedness, should they materialize. For instance, it
should agree a set of common messages to be deployed by EU capitals and discuss a set of
common measures aimed at supporting the status quo in the Taiwan Strait and at
preventing China from providing more substantial support for Russia in its aggression
against Ukraine.
To facilitate collective communicatio n practices, the EEAS and COASI (Asia -Oceania
Working Party of the Council of the EU) could conduct messaging alignment discussions –
including for public -facing readouts and statements – ahead of major interactions with
Chinese officials when EU’s strateg ic interests are being discussed. In a similar vein,
common practices in terms of timely publications of robust readouts after meetings with
Chinese counterparts should be established to prevent Chinese narratives from
dominating the discourse space in the absence of European positions.
2. Strengthen the rules -based international order through reform coalitions –
with or without China
Collective solutions to strengthen the rules -based international order can address areas
where the emergence of China has shaken the existing framework and threatens the rule
of law in favor of power dictating law. Such actions weaken smaller actors, the
international competition rulebook (the WTO) and international debt restructuring. The
goal should be for China to constructi vely participate in reforms that strengthen rules -
based multilateralism.
However, based on Beijing’s limited enthusiasm for such initiatives in the past, the EU
should be ready to build coalitions for reforms, especially with developing countries, that
could incentivize China to join. This could take the form of plurilateral agreements among
countries willing to support the norms of a rules -based system with or without China.
Getting China on board should not come at the cost of the core principles of transparency,
fairness and predictability. Proposed or established plurilateral upgrades will incentivize
China to genuinely take part in negotiations focused on multilateral solutions.
When engaging China on those matters, Europeans need to be clear, especially internally,
of their objectives in those exchanges. This would help to monitor the efficiency of
dialogues with China over time, manage expectations and foster consistency with broader
European endeavors. The risk of Beijing only engaging the EU to pursue strategic stalling
and extend the beneficial status quo, ought to be considered. External communication to

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 8
partners and civil society should more clearly underline that a functional rule -based
international order foremost benefits the players with the least bargaining power, often
developing countries. This communication dimension shall, however, not prevent
European actors from better integrating the views and interests of less developed actors.
3. Develop ground rules for constructive green cooperati on/competition with
China
The EU and China should find common ground for action on environmental challenges.
This is a shared interest of both parties, and cooperation should not require European
partners to meet unrelated conditions – e.g., it should not be affected by European
exchanges with Taiwanese partners. Beyond bilateral efforts to strengthen international
discussions and frameworks on the environment, the EU should invest in establishing
green standards with China, including for goods, the enviro nmental impact of their
production, and for the design of public investment in relevant sectors.
As a condition for access to the single market, the EU is setting high-level green standards
for products with a high environmental impact. The next step is a common certification
and assessment system to maximize the effect of these measures on its environmental
goals. Products made of wood, batteries and even extractive minerals, as well as those
covered by the EU’s Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) are obvious priorities,
as is international transport. Efforts for international cooperation should not be
conditioned by China’s participation. Still, China’s economic and political significance in
the green transition make it a priority partner, so it is prudent for the EU to consider
China’s concerns in its proposals for a certification system. Areas of cooperation ought to
be defined with the competitive implications in mind, considering the perspective of
European firms.
Similarly, to ensure its measur es are internationally accepted, the EU should invest
resources in explaining and presenting better the European green standards, their
certification procedures, the funding provided to facilitate reaching those standards and
their respect and alignment with international regulations.
Key ways to COORDINATE
1. Create an EU China Action Plan review and update mechanism
Improving internal coordination, both between stakeholders and policies, is a priority for
the EU’s China policy. Conducting periodic assessments of the implementation of the
action points and updating them in two-year cycles can help to ensure that China-related
policy measures are more coherently implemented by the member states, to avoid
miscommunication and align EU member states more closely on a tactical-level agenda of
EU China policy. It would serve as the next step towards a more united China policy
standing upon the common foundation of the Strategic Outlook’s three-pronged approach.
The assessment should be carried out by the EEAS in coordination with COASI and include
an outreach exercise to a wider group of relevant stakeholders (such as MEPs, business
representatives, NGOs, research institutions, etc) and input from EU and member state
delegations in Beijing. The conclusions of the assessments and a proposal of an update of

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 9
the action points could then be discussed on the COREPER level and, if deemed
appropriate, put on the agenda of the Foreign Affairs Council or the European Council.
With a growing number of actors and policy inst ruments being involved or impacted by
the China policy, such a review process could narrow the gap between strategic thinking
and the practical, operational- level actions of the EU and its member states on China
policy. Furthermore, the biannual rhythm could also help to structure the China agenda of
subsequent European Commissions, helping to ensure effective delivery of policy projects
between the EU terms.
The revision exercise would also help to limit information asymmetry between the
various EU actors and China (which coordinates exchanges between its own officials and
member states). Reducing this asymmetry, which currently benefits Beijing, would hinder
divide and rule tactics.
2. Develop the EU’s understanding of China policies of partners
China’s policies and initiatives are increasingly geared towards using Beijing’s
engagement with third countries to reshape the international order. Better understanding
its partners’ positions on China will help the EU respond to the systemic challenge th at
Beijing’s efforts present. Exchanges with partner countries already take place for example
through the dedicated EU -US High-level Dialogue on China and the coordination efforts
within the G7 framework. The EU should expand such efforts and map where its interests
overlap with the governments and societies of partner countries and in alignment with
them raise concerns and hopes for Beijing’s policies. Such efforts should include
developing countries to build non-Eurocentric perspectives into coalitions. This also helps
refute labels like “West vs. Rest” or “Global North vs. Global South” that constrain EU
policies or validate Beijing’s narratives.
For instance, regular information gathering by contact points on China in EU delegations
could lead to quarterly updates for the EEAS on China’s activity and evolving footprint in
the host countries and their China related policies. This could help map China -related
opportunities or concerns of third countries and bolster the EU’s capacity to engage in the
battle of narratives and the battle of offers. The outreach should also include discussions
with European businesses in said third countries to identify the challenges they face from,
oftentimes subsidized, Chinese competitors.
Such an effort would make engaging with new partners on China issues easier and could
be used to inform the EU’s outward facing activities within the scope of, for instance, the
Global Gateway or Neighborhood Policies. EEAS could share the results with member
states in the framework of existing exchanges, as they often lack the resources to conduct
such consistent mapping on their own. To facilitate that, the member states should
allocate additional resources to process data on Chinese activity in third countries on the
EU level.
3. Develop and pool China expertise including for training measures
China is a new and complex global power whose decisions have an impact on a growing
range of the EU’s cross -sectoral policy debates – from industrial policy to knowledge

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 10
security. Yet, EU and national agencies often do not have the capacity and/or the in-house
expertise to focus on China and the level of knowledge on China remains unevenly
distributed and prioritized within governmental agencies across the EU. The EU has been
building its knowledge on China through EU -sponsored initiatives such as China -related
projects under the Horizon Europe or the China in Europe Research Network (CHERN),
which can provide governmental actors with a pool of expertise to tap into. But connecting
the ever -growing pool of government institutions impacted by China to this pool of
expertise remains a challenge.
To overcome this, the EU and member states should consider investing in long -term
efforts to strengthen applied European China research, either in ways s imilar to Bruegel
or the new institute of geopolitics in Brussels or in a more networked fashion. They should
begin by establishing dedicated annual China trainings for European officials to help them
contextualize Beijing’s actions within their field of work. These should be offered not only
to officials who directly and officially deal with China, but especially to those who cover
issue areas strongly related to China. Some of the EU’s like-minded partners have already
taken such measures.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 11

This MERICS Report is part of the project “Dealing with a Resurgent China” (DWARC)
which has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and
innovation programme under grant agreement number 101061700.
Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union. Neither the European Union nor the
granting authority can be held responsible for them.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
MERICS Report

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies June 2023 l 12
IMPRINT
CONTACT
François Chimits
Analyst, MERICS
francois.chimits@merics.de
Francesca Ghiretti
Analyst, MERICS
francesca.ghiretti@merics.de
Grzegorz Stec
Analyst, MERICS
grzegorz.stec@merics.de
EDITORIAL TEAM
Claudia Wessling
Director Communications
and Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
Alexander Davey
Analyst and Editor, MERICS
Ellen Thalman
Freelance Editor
GRAPHICS AND LAYOUT
Alexandra Hinrichs
Graphic Designer, MERICS
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64
10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
