
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE CONNECTION OF EVERYTHING
China and the Internet of Things
John Lee
MAIN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 Massive growth in devices connected to the internet raises technical and policy
challenges on a new scale. This ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) is diffusing power to a grow -
ing range of actors worldwide who build and operate connected devices and the under -
lying infrastructure, both physical and virtual.
 The IoT is amplifying both rewards from technological leadership and risks from
inter-connection across borders. Sovereign governments are responding by imposing
increasing control over the internet within their jurisdiction, leading to growing frag -
mentation of cyberspace governance on national lines.
 China now plays a significant role in shaping the IoT, which is growing with the
technological footprint of Chinese firms. This is being driven by the incentives of pri-
vate industry, and by the Chinese state’s sustained policies to boost the role of Chinese
actors in IoT development, including technical standardization.
 Concerns about how China may exploit the IoT are driving moves to disconnect
from Chinese networks, led by the US. But the reluctance of other countries to join a
“democratic” internet coalition excluding China means that instead, the IoT will likely
continue fragmenting into a variety of distinct “cyber-spaces”.
 Europe must adopt measures to mitigate the growing risks from international
connectivity, as well as to compete with China in shaping the IoT worldwide. This
implies adapting European “cyber diplomacy” to the growing role of non-Western coun-
tries, which have their own priorities and views towards Chinese influence, in shaping
the IoT and the economic systems being built upon it.
 The “public core of the internet” concept offers a baseline for compromise on these
issues, focused on maintaining the internet’s function as a global public good. But
while avoiding a stance of unmitigated confrontation with China, Europe must closely
monitor Beijing’s priorities for shaping the evolving IoT.
June 24, 2021
MERICS
CHINA
MONITOR

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
| 2
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
1. CHINA IS HELPING SHAPE THE WORLD’S TRANSITION TO THE INTERNET OF
THINGS (IOT)
The rise of the Internet of Things (IoT) is transforming economic systems and social relations
worldwide. China is a key actor shaping this transformation, thanks to the scale of its digital
industries and state-led ambitions to lead in new technologies. Beijing committed early on
to the IoT’s development, using sustained state policy to leverage China’s huge markets and
central position in global manufacturing. Chinese actors, which before the late 1990s had
little influence over design of the world’s digital infrastructure, are becoming major players
in shaping the international IoT, and by extension the power relations embedded within it.
The IoT’s evolution will amplify the rewards accruing to those who wield influence over
the design of the internet’s architecture and constituent systems. For the transatlantic
economies that historically dominated the design and governance of the global internet,
China’s role in the growing “interconnection of everything” represents a potentially
profound shift in the international distribution of economic and technological power,
which merits close attention.
1.1 What is the IoT?
The internet is no longer merely a communication medium among people. It now directly
affects the physical world. An expanding range of “things” are being connected to the
internet, resulting in a growing number of real-world functions being controlled through
cyberspace.1 The number and type of objects connected to the internet and which can be
influenced through it is expanding massively, even as these objects increasingly interact
with each other and with humans, often without human mediation. As a result, the world is
becoming ever-more populated with inter-connected cyber-physical systems.
By one estimate, in 2020 the number of IoT connections (e.g., connected cars, smart home
devices, connected industrial equipment) was approaching 12 billion worldwide, overtaking
the number of non-IoT devices online (e.g., smartphones, laptops, computers). By 2030,
this number could rise to 125 billion. US digital technology leader Qualcomm estimates that
the global economic output of industrial 5G IoT technologies will be worth a trillion USD
by 2035.2
The internet’s penetration of the ‘real world’ means that relations among individuals,
entities and societies will increasingly be embedded in the IoT. Those who influence the
design, building and regulation of internet infrastructure will obtain gatekeeper and first-
mover advantages. These advantages will be scaled up across emerging internet-connected
technological ecosystems. Parties who hold these structural advantages will be able to
shape other actors’ choices across expanding fields of activity - often without actively
exerting power. Increasingly, power will be implied in the structures of the evolving IoT.
1.2 The IoT presents challenges on a new scale, and China’s role is growing
These changes are creating challenges much greater than those previously brought by the
internet’s expansion. Some of these challenges require more global cooperation, including
with new and potentially non-“like minded” actors, to realize the IoT’s potential. Others
will present governments with hard choices between tolerating significant risks from
international connections or sacrificing substantial benefits by disconnecting from the
source of risk.
Those who influence
the design, building
and regulation of
internet infrastructure
will obtain gatekeeper
and firstmover
advantages

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
| 3
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
China’s role in shaping the emerging IoT landscape will feature prominently for governments
worldwide in addressing these challenges. Chinese firms are leading participants in
both the development of IoT applications and of the internet’s underlying infrastructure.
China’s cyberspace governance regime diverges significantly from the political values that
have informed the internet’s past evolution, although it also continues to be shaped by
imperatives to maintain foreign connections. Security concerns around Chinese actors and
the consequent responses by governments around the world are shaping the global evolution
of IoT-enabling technologies, for example with fifth generation (5G) telecoms networks.
The IoT’s growth compounds the security risks that are inherent in the internet’s design to
enable the free flow of information. Connection of vast numbers of devices with different
functions and protocols complicates the task of securing the whole network. The expanding
effects of internet-connected objects in the physical world are expanding the scope of
harmful outcomes that could arise from manipulation across the internet.
These growing risks, together with imperatives to capture the IoT’s potential rewards within
national borders, are driving widespread and intrusive assertions of ‘digital sovereignty’. 3
The universal architecture of the internet was designed for the seamless transfer of data.
Yet governments worldwide have imposed growing constraints on use of the internet –
China’s “Great Firewall” is only the best-known example – to control data transfers and
online activity within their jurisdiction.
This growing administrative fragmentation of the internet along political lines means
that the global IoT will likely evolve as a federation of networks, which differ significantly
within national borders in their governance arrangements, and possibly in their technical
design. Basic functionality and systemic resilience will increasingly require cooperation
among governments with distinct approaches to cyberspace, driven by divergent political
priorities and underlying values. One example is the contrast between the ‘European values’
that nominally guide the European Union’s cyberspace regulation and diplomacy, and the
central role that China’s cyber-governance regime gives the Communist Party’s leadership.
Because the internet was designed to operate seamlessly, this fragmentation across borders
threatens to undermine its efficient operation on a global scale. The recent controversy
over Chinese firms’ role in developing network protocols for the future internet shows
how politics can influence the internet’s international interoperability and performance
at fundamental levels. 4 These problems will be amplified by the expanding complexity
inherent in the IoT.
IOT SECURITY DILEMMAS: CYBERATTACKS ON UKRAINE
The potential for “weaponization” of connected systems to produce real-world
effects was seen in the 2015 cyberattacks on Ukraine’s power grid, which disrupted
electricity supply to 230,000 people in winter. In 2017, new attacks undermined the
functioning of Ukraine’s railroads, airports, hospitals and other critical infrastructure.
These attacks had global flow-on effects that included a temporary 20 percent
drop in shipping volume for Maersk, the global cargo handling group. In a world
increasingly connected through the IoT, such events could produce cascading crises
with costs orders of magnitude higher than previously seen.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
| 4
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
This complexity reflects the growing multitude of systems connected to the internet, most
of which are being designed by private firms. The IoT’s growth therefore implies the rising
influence of a growing range of non-state actors. Business entities already wield significant
influence over the security of networks, and over public equities such as free speech and
non-discriminatory internet access (“net neutrality”). Cyber-physical device ecosystems
controlled by private firms, increasingly including Chinese companies, are expanding
rapidly.
Furthermore, many new applications touted as benefits of the IoT may require re-design of
the underlying internet infrastructure to deliver the necessary performance. For example,
self-driving connected vehicles and other time-sensitive applications require fast (low
latency) data transmission that may be unachievable with legacy network architectures. 5
Unlike the legacy “stack” of internet technologies, development of which was dominated
by US and European actors, these new IoT applications are evolving through transnational
collaboration and on a global scale. Many important developments are now taking place
outside the jurisdiction of Western governments, with Chinese actors featuring prominently.
2. CHINA IS SHAPING THE IOT AT HOME AND ABROAD
China’s government has driven development of a domestic IoT ecosystem by combining
centralized direction and incentivization with decentralized implementation. The growing
capacity of Chinese businesses to deploy IoT technologies, capture market share and
attract international partnerships is bolstering the ability of the Chinese state and China’s
corporate champions to shape the internet’s governance, design and implementation on a
global scale.
2.1 China’s footprint in the global IoT is growing
The concentration of electronics manufacturing in China has provided a foundation for
the rapid development of IoT products and services, which has been further stimulated by
massive domestic consumer demand. By one estimate, China accounted for three quarters
of cellular IoT connections worldwide at the end of 2020. The US network technology leader
Cisco projects that by 2023 China will lead globally in 5G connections. 6
Although the overall level of digitalization in China’s manufacturing sector remains low,
more firms are moving towards automation and industrial IoT applications, with a few
becoming global leaders.7 Haier for example, the world’s largest white goods-maker, in 2020
completed a “proof of concept” case study for IoT-enhanced manufacturing in cooperation
with China Mobile, Huawei and the global mobile networking standards association GSMA.
Two of Haier’s factories are on the World Economic Forum’s “Lighthouse” list of global
leaders in the deployment of IoT manufacturing technologies with demonstrated benefits. 8
China’s private digital technology firms have turned to the IoT for new revenue streams,
given the saturation of existing product and service markets. Xiaomi for example generated
over 30 percent of its revenue from the IoT and lifestyle product sector in 2019 and says that
over half its revenue now comes from markets outside China. Xiaomi claims that its IoT
platform connected 325 million smart home appliances (excluding laptops and handsets)
by end 2020.9 Alibaba and Huawei have also developed large-scale consumer IoT platforms.
Important
developments
are now taking
place outside
the jurisdiction
of Western
governments,
with Chinese
actors featuring
prominently

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
| 5
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
These firms are leveraging strengths in networking and artificial intelligence (AI) to enter
new sectors, notably intelligent connected vehicles (ICVs). Baidu’s Apollo, the world’s first
open-source ICV platform, has over 130 corporate partners, including foreign industry
leaders like Volkswagen and Toyota. Huawei is a founding member of the international
5G Automotive Association and is extensively involved in international development of
ICV systems. Xiaomi recently announced its own project to build a “best-in-class” ICV
ecosystem for customers worldwide.
The performance demands of these emerging IoT ecosystems are in turn driving Chinese
firms to become global leaders in enabling technologies. For example, in 2020, Alibaba
introduced a leading-edge computer processor based on open-source RISC-V architecture.
Such developments have potential to reshape the global information and communications
technology (ICT) industry landscape and give leading Chinese digital technology firms
greater influence abroad, while stimulating economic development at home.
The IoT’s development in China also benefits from massive state-led spending on enabling
infrastructure. By mid-2021, Chinese authorities claimed that the nation had installed
over 800,000 5G base stations, around 70 percent of the global total. China’s state-owned
telecoms operators are projected to invest more than 200 billion USD over 2020 - 2025 in
network infrastructure.
In mid-2020 the city of Shenzhen announced that it had achieved comprehensive coverage
with 5G ‘standalone’ networks, which will provide the foundation for the IoT’s more
transformative applications, such as ICVs. Shenzhen has installed 46,000 base stations,
compared to 850 standalone 5G sites across Germany in early April 2021. 10 In late 2020
a Chinese state-owned enterprise completed the first phase of a dedicated satellite
constellation to support IoT services, which is due to be fully operational by 2023.

Chinese cities were global pioneers in deploying “smart city” management systems and
platforms for commercial services based on narrow-band-IoT (NB-IoT) technology, through
projects delivered by China’s state-owned telecoms operators and Huawei. These early
deployments translated into international industry leadership, with China Unicom, China
Telecom and Huawei recognized by GSMA as key players in NB-IoT development globally. 11
Beijing’s strategic technology plans have for many years promoted the development of
new network infrastructure technologies, addressing the technical requirements of the
emerging IoT. For example, the 12th Five Year Plan (2011-2015) included among its major
science projects a program (CENI) to develop alternative network architecture for the future
internet. This program’s backbone network became operational for testing purposes in
April 2021.12
The rising profile of Chinese entities in IoT technologies has led to growing foreign interest
in collaboration, particularly from European actors (see Exhibit 1). For a decade, the IoT has
featured in dialogues between China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
(MIIT) and the European Commission. In 2016 the Commission’s DG-CONNECT co-
published an IoT development policy paper with the Chinese Academy of Information and
Communications Technology (CAICT). The Commission-backed Future Internet Research
and Experimentation (FIRE) project has institutionalized collaboration with Chinese
researchers and will reportedly connect to China’s newly operational CENI network. 13
The rising profile
of Chinese entities
in IoT technologies
has led to growing
foreign interest
in collaboration,
particularly from
European actors

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
| 6
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
The Alliance for Internet of Things Innovation, launched in 2015 to drive growth of a
European IoT ecosystem, has signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with its
Chinese counterpart the Alliance for Industrial Internet (AII). The AII counts among its
members the German industry leaders SAP , Siemens and Schneider Electric. 14 The three-
year EXCITING project, backed by a consortium of European and Chinese firms and
research institutes, studied China’s innovation ecosystem for 5G and IoT technologies to
better promote Sino-European collaboration. 15
Europe-China IoT-related collaborations have continued despite growing political tensions
with Beijing, US pressure for technological ‘decoupling’ and growing European concerns
about China’s ‘uneven playing field’ for foreign firms. The German government is negotiating
a new (MoU) to succeed the 2015 MoU with MIIT on intelligent manufacturing, reportedly
with greater focus on the IoT.
Exhibit 1
PARTNERING INSTITUTIONS FIELD OF COLLABORATION
German Corporation for International Cooperation
(Giz) – China Academy of Information and Communica-
tions Technology (CAICT)
Sino-German Cooperation on Industrie 4.0:
strengthening industrial cooperation in
intelligent manufacturing
SAP – Huawei Cloud Partnership
SAP – Nanjing Utilization of SAP IoT to analyze traffic
movement patterns in real time
Dassault Systèmes – Huawei Dassault Systèmes’ 3DEXPERIENCE platform
provided through Huawei Cloud
Siemens – Alibaba Siemens’ MindSphere operating system
provided through Alibaba Cloud
Bosch – Huawei Bosch IoT Suite services provided through
Huawei Cloud
Ministry of Science and Technology of China –
Innovation Fund Denmark
Research and innovation collaboration on green
urban development (AI & IoT named as a priority)
Irootech – Putzmeister, Munich Reinsurance Company,
Telenor Connexion
Irootech’s RootCloud IIOT platform provided in
European markets
Lenovo – Schneider Electric Smart green manufacturing solutions for the
Chinese manufacturing sector
ABB – Huawei ABB Ability digital solutions provided through
Huawei Cloud
1NCE – China Telecom Partnership for the commercial launch of China
Telecom’s NB-IoT roaming SIM
Selected Europe-China IoT collaborations
© MERICS
Source: MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
| 7
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
Commercially, European firms continue to work with Chinese Technology providers. This
is happening despite increased focus on security risks associated with Chinese firms and
the Commission’s goal of achieving European global leadership in 5G and 6G technologies.
Last year, Nokia partnered with China Mobile IoT (CMIoT) to deliver IoT connectivity and
services to CMIoT’s customers in China and abroad. Ericsson is assisting China Telecom to
develop commercial standalone 5G services. 16
2.2 The Chinese state helps drive IoT development
The IoT is the next step in the pervasive application of ICT (“informatization”) that China’s
top leadership identified two decades ago as a universal trend, that must be mastered to
succeed in a competitive world. The implications were recognized in the 2016 guidance
on “informatization” issued by the State Council, the highest executive agency of China’s
government. “New technologies... drive the evolution of cyberspace from interconnection of
everyone to interconnection of everything, and digital, networked and intelligent services
will be ubiquitous. The real world and digital world are increasingly... integrated.” 17
China’s top-level focus on building the IoT goes back to 2009, when it was included in
Premier Wen Jiabao’s work report to the national legislature as one of five “strategic
emerging industries.” In 2010, the State Council issued a decision on strategic new
emerging industries that included promoting the IoT. In 2012, MIIT identified the IoT as
technological “strategic high ground”, and alongside another powerful ministry, the
National Development and Reform Commission, articulated basic tasks and priorities
that have guided IoT development in China over the past decade. These policies drove
establishment of industrial clusters and demonstration zones to concentrate R&D and
implementation efforts.
National and regional state agencies have continued churning out directives to stimulate IoT
development. More than two dozen policies and plans were issued at national level alone
from 2010 to 2020. For example, the Industrial Internet Development Action Plan issued by
MIIT in January 2021 includes goals such as establishing 30 factories fully connected by 5G
services and developing industrial internet platforms ‘with international influence’. 18
The State Council’s 2015 “Made in China 2025” action program for building China into a
manufacturing superpower called for accelerating IoT research and applications, with
multiple IoT-related technologies listed in the associated “priority technical fields”
roadmap. The State Council also in 2015 issued guidance on an ‘Internet Plus’ approach
aimed at “deep integration” of the internet across China’s economy and society.
In 2016, the State Council assessed that the 13th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) would coincide
with critical technological changes worldwide, transitioning “from accumulation of
potential to the collective efflorescence” of new technologies, led by the IoT. 19 Accordingly,
the State Council and MIIT directed that a foundational infrastructure for the industrial
internet be established by end 2020. MIIT issued an IoT development plan for this period,
and in September 2020 commenced assessment of the results. These efforts’ outcomes will
shape the extent which China can achieve “deep integration” of the internet across multiple
industries, a key goal over the period of the 14th Five Year Plan adopted in March 2021.
Public-private partnerships have also been utilized to drive development of China’s IoT
ecosystem, including enabling technologies like 5G infrastructure. For example, the IMT-
2020 5G Promotion Group was established by three national ministries in 2013 to coordinate
China’s top-level
focus on building
the IoT goes back
to 2009

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
| 8
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
efforts by government, state-owned enterprises, private businesses and research institutes.
The Alliance of the Industrial internet (AII) was set up in 2016 with similar goals.
China’s leading digital technology firms have partnered with governments and state-owned
telecoms operators on specific IoT projects. Alibaba, for instance, collaborated with the
Wuxi city government on a “smart city” management platform, which combined Alibaba’s
big data analytics with Wuxi’s advantages as a demonstration zone for IoT sensing devices.20
Another example is the co-operation between CAICT, China Telecom and Huawei on the
industrial internet testbed MQM to assist Haier in improving manufacturing quality control.
Sector-specific policies are also employed to stimulate IoT development. China’s state-
endorsed National Innovation Centre for Intelligent Connected Vehicles has set a goal for
more than half of new vehicles sold nationwide to incorporate self-driving technology by
2025. As of December 2020, Shanghai’s government had opened almost 600 kilometers of
roads for testing of ICVs and integrated traffic infrastructure.
By 2016-17, CAICT’s assessment was that China had developed a relatively complete IoT
supply chain, albeit with “bottlenecks and deep-seated problems.” CAICT’s annual
IoT White Papers have repeatedly highlighted systemic problems such as supply chain
decentralization and inadequate product scalability, drawing unfavorable comparisons
with an American IoT development ecosystem perceived as more streamlined and mature.
The AII assessed in its 2019 Industrial Internet white paper that most Chinese enterprises
are still struggling with basic levels of digitalization, and not yet able to generate income
from internet platforms.
To address these obstacles, Chinese actors have sought partnerships with foreign industry
leaders and IoT industry alliances. In this, they have enjoyed considerable success – in
February 2021, Huawei alone had at least 38 IoT partnerships with non-Chinese actors.
So far, China’s state-led IoT industrial policy has produced the most notable tangible results
within China itself, which by one estimate accounted for around 90 percent of global NB-IoT
connections in December 2019. 21 Even with these numbers, it appeared that China would
fall short of MIIT’s target of 600 million NB-IoT connections nationwide by end 2020. 22
Nonetheless, this progress shows how the Chinese state’s promotion of R&D capabilities
and market creation drives the IoT sector’s development. By contrast, Japanese telecoms
firm NTT shut down its NB-IoT service in 2020, apparently due to lack of take-up.
China’s IoT connections now represent 30 percent of the global total , according to CAICT’s
most recent assessment in its white paper of December 2020. It assessed that China’s total
IoT sector had maintained an average annual growth rate of 20 percent in the 2016-2020
period. This growth helps explain why global leaders such as European auto-majors are
now locating R&D operations inside China and entering partnerships with Chinese industry
leaders in IoT-related fields such as connected vehicles. Examples include Huawei’s
partnership with Stellantis and Alibaba’s with BMW and Ford Motors. Volkswagen is
investing EUR 15 billion into electric vehicle development in China over the next four years.
US government ‘decoupling’ pressures present a challenge to this progress. China’s
IoT ecosystem is now faced with the threat of losing access to “core technologies” such
as high-performance semiconductors, as well as to export markets and foreign industry
partnerships. The Chinese state has responded by doubling down on the goal of increased
national technological and economic self-reliance. The new ‘dual circulation’ slogan stresses
China’s IoT
connections
now represent
30 percent of
the global total

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
| 9
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
development of self-sustaining domestic economies by leveraging new technologies such
as the IoT. In January 2021, Xi Jinping described the digital transformation of infrastructure
as China’s economic “booster and gas pedal”, despite “technological blockade by the US”.23
A critical piece of the strategy to move Chinese firms up the technological ladder is
to play a greater role in shaping the standards that guide ICT development. Standards-
setting is becoming an increasingly contentious issue in advanced economies’ relations
with China. In the EU-China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment (CAI), provisionally
signed in December 2020, Beijing agreed to provide equal access to China’s domestic
standards-setting bodies. How China pursues standardization domestically and abroad
has particularly significant implications for evolution of the IoT, as a globally connected
‘system of systems.’
2.3 China aims to shape standards for the IoT
IoT-related standardization in China takes place under the auspices of MIIT and the
Standardization Administration of China (SAC). Much of this work is done by technical
standardization committees that are nominally independent, though in reality they have
close links to Chinese state agencies. For example, TC-260, which works on national
information security standards, is headed by the Deputy Director of the Cyberspace
Administration of China. Foreign firms are allowed limited participation in such bodies,
but it appears that foreign contributions are only facilitated when consistent with Chinese
policy goals.
Standards-setting within China is a multi-stakeholder process: China’s leading technology
firms are among the most influential actors and have had a prominent role in developing
standards linked to the IoT. However the closed nature of China’s technical standardization
processes has led to significant divergence with standards abroad; by one estimate, only 15
percent of standards issued by TC-260 are currently aligned with international standards. 24
State recognition that Chinese firms are at a competitive disadvantage abroad if subject
to parallel Chinese and foreign standards has led to attempts to rationalize domestic
standards and harmonize them with international ones. At the same time, China is
seeking to internationalize its domestic standards by promoting them abroad. In 2019, SAC
published policy objectives that included enhancing standards cooperation and integration
with countries participating in China’s ‘Belt and Road’ infrastructure-building initiatives.
The revised draft of China’s “ Administrative Measures for National Standards,” issued
by China’s market regulator in December 2020, directs that “development of national
standards shall be based on adoption of international standards, in line with China’s
national conditions.” Where Chinese standards have not yet incorporated international
ones, it directs that foreign-language editions of extant Chinese standards be issued.
Additionally, SAC issued “Guidelines on Adoption of International Standards”, promoting
“simultaneous initiation of international standardization projects proposed by China
and of Chinese national standardization projects” and prioritizing their adoption in “key
sectors” including the IoT. 25
Nonetheless, China has yet to achieve a unified approach to IoT technical standardization.
In 2019, SAC established a national coordinating body (SAC/TC28/SC41) with a mandate
for comprehensive IoT standardization, which was expressly nominated to be a direct
counterpart to the international standardization body responsible for the IoT and related
China is seeking to
internationalize its
domestic standards
by promoting them
abroad

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
| 10
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
technologies.26 However this body’s membership does not include the organization (CCSA)
responsible for networking communication and security, which continues to develop
standards issued by MIIT relevant to communication aspects of the IoT’s.
This has apparently resulted in some “siloing” of IoT technical standardization work
between ecosystems led by MIIT and SAC. However, it would be inaccurate to view all
aspects of China’s IoT standardization ecosystems as fragmented. MIIT and SAC jointly
issued guidelines for standardizing the industrial internet in 2019, which appear to reflect
input from the AII. The AII is also involved in regulating deployment of China’s new
industrial internet identification resolution system that will operate in parallel with the
global internet’s addressing system, which was developed by CAICT and is being trialled
nationwide.
Standards development organizations (SDOs) within China have also pursued standards
development by industry sector in tandem with real-world implementations. The pace of
IoT-related standardization therefore responds to market forces, and not only the Chinese
state’s declared priorities. The SAC’s webpage indexing “IoT standards” in January 2021
listed 76 national standards; 30 industrial standards; and 62 local, province-level standards.
This probably results in some overlap and inconsistency. However, it also reflects the general
challenge in standardizing the IoT that stems from the diversity of systems constituting it.
Overall, Chinese actors are having a notable impact on global IoT standardization
processes. Ten out of 18 IoT-related standards adopted by late 2020 by two transnational
SDOs – the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) – were proposed by Chinese actors. Development of the
reference architecture (ISO/IEC 30141) for IoT standards – which the European Commission
is committed to propagating under its rolling plan for IoT standardization – was led by
China’s Wuxi IoT Research Institute. Its director observed that this standard “will be
universally accepted in the IoT industry like a ‘constitutional law’.” 27
3. WILL THE IOT ACCELERATE THE WORLD’S DIGITAL DIVISION INTO A
‘SPLINTERNET’?
As China’s influence over the IoT grows, other nations are being forced to assess the risks of
connections to Chinese networks. In many liberal democracies, concerns are increasingly
being raised about the CCP’s political values and methods. These are reflected in debates
over involvement by Chinese firms in 5G networks and the role of Chinese actors in technical
standardization. Concerns about alleged Chinese state-sponsored cyber-espionage and
purported state control over firms like Huawei has spilled over into debates on the IoT.
Some experts question whether the emerging “Internet of Everything” can ever be
acceptably secured, if it is populated with Chinese-made devices and connected to Chinese
networks. This has led to increasingly urgent arguments for complete disconnection from
Chinese networks, and from those of countries that refuse to do so. 28
Such thinking likely informed the Trump administration’s ‘Clean Network Program’, which
encouraged other countries to exclude Chinese actors from their digital ecosystems, and
other recent US government initiatives such as the US telecom regulator’s termination of
licenses for Chinese operators.
Chinese actors are
having a notable
impact on global
IoT standardization
processes

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
| 11
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
The Biden administration is continuing this general approach in a more calibrated manner.
In March 2021, the US government served subpoenas on multiple unnamed Chinese firms
that provide ICT services within the US, utilizing President Trump’s 2019 Executive Order on
securing the ICT supply chain. The US government recently completed reviews of the supply
chains for semiconductors, large capacity batteries and critical minerals and materials –
which are all foundational elements of the IoT – and is conducting a review into the US ICT
industrial base as a whole, while the Secretary of state is promoting international cooperation
“to foster a secure and trustworthy alternative” to Chinese digital technologies. 29
In June 2021 the US Senate passed a bill, supported by President Biden, that includes a
range of measures directed at competition with China in digital technologies and their
implementations worldwide. And while in early 2021, President Biden pledged to “work
with Beijing when it’s in America’s interest to do so”, his words also reflected the perceived
imperative in the US policy establishment for “some degree of technological bifurcation”
with China.30
However, in pursuing selective decoupling, the US faces not just significant costs from
eroding the global economies of scale that have supported ICT advances for decades, but
also resistance in many nations to excluding Chinese technology.
Many developing nations prioritize economic and technological development, and
already have an extensive Chinese presence in their digital infrastructure and technology
collaborations. This influences their choices about the future internet and the involvement of
Chinese actors. Indonesia and Malaysia for example recently signed agreements with Beijing
on cybersecurity and capacity building, and they are implementing ‘smart city’ projects with
Chinese firms like Huawei. Other large emerging economies like Brazil and South Africa are
allowing Chinese firms to participate in their next-generation telecoms networks.
This means that even if countries within a politically “trusted community” commit
to purging their digital networks of Chinese technology, they can still expect to face its
presence across large areas of the world. For example, foreign transport markets might
still be populated with vehicles made in China and operated by AI platforms designed by
Chinese firms, using networking standards co-developed with Chinese actors and telecoms
infrastructure built by Chinese firms. And within such a trusted community, the cost of
developing ‘China-free’ technological ecosystems would rise significantly, due to reduced
economies of scale.
Furthermore, technologically advanced liberal democracies disagree among themselves
over the extent and type of state control to be imposed on the internet. Divergence between
the US and EU over regulation of data storage and transfers, platform businesses and other
internet-based activities seems to be widening, despite continuing efforts to reconcile these
differences. Leading technology firms from countries like Germany, Japan and South Korea
are continuing to invest in China and work with Chinese partners.
Despite much talk of coordinating technology and industry policy vis-a-vis China, in
most countries there appears to be little appetite for extensive ‘decoupling’. And so far,
governments are not providing resources sufficient to substitute for the opportunities
offered by China’s emerging IoT ecosystem. At the same time, competition is rising between
advanced economies for dominance of future technologies and markets. This can be seen in
the EU’s growing flurry of policies directed at achieving ‘digital sovereignty’, at the expense
of US business interests.
The prospect of
the global internet
‘splintering’ cleanly
is unlikely

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
| 12
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
The prospect of the global internet ‘splintering’ cleanly, into a “liberal democratic” internet
on the one side and a Chinese-dominated cyberspace on the other, is unlikely. The world will
instead probably see a continued and messy evolution towards a ‘federation’ of networks,
interconnected but increasingly divergent. The US continues to pursue technological
‘decoupling’ with China, which for its part seeks reduced reliance on the US and its ‘like-
minded partners’ for “core technologies.” Third parties will likely continue pursuing their
own paths in between these two poles, choosing elements and connections that suit them.
4. EUROPE NEEDS TO TAKE ACTION TO COMPETE IN A CONTESTED IOT WORLD
The European Commission has taken various measures to promote European innovation
and a single market for the IoT, including establishing the Alliance for Internet of Things
Innovation, investing almost EUR 500 million over 2014 to 2020 and managing a rolling
plan for IoT standardization. 31 The Commission’s ‘Digital Compass’ roadmap announced
in March 2021 sets ambitious targets for European digital transformation by 2030, and has
at its core enabling technologies like the IoT. In parallel, the EU’s cybersecurity process is
addressing the IoT’s implications for the security of European networks. 32
The EU should double down on such measures to compete with the growing influence of
‘China Inc.’ over global markets for IoT applications and the underlying infrastructure.
As challenges inevitably arise, European leaders may be tempted to fall back on the so-
called ‘Brussels effect’, relying on the single market’s global importance to ensure that EU
regulations and standards are propagated worldwide by non-European actors. But shaping
technology adoption requires more than simply specifying standards: “referees do not
win the game”. 33 Pooling Europe’s advantages to build competitive products and services
across the IoT ecosystem is necessary to compete.
European leaders should also focus on adjusting diplomatic objectives to the expanding
community of actors shaping the global IoT. An informal proposal for the future of EU cyber
diplomacy developed in 2020 by several member-states calls for European governments to
“shape the [global] digital environment” and “build trust and dependable relationships,”
but does not address how to tackle the conflicting interests that are increasingly apparent. 34
For example, the European Commission’s new “Digital Compass” emphasizes growing Eu -
ropean digital connections with Africa. The African Union will be the first regional partner
in the EU’s recently launched Digital4Development Hub, aimed at “promoting a compre-
hensive values-based rulebook for a digital economy and society worldwide”. 35 Yet South
Africa and Kenya, two of the continent’s most important economies, have chosen Huawei
for their 5G infrastructure rollouts.
As of mid-2020, Huawei – which by one, admittedly controversial, estimate has equipped
70 percent of Africa’s wireless broadband networks – had not lost any contracts from Africa
governments due to security concerns, let alone concerns about “use of digital tools by
authoritarian states … contrary to the idea of a free, open and global internet.” 36
Addressing such divergent attitudes outside Europe towards Chinese “digital authoritari-
anism” is crucial. The IoT will increasingly be shaped by the developing world. The global
South now accounts for the vast majority of internet users and the lion’s share of economic
growth worldwide. As developing nations increasingly contribute to digital technological
European leaders
should also focus
on adjusting
diplomatic
objectives to
the expanding
community of
actors shaping the
global IoT

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
| 13
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
Connection with
Chinese networks
implies significant
risks that will
expand with the
IoT
development, their preferences on design and governance of the IoT, and the systems built
upon it, will need to be accommodated in an integrated global economy.
One metric for this trend is provided by the collaborative software development platform
GitHub, which estimates that by 2025 the US share of its users will halve compared to 2015,
with an equivalent increase from developing nations. 37 Many of these countries are now
engaged in infrastructure and logistics projects involving Chinese actors and branded
under Beijing’s ‘digital silk road’. This promotes integrated digital infrastructure solutions
that build-in emerging technologies like AI and digital currencies, in which China is striving
to lead.
If Europe is to remain integrated in an internet-based economy global in scale, rather than
confined to a relatively small group of “like-minded” states, it must find common ground
with China and other emerging actors on the IoT’s design and regulation. This requires
grappling with approaches to internet architecture and management that go beyond those
inherited from the 1990s-2000s. At the same time, connection with Chinese networks
implies significant risks that will expand in tandem with the IoT, requiring potentially
costly mitigation measures and likely placing limits on the desirable extent of international
connectivity.
One potential approach is to focus on global cooperation to protect the internet’s “public
core”, meaning elements that facilitate international data transfers (such as the domain
name system and networking protocols). Supporting the security and stability of this
essential function “as a global public good” is already mandated by the EU’s Cybersecurity
Act. The “public core” concept is also referenced in the Commission’s December 2020
Cybersecurity Strategy and proposal to update the EU’s Network and Information Systems
(NIS) Directive, which if accepted would require member-states to adopt policies “related to
sustaining the general availability and integrity of the public core of the open internet.” 38
This approach implies prioritizing international cooperation to maintain shared systems of
common interest, potentially at some expense to propagation of political values. Western
governments are already engaging in such limited compromises with greater frequency, as
they diverge in regulatory practice from the widest conceptions of ‘internet freedom.’
Prioritizing internet infrastructure also implies moving beyond the focus on content
regulation, human rights and malicious cyber activity that still dominates debates
over “internet governance.” Shared interests in the internet’s functionality as a global
public good are readily identified. For example, managing network congestion requires
international coordination; the alternative would be for each party to massively expand its
own infrastructure and incur significant increases in costs. 39
A focus on common-interest cooperation further implies keeping the challenges presented
by Chinese actors in perspective, and not overreacting to their involvement in global
infrastructure development or standardization processes. As an example, the negative
reaction to the Huawei-led “New IP” proposal at the International Telecommunications
Union was disproportionate to the proposal’s content and its potential political
significance.40 Sustaining the internet as a global public good requires some adaptation to
the role of politically non-trusted actors, reflected in Beijing’s adjustment of its own “cyber
sovereignty” concept to accommodate the “multi-stakeholder model| of global internet
governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
| 14
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
Kapitelüberschrift ipsum dolor
Ultimately, much depends on Beijing’s own choices. So far, China’s leaders have sought to
strike a balance between “cyberspace sovereignty” and exchanges with the outside world.
Even as technical advances augment the capacity of China’s cyberspace governance regime
for surveillance and political repression, this regime is still being calibrated to facilitate
cross-border connectivity through the internet. This provides, for example, some prospect
for convergence with China on regulation of international data transfers.
European decision makers need to closely follow China’s evolving approach to the IoT’s
development on a global scale, and how this is shaping the politics of the “interconnection
of everything”.
ENDNOTES
 1 | See generally DeNardis, Laura (2020). The Internet in Everything: Freedom and Security in a World with
No Off Switch. Yale University Press.
 2 | Lueth, Knud Lasse (2020). ‘State of the IoT 2020: 12 billion IoT connections, surpassing non-IoT for the
first time’. https://iot-analytics.com/state-of-the-iot-2020-12-billion-iot-connections-surpassing-non-iot-
for-the-first-time/; Wilson, Dave (2020). ‘IoT is Creating Massive Growth Opportunities’. https://blogs.
cisco.com/internet-of-things/iot-is-creating-massive-growth-opportunities; Mobile World Live (2019).
‘Qualcomm tips Germany to lead on 5G industrial IoT’. https://www.mobileworldlive.com/featured-con-
tent/top-three/qualcomm-tips-germany-to-lead-5g-industrial-iot . Accessed: May 12, 2021.
 3 | For an overview of this term’s usage, see Pohle, Julia and Thiel, Thorsten (2020). “Digital Sovereignty.”
Internet Policy Review 9(4).
 4 | Lee, John (2020). “Will China reinvent the Internet?” https://www.thechinastory.org/will-china-rein-
vent-the-internet/. Accessed: May 12, 2021. (Hereafter ‘Lee, Will China Reinvent the Internet?” (2020)’).
 5 | Panwar, Shivendra (2020). “Breaking the Latency Barrier.” https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/wireless/
breaking-the-latency-barrier. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
 6 | Cisco Annual Internet Report (2018–2023) White Paper (2020). https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solu-
tions/collateral/executive-perspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html.
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
 7 | Platform Industrie 4.0 (2020). “I4.0 x Industrial Internet: Practices and Findings”
https://www.plattform-i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publikation/China/i4-0-x-industrial-in-
ternet-practices-and-findings.html. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
 8 | Onag, Gigi (2020). ‘Haier gets its second “lighthouse” for advanced manufacturing
https://futureiot.tech/haier-gets-its-second-lighthouse-for-advanced-manufacturing/
 9 | Tang, Flora (2020). ‘Xiaomi’s IoT Move: Strategy, Investment Philosophy, Challenges and Success Drivers’.
https://www.counterpointresearch.com/xiaomis-iot-move-strategy-investment-philosophy-challenges-suc-
cess-drivers/; Onawole, Habeeb (2020). “Xiaomi Q3 2020 financial report reveals it recorded 46.6 million
shipments”. https://www.gizmochina.com/2020/11/25/xiaomi-q3-2020-financial-report-reveals-it-recorded-
46-6-million-shipments/; Shen, Jill (2021). “Xiaomi invests $1.5 billion in fully owned EV business”. https://
technode.com/2021/03/31/xiaomi-invests-1-5-billion-in-fully-owned-ev-business.Accessed: May 12, 2021.
10 | Handelsblatt (2021). “Why Shenzhen has more 5G stations than all of Europe” (in German).
https://www.handelsblatt.com/technik/it-internet/kolumne-asia-techonomics-warum-shenzhen-mehr-
5g-stationen-als-ganz-europa-hat/27045968.html. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
11 | Chen, John; Walz, Emily; Lafferty, Brian; McReynolds, Joe; Green, Kieran; Ray, Jonathan; and Mul -
venon, James (2018). “China’s Internet of Things: Research Report Prepared on Behalf of the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission”, 91-92.
12 | South China Morning Post (2021). “China starts large-scale testing of its internet of the future”.
China starts large-scale testing of its internet of the future | South China Morning Post (scmp.com).
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
13 | SIGMA-ORIONIS (2015). “EU-China FIRE announces exciting final outcomes supporting EU-China
cooperation on FIRE and IPv6”. EU-China FIRE announces exciting final outcomes supporting
EU-China cooperation on FIRE and IPv6 | News | CORDIS | European Commission (europa.eu).
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
14 | Wessling, Claudia; Shi-Kupfer, Kristin; von Carnap, Kai; Arcesati, Rebecca; and Holzmann, Anna (2020).
“China’s digital platform economy: Assessing developments towards Industry 4.0”, 9.
https://merics.org/en/report/chinas-digital-platform-economy-assessing-developments-towards-indus-
try-40. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
15 | EXCITDING, The EU-China Study on IoT and 5G (2019). https://www.euchina-iot5g.eu/.
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
16 | Nokia (2020). “Nokia enables China Mobile with enterprise IoT connectivity globally”.
https://www.nokia.com/about-us/news/releases/2020/11/23/nokia-enables-china-mobile-with-enter-
prise-iot-connectivity-globally/; Ericsson (2020). “Ericsson and China Telecom achieve 5G Standalone data
call with Ericsson Spectrum Sharing”. https://www.ericsson.com/en/press-releases/2020/10/ericsson-and-
china-telecom-achieve-5g-standalone-data-call-with-ericsson-spectrum-sharing. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
17 | State Council (2016). “13th Five Year Plan: National Informatization Plan” (in Chinese).
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-12/27/content_5153411.htm. Accessed: May 12, 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
| 15
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
18 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (2021). “Industrial Internet Innovation Development
Action Plan” (in Chinese). http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2021-01/13/content_5579519.htm.
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
19 | State Council (2016). “National Development Plan for Strategic New Type Industries” (in Chinese).
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-12/19/content_5150090.htm. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
20 | China Daily (2018). “Public-private collaboration drives China’s industrial IoT innovation”.
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201809/07/WS5b95d1c8a31033b4f46551d5.html.
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
21 | Clark, Robert (2020). “China crosses 100M NB-IoT connections but still short of target.”
https://www.lightreading.com/iot/china-crosses-100m-nb-iot-connections-but-still-short-of-target/d/d-
id/759145. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
22 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (2017). “Comprehensively Promote the Construction
and Development of the Mobile Internet (NB-IoT)”. https://www.miit.gov.cn/jgsj/txs/wlfz/art/2020/art_
3f73a956a16940b18a7e753df44a9a58.html. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
23 | Study Times (2021). “Grasp the Focal Point of Building Domestic Circulation” (in Chinese).
http://theory.people.com.cn/n1/2021/0125/c40531-32010386.html. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
24 | Wang, Clara (2021). ‘Here’s who has the ear of China’s most active cyber regulator [TC-260]’ (Jan 2021)
https://www.protocol.com/china/tc260-china-cyber-regulator-companies; Sacks, Samm and Li, Manyi
Kathy. ‘How Chinese Cybersecurity Standards Impact Doing Business in China’. https://www.csis.org/
analysis/how-chinese-cybersecurity-standards-impact-doing-business-china. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
25 | State Administration for Market Regulation (2020). "Measures for the Administration of National
Standards (Draft for Comments)” (in Chinese). http://www.moj.gov.cn/government_public/con-
tent/2020-12/19/657_3262142.html; Standardization Administration of China (2020). "Guidelines for
the Adoption of International Standards in National Standards (2020 Edition)” (in Chinese).
http://www.sac.gov.cn/sbgs/sytz/202101/t20210111_347021.htm. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
26 | Standardization Administration of China (2019). ‘ Announcement of the Proposed National Information
Technology Standardization Technical Committee on the Internet of Things Sub-Technical Committee’
(in Chinese). http://org.sacinfo.org.cn:8088/tcrm/recruit-index/notice/1672.do. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
27 | 2020 Rolling Plan for ICT Standardisation – Internet of Things’ (‘ Action 5: Promote the development and
foster the adoption of the international Reference Architecture for IoT developed in ISO/IEC JTC 1 SC41)
https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/rolling-plan-ict-standardisation/internet-things;
 http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/m/jiangsu/wuxi/2018-07/11/content_36556927.htm
28 | See for example Demchak, Chris (2018). ”Three Futures for a Post-Western Cybered World”. Military Cyber
Affairs 3(1); Clarke, Richard and Knake, Rob (2019). “The Internet Freedom League: How to Push Back
Against the Authoritarian Assault on the Web”. Foreign Affairs (Sep/Oct); Cohen, Jared, and Fontaine, Rich-
ard (2020). “Uniting the Techno-Democracies: How to Build Digital Cooperation”. Foreign Affairs (Nov/Dec).
29 | The White House (2021). “Biden-Harris Administration Announces Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force
to Address Short-Term Supply Chain Discontinuities.” https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2021/06/08/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-supply-chain-disrup-
tions-task-force-to-address-short-term-supply-chain-discontinuities/. Accessed: June 9, 2021. Bloomberg
(2021). “Blinken Says U.S. Won’t Force ‘Us-or-Them’ Choice With China”. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2021-03-24/blinken-says-biden-won-t-force-us-or-them-choice-with-china. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
30 | The White House (2021). “Remarks by President Biden on America's Place in the World”. https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/02/04/remarks-by-president-biden-on-ameri-
cas-place-in-the-world/; China Strategy Group (2020). “ Asymmetric Competition: A Strategy for China
& Technology”. https://beta.documentcloud.org/documents/20463382-final-memo-china-strate-
gy-group-axios-1. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
31 | European Commission (2021). “Europe's Internet of Things Policy”. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-sin-
gle-market/en/internet-of-things; European Commission (2020); European Commission (2021). “Rolling
Plan for ICT Standardisation 2021”. https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/rolling-plan-ict-standardisa-
tion/rolling-plan-2021. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
32 | European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (2021). “Internet of Things”. “ https://www.enisa.europa.eu/
topics/iot-and-smart-infrastructures/iot . Accessed: May 12, 2021.
33 | European Council on Foreign Relations (2020). “Europe’s digital sovereignty: From rulemaker to super -
power in the age of US-China rivalry”. https://ecfr.eu/publication/europe_digital_sovereignty_rulemak-
er_superpower_age_us_china_rivalry/. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
34 | “Non-Paper on EU Cyber Diplomacy by Estonia, France, Germany, Poland, Portugal and Slovenia”. EU
Cyber Diplomacy – working together for a free and secure cyberspace - Federal Foreign Office (auswaer -
tiges-amt.de). Accessed: May 12, 2021. (Hereafter “Non-Paper on EU Cyber Diplomacy (2020)”).
35 | European Commission (2020). “Team Europe: Digital4Development Hub launched to help shape a fair
digital future across the globe”. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_20_2321.
Accessed: May 12, 2021.
36 | Bloomberg (2020). “Huawei Strengthens Its Hold on Africa Despite U.S.-Led Boycott”.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-08-19/china-s-huawei-prospers-in-africa-even-as-eu-
rope-asia-join-trump-s-ban; Non-Paper on EU Cyber Diplomacy (2020). Accessed: May 12, 2021.
37 | Github (2020). “The 2020 State of the Octoverse”. https://octoverse.github.com/. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
38 | European Commission (2020). “Revised Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems
(NIS2)”. https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/revised-directive-security-network-and-infor-
mation-systems-nis2. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
39 | Rauscher, Karl Frederick (2019). “US–China Collaboration on the Internet of Things Safety: WHAT
NEXT?”. https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/US-China-Collabora-
tion-on-IoT-Report-web.pdf. Accessed: May 12, 2021.
40 | Lee, “Will China Reinvent the Internet?” (2020); ICANN Office of the Chief Technology Officer (2020).
“New IP”. New IP (icann.org) Accessed: May 12, 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
| 16
MERICS CHINA MONITOR | June 24, 2021
CONTACT
John Lee
Senior Analyst, MERICS
john.lee@merics.de
EDITORIAL TEAM
Claudia Wessling
Director Communications
and Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
GRAPHICS AND LAYOUT
Alexandra Hinrichs
Graphic Designer, MERICS
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64 | 10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
ISSN: 2509-3843
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank MERICS colleagues and external peer reviewers who enga-
ged with this report through substantive input, suggestions and feedback, in addition to
reviewing previous drafts of the text. In particular, the author would like to thank Valentina
Vengust for providing research support.
