
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
ACCELERATOR STATE
How China fosters "Little Giant" companies
Alexander Brown, François Chimits, Gregor Sebastian
MERICS
REPORT

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
| 2
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
KEY FINDINGS
 High-tech small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have emerged as key new
players in China’s industrial policy: They have the potential to specialize in niche
markets, develop domestic alternatives to foreign inputs and reinforce China’s industrial
chain. Beijing has established a comprehensive support system for these firms, as origi-
nally outlined in the Made in China 2025 strategy.
 The emergence of an “accelerator state” in China marks a dramatic extension of
the industrial focus of Chinese policymakers towards smaller companies: Previous
industrial policy primarily directed resources to larger firms to achieve strategic goals.
Smaller firms are now seen as valuable sources of innovation.
 Beijing’s tiered-cultivation system combines state guidance with market forces:
China has developed a dynamic multi-level evaluation and support system, active at
the local, provincial and national levels, to first identify specialized high-tech SMEs and
then fast-track their growth.
 Government-certified high-tech SMEs are labeled as “Specialized SMEs” or “Little
Giants”: They benefit from a comprehensive system of direct and indirect state support.
But these firms cannot rest on their laurels as the system is set up to promote competition
and after three years the government support has to be earned once again.
 Officials are channeling ever more finance towards high-tech companies: Beijing
has mobilized public financial institutions and is pushing private investors to direct cap -
ital towards government-certified start-ups and SMEs, worth tens of billions of yuan. The
government has increased loan financing through the banking system and expanded
access to equity markets for high-tech SMEs.
 The support system seeks to cover all the needs of its SMEs: The government is en-
couraging all state-connected entities to help high-tech SMEs. This means more state
subsidies and R&D support, increased collaboration with universities and research insti-
tutes and a more favorable intellectual property system. Officials are also directing large
firms to act as financiers, clients and mentors.
 The model presents both risks and rewards: The system is channeling more funding
to high-tech SMEs. Several state-backed firms such as Leaderdrive and Endovastec in the
robotics and MedTech sectors are advancing self-reliance in core technologies. Yet, there
are also signs of weaknesses. The system relies on the capacity of officials to identify the
most promising firms, which may be flawed. Support measures could result in significant
bad investments and misuse of funds.
 Foreign companies need to be prepared for the challenge: Foreign manufacturing
firms ought to be wary of the large pool of state-backed SMEs which could target their
core business area. In addition to increasing competition within China, Little Giants
have already begun their entry into foreign markets.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
| 3
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
1. THE NEW PLAYERS ON BEIJING’S TEAM: SMES ENTER THE STAGE OF INDUSTRIAL
POLICY
High-quality small and medium-sized enterprises have strong innovation capabilities
and good growth potential. They are the basic force for improving the stability and
competitiveness of the industrial supply chain and an important driver for promoting
high-quality economic development.”
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 1
1.1 China evolves its gameplan: The start of state-led SME acceleration
One of the most significant evolutions in China’s industrial policy approach is its recent fo -
cus on cultivating high-tech SMEs. Officials are striving to boost the development of China's
most promising and innovative small firms by combining the allocative and entrepreneur -
ial benefit of the market with state guidance. The end goal is to create an Olympic team of
SMEs which not only rise to the top of China's domestic market, but also can succeed at the
international level.
The emergence of an “accelerator state” in China marks a dramatic extension of the indus -
trial focus of Chinese policymakers towards smaller companies, true to the “new-style na-
tional team” approach to reaching strategic goals. 2 Beijing’s original model was marked by
large-scale projects, the creation of new markets and the fostering of national champions.
State support was more concentrated on fewer and larger firms, along the lines of mantras
such as holding to the “commanding heights” of the economy and “picking the winners.”
Beijing’s playbook has been expanded from prodding and funding large firms to pursue
national goals, to nurturing a large pool of potential winners and harnessing market forces
to help pick the final winners.
The government has gained a new appreciation for the importance of private enterprises
and small firms as drivers of innovation. In emerging markets and sectors with continual
technological innovation, Beijing realizes that SMEs can act as key actors in experiment -
ing with new technology, production methods and business models. In other areas where
established players already dominate the market, SMEs can occupy niche markets or have
a role as critical suppliers. Larger firms still play a central role, but Beijing is attempting to
enhance the contribution of smaller firms.
High-tech SMEs such as BWT Beijing, Leaderdrive and Endovastec have developed domes -
tic alternatives to foreign inputs and are gradually reinforcing China's industrial chain. In
2021, BWT Beijing and Leaderdrive both ranked second in terms of domestic market share
for their respective main products, namely semiconductor lasers and harmonic reducers
(a core component for robots). 3 Leaderdrive has been lauded by the Chinese Institute of
Electronics for its success in achieving breakthroughs in “bottleneck” technologies and
developing robotics core technologies. 4 In the medical device sector, Endovastec developed
the first indigenously-made abdominal aortic stent graft, and its aortic products occupy 28
percent of the domestic market. 5
Scores of innovative SMEs now receive a plethora of government benefits as part of the
newly formed acceleration system. Like a sports coach developing elite athletes, Beijing
is rolling out a raft of measures to boost their growth and cultivate thousands of firms of
similarly high caliber. Promising candidates are granted special status as government cer -
SMEs can act as
key actors in
experimenting
with new
technology
“

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
| 4
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
tified high-tech SMEs and ranked according to their abilities. The Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology (MIIT) has identified more than 70,000 “Specialized SMEs” ( 专精
特新中小企业), and over 12,000 “Little Giant” ( 小巨人) SMEs.6 BWT Beijing and Leaderdrive
were both selected in the first batch of Little Giants in 2019.
These “government certified” SMEs gain access to significant support through access to
finance, direct subsidies, research funding, collaboration with state entities and so on. In
addition to deploying government resources, Beijing is also seeking to activate private firms
and investors who, after recent crackdowns on tutoring and internet companies, are paying
even more attention to government signals. But certified high-tech SMEs are required to
excel, or else they could lose the government’s favor.
1.2 The mission for state-backed SMEs: Innovation, manufacturing strength and
self-reliance
The core objectives of the accelerator state reflect the strategic goals of China’s government
and their evolution in recent years. In fact, Beijing’s program of high-tech SME support is
part and parcel of the Made in China 2025 (MiC2025) strategy. The Little Giants initiative –
a centerpiece of the accelerator state – was first announced in 2016 in one of the implemen-
tation documents of that strategy. At its official launch in 2018, the Little Giants program
was focused on pushing forward innovation in core technologies and products in the ten
strategic manufacturing sectors outlined in the MiC2025 strategy, ranging from chips to
robots to airplanes. About 80 percent of all Little Giant firms approved to date fit into these
ten key sectors (see Exhibit 1). 7
Note: "Batch" refers to the selection round for Little Giant firms.
Sources: Sohu, PatSnap, Wind
© MERICS
 New materials
 New generation IT
 Energy equipment; Agricultural equipment;
High-end computerized machines & robotics
 Energy-saving & new energy vehicles
 Biomedicine & high-performance medical equipment
 Aviation & space equipment
 Maritime engineering equipment & high-tech ships
 Advanced railway transportation technology
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
Batch 4
(2022)
Batch 3
(2021)
Batch 2
(2020)
Batch 1
(2019)
The majority of Little Giant companies match the Made in China 2025
priority industries
Share of Little Giant companies aligned with the Made in China 2025 ten core industries, by batch
Exhibit 1

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
| 5
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
The sectoral focus of high-tech SME support matches Beijing’s focus on industrial upgrad -
ing and desire to prioritize the development of hard technologies over soft technologies,
i.e., hardware and equipment over consumer-oriented software applications. Even though
the latter generated huge revenue for China’s leading internet-based companies in recent
years, the former has taken on the importance of underpinning the resilience of the manu -
facturing sector going forward.
Economic security is the other key objective of the accelerator state. In light of growing
tensions with the United States, including the risk of having its access to foreign technology
cut-off, Beijing has redoubled efforts to enhance innovation and plug gaps in local supply
chains. References to bottleneck technology gaps that need to be plugged have become
more and more commonplace in Chinese industrial policy documents (see Exhibit 2). SMEs
have a vital role in providing technological breakthroughs and industrial security.
In Beijing’s eyes, among the most prized SMEs are those offering basic and foundational
technologies and components, such as highly specific industrial machinery, measuring de-
vices or robotic components. 8 These niches are often occupied by a handful of European,
American or Japanese suppliers, that tend to serve China through exports. For instance,
41 out of 44 Chinese metro systems use operation and maintenance measurement devices
supplied by the Austrian company NEXTSENSE with fewer than 100 employees. 9
Many listed Little Giants are openly pursuing Beijing’s goal of import substitution. An anal -
ysis of 719 annual reports from Little Giant firms in 2021 found that 44 percent mentioned
Source: MERICS PoliXi Tracer
© MERICS
 Mentions of Specialized SMEs (专精特新)
 Mentions of Little Giants (小巨人)
 Mentions of bottleneck technologies (卡脖子)
 Mentions of fixing technological gaps ( 补短板)
 Mentions of productivity (生产率)
 Mentions of market share (市场份额)
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
China’s focus on technological self-reliance and high-tech
SME promotion
Mentions of terms in Chinese national and provincial policy documents, indexed with 2018 = 100
Exhibit 2

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
| 6
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
the term domestic substitution ( 国产替代) at least once. 10 The application forms for recent
batches of the Little Giants program include questions on how firms are contributing to ef -
forts to localize and replace foreign inputs. As such, high-tech SMEs are explicitly intended
to progressively replace foreign companies in China, and then challenge them in markets
abroad.
2. TRYOUTS, TRAINING AND TIERS: HOW CHINA FOSTERS HIGH-TECH SMES
The birth of a hidden champion is not a one-day effort. It requires a cultivation
process with strategic patience … We should further enhance the cultivation
and development of hidden champions in advanced manufacturing segments …
especially those that can fill technological shortcomings …”
Dong Jingmei, Economic Forecasting Department at the
State Information Center (affiliated with NDRC) 11
2.1 The pyramid cultivation system: From Innovative SME to Manufacturing Champion
China has developed a hierarchical framework of SME support in the form of a “pyramid culti-
vation system” (梯度培育体系). Like a sports coach trying to develop an Olympic team, Beijing is
continually hosting tryouts at different levels – testing the merits of companies – and awarding
benefits accordingly. Local and central government officials evaluate high-tech SMEs against
a broad suite of economic and innovation criteria. The best are granted special titles, receive
access to subsidies and policy support, and are trained to become world-class competitors.
The system runs on a good dose of competition in the selection process to ensure that sup -
portive measures and resources are allocated to the most competitive and promising play -
ers. Like competing athletes, companies must “run races” against other firms in the open
market to acquire market share and technological capabilities to prove their “fitness.” Gov -
ernment titles and support are granted for three years. Afterward, firms are re-evaluated
based on their economic and innovation performance.
The fourth and lowest-ranked league of the tiered system is composed of manufacturing-fo -
cused “Innovative SMEs” ( 创新型中小企业) identified at the provincial level. Provincial
governments can draw on this pool of innovative SMEs to select more advanced “Special -
ized SMEs” ( 专精特新中小企业), which can tap into a wide array of support mechanisms.
The cream of the crop is then promoted to national “Little Giant” ( 小巨人) status, and after
reaching a certain size, can be recognized as industry leaders in specific subsectors ( 制造
业单项冠军) hereon referred to as “Manufacturing Champions.” Little Giants and Manufac -
turing Champions are model firms in China’s pursuit of innovation-driven development. 12
China has set targets for the number of firms in each of these categories to reach by 2025
and already achieved its goal of cultivating 10,000 Little Giants (see Exhibit 3). 13 14
Leaderdrive has risen swiftly through the ranks of this system thanks to its ability to grow
and win domestic market share in an area traditionally dominated by foreign firms. To be-
gin with, provincial officials in Jiangsu awarded Leaderdrive titles such as “high-tech en-
terprise,” “science and technology-based SME” and its harmonic reducer products were
deemed a “Specialized SME product.” 15 In 2019, the company was included in the first
batch of national-level Little Giant companies, and by the end of 2020, it had risen to the
rank of a Manufacturing Champion. 16
“
Like competing
athletes, companies
must “run races”
against other firms

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
| 7
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
The Manufacturing Champion, Little Giant and other initiatives have been launched at sep -
arate times and follow their own schedule for evaluating and announcing new awardees.
Firms do not need to start from the bottom of the pyramid. For instance, in the last two
batches of Manufacturing Champions, only about a quarter were derived from Little Giants,
but the proportion has increased with each batch. 17 Beijing is establishing a pipeline to
track innovative firms from their early stages of development and accelerate their growth.
Imitating Germany’s “hidden champions”
A key source of inspiration for China’s acceleration system are Germany’s “hidden
champions,” highly specialized and often unknown SMEs that dominate niche mar -
kets globally. The concept has been developed by German management theorist and
consultant Hermann Simon to explain the success of German SMEs in global mar -
kets.18 These firms emerged organically from the economic and social circumstances
present in Germany, such as excellent vocational training, close ties to social banks,
and a distinctive corporate culture.
Longing after the manufacturing might displayed by Germany’s hidden champions,
Chinese policy, think tank and investment banking documents regard them as a mod-
el to emulate.19 Beijing thinks that it can replicate their success through state inter-
vention, essentially turning a bottom-up process on its head. The very different social
and economic environment in China means that it is down to government officials to
orchestrate the emergence of local hidden champions. Hence the cultivation system
has been set up to identify potential success stories and channel state support.
Exhibit 3
Source: MIIT
© MERICS
China's pyramid cultivation system works akin to a sport league
“Little giant” program intends to foster world class small and medium-sized enterprises
Promoted to next tier/
Demoted to lower tier
New entrant/
Drop out
Status renewed Cultivation targets
 Manufacturing
Champions
1,000 by 2025
Little Giants
10,000 by 2025
Specialized SMEs
100,000 by 2025
Innovative SMEs
1,000,000 by 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
| 8
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
2.2 Rigging the race: The shaping and misapplication of selection criteria
The government uses selection criteria to choose Little Giants and other types of high-tech
SMEs. Officials at the municipal and provincial levels rely on them to evaluate and pick
companies which they then recommend to higher authorities for further support. The crite-
ria are broad in scope and cover aspects such as niche product focus, growth performance,
the number of invention patents and R&D intensity (see Exhibit 4).
Such detailed criteria ought to enhance the identification of innovative SMEs. However,
close examination of the firms granted special titles shows they do not necessarily tick all
the boxes, and some appear to contradict the purpose of the accelerator program. Out of
a sample of 44 robotics firms selected in the first two batches of the Little Giants program,
many appear to fall below the selection standards or to undermine its objectives: 20
 Too big: Efort and Sanfeng Intelligent Equipment both had over CNY 1 billion in
revenue and over 1,400 employees in 2018 and 2019 respectively, well beyond the
SME threshold of CNY 400 million and 1000 employees.
 Lacklustre economic performance: Haozhi Industrial did not achieve the required
average revenue or profit growth rate of 10 percent over the past two years. Ningxia
Juneng Robotics recorded a liabilities-to-assets ratio over the ceiling of 70 percent.
 Parent companies piggyback on subsidiaries: Nine of the 44 companies are fully
owned subsidiaries of larger firms. Siasun Robot & Automation and Shanghai STEP
Electric Corporation are among China’s leading robot manufacturers, yet their
subsidiaries were both successfully selected as Little Giant firms. 21
Source: MIIT
© MERICS
Detailed criteria set the benchmark for Little Giant firms
SELECTION CRITERIA FOR THE FOURTH AND FIFTH BATCHES OF LITTLE GIANTS
SME status Complies with SME classification; industrial firms with less than 1,000
employees or annual revenue less than CNY 400 million qualify as an SME.
Sector / product focus Matches the ten key industries listed in the Made in China 2025 strategy;
or main product related to core manufacturing components, software,
processes, materials, or focused on gaps in the industrial supply chain.
Economic performance Average growth rate of revenue in the past two years not less than five
percent; asset to liability ratio not higher than 70 percent; leading
products in niche market occupy ten percent of domestic market share.
Degree of specialization Engaged in a specific market segment for over three years, revenue from
main business segment accounts for no less than 70 percent of total revenue.
Innovation ability Share of R&D expenses to revenue no less than three percent over the past
two years, possesses more than two invention patents are similar IP;
recent recipients of national S&T awards are exempt the innovation criteria.
Exhibit 4

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
| 9
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
The MIIT does allow for some exceptions to be made for firms which score well in almost
all areas but fail in others. 22 Yet the frequency of leniency with selection criteria suggests
that authorities have trouble finding enough firms that meet their prescribed benchmarks.
It may also indicate that the scheme is being repurposed to suit local priorities, or that
personal connections are influencing the results. China’s previous efforts to stimulate high-
tech SME R&D efforts through the Innofund program have faced similar selection issues. 23
The lax implementation of the selection process and apparent inability of the central gov -
ernment to enforce official criteria reflects an underlying weakness in China’s cultivation
system.
3. FAST-TRACKING SME GROWTH: BEIJING’S COMPLETE FRAMEWORK FOR
SME PROMOTION
Guide more funds to the advanced manufacturing and strategic emerging
industries, provide better service to key core technology research enterprises
and Specialized SMEs.”
Yi Gang, Governor of the People’ s Bank of China 24
3.1 The golden ticket to an exclusive sponsorship program
Certified high-tech SMEs are granted a golden ticket to special treatment from public
authorities. They are effectively the privileged sponsored athletes of China’s state acceler -
ation system. The government is encouraging all state-connected entities to smooth the
development pathway for high-tech SMEs. This means more state subsidies and R&D sup -
port, increased collaboration with universities and research institutes and a more favorable
intellectual property (IP) system. Officials are also pushing for larger firms, especially SOEs,
to engage more with local SMEs and incorporate them into their supply chains.
Most notably, policymakers are guiding the financial system to provide additional capital to
innovative SMEs. These steps mark a notable shift in direction for financial institutions in
China. The structure of the financial system has for decades directed more capital towards
large state-connected firms, at the expense of SMEs. The government only recently began
attempts to limit these entrenched biases. 25 Greater tolerance of defaults and insolvency
weakened the implicit state guarantee associated with such large firms. However, these
reform efforts appear to be half-baked.26 To overcome ongoing financing challenges, Beijing
has more directly increased access to loans, reformed domestic stock markets and activated
dedicated funds to support innovative SMEs. 27
The importance of equity financing, as well as other diverse sources of state support, is
evident from the example of Leaderdrive. The robotics Little Giant firm received a large
windfall following its listing on the STAR market in 2020. Moreover, it is the beneficiary of
direct equity investments from private and public investors, including government guid -
ance funds. The firm has secured significant bank loans. On the R&D front, Leaderdrive has
developed long-term collaborative partnerships with several universities and was involved
in four National Key R&D programs between 2017 and 2019. 28 Some of the largest indige-
nous producers of industrial robotics provide steady and ongoing demand for Leaderdrive’s
products.
“
Policymakers guide
the financial system
to provide additional
capital to innovative
SMEs

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
| 10
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
Exhibit 5
Beijing orchestrates state-connected actors to support high-tech SMEs
Key actors in China's SME support ecosystem and their respective roles
© MERICS
 Party state entity Private entity Guides Provides
Preferential
treatment
Government
guidance
funds
(GGFs)
Banks
Stock
market
Other
investors
FINANCIAL SECTOR
Certified
high-tech
SMEs
Pool of
SMEs
LARGE FIRMS,
SOEs
Guaranteed
 market,
 resources,
 funding,
information
Commercial-
ization of
R&D
output
Fill techno-
logical gaps
in supply
chain
Returns
Loans,
investment
R&D support,
spinoffs,
talent
Resources,
funding,
information
about SME
Certification,
subsidies
GOVERNMENT
IPR COURTS
UNIVERSITIES
FINANCIAL SECTOR
Leaderdrive
绿的谐波
LARGE FIRMS,
SOEs:
Estun, Siasun
Robotics,
Huashu Robot,
Shanghai STEP
Electric
Key customersR&D support
GOVERNMENT
UNIVERSITIES:
Harbin Institute
of Technology,
Shanghai Jiao
Tong University,
Southeast
University
Sources: MERICS based on MIIT, Leaderdrive annual reports and website, industry reporting and Wind Financial Terminal
*Values for 2022
Practice: The case of LeaderdriveTheory
CNY 14 million
in subsidies*
GGFs: :
Advanced
Manufacturing
Ind. Investment
Fund
Banks
Shanghai
Stock Exchange
STAR
Market
Other
investors
CNY 1.1 billion
raised by IPO
CNY 310 million
in short- & long-
term loans*
Owns 4.96 %
of shares
CNY 169 million
paid-in
capital

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
| 11
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
A key aspect of China’s new blend of state capitalism is the certification effect, i.e., the im-
pact of the government’s stamp of approval. Earning the “Specialized SME” or “Little Giant”
label indicates that an SME is a leader among their peers with significant growth and inno -
vation potential, as well as preferential access to government support. This sets in motion
a virtuous cycle for certified high-tech SMEs, whereby state benefits increase their growth
outlook, leading to more funding from investors, faster expansion, additional opportunities
to access state support, and so on, with some firms eventually listing on the stock market.
Explicit government-backing can work as a form of last-mile guidance for investments on
top of the list of sector priorities produced by the party state. For instance, power equip -
ment producer Guizhou Changtong Electric Ltd. received CNY 100 million from state-
backed funds and further interest from other investors soon after being granted the Little
Giant title in 2021. 29 Considering Beijing’s recent tech rectification campaign, Little Giants
are increasingly viewed as sound investment options. According to Bloomberg, one venture
capital firm only invests in Little Giants. 30 Numerous bank reports also highlight Little Gi-
ants as aligned with government policy and displaying strong growth potential. 31
3.2 A shot of adrenaline: Carving out dedicated financing channels for high-tech SMEs
Not content with market forces determining where capital flows, Beijing is further increas -
ing its guidance over where capital should be allocated. China’s accelerator state directly
invests and guides private investors about where they should put their money. More of that
cash now ends up in the pockets of government-certified SMEs.
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
Both private and public capital is channelled toward innovative SMEs
The financial system fueling Beijing's accelerator system
Exhibit 6
 Party state flow or entity Private entities and flows Minor source of capital Major source of capital
PROVIDER OF
FINANCIAL
RESOURCES
MICRO AND SMEs
High-tech SMEs
in priority sectors
INTERMEDIARY
OF FINANCIAL
FLOWS
Stock
markets
State-
connected
and large
firms
Banks
Venture capital
and private
equity firms
Government
guidance
funds
Private
investors
Certified high-tech SMEs

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
| 12
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
3.2.1 Direct financing strengthened through equity markets
Beijing aspires to blend state intervention with market forces by creating a multi-tier capital
market that can channel more direct financing to priority firms like Little Giants throughout
their development. 32 To fulfill this objective, the government has vastly expanded listing
opportunities for high-tech SMEs on the mainland stock markets.
 Regional over-the-counter trading markets have emerged as an important tool for pro -
moting the development of innovative SMEs. 33 As of November 2022, 20 out of China’s
35 regional equity markets had set up Specialized SME boards and ten more had plans
in place.34
 The new Beijing Stock Exchange (BSE) was created in 2021 to expand listing opportu -
nities. It provides a complementary steppingstone between the provincial OTC markets
and the more mature markets dedicated to tech-intensive firms (see below). 35 To match
the characteristics of SMEs, the exchange has wider volatility bands than other main-
land exchanges and has more flexible listing criteria.
 Policymakers have also liberalized the smaller and tech-intensive STAR and ChiNext
stock markets. The STAR market was the first to trial a registration-based IPO approval
procedure, which was later expanded to the ChiNext market, the Beijing Stock Ex -
change, and eventually all Chinese stock exchanges. This procedure grants stock ex -
changes the authority to determine whether a company can issue public stocks, solely
based on official criteria, rather than requiring verification by the CSRC. 36
*Data valid as of March 31, 2023.
Source: Exchange websites, CYZone
© MERICS
China’s main financial exchanges serving high-tech SMEs
CHINEXT STAR MARKET BEIJING STOCK
EXCHANGE
Year founded 2009 2019 2021
Location Shenzhen Shanghai Beijing
Minimum estimated
market value at IPO
CNY 1 billion CNY 1 billion CNY 200 million
Approval procedure Registration-based since
2020
Registration-based since
inception
Registration-based since
inception
Number of listed
firms*
1,247 510 184
Number of Little
Giants (share of
total firms listed)*
247
(20 percent)
220
(43 percent)
73
(40 percent)
Exhibit 7

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
| 13
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
So far only a small share of Little Giant firms have managed to go public, yet they make
up a significant share of new listings on China’s stock exchanges. In 2022, 40 percent of
listings on the Shanghai, Shenzhen and Beijing stock exchanges were made by Little Giant
companies.37
The amount of capital raised through IPO by Little Giant companies in recent years typi-
cally falls in the range of CNY 100 million to CNY 4 billion. Notable examples of listings in
early 2023 include: 38
 Unicomp Technology (CNY 3 billion in funds raised), a provider of X-ray smart inspec -
tion technology for semiconductors, electronic manufacturing and new energy batteries;
 Naruida Technology (CNY 1.8 billion in funds raised), a producer of radar hardware
and detection systems, used for weather detection, water conservancy monitoring and
civil aviation;
 Nanjing Gova Technology (CNY 1.3 billion in funds raised), a manufacturer of pressure
sensors, temperature sensors, accelerometers, motion detectors, applied in aerospace,
rail transportation and metallurgy sectors.
Not as significant as the stock markets for SME financing, bond markets have also been re-
formed to help SMEs. Leading ministries issued instructions to support high-quality SMEs
to issue bonds in the capital market. 39 The regulators and main industrial federation issued
a notice aiming to ease bond issuance by private firms, especially in strategic sectors, cov -
ering collective bonds for SMEs. 40
3.2.2 Beijing pushes the banking sector to provide more loan financing
China’s fully state-controlled banking system has sprung into action to increase lending to
high-tech SMEs. In the words of a Beijing-based joint stock bank credit manager, no matter
whether the Specialized SME is certified by the central or local government, banks will now
approve loans more quickly and under more generous conditions. 41
Notable policy developments dedicated to boosting loans to high-tech SMEs include:
 Monetary policy guidance targeting SMEs: The PBOC has guided banks to channel ex-
tra financing capacity freed up by multiple cuts in the required reserve ratio toward SMEs.
This relaxation has pushed down the ratio to be set aside for each loan from 16.5 percent
in 2017 to 7.8 in 2023 on average, freeing up roughly CNY 19 trillion of liquidity.42
 Specialized PBOC financing instruments: Since 2018, specific PBOC financing and
refinancing facilities have been established that target SMEs or innovative firms, to in-
centivize banks to provide such loans. For instance, in 2022 the PBOC set up a CNY 200
billion quota for a science and technology innovation refinancing instrument that also
covers Specialized SMEs.43 This is part of a clear ambition to “guide more funds to invest
in advanced manufacturing and strategic emerging industries, and better serve key core
technology research enterprises and Specialized SMEs”. 44
The political shift in lending practices is trickling down through China’s banking system.
The China Development Bank, one of China’s policy banks, announced that it provided
CNY 13.1 billion in loans to 44 Little Giants and 71 Specialized SMEs in the first three
More opportunities
to go public
incentivize SME
investments

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
| 14
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
quarters of 2022. Local level financial institutions are also following through. For instance,
the Guangdong government together with three banks has pledged CNY 600 billion in fi-
nancing support for Specialized SMEs during the 14th FYP period. Banks, like the Chengdu
branch of Minsheng Bank, are trying to improve their services for high-tech SMEs by intro -
ducing new SME departments. 45
3.2.3 Government guidance funds channel additional capital to priority firms
Government guidance funds (GGFs) have become one of the main tools to directly channel
financial resources toward China’s industrial objectives. This is a clear sign that Beijing is
not leaving it up to market forces to capitalize strategic firms. Promoted on a national scale
from 2014 onward, estimates suggest that GGFs had raised around CNY 6 trillion of capital
by mid-2021. 46 High-level policy documents on the cultivation of SMEs underline the key
role of GGFs in supporting high-tech SMEs and manufacturing. 47 As such, it is quite com-
mon to see such funds among the shareholders of Little Giant firms.
In line with guidance from Beijing, GGFs bring in shareholders or limited partners in a
structure similar to venture capital and private equity funds. 48 This makes them naturally
suited to provide capital to growing and smaller firms. GGFs frequently operate as funds
of funds, which effectively transfers the political objectives of their investments to other
venture capital and private equity firms and increases the number of public and private
funds channeling equity towards high-tech SMEs. 49 GGFs collect capital from banks, local
governments, SOEs and private investors (although private investment is small and far off
government targets) to guide the flow of financial resources to priority areas.
The limited prospects for SMEs to list publicly is one of the main challenges hindering the
growth of a more dynamic Chinese venture capital scene. Hence GGFs and the stock market
reforms mentioned above are highly complementary, with public listings potentially allow -
ing GGFs to generate hefty returns that can be then re-invested into new firms. 50
3.3 Full body workout: Diverse measures help SMEs to innovate and compete
While directing financial flows towards high-tech SMEs is the most powerful item on Bei-
jing’s training plan, the government is introducing a well-rounded training regime to facili-
tate the development of SMEs into internationally competitive champions. The government
is embedding them in China’s innovation system and matching SMEs with large firms – as
financiers, clients and mentors.
3.3.1 Providing cash to cultivate Little Giants
The government is providing subsidies to cash-strapped high-tech SMEs often active in cap -
ital-intensive manufacturing sectors. Vast regional differences remain, and wealthy local
governments often go above and beyond to support their local high-tech SMEs. Guangzhou
is a particularly generous patron 51:
 Cultivation: Guangzhou offers CNY 500,000 to provincial-level
Specialized SMEs and CNY 2 million to Little Giants
 Rent: One-off rent subsidies of up to CNY 2 million
Guidance funds
transfer their
political objectives
to private equity
firms

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
| 15
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
 Investments: New investments into land or production facilities are subsidized
by 5 percent up to CNY 100 million
 Relocation: Little Giants that relocate to Guangzhou receive an additional
CNY 2 million
 Technologies: Up to CNY 500,000 for selling equipment listed that has been
listed on government catalogs
 Talent: Up to CNY 200,000 for talent support
Close relations with local governments can have a massive impact on Chinese SMEs. Little
Giant Guizhou Anda Technology & Energy (Guizhou Anda) produces new lithium battery
cathode materials and is a key supplier of BYD. In 2022, a year after becoming a Little
Giant, the firm formed a JV with the Nanning and Hengzhou city governments (both in
Guizhou) to produce lithium iron phosphate – benefitting China’s downstream EV industry.
The city governments not only granted the land and production equipment, but an indus -
trial investment fund also covered 49 percent of the JV’s investment costs allowing Guizhou
Anda to scale.
3.3.2 Collaboration between universities and high-tech SMEs
High-tech SMEs can use cooperation projects to outsource research, innovation and train-
ing activities. However, China’s SMEs have had difficulties in identifying suitable university
partners and making collaborations work. The central government has made clear that it
wants this to change. Beijing expects – and makes funding dependent on – universities
and research institutes to cultivate high-tech SMEs, for instance by supplying them with
waiting-to-be-commercialized research.
Central policy measures are trickling down to local governments. The city of Nanjing in-
tends to cultivate 1,000 Specialized SMEs, 300 Little Giants and 30 Manufacturing Cham-
pions and has issued a dedicated policy to boost SME-university collaboration. Shanghai
Jiaotong University together with the Shanghai Municipal SME Development Service Center
established an SME empowerment platform. This program grants 16 certified high-tech
SMEs, among them Shanghai Recoen Laser Tech and medical device supplier Push Medi-
cal, access to training and consulting opportunities. 14 of the university’s professors act as
dual-employed mentors for Little Giants.
3.3.3 Integrating Specialized SMEs into the supply chains of large firms
The relationship between Little Giant ComNav Technology and Guangzhou-based Manu -
facturing Champion South GNSS Naviation is indicative of the ties Beijing wants to fos -
ter between high-tech SMEs and large corporates. ComNav produces specialized computer
chips and computer boards for high-precision navigation positioning. The company was
established to provide a local alternative to South GNSS Navigation, a producer of satellite
receivers, which previously sourced the same components from expensive foreign suppliers
such as American company Trimble Inc. 52
Both sides ought to benefit from greater linkages. Beyond acting as a reliable customer,
large companies can help SMEs by addressing their external financing difficulties. As banks
hesitate to lend to small firms, large corporates are expected to become financial backers
and intermediaries – as they have a more granular understanding of their suppliers’ opera-
Beijing expects
universities to
cultivate high-tech
SMEs

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
| 16
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
tions.53 In April 2022, State Grid’s Jiaxing subsidiary started supplying CITIC Bank with in-
formation on the electricity usage of SMEs to improve their financing. 54 For their part, SMEs
are expected to fill gaps in the domestic supply and value chains of large corporates. Their
role is to advance import-substitution as quickly as possible, through their specialization,
dynamism and flexibility.
The government steers the large-small firm coupling and has released guidelines on how to
do so.55 One way is through match-making events. The first such event at the national level
was held in Qingdao in June 2022. There, local heavyweight Haier put forward 63 match-
making demands focused on intelligent home appliances, biomedicals and industrial inter -
net. The MIIT think tank China Academy for Information and Communications Technology
(CAICT) has since built an online platform to match large firms with SMEs. 56 SOEs are also
expected to support high-tech SMEs. They will be evaluated based on their contributions.
3.3.4 Supporting SMEs to use research outputs and protect their IPR
Beijing also intends to spur innovation and cultivate high-tech SMEs by tweaking intellec -
tual property rights (IPR) regulations.
Situated in one of China’s four silk capitals, textile equipment producer Huzhou Modern
Textile Machinery (Huzhou Textile) – a Specialized SME – had faced difficulties to develop
equipment that can weave fabrics thinner than 2 mm. But then Huzhou Textile came across
a Zhejiang university professor who held an important patent. The patentee and Huzhou
Textile are now jointly developing a prototype that could raise revenues by up to 30 per -
cent. The collaboration is not accidental. Huzhou Textile found the patent via Zhejiang’s
open licensing platform set up in 2021 which allowed firms to access 379 patents without
having to pay royalties or license fees.
Apart from open licensing, the government also wants to better protect the IPR of high-
tech SMEs. As access to foreign technology becomes more cumbersome and Chinese firms
edge closer to the global technological frontier, policymakers have come to prioritize IPR
protection. The local patent office in Jinan, Shandong, has trained 48 Specialized SMEs on
IPR protection and Sichuan’s provincial government has formed a research team to survey
the IPR needs of local SMEs. Local IP authorities are instructed to pay special attention to
high-tech SMEs, which could lead to special treatment in court rulings in favor of such com-
panies to the detriment of other high-tech firms – both local and foreign.
4. GOING FOR GOLD: ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF CHINA’S STATE ACCELERATION SYSTEM
The cultivation work has achieved certain results and has attracted widespread
attention from society, but it also faces problems such as inconsistent standards,
inaccurate services, and unbalanced development.”
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 57
4.1 Risks and rewards: The potential outcomes of China’s new approach to industrial
policy
Four years on from the release of the first batch of Little Giant firms, China’s acceleration
system appears to be delivering on its primary objectives. The system has identified inno -
“
SOEs are also
expected to
support high-tech
SMEs

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
| 17
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
vative SMEs and some have already risen to become leaders in their field. Among the first
three batches of Little Giant enterprises, 114 grew into Manufacturing Champions. 58 Little
Giant firms such as Leaderdrive, Endovastec and Unicomp Technology are helping to en-
hance China’s industrial self-reliance. They have contributed to advancing localization in
strategic sectors such as robots, medical equipment and semiconductors.
Perhaps the most important achievement so far is how Beijing’s new financing model is
channeling more capital toward SMEs. Data shows that more loans and investments have
gone to SMEs since 2019. The share of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises in total
bank loans has risen from 35 percent from 2015 to 2019 to 41 percent in September 2022.59
The share of capital raised on SME-oriented stock exchanges has also grown from 33 per -
cent in 2018 to 43 percent in 2022. 60 According to figures compiled by CYZone (a Chinese
start-up platform), over CNY 900 billion in capital has been raised by Little Giants between
2018 and October 2022. 61 The number of Little Giant firms going public has also increased
each year since the start of the program, rising to 137 in 2021 and adding 133 during the
first ten months of 2022. 62
Nevertheless, inherent tensions and conflicting priorities within the accelerator state ap -
proach pose underlying risks, such as bad investments and misuse of funds earmarked for
high-tech SMEs. This can be seen, for instance, in the process for identifying innovative
firms. There is a risk that due to political distortions, a significant share of resources dedi-
cated to the Little Giants program will flow into large parent companies or underperforming
firms rather than promoting the growth of dynamic, independent firms. This is the weak -
ness of what remains a primarily top-down approach, in contrast to how specialized SMEs
developed elsewhere.
The government’s attempt to steer private investment toward certain industries and firms
undermines the ability of the private sector to respond to market signals. Through the state-
led cultivation system, the government is pointing to where the honey pot is, reflecting its
constrained embrace of market mechanisms. This is not without its drawbacks:
 Government signaling on priority sectors and specific companies could exclude firms
with strong innovation potential that have been left out of the scheme while directing
more resources to underperforming firms that play the “government-certified” card.
Insiders from the government and industry could also exploit the certification effect
provided to government-backed firms, by pumping and dumping related stocks.
 Recent analysis suggests that firms with investments from entities with government ties
perform worse than their more private counterparts, and that investment from state-con-
nected entities also makes firms less attractive for other private investors. 63
 Concerns have been raised about the viability of the Beijing Stock Exchange given its fo -
cus on smaller firms, which are generally less suited to public trading. Small companies
issue fewer shares, leading to less liquidity and difficulties in trading the stock. 64
The accelerator state system is not perfect and like all government intervention is bound to
generate a certain amount of duplication, misuse or misallocation of resources. Ultimately
for the government, the priority is future proofing local industry and it is willing to pay a
premium to advance that aim. Self-sufficiency is not feasible, but Beijing is eager to get as
close as possible to independent supply chains in certain strategic areas. To what extent it
can meet these lofty goals, and what the costs will be, remains to be seen.
Underlying risks
include bad
investments and
the misuse of
funds

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
| 18
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
4.2 From rookie to champion: The looming challenge for foreign firms
The strategic sectors identified by Beijing are often dominated by foreign, especially Eu -
ropean SMEs and the selection criteria of the fourth and fifth batch of Little Giants explic -
itly aim to replace foreign firms in key value chains. Foreign manufacturing firms, large
and small, ought to be wary that one of the over 70,000 Specialized SMEs and more than
12,000 Little Giants could target their core business area. These magnets of state support
are not only likely to compete more effectively in China’s domestic market but also to in-
crease competition in third markets.
The sheltered position of China’s high-tech SMEs within their huge home market is a crucial
advantage over their foreign competitors. Once they have scaled up domestic production
and reached a size enabling them to invest more in R&D and overseas expansion, they are
very well placed to tackle foreign markets. European firms do not have access to this sort of
“safe haven.” The impact will be felt particularly in areas of emerging technologies where
China expects Little Giants to act as key innovators and lead market growth, such as renew -
able energy, power equipment, medical technology, EVs etc.
Little Giants have already begun their entry into foreign markets. BWT Beijing, the producer
of semiconductor lasers, sells its products in more than 70 countries around the world. 65
Medtech firm Endovastec’s international business covers 22 countries in Europe, Latin
America, Southeast Asia. 66 In addition, Unicomp Technology has exported its industrial
X-ray equipment to more than 60 countries and regions. 67 These firms have a global reach
and will naturally seek out new markets once they have established themselves at home.
The blurry lines between private ownership and state backing will make it difficult to hold
China accountable and ensure a level-playing field. Foreign firms will likely be reluctant
to challenge the preferential treatment granted to government-certified SMEs for fear of
retaliation and therefore need to rely on the efforts of their home governments to advocate
on their behalf. However, the new system of state support is in large part opaque, given the
incorporation of further market mechanisms and private actors. This will render the appli-
cation of anti-foreign subsidy laws more difficult.
China’s ambitious program to develop an “Olympic team” of high-tech SMEs is nearing
full scale and seeks to challenge the position of foreign companies in China and abroad.
Over the coming years, Chinese authorities will continue to refine the system and draw on
a pool of thousands of promising firms to advance its technological capabilities in key ar -
eas. There is no guarantee that China will succeed in any particular product or sector, and
as shown above, the system has its flaws. Yet in many areas, SMEs aligned with national
strategic objectives will gain a significant boost thanks to Beijing’s new industrial focus.
Foreign firms will need to continue to innovate and deepen their own competitiveness to
stay ahead.
Little Giants have
already begun their
entry into foreign
markets

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
| 19
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
Source: Chinese government policies
© MERICS
Leveraging state-control over the economy to support SMEs
Selected policy measures to support certified high-tech SMEs
KEY POLICY MEASURES TO FOSTER HIGH-TECH SME
Bankrolling high-tech SMEs From 2021 to 2025 the central government will provide
at least CNY 10 billion in direct funds to support 10,000
Little Giants
 Local governments often match the national-level subsi-
dies and offer additional financial support related to SME
cultivation, training, investment etc.
Promoting R&D collaboration Specialized SMEs receive subsidies towards university-
industry innovation and support for finding suitable
partners
 Specialized SMEs that have R&D cooperation projects with
universities receive priority recommendations for Little
Giant applications
 Universities and researchers are evaluated based on their
technical consulting services and cooperation projects
with companies
Promoting R&D collaboration
Integrating SMEs into the supply
chains of large companies
 Encourage large corporates and SOEs to share their tech-
nological needs with Specialized SMEs to allow them to
develop relevant products
 Promote large firms address SMEs’ capital needs through
supply chain financing
 SOEs will receive additional points in their KPIs for pro -
moting the integration and innovation of Specialized SMEs
Strengthening IPR protection and use Prioritize Specialized SMEs in patent applications and
provide trainings on IP applications
 Promote open patent licensing and further develop IP
financial services
 Increase the severity of administrative rulings on patent
infringement disputed involving Specialized SMEs
 Assist Specialized SMEs to develop through IP creation,
also overseas
ANNEX 1

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
| 20
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
ENDNOTES
 1 | Government of the PRC (2022). “Interpretation of Interim Measures for Gradient Cultivation and Man-
agement of High-quality Small and Medium-sized Enterprises ( 《优质中小企业梯度培育管理暂行办法》解
读).” June 3. https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2022-06/03/content_5693839.htm. Accessed: July 10, 2023
 2 | China’s “new-style national team” or “new type whole nation system” ( 新型举国体制) concept reflects a
revival of government-organized consortiums set up to achieve strategic goals.
Tan, Xiao and Song, Yao. The Diplomat (2022). “China’s ‘Whole Nation’ Effort to Advance the Tech
Industry.” April 21. https://thediplomat.com/2022/04/chinas-whole-nation-effort-to-advance-the-tech-
industry/. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
 3 | OFweek Laser Network (2023). “Kaplein Sci-Tech Innovation Board’s IPO has been accepted and plans
to raise 952 million yuan to invest in high-power, semiconductor, and fiber laser projects ( 凯普林科创板
IPO获受理 拟募资9.52亿元投入高功率、半导体、光纤激光器项目).” May 10. https://laser.ofweek.com/2023-
05/ART-8120-2400-30596097.html. Accessed; July 10, 2023;
Zheshang Securities (2022). “Humanoid Robots Wind up, Core Components Help Sail Away --Robot
Industry in-Depth Report ( 人形机器人风起，核心零部件助力扬帆远航 ——机器人行业深度报告).” October 17.
 4 | The Chinese Institute of Electronics is an academic institution with over 100,000 members under the
direct management of Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.
Chinese Institute of Electronics (2021). “China Robotics Industry Development Report (2021) ( 中国机器
人产业发展报告（2021 年）).” https://www.cie.org.cn/about_107/. Accessed; July 10, 2023.
 5 | Endovastec (2023). https://www.endovastec.com/24/. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
 6 | The first four batches of Little Giants included 8997 companies. Media reports, based on the compi-
lation of local government announcements from July 2023, claim that an additional 3671 companies
were included in the fifth batch of Little Giants.
Ministry of Industry and Information Technolgy (2023), “National Industry and Information Technol -
ogy Work Conference Held in Beijing (全国工业和信息化工作会议在京召开).” January 11. https://wap.miit.
gov.cn/xwdt/gxdt/ldhd/art/2023/art_f1e1bfd142e5406b98a917e5d4543e46.html. Accessed: July 10,
2023.
Tobse (2023). “The fifth batch of Little Giants is announced: 3671 in total, Jiangsu, Guangdong and
Zhejiang still lead (第五批国家级专精特新“小巨人”正公示：总计3671家，苏粤浙仍领跑全国).” July 16. https://
web.archive.org/web/20230719095256/https://www.tobse.cn/2411.html. Accessed: July 19, 2023.
 7 | Luming Finance and Economy (2022). “Biomedical and high-performance medical device Little Giants
have an average of 38 effective invention patents (生物医药及高性能医疗器械“小巨人”平均有效发明专利量38
件).” October 27. https://www.sohu.com/a/600259094_99990181. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
 8 | NMSAC (2022). “Industrial Base Innovation Development Catalogue (2021 Edition) 产业基础创新发展
目录（2021年版）.” 2022. http://www.cm2025.org/uploadfile/2022/0805/20220805013919818.pdf.
Accessed: July 10, 2023.
 9 | NEXTSENSE (2021). “How China’s Metros Are Benefitting from Faster, More Reliable Profile Measure-
ments.” Railway News Magazine Issue 3 2021: 146-147.
10 | EY and Zhejiang University (2022), “Report on the Innovation and Development of Specialized and
Sophisticated Listed Companies (2022) ( 专精特新上市公司创新与发展报告（2022年)).” October 10,
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__biz=MjM5OTYyODg4MQ==&mid=2653825940&idx=1&sn=3e65283d7
4538a65cb364970d840384a&chksm=bce212aa8b959bbc65c2ecc8f86f6bc5d13a4d3982b -
c02d6613d40c18cda886069b2842e8da7#rd.
11 | Dong, Jingmei (2021). National Development and Reform Commission. “ 【Expert Opinion】Invis-
ible Champion Cultivation Path under the Construction of New Development Pattern 【专家观点】
新发展格局构建下的隐形冠军培育路径.” November 29, https://www.ndrc.gov.cn/wsdwhfz/202111/
t20211129_1305672_ext.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
12 | Zhou, Pingjun. “Specialized, Specialized and New’ SME Development Policy Orientation ‘ 专精特新’中小
企业发展政策取向.” (Advanced Manufacturing Technology Business School, 2022), https://www.amtbs.
cn/article/e8244eb50e794f388acb547a202ca9c6. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
13 | Xinhua News Agency (2022). “China Has Cultivated Nearly 9,000 ‘Little Giant’ Enterprises with Spe-
cialties and New Features, and the BSE Has Taken Many Measures to Help Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises Grow Bigger and Stronger 我国已培育近九千家专精特新‘小巨人’企业 北交所多措并举助力中
小企业做大做强.” September 9. http://www.xinhuanet.com/money/20220909/a95d588358b64e-
1797021186c10aab33/c.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023; MIIT et. al. (2021). “14th Five-Year Plan to
Promote the Development of SMEs ‘ 十四五’促进中小企业发展规划,” December 17. http://www.gov.cn/
zhengce/zhengceku/2021-12/17/content_5661655.htm. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
14 | The timeline to cultivate 10,000 Little Giants has been brought forward to the end of 2023. See: Minis -
try of Industry and Information Technology (2023). “Notice on Printing and Distributing Several Mea-
sures to Help Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises Stabilize Growth, Adjust Structure and Strengthen
Capabilities助力中小微企业稳增长调结构强能力若干措施.” January 11. https://www.miit.gov.cn/zwgk/zcwj/
wjfb/tz/art/2023/art_0ac5cd8988084fff9e4a70da792baa10.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
15 | IMRobitic (2023). “Leaderdrive company profile.” https://www.imrobotic.com/integrator/13924/about .
Accessed: July 10, 2023.
16 | Leaderdrive (2023). http://www.leaderdrive.cn/companyIntroducePage - See “企业资质” section. Ac-
cessed: July 10, 2023.
17 | Hao, Karen. The Wall Street Journal (2023). “China Cultivates Thousands of ‘Little Giants’ in Aerospace,
Telecom to Outdo U.S.” March, 16. https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-cultivates-thousands-of-little-
giants-in-aerospace-telecom-to-outdo-u-s-97ef9bdb . Accessed: July 10, 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
| 21
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
18 | Brown, Alexander. MERICS (2022). "China Relies on ‘Little Giants’ and Foreign Partners to Plug
Stubborn Technology Gaps.” February 24. https://merics.org/en/short-analysis/china-relies-little-gi-
ants-and-foreign-partners-plug-stubborn-technology-gaps. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
19 | Sealand Securities (2022). “ 专精特新2023年度策略报告：补齐产业链短板，助力高质量发展.” December 12.
https://data.eastmoney.com/report/zw_industry.jshtml?encodeUrl=MvU5vkWB177R4HPi5cckg4pzD-
voYRAZeOUO9bQQEnWk=. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
20 | The flexible approach to applying Little Giant standards continued during the reevaluation of first
batch Little Giants carried out in 2022, as it had during the initial selection process. Siasun Co., Ltd.
maintained its status despite being the subsidiary of major robotics producer Siasun Robot & Automa-
tion. Efort is also still much larger than the official definition of an SME, and it also failed to meet the
economic performance requirement of five percent average growth in revenue or profit over the past
two years. Rather, between 2019 and 2021 Efort’s revenue shrunk by 10 percent and its income losses
deepened. Nevertheless, both these firms had their status as Little Giant companies renewed.
21 | The subsidiaries are Siasun Co., Ltd. and Adtech (Shenzhen) Technology Co., Ltd.. For background
information on Siasun and the Shenyang Robotics Cluster where it is situated, see: Groenewegen-Lau,
Jeroen and Laha, Michael. MERICS (2023). “Controlling the Innovation Chain. China’s Strategy to
Become a Science & Technology Superpower.” February, 2. https://merics.org/en/report/controlling-in-
novation-chain. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
22 | Government of the PRC (2022). “Interpretation of Interim Measures for Gradient Cultivation and Man-
agement of High-quality Small and Medium-sized Enterprises" ( 《优质中小企业梯度培育管理暂行办法》解
读). June 3. https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2022-06/03/content_5693839.htm. Accessed: July 10, 2023
23 | Wang, Yanbo; Li, Jizhen and Furman, Jeffrey (2017). “Firm performance and state innovation funding:
Evidence from China’s Innofund program.” Research Policy 46(6): 1142-1161.
24 | Yi, Gang (2022). “Report of the State Council on Financial Work - at the Thirteenth Session of the Stand -
ing Committee of the Thirteenth National People’s Congress on October 28, 2022 国务院关于金融工作情况
的报告——2022年10月28日在十三届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第三十七次会议上.” State Administration of
Foreign Exchange, October 30. http://m.safe.gov.cn/safe/2022/1030/21646.html. Accessed: July 10,
2023.
25 | Geng, Zhe and Jun (2019). “The SOE Premium and Government Support in China’s Credit Market.”
NBER, Working Paper: 26575. Jurzyk, Emilia M and Ruane, Cian (2021). “Resource Misallocation
Among Listed Firms in China: The Evolving Role of State-Owned Enterprises IMF Working Paper
2021/075.
Harisson, Ann, et al (2019). “Can a Tiger Change Its Stripes? Reform of Chinese State-Owned Enterpris -
es in the Penumbra of the State.” Cerdeiro, Diego and Ruane, Ciane (2022 “China’s Declining Business
Dynamism IMF, Working Paper 2022/032.
26 | Li, Bo and Ponticelli, Jacopo (2022). “Going Bankrupt in China.” Review Of Finance 26(3): 449–86.
27 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (2023). “Notice on the Issuance of Several Measures
to Help Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Stabilize Growth and Adjust Their Structural and Strong
Capabilities 关于印发助力中小微企业稳增长调结构强能力若干措施的通知.” January 14, 2023. https://www.
miit.gov.cn/zwgk/zcwj/wjfb/tz/art/2023/art_0ac5cd8988084fff9e4a70da792baa10.html. Accessed:
July 10, 2023.
28 | Leaderdrive (2020). Initial Public Offering Prospectus. August 19, 2022. http://file.finance.sina.com.
cn/211.154.219.97:9494/MRGG/CNSESH_STOCK/2020/2020-8/2020-08-25/6536262.PDF . Accessed:
July 10, 2023. See “承担的重大科研项目” section - 国 家 重 点 研发计划
29 | Bloomberg (2022). “China’s ‘Little Giants’ Are Its Latest Weapon in the U.S. Tech War.” January 23.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-23/china-us-xi-jinping-backs-new-generation-of-
startups-in-tech-war#xj4y7vzkg. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
30 | Bloomberg (2022). “China’s ‘Little Giants’ Are Its Latest Weapon in the U.S. Tech War.” January, 23.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-23/china-us-xi-jinping-backs-new-generation-of-
startups-in-tech-war#xj4y7vzkg. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
31 | Citic Securities (2021). “Specialisation and the New Era of Manufacturing 专业化和新制造时代.”
September 15. https://www.ligongku.com/resource/145629. Accessed: July 10, 2023; Everbright
Securities (2021). “Discovering Specialized SME Small Giants.” October 23. https://pdf.dfcfw.
com/pdf/H3_AP202110261525051169_1.pdf?1635266793000.pdf. Accessed: July 10, 2023;
Sinolink Securities (2022). ““ 专精特新”中的“专精特新.” January 10. https://pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_
AP202201131540135645_1.pdf?1642073790000.pdf. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
32 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2022). “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of the
Communist Party of China.” October 25. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/zxxx_662805/202210/
t20221025_10791908.html Accessed: July 10, 2023;
State Council (2018). “Liu He Chaired the First Meeting of the State Council Leading Group for Promot -
ing the Development of Small and Medium Enterprises 刘鹤主持召开国务院促进中小企业发展工作领导小组
第一次会议.” August 20. http://www.gov.cn/guowuyuan/2018-08/20/content_5315204.htm. Accessed:
July 10, 2023;
State Council (2019). “Guidance on Promoting the Healthy Development of Small and Medium Enter -
prises 中共中央办公厅 国务院办公厅印发《关于促进中小企业健康发展的指导意见》 .” April 7. http://www.gov.
cn/zhengce/2019-04/07/content_5380299.htm. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
33 | China Securities Regulatory Commission, CSRS (2021). Annual Report 2021. http://www.csrc.gov.cn/
csrc/c100024/c5799921/content.shtml. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
CSRC (2020). Annual Report 2020. http://www.csrc.gov.cn/csrc_en/c102063/c1606114/content.shtml.
Accessed: July 10, 2023.
CSRC (2019). Annual Report 2019. http://www.csrc.gov.cn/csrc_en/c102063/c1606308/content.shtml.
Accessed: July 10, 2023. CSRC (2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
| 22
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
Annual Report 2018. http://www.csrc.gov.cn/csrc_en/c102063/c1372574/content.shtml Accessed:
July 10, 2023.
34 | International Center for Science & Technology Innovation, NCSTI (2022). “Several Measures on Further
Promoting the High-Quality Development of ‘Specialized, Specialized and New’ Enterprises in the Bei-
jing Sub-Center 关于进一步促进北京城市副中心‘专精特新’企业高质量发展的若干措施.” September 22. https://
www.ncsti.gov.cn/kjdt/yqdy/zcwj/202209/t20220926_98660.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
35 | Lu, Lerong and Ye, Jiujing (2022). “Beijing Stock Exchange and Multi-Tier Capital Markets: How China
Alters Share Listing and Trading Rules to Promote SME Finance?.” SSRN Electronic Journal 43, 2022.
36 | However, the regulator has acknowledged it continues to influence listing approvals based on industrial
priorities, in line with the broader ambition to develop a traffic light system for capital allocation
He, Lifeng (2022). “High-quality development is the primary task of building a modern socialist country
in an all-round way (高质量发展是全面建设社会主义现代化国家的首要任务).” The People’s Daily. November
11. http://dangjian.people.com.cn/n1/2022/1114/c117092-32565249.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
37 | As of March 31, 2023, 708 out of 8997 Little Giants released in the first four batches had gone public.
Sina (2023). “In the first quarter, nearly 50% of the specialized and special new financing was concen-
trated in Beijing and Shanghai, and 30% of the newly listed companies in A-shares were Little Giant (
一季度专精特新融资近五成集中在北京、上海，A股三成新增上市企业为小巨人).” May 15. https://finance.sina.
com.cn/tech/roll/2023-05-15/doc-imytvrpe7311928.shtml. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
38 | Wind financial database.
39 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, et al (2021). “Guiding Opinions on Accelerating the
Cultivation and Development of High-Quality Manufacturing Enterprises ( 关于加快培育发展制造业优质
企业的指导意见).” July 3. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2021-07/03/content_5622135.htm.
Accessed: July 10, 2023.
40 | China Securities Regulatory Commission, et al (2022). “Notice on Promoting the Bond Market to Better
Support the Reform and Development of Private Enterprises( 关于推动债券市场更好支持民营企业改革发展的
通知).” July 23, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2022-07/23/content_5702437.htm. Accessed:
July 10, 2023.
41 | Xiang, Jiaying (2022). “‘Professional and Special New Loans Have Become a Compulsory Course for
Banks’—New Trends in Loan Issuance from the Perspective of a Credit Manager ( 投放专精特新已成银
行必修课’—位信贷经理视角下的贷款投放新动向).” Sina, December 20. https://cj.sina.com.cn/articles/
view/1657914910/62d1c61e02001c4w3. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
42 | People’s Bank of China, PBoC (2022). “China Monetary Policy Report Q4 2021”. February 11. http://
www.pbc.gov.cn/en/3688229/3688353/3688356/4271098/4515014/2022032411414559365.pdf.
Accessed: July 10, 2023;
PBoC (2019). “China Monetary Policy Report Q2 2019”. August 27. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/368822
9/3688353/3688356/3830461/3881238/index.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023;
PBoC (2019). “China Monetary Policy Report Q4 2018”. February 21. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/re-
source/cms/2019/03/2019032115562784220.pdf. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
43 | Xinhua News Agency (2022). “200 Billion Yuan of Technological Innovation Re-Lending Will Provide
Low-Cost Funds to 21 Financial Institutions 2000( 亿元科技创新再贷款将向21家金融机构提供低成本资金).”
April 28. https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2022-04/28/content_5687929.htm. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
44 | Yi, Gang (2022). “Report of the State Council on Financial Work - at the Thirteenth Session of the Stand -
ing Committee of the Thirteenth National People’s Congress on October 28, 2022 国务院关于金融工作情况
的报告——2022年10月28日在十三届全国人民代表大会常务委员会第三十七次会议上.” State Administration of
Foreign Exchange, October 30. http://m.safe.gov.cn/safe/2022/1030/21646.html. Accessed: July 10,
2023
45 | Sina (2022). “Specialized SME Financing Credit May Be More Flexible ( 专精特新企业融资授信或将更加灵
活).” May 30. https://finance.sina.com.cn/roll/2022-05-30/doc-imizirau5634939.shtml. Accessed: July
10, 2023.
46 | Some authoritative estimates: 1,741 of such funds by Q1 2020 with total assets of CNY 4.8 Trn, and
a cumulative targeted size of CNY 11 Trn (Zero2IPO [2020]. “Report on Performance Evaluation of
Chinese Government Guidance Funds 2020” [2020 年中国政府引导基金绩效评价研究报告]. November;
2k funds with CNY 10 Trn of assets by early 2019 (Fuller, D. B. (2019). Paper Tigers, hidden dragons.
Oxford University Press).
47 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, et al (2021). “ Accelerating the Cultivation and
Development of High-quality Manufacturing Enterprises ( 六部门关于加快培育发展制造业优质企业的指
导意见).” July 2021. https://www.miit.gov.cn/jgsj/zfs/qypy/art/2021/art_ad29811e3bbd4129851f-
63d125c2e456.html; Bureau of Small and Medium Enterprises (2022). “Notice on Several Measures for
Intellectual Property Rights to Help the Innovation and Development of Specialized, Specialized and
New SMEs (《关于知识产权助力专精特新中小企业创新发展的若干措施》解读 ).” November 24. https://www.
miit.gov.cn/jgsj/qyj/gzdt/art/2022/art_19dd17ebcd3d46419c693a1d324183da.html.
48 | Luong, Ngor; Arnold, Zachary, and Ben Murphy. CSET (2021). “Understanding Chinese Government
Guidance Funds.” March 2021. https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/understanding-chinese-gov-
ernment-guidance-funds/. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
49 | Luong, Arnold, and Murphy, “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds”. Yue, Yue; Wang,
Liwei, and Han, Wei. Caixin (2020). “Four Things to Know About the State’s Role in China’s Private In-
vestment Market.” October 14. https://www.caixinglobal.com/2020-10-14/four-things-to-know-about-
the-states-role-in-chinas-private-investment-market-101614377.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
50 | Malkin, Anton. “China’s Experience in Building a Venture Capital Sector: Four Lessons for Policy
Makers” (CIGI Papers, 2021), https://www.cigionline.org/static/documents/documents/no.248_0.pdf;
Xiang, D. W . and Li, Z.Y. (2016). “Government Equity Investment Guide Fund: Questions, Analysis and
Recommendations”. Economic Research Reference, No. 19, 22-27.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
| 23
MERICS REPORT | August 3, 2023
51 | 梧桐树下V (2022). “Incentive standards for Little Giants: CNY 6 million/enterprise at the national level,
2 million per year (专精特新小巨人企业奖励标准：国家级600万元/家，每年200万).” January 11. https://web.
archive.org/web/20230703151213/https://www.861718.com/fagui/show-1694-2.html. Accessed: July
10, 2023.
52 | Hao, Karen. The Wall Street Journal (2023). “China Cultivates Thousands of ‘Little Giants’ in Aerospace,
Telecom to Outdo U.S.” March, 16. https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-cultivates-thousands-of-little-
giants-in-aerospace-telecom-to-outdo-u-s-97ef9bdb Accessed: July 10, 2023.
53 | Wasiuzzaman, Shaista, et al (2020). “Creditworthiness and Access to Finance of SMEs in Malaysia: Do
Linkages with Large Firms Matter?” Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 27(2): 197-
217.
54 | Ma, Jiang (2022). “State Grid Jiaxing Power Supply Company Actively Promotes ‘Letter of Credit
Payment’ Business 国网嘉兴供电公司积极推广‘信用证交费’业务.” Xinhua, April 9. http://zj.news.cn/2022-
04/09/c_1128545033.htm. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
55 | China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (2022). “Forum on Integration and In-
novation of Large and Small Enterprises Held in Nanjing ( 大中小企业融通创新论坛在南京举办).” September
14. http://www.xieshouxingdong.cn/policy/41. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
56 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (2022). “Notice on Printing and Distributing the
Operation Guide for the ‘Hundred Fields and Thousands of Enterprises’ Integration and Innova-
tion Matchmaking Activities of Large and Small Enterprises ( 关于印发‘百场万企’大中小企业融通创新
对接交流活动操作指南的通知).” September 9. https://jxt.hubei.gov.cn/bmdt/ztzl/zjtx/zcwj/202210/
t20221027_4374464.shtml. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
57 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (2022). “Interpretation of ‘Interim Measures for Gra-
dient Cultivation and Management of High-quality Small and Medium-sized Enterprises ( 《优质中小企业
梯度培育管理暂行办法》解读).” June 3. https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2022-06/03/content_5693839.htm.
Accessed: July 10, 2023.
58 | Wang, Yiming (2022). “765 specialized and special new "little giants" have been listed, focusing on the
field of hard technology (聚焦硬科技领域 765家专精特新“小巨人”已上市).” STCN, September 10. https://
www.stcn.com/article/detail/682156.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
59 | Official People’s Bank of China (PBoC) and China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission
(CBIRC) data retrieved via CEIC, calculations by MERICS.
60 | Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE), Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE), Beijing Stock Exchange (BSE) and
National Equities Exchange & Quotations (NEEQ) data retrieved via CEIC.
61 | China Daily (2023). “Cyzone releases the ‘2022 Specialised New Small Giant Enterprise Development
Report’ (创业邦发布《2022专精特新小巨人企业发展报告》).” January 3. http://finance.ce.cn/stock/gs-
gdbd/202301/03/t20230103_38323052.shtml. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
62 | CDLF (2023). “2022 Specialised New Small Giant Enterprise Development Report 专精特新小巨人企业发
展报告（2022年）.” January 28. https://www.digitalelite.cn/h-nd-5791.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023
63 | Colonnelli, Emanuele; Li, Bo, and Liu, Ernest (2022). “Investing With The Government: A Field Experi-
ment In China.” NBER, Working Paper: 30161.
64 | Quan, Yue and Zhang, Ziyu. Caixin (2022). “In Depth: Beijing Stock Exchange Fights to Make Its Mark.”
December 7. https://www.caixinglobal.com/2022-12-07/in-depth-beijing-stock-exchange-fights-
to-make-its-mark-101975460.html. Accessed: July 10, 2023; Jaramillo, Eduardo. The China Project
(2023) “The Beijing Stock Exchange Is Struggling, despite Policymakers’ Best Efforts.” January 2.
https://thechinaproject.com/2023/02/01/the-beijing-stock-exchange-is-struggling-despite-policymak-
ers-best-efforts/ Accessed: July 10, 2023.
65 | Laser Processing Committee of COS (2022). “Caplin plans to increase capital by 467 million to acceler -
ate independent innovation of world-class technology ( 凯普林拟增资 4.67 亿，加速世界级技术自主创新).”
June 22. http://www.chinalaser.org/index/news/detail?id=19. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
66 | Endovastec (2023). https://www.endovastec.com/24/. Accessed: July 10, 2023.
67 | Unicomp (2023). https://www.unicomp.cn/about.html#dw1. Accessed: July 10, 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
CONTACT
Alexander Brown
Analyst, MERICS
alexander.brown@merics.de
François Chimits
Analyst, MERICS
francois.chimits@merics.de
Gregor Sebastian
Analyst, MERICS
gregor.sebastian@merics.de
EDITORIAL TEAM
Claudia Wessling
Director Communications
and Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
Alexander Davey
Editor and Analyst, MERICS
GRAPHICS AND LAYOUT
Alexandra Hinrichs
Graphic Designer, MERICS
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64 | 10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
Copyright © 2023
MERCATOR INSTITUTE FOR CHINA STUDIES
Printed in Berlin, Germany
ISSN (Print): 2941-5799
ISSN (Online): 2941-5608
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report benefited from the “China Science, Technology, Innovation, and Industrial
Eco-systems” project that is supported by the US State Department, and from a workshop
hosted by the University of California at San Diego in October 2022. It was peer-reviewed
by Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau, Head of Program of Science, Technology and Innovation,
MERICS.
