
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Governance through information control: China’s leadership struggles with credibility in social media
Staged propaganda, everyday tips, lack of interactivity.

by Hauke Gierow, Karsten Luc and Kristin Shi-Kupfer

MAIN FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
 Hundreds of millions of Chinese use social media. The WeChat messaging
app and Weibo, a platform similar to Twitter, are not only both enormously
popular, but are also becoming a challenge to the Chinese leadership –
many citizens are now more likely to believe information obtained from
their social networks online than from state news sources.
 The Chinese leadership has reali sed it will not get public opinion on its side
by censorship alone. It therefore developed a comprehensive strategy for its
official social media communications within a short period of time.
 This strategy includes using carefully made infographics and visual elements
designed to illustrate the activities of the state in an entertaining manner. The
Chinese government offers readers tips on everyday matters in an
effort to present itself as a patern alistic, but non -invasive force in the
lives of its citizens.
 Officials in China are presently unable to take advantage of one of the
greatest strengths of social media: the ability to disseminate unfiltered
content rapidly. This is because information policy is a matter of national
security for the Chinese leadership; a ll content must be reviewed carefully
before posting to ensure that it meets ideological standard s. This prevents
fast responses, however, especially in the event of a crisis.
 The central Chinese government has not mastered the language of the
internet yet, instead preferring to stick wi th standard bureaucratic
wording. Rather than engaging in two-way exchanges with citizens, it uses
the platforms predominantly for a one-sided dissemination of information.
 Social media users might start perceiving the official reports as credible
and even interesting if the Chinese leadership relaxed its grip on
maintaining ideological control . Some local authorities and individual
cadres are seen in a better light on account of their more creative and
interactive use of social media.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
©

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
©

1 Social media is shaping public opinion in
China

The huge explosions that occurred on 12 August
2015 in Tianjin, a major port city in north-eastern
China, serve to illustrate the shortcomings of
Beijing’s communic ations system in a crisis .
Whereas the first social media reports appeared
within minutes of the initial blast, no official reports
were made until three or four hours later , even
though the extent of the damage could presumably
have been reduced by sounding the alarm and
taking protective measures earlier .1 This example
demonstrates that what the Chinese public finds
out about an incident and what opinion it forms
is currentl y influenced more by social media
than by the state-controlled media.2

Anyone who is active in Chinese social media can
sometimes gain enormous coverage with it s help ;
prominent bloggers can reach up to 80 million
people with a single post on Sina Weibo, a
messaging app similar to Twitter. Private media -
makers use the WeChat (微信) messaging platform,
which has some 600 million active users, to send
free newsletters to their subscribers every day.
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has attempted
to curb the growing influence of social media.
Security agencies have arrested bloggers, and
propaganda departments have imposed new
restrictions on social media users and online
entrepreneurs. However, state requirements such
as mandatory registration of people’s real names
and censorship of content are usually slow to take
effect and have not even been fully implemented by
the platform providers themselves, who claim that
they can only generate a profit if they grant their
users anonymity and provide them with a wide
variety of information.

This is why the Chinese government no longer
relies on strict controls and censorship alone,
but is now using social media specifically as a
channel for political communication. At the end of
2011, central party and state institutions, the state -
run media and individual party cadres began setting
up government social media accounts (政务微博, 微
信账户). By the end of 2014 , there were more than
100,000 official accounts of this kind on WeChat ,
and Sina Weibo had 180,000 profiles for state
agencies and agency representatives.3

2 China’s leadership starts actively engaging
in social mediaFrom censor to blogger

Social media platforms have grown enormously
popular in China since 2009. For a long time, t he
Chinese government used social media platforms
primarily to gauge public opinion. It also utilised
Weibo and other platforms as a sounding board for
dissatisfied citizens. 4 The only direct influence
exercised by the leadership so far has come from
paid commentators dubbed the ‘Fifty-Cent Army ’
(五毛党), who post government -friendly content on
Weibo in order to steer debates there, for example.

In the autumn of 2011, Liu Yunshan, then head of
the CP C’s propaganda department, called for
‘strategic positions ’ in social media to be occupied
by party members for the first time; both cadres and
state and party organs were instructed to set up their
own accounts on popular platforms.

From Beijing’s perspective, ‘rumours’ making
their way aroun d social media pose an
increasing threat not only to the state’s
credibility, but also to its security.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
©

At the end of October 2013, head of state Li Keqiang
personally called upon official institutions to no t just
monitor social media platforms systematically, but
also to get involved in unrestricted exchanges on
them and that way prevent any doubts,
misunderstandings and rumours from being spread
over these c hannels.5 In the summer of the same
year, President Xi Jinping had spoken of a ‘battle for
public opinion’
( 舆论斗争 ) and the necessity of preserving
‘ideological security’ (意识形态安全) with regard to the
state’s official communications policy.

2.2 Communication as a matter of national
security

Today, social media is an established part of the
Chinese government’s comprehensive
communications strategy. The goal of it is to
disseminate officially authorised information quickly,
including information on current events, in order to
present the leadership as being credible, responsive
and trustworthy.

Three powerful institutions are responsible for all
communications work in their function as governing
and supervisory bodies :6 the State Council Internet
Information Office, the CCP Department of
Propaganda and the General Office of the Central
Committee, which was expanded under Xi Jinping,
who is both Party Secretary and President. The
latter is also where the Task Force of the National
Security Commission is located – an indication that
information policy is seen as highly relevant in
security matters. Regional governments and
authorities have also made specific regulations for
their social media communications.7 The various
departments involved generally post between one
and ten short messages per day. Whe re sensitive
topics are concerned, the social media coordinators
in the departments have to obtain authorisation from
the Publicity Department first or even from the
organisation’s higher management level for any
content they want to post or for responses to users’
comments.

Although this does prevent any off-the-cuff
action from being taken that could damage the
image of the state or the party, it frequently
makes prompt responses impossible due to the
time needed to approve message s. Departmental
employees must be extremely careful in drafting their
posts, as any undesired wording could subject them
to penalties and even consequences under civil law.
At the national lev el, state and party institutions
concentrate primarily on sending two main
messages in their social media postings (see Fig.
1):8 firstly, they portray leading party cadres as
representatives of the people who handle political
challenges and regional or national crises
competently, and secondly, the posts emphasise the
concern of the Chinese leadership with national unity
and the basic issues in citizens’ lives.

3 Political entertainment meets staged
propaganda
3.1 Leading party cadres online: presented as
competent and close to the people
China has traditionally classified biographical
information on its political leadership as a state
secret. The media has therefore had to strike a
balance between maintaining an aura of
mysterious secrecy and representing leaders as
being close to the people. While the social media
accounts operated by the Communist Party only
report on Xi Jinping and party matters, the
government accounts concentrate on Li Keqiang.
Only the media accounts report on both areas.
Both party and government accounts present Li
and Xi as hardworking statesmen who operate
with confidence in the international arena. Since
2010, it has again been officially permitted to depict
members of the top leadership in cartoons. 9 This
privilege is only resorted to in social media on
specific occasions, however.10

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
©

The cult of personality surrounding Xi Jinping in the
state media is actively promoted in the party’s social
media accounts. In additional to recurring images
from his life over the years , which include his
prominent wife, Peng Liyuan, social media posts
regularly include quotes of Xi’s words. His proximity
to the people is demonstrated in photos of the
President mixing with the common folk.

3.2 Politics online: select ed facts and
colourful pictures
The government wants to use social media to
convey an image of Chinese politics that is both
visionary and systematically planned.
Professionally designed infographics are frequently
used for this purpose (see Fig. 2). These images are
intended to illustrate the complex domestic policy
environment in which the CCP has to draft plans and
make decisions, for example. The logical structure of
the reports and the numbering of the measures to be
taken are also meant to show that China’s leadership
is following a plan and has all the issues well under
control.
At the same time , Beijing is attempting to use
statistics such as graphics portraying rising trade
volumes and new business or trade agreements to
underline China’s growing international significance.
In the case of political decisions that will affect
people’s day-to-day lives, the social media posts
often include pictures conveying harmony and
simplicity, but they also express the idea of
visionary power.
The government accounts once displayed a
photograph of a sign saying ‘Dream’ in front of a
clear blue sky alongside new regulations on
household registration, for instance. Information on
planned health -care r eforms was illustrated by a
glass of daisies surrounded by scattered pills.
Fig. 1: Social media presence of the national party and
state institutions analysed in this study
©

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
©

The images are often quite basic, with simple screen
shots from CCTV and the fixed state logo showing
up time and again in addition to other stereotypical
symbols.

Officials still have their problems with the
general tone of social media. Their texts are not
adapted to the new media. The sentences are just as
long and bureaucratically worded as statements
intended for traditional channels of communication.
So far, the leadership has failed to come to terms
with the particular style of communication used in
social media such as playful and humorous language
and the element of interaction these modern
platforms allow.

3.3 Crisis management online: awak ening
emotions rather than supplying information

Government agencies in the provinces often
downplay crises, partly due to fear of punishment
from higher-ranking offices. Moreover, they are often
not given any clear communication guidelines from
the propaganda units until two or three days have
passed.

National government agencies are therefore
unable to take advantage of the key benefits of
social media: authentic reports from the field in
real time. For that reason, it is usually posts from
citizens that give social media users an initial idea of
events.
If no information is forthcoming from official sources,
this creates room for speculation and unrest. The
government has been attempting to counteract
this by presenting itself as an efficient crisis
manager that is responsive to people ’s calls for
help.
 One example of this strategy was seen
during the events surrounding the demise of
the Oriental Star, the cruise ship that
capsized on the River Yangtze on 1 June
2015: the national social -media accounts
posted numerous photo spreads depicting
Premier Li Keqiang as the caring and
concerned head of the government. The
images portray him soaking wet on rescue
vessels, with a sad and tired expression on
his face and sharing instant noodles with
emergency responders. The site of the
disaster itself and the distraught
eyewitnesses of the event are not shown.
The state media accounts also focus on
‘everyday heroes’ in the tradition of Lei
Feng, the Chinese model soldier.11 CCTV
posted pictures of exhausted rescue
workers after the cruise ship accident in an
attempt to foster admiration and evoke
sympathy – and to call attention away from
the question of what actually caused the
disaster. The strategy was only partially
Fig. 2: An i nfographic posted via the social media
accounts of the central government and the state-run
media on Li Keqiang’s trip to Latin America in May
2015

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
©

successful. Most of the comments displayed under
CCTV’s Weibo posts were sympathetic to the official
line, showing candles and heart icons. However, a
number of microbloggers made repeated complaints
of blatant sentimentality (一串感动， 煽情). They also
pointed out contradictory facts and figures in the
official reports, raised questions about the cause of
the accident and asked who was to blame.
4 China’s leadership present s itself as
promoting a sense of national identity and
providing sound everyday advice

The Chinese leadership has not limited its social
media strategy to disseminating official statements or
information on political events, however; it also sees
itself as promoting China’s national identity and
providing practical tips to the country’s citizens , for
instance in the area of health and information
technology.
The Beijing leadership wants to be regarded as a
paternalistic, but non-invasive force in people’s lives.
Government agencies and the state media
additionally want to mobili se the population in
support of the party .12 Both the party and state
have reali sed they cannot solve all the country’s
problems themselves, but are dependent on help
from the people as well . Various week-long
campaigns to promote issues such as cyber security
have been launched to encourage social media
followers to take their lives into their own hands –
within clearly defined limits , that is; Beijing’s
intention here is to prevent citizens from setting
up their own initiatives in areas frowned upon by
the government.

4.1 A selective memory to foster national
unity

In addition to posting information on campaigns and
commemorative days, the Chinese leadership also
uses social media to focus attention on its own
version of general knowledge and histo ry, which is
intended to serve as the basis for China’s national
identity and collective consciousness.

Using the hashtag of ‘XYearsAgoToday’ (那年今日),
the government calls attention not only to prominent
figures in Chinese history such as mathematician
Chen Jingrun, but also to international personages
such as French novelist Honoré de Balzac. In
addition, Mao Zedong continues to be a key
personifier of China’s national identity. Despite the
‘ten lost years’ of the Cultural Revolution, many
Chinese regard the founder of the People's Republic
as the liberator of China and the epitome of national
independence and strength. Detailed stories about
the even ts in Mao’s life are posted under the
category of ‘weekend history lessons’ (周末读史) by
state, party and media accounts.

The state media uses other hashtags to note
commemorative holidays and action days such as
International Children’s Day on 1 June and th e
Chinese equivalent of Valentine’s Day on 20 May.
The aim here is for both the state and its citizens to
forget their problems and focus on the group in
question on those days.

4.2 Virtual ‘ exercise machine’ for the
smartphone

For several years now, it has been popular among
the Chinese to consult private websites for advice on
health and well -being. The Chinese government
wants to take advantage of this trend to improve
its citizens’ health by providing information and
encouraging people to take responsibility for
their own health.

The government’s social media posts call for citizens
to exercise more, for instance by setting daily targets
for the number of steps they walk. The government
and s tate media also offer free online advice on
exercises that can be done outside the gym, such as
sit-ups, press-ups and stretch ing using an exercise
ball.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
©

These efforts to promote better health are based on
a serious concern: as the standard of living increases
in China, health conditions that were previously
almost unknown, including type 2 diabetes and
obesity, have become much more widespread.13 The
government and state media seem to have hit a
nerve with their focus on health; on average, the
health-related reports are shared more often than
reports on other topics.

4.3 IT security tips for the people

The Chinese government monitors the i nternet very
closely and has strict guidelines on the use of IT
products. However, it has reali sed that IT security
cannot simply be ordained by law. The government
is attempting to increase cyber security in China
by warning against risky behaviour.

The Chinese tend to use modern communication s
technology without a lot of reservations. Many are
early adopters who try out the new technologies as
soon as they are available. When the pace of
innovation is high, people are often not
especially concerned about IT security. This is an
area where action needs to be taken as fraud
becomes increasingly prevalent in Chinese social
media, one example being bogus calls for
donations.
14

The state media also gives advice on specific
everyday situations. In one post, for example, it
warned of excessive roaming charges for mobile
phone calls abroad and offered tips on how to avoid
hidden costs.

5 Conclusion: the primacy of ideology is
hindering a credible information policy

The Chinese government has recogni sed that it
needs a comprehensive social media strategy if it is
to win the ‘battle for public opinion ’. Thus far, the
leadership has made little headway in reaching
its three main social media goals: spreading
information more effectively, improving the
credibility of information from official sources,
and impacting public opinion. One reason is the
difficulty of communicating quickly and convincingly
– especially in a crisis – when the correct
ideological line to follow needs to be agreed upon
first. Although not especially visible due to blanket
censorship, the cynical comments about the
government’s information policy and its attempts to
play up its concern for the people after the cruise
ship sank on the Yangtze are an indication of the
extent of the mis trust and the distance existing
between the online community and the authorities.
Another reason for the lack of progress is that
neither the version of history that is officially
endorsed nor the state’s paternalistic educational
campaigns serve to foster the credibility of official
sources of information. Instead, they reinforce the
tendency (among netizens) to view political
messages as ‘infotainment’ and to concentrate on
non-political topics. Lastly, Beijing has yet to begin
taking advantage of one of the greatest strengths of
social media – its interactivity. The Chinese
leadership sees social media primarily as a
platform for a on e-sided dissemination of
information and shies away from public
exchanges with citizens.
Opportunities to have a say are extremely limited,
being restricted to reporting ‘rumours’ on Sina Weibo
or to calls to rate or ‘like’ posts on WeChat , for
example.15
At the local level, government agencies and
individual cadres are frequently more flexible in their
use of social media and they employ it for a wider
variety of purposes. When natural disasters occur ,
for instance, they are able to present themselves as
capable crisis managers by responding quickly and
offering practical assistance .16 This only goes to
show that if the Chinese leadership wants its
followers to credit its reports as being interesting
and informative, it will need to relax its grip on
maintaining ideological control. At present,
however, this does not appear likely at a n ational

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
©

level given the recent re-centralisation of power and
the re-ideologisation occurring under President Xi ’s
leadership.
Your contact for this issue of China Monitor:
Kristin Shi-Kupfer
Kristin.Shi-Kupfer@merics.de
Editor: Claudia Wessling

Publisher:
Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstr. 64
10179 Berlin
Germany
phone: +49 30 3440 999-0
e-mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
©

1 Cf. Shi-Kupfer, Kristin (2015). ‘Tianjin zeigt: Chinas
Informationspolitik ist eine zentrale Schwachstelle des
Systems’. http://www.merics.org/presse/china-flash-
pressemitteilungen/china-flash-tianjin-zeigt-chinas-infor-
mationspolitik-ist-eine-zentrale-schwachstelle-des-sys-
tems.html. Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015.
2 Cf. Shan, Chenyang (2013). ‘The sources young
people trust: The credibility ratings of sources of
national political news in China’. http://lib.dr.ias-
tate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4091&context=etd,
Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015.
3 China Academy of Governance (国家行政学院电子政务研
究中心) (2014). ‘2013 年中国政务微博客评估报告’ (Evaluation
Report on Chinese Government Microblog Accounts
2013). March 2014. http://www.egovern-
ment.gov.cn/art/2014/4/5/art_477_722.html. Accessed
on 31 July 2015.
4 Chinese netizens used Facebook and Twitter to post
pictures of the social unrest that occurred in Urumqi
(the capital of Xinjiang Autonomous Region) on 5 July
2009, sending them around the world. Beijing
subsequently ordered access to these dominant social
networks to be blocked.
5 The State Council’s General Office (国务院办公厅)
(2013). Accessed on 13 Oct. 2013,
http://www.scio.gov.cn/xwfbh/zdjs/Document/1347883/1
347883.htm (‘General Office calls for the room for the
press conference used by the State Council Information
Office to be made the main venue for announcing
information from the central government’). 国办要求把国
新 办新闻发布厅建成中央政府信息发布主要场所
6 The State Council’s General Office (国务院办公厅)
(2013). ‘国务院办 公厅关于进一步较强政府信息公开，回应社
会关切提升政府公
信力的意见’ (Views of the General Office of the State
Council regarding the further strengthening of
disclosures of government information and increasing
credibility by providing answers to social concerns).
http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2013-
10/15/c_117723137.htm. Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015.
7 Some of these can be found online, e.g. the State
Administration of Work Safety (国家安全生产监督管理总局
).
8 There are already a number of studies on cadres’
social media accounts (e.g. Esarey, Ashley (2015).
‘Winning Hearts and Minds? Cadres as Microbloggers
in China’. Journal of Current Chinese Affairs, 44 (2),
69–103) and on accounts belonging to regional
governments (e.g. Schlaeger, Jesper/Jiang, Min
(2014). ‘Official microblogging and social management
by local governments in China’.
http://cin.sagepub.com/content/28/2/189.full.pdf+html.
Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015). The MERICS study
outlined here monitored six national accounts used by
central government and party institutions over a period
of one-and-a-half months, extracting data from them
and analysing it.
9 Yan, Xiaoye (颜小叶). ‘Don’t be “unapproachable” any
more. Cartoons show us the “human” side of top
politicians’ ( 不 再“高冷” 卡通漫画给你一个“有温度”的领导 人
)”. http://www.bjnews.com.cn/news/2015/07/14/37061
5.html. Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015.

10 As in the autumn of 2013 (Xi Jinping appeared in a
video on the subject of how to be president of the PRC)
and in March 2014 (Li Keqiang as the man behind a
government report); see the Global Times (2015).
‘Drawn together: Xi Jinping cartoon puts people over
politics’. 20 Feb. 2014,
http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/843742.shtml.
Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015; China Forum (2014). “媒体
解 读李克强总理政府工作报告大盘点” (Collection of Media
Declarations on Li Keqiang’s Government Report).
http://forum.china.com.cn/thread-3628388-1-1.html.
Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015.
11 Lang, Simon (2015). ‘Das Vorbild aller Vorbilder: Lei
Feng’. http://www.merics.org/merics-analysen/web-spe-
zial/helden-und-vorbilder/historische-helden.html.
Accessed on 21 July 2015.
12 Sun, Wanning (2015). ‘From Poisonous Weeds to
Endangered Species: Shenguo TV, Media Ecology and
Stability Maintenance’. Journal of Current Chinese
Affairs, 44 (2), 17–37.
13 Yu Xu, Limin Wang, Jiang He et al. (2013).
‘Prevalence and Control of Diabetes in Chinese Adults’.
JAMA 310 (9): 948–59.
14 A fake donation app was made available to users in
August 2014 after an earthquake in Yunnan province;
rather than helping the victims with the money, the
people behind it pocketed it themselves. See ‘“A
Godsend for the Earthquake” has been exposed as a
fraud. WeChat: Its distribution has already been
stopped’ (朋友圈“地震祈福”被指诈骗 微信：涉诱导分享已屏
蔽),
http://news.ifeng.com/a/20140806/41470408_0.shtml.
Accessed on 15 Oct. 2015.
15 See Schlaeger/Jiang 2014, endnote 5.
16 Tai, Zixue/Liu, Xiaolong (2015). ‘The Chinese
Government Hops on the WeChat Bandwagon’. 6 May
2015, https://blogs.nottingham.ac.uk/chinapolicyinsti-
tute/2015/05/06/chinese-government-hops-on-the-
wechat bandwagon. Accessed on 20 Oct. 2015.
