
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
NOVEMBER 2024
CHINA IS THE WORLD’S FACTORY – BUT
LESS INTEGRATED INTO THE GLOBAL
ECONOMY THAN THE US AND JAPAN
FRANÇOIS CHIMITS

KEY FINDINGS
 The MERICS China Internationalization Index (MCII) shows that the Chinese economy
remains substantially less integrated into the world economy than the US and even
Japan, despite years of growing international exchanges. China’s dominance in industrial
exports can lead to an overestimation of its global role. Its economy remains more isolated than
its manufacturing prowess suggests.
 These disparities in Chinese global economic integration are the result of a selective and
sequenced approach by Beijing. Contrary to the largely principle s-based approach of more
advanced economies, China has shown a more transactional approach , advancing economic
integration only if this promised gains elsewhere: the MCII reveals that opening up was aimed
at securing commodities, investment and talent for China.
 China’s recent emphasis on national security points to a “slowbalization” of its economy,
making it unlikely the country will become as globally integrated as the US any time
soon. Xi has not rolled back China’s opening-up policy, but its drivers have in recent years been
exclusively formal changes, especially in the financial sector. In terms of actual cross-border
exchanges, Chin a’s international integration stalled around 2016. It appears that the more
challenging political environment in China and globally has discouraged actors.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 2
China is the world’s factory – but less integrated
into the global economy than the US and Japan
The new MERICS China Internationalization Index (MCII) shows that China is still
significantly less integrated into the global economy than the US and even Japan. Despite
two decades of fast increasing economic exchange s with other countries, China's MCII
Internationalization score of 0.3 in 2020 was only half the US score of 0.6 and a third lower
than Japan's score of 0.4. This seemingly startling difference reflects the fact that China's
integration into the global economy has been largely driven by real economic activity –
tangible actions such as trade, foreign direct investment, the movement of labor, and the
exchange of ideas – and less so by the financial economy and its vast but intangible capital
markets and related services.
The MCII shows how much more integrated China's real economy is with the global
economy than its financial economy. This discrepancy between China's strength in the
"visible" economy and its relative weakness in the "invisible" one suggests why China's
integration into the world economy is often a contentious issue.
Perceptions of China's global economic status vary widely, ranging from predictions of
eventual dominance to assertions of inevitable decline – both within China and abroad.
The unprecedented speed of China's rise from a developing economy to a global
powerhouse and the complexity of defining and measuring economic integration only
complicate balanced analysis further.
To contribute to a more objective understanding of China's global economic integration,
MERICS has developed a data-driven tool to assess the internationalization of the Chinese
economy since 2000 (the latest year is currently 2020, see the annex for more
methodological details).
The MERICS China Internationalization Index measures the extent and modalities of
China's economic integration with the rest of the world and compares it with that of two
other prominent international actors, the United States and Japan. (The European Unio n
had to be excluded due to data availability problems, and EU member states were
excluded given the difficulty of comparing intra-EU economic exchanges to external ones.)
MERICS is launching the MCII as China is recalibrating its engagement with the world,
which will have profound implications for globalization. Xi Jinping’s emphasis on national
security over economic growth has blurred the objectives Beijing for at least two decades
assigned to its international economic exchanges. The country’s “opening up” no longer
aims to attract foreign resources to spur economic development and instead refers to
China reaching out into the world to secure desperately needed technologi es and supply
chains for Chinese industry.
The relationship between China and the United States remains tense. The mutual co -
existence that over the past four decades helped China integrate with the globalization is
crumbling. The economic frictions between the two countries have grown from gripes
about balance of trade to higher tariffs in imports and controls on the export of select
essential technologies. China's readiness to use economic coercion against other countries

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 3
and its support for Moscow during Russia’s war on Ukraine have strained relationships
with most advanced economies. Many of those countries are trying to „de- risk“ their
dealings with China, questioning the wisdom of deeper economic integration as the way
forward and even pushing for diversification in critical areas.
Exhibit 1

Any change in the way the world interacts with an economy as large as China’s will be
profound. The scale of China's international economic activity has become immense,
meaning that any changes will have significant impact on global goods and financial
markets. China’s global trade activity in goods hit $5.9 trillion USD in 2023, 20 percent of
the world total, and in the same year it secured a stock of $5,5 trillion in foreign direct
investment (FDI), roughly 10 percent of global FDI.
Beijing's bilateral official lending, almost non-existent two decades ago, now exceeds that
of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank put together. In addition, China's
education and tourism footprint is vast, with nearly one million students studying abroad
and 155 million annual outbound tourist trips before the Covid-19 outbreak in 2020.
The MCII provides a baseline for assessments of the evolution and future direction of
globalization in the light of China’s economic shifts. Made up of more than seventy
components, the MCII encompasses a dozen subindexes that capture the various

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 4
economic channels through which an economy integrates with the rest of the world. To
provide greater information, each (sub-)index has four sub-dimensions capturing (1) the
importance of the world for China, or the China perspective, (2) the importance of China
for the world, or the world perspective, (3) the de facto value and (4) its de jure
counterpart.

A data-driven analysis of the international interlinkages of the Chinese economy allows a
more sober assessment of its role in the world economy. Aggregating such a complex
phenomenon like economic integration into a single metric has its limitations. But the
depiction of relative strengths and weaknesses through the main index and its subindexes
does shine a light on important aspects of our complicated and highly connected world.
Despite China’s undeniable strengths in many dimensions, they show that the Chinese
economy remains nowhere near as important to the global economy as that of the US.
The days in which Beijing could pick an economic dimension and successfully drive its
integration with the global economy are over – this applies to both internal and more
security-focused international exchanges mentioned above. This analysis reviews China’s
integration with the world economy over the last two decades. Despite recent attempts to
take countermeasures, the Chinese financial system remains much more isolated than the
real economy. To understand why this is so, it is useful to divide China’s e conomic
integration since 2000 into three distinct periods, which are discussed in detail in the next
section.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 5
CHANGING DRIVERS MEAN CHINA HAS SEEN THREE STAGES OF
GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION
2000 to 2008 – export-driven integration that pushed China’s trade surplus higher
In the first decade of the 21st century, China’s integration into the global economy was
primarily driven by trade. “Opening -up and reform” throughout the 1990s and China’s
accession to the World Trade organization in 2001 had set the points for China to become
the global manufacturing hub. Exports of Chinese manufactured goods, be it in the form
of finished goods of inputs for other products, boomed in line with strong demand from
consumers in advanced economies. The country’s exports as a share of gross d omestic
product (GDP) reached an all-time high of 37 percent in 2006, before trending back to 18
percent in 2020. Since China's imports of foreign finished goods and manufacturing inputs
did not experience the same growth momentum, the value of China's tra de surplus
reached new heights every year until 2008.
Exhibit 2

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 6
This phase of integration also saw an uptick in cross- border flows of people and ideas,
albeit from a very low base, as China’s need to attract foreign expertise and technology
grew. Opening up to a substantial influx of foreign brands and expertise, China began
paying hefty sums for the domestic use of foreign intellectual property – as much as 2.4
percent of GDP in 2006. Chinese students ventured abroad to study in the West,
accounting for 11 percent of the worldwide international student population in 2012, up
from a meager 2 percent in 2000. International students studying in China also became
more common.
Foreign investment in China had accounted for a substantial 10 percent of total capital
accumulation in the 1990s. But it became less important after 2000 as Chinese savings
and capital accumulation soared. The more limited expansion of market access after WTO
accession in 2001 did not help. Despite Beijing’s efforts to promote international
investment by Chinese companies through its “Going Global” strategy initiated in 1999 ,
Chinese outward FDI only began to pick up significantly in 2012. On the financial front,
the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s confirmed the Beijing leadership’s distrust of
cross-border financial flows.
2008 to 2014 – China’s first steps towards integrating its financial economy
Towards the end of the first decade of the new millennium, the global integration of
China’s real economy slowed, and new drivers of integration emerged, particularly in the
financial economy. Financial integration remained comparatively modest as Beijing
maintained stringent controls on cross-border financial flows and the exchange rate of the
yuan. But even this cautious opening kept the internationalization of the Chinese economy
on a steady path through the difficulties of the global financial crisis of 2007 – 2008 and
the subsequent slow recovery of many of the major economies in the rest of the world
(see exhibit 3).
China's real economy continued to integrate at a slower pace as trade integration stalled.
Sluggish international demand depressed Chinese exports, while China's post -2008
stimulus package only boosted imports of raw materials relative to Chinese GDP, as it
focused on inward-looking sectors such as construction and infrastructure. In addition, an
increasing number of foreign companies built capacity in China to serve the domestic
market, reducing the need for imports.
The stellar growth of the Chinese economy relative to others during this period made
possible two seemingly contradictory facts: the Chinese economy became more important
to the rest of the world, while the economy of the rest of the world became less important
from a Chinese perspective.
China in this period began to emerge as a significant provider of FDI. The country’s
remarkable demand for raw materials to fuel its post -financial crisis infrastructure and
real-estate boom encouraged Beijing to allow Chinese companies to invest in extractive
and logistics industries around the world. In addition, cross-border student continued to
soar. Chinese students seeking foreign academic qualifications by 2013 accounted for 11
percent of international students in the rest of the world. The number of foreign students

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 7
in China almost doubled in this period, with 400,000 foreigners attending mainland
universities in 2015.
But as overall trade perspectives became gloomier, Beijing turned to finance to keep funds
flowing into the country. It enabled more sectors of the economy to tap foreign financial
markets for debt and equity: Chinese developers issued bonds in Hong Kong, while many
financial institutions followed the large state -owned banks in going public on the Hong
Kong Stock Exchange. Balance- of-payments data shows that the foreign debt securities
holdings of Chinese companies rocketed from 17 to 231 billion of USD in less than a
decade. Chinese start-ups looked to US stock markets for fresh capital, almost tripling the
foreign liabilities of Chinese entities in the form of equity securities to USD 617 billion. At
the same time, foreign investors were given broader access to mainland financial markets,
with the quota of Beijing’s main “Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor ” program
quadrupling to USD 40 billion by 2013.
International use of the CNY grew with China’s trading power and because of Beijing’s
ambitions to challenge the USD’s centrality in the global monetary system. Over the
period, yuan-denominated deposits held overseas rose from a negligeable amount to CNY
1.6 trillion. The internationalization of China’s currency was also boosted by investors
betting on its continued appreciation against the dollar – after all the yuan had hardly
experienced any depreciation against the USD between 2005 and 2013. Indeed, the yuan
continued to do so until 2015.
Exhibit 3

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 8
2014 to 2020 – Xi widens the gap between formal and practical economic
integration
Xi Jinping has continued the general trend of integrating China into the global economy –
although his ambitions to create a more internationally powerful China have dramatically
shifted the drivers. First, the period saw the emergence of a disconnect between the many
formal steps towards economic opening enshrined in law ( de jure integration) and the
much more limited number of practical steps towards effective integration in practice (de
facto integration).
Excluding all de jure openings, the Chinese economy has not become any more integrated
since 2016 (see exhibit 4): greater de jure openness in many service sectors and efforts to
lower tariffs have not led to a de facto increase in imports, while de jure efforts to ease
restrictions on foreign players in many sectors have not led to a significant increase in FDI.
Exhibit 4

Second, Xi has made China’s financial economy a much bigger driver of overall global
economic integration – and not even the domestic financial -market turmoil of 2015 and
2016 seems to have affected this. Foreign banks, insurers and asset managers saw a slow
but sustained reduction in formal barriers. The integration of financial markets was

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 9
driven by the development of new stock and bond “connects” between the mainland and
Hong Kong, which from 2014 drew in dozens of billions of USD from foreign investors.
The BRI allowed the Chinese banks to aggressively lend abroad, resulting in more than
USD 400 billion in net external lending to favored developing countries in less than a
decade. Those moves to open up mainland China's financial sector led to a doubling of the
financial integration sub-index between 2017 and 2020.
At the same time, an impressive increase in the de jure global integration of the Chinese
financial sector has contributed to a growing presence of foreign financial institutions.
Nonetheless, the renewed financial opening took place in an environment full of state-
backed institutions that ultimately represent Beijing’s interests.
Key impediments to meaningful global financial integration remain untouched, including
stringent capital controls on cross-border capital flows and the willingness of authorities
to intervene directly and intensively in the sector when they feel the need. Coupled with
Xi’s vision of an assertive China and the country’s growing distrust of “the West”, these
factors will not help build confidence among foreign financial institutions for long -term
investment.
CHINA’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION FROM 2000 TO 2020
SUGGESTS THREE PATHS INTO THE FUTURE
China is moving from globalization to “slowbalization” and will not match the
US any time soon
Xi's goal of transforming China into an economically self -sufficient high -tech global
superpower, and the G7 -led “de -risking” response, mean that the global economic and
geopolitical environment is now more challenging than at any time in the past quarter
century. As a result, China's integration into the global economy is likely to continue at the
slower pace established in the last few years.
The country’s rapid integration into the global economy from 2000 to roughly 2015
occurred despite significant constraints on China’s legal and administrative capacities –
growth prospects and the political support of advanced economies allowed market forces
to overcome ideological and political hurdles. Under Xi, these trends appear to have
reversed, with ideology and politics now trumping economic considerations. 1 China’s
opening continues in an environment of slower growth and greater opacity. Beijing is still
aiming for global economic integration, but with more conditions, even greater safeguards
and enhanced powers to monitor and control the goods and capital f lows of the real and
financial economies.
2
The widening gap between greater de jure economic opening and de facto economic
integration reflects the dwindling appetite of foreign companies to do business with
China. The G -7-led mantra of “de -risking” economic relations with China will only
reinforce China’s shift from sometimes breathtakingly rapid globalization to
“slowbalization”. Geopolitics has increased legal and reputational uncertainties for
companies doing business with China.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 10
The outflow of foreign capital from China after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine shows that
international investors have recalibrated the risks of putting their money on the mainland.
This has dimmed the prospects for financial integration, the area in which t here perhaps
is most further integration potential.
Recent developments hence suggest that over the next few decades China will not match
the degree to which the US is currently integrated into the global economy. Extrapolating
China’s past integration suggests that it could once have done so over the next twenty-five
years. But in today’s more challenging geopolitical and economic context, China’s
economic integration will slow, thwarting any ambition in Beijing of matching US levels of
economic internationalization any time soon. It’s possible that China will not even match
the economic integration of the Japanese economy in the foreseeable future.
Beijing has fared well with selective integration and will carry on relying on
only a few drivers
Another feature of the China’s integration into the global economy is its heavy reliance on
a few drivers – essentially trade and movement of people and ideas – stretching back as
far as 2000. The US and Japan do also display impressive performances in some categories
(see Exhibit 5). However, those unbalances have been much less pronounced relative to
the area of relative weakness in their international integrations.
Exhibit 5

China’s de facto financial sectors’ and financial markets’ integrations score below the 0.1,
as do some more granular dimensions such as the domestic perspectives on outward FDI

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 11
or industrial imports. On the contrary, no tier-3 sub-MCII for the Japan and US score below
0.2, but for the Japanese currency.
Beijing’s reliance on only a few integration drivers reflects its political agenda. In the
economically liberal and favorable international environment of the past two decades,
China’s leadership chose to harness foreign FDI and demand to fast -track indust rial
development. At the same time, its ideological and practical desire to have the Chinese
Communist Party steer and monitor the economy made it resist the liberalization of asset
flows and price controls in the financial system.
Washington’s increased focus on global financial interconnections as an area in which to
exercise international sanctions will surely only bolster Beijing’s reluctance. Similarly, the
Chinese leadership’s industrial preference to favor domestic industry over both domestic
consumers and foreign companies led to a limited influx of industrial inputs and final
products.
Beijing is pursuing national security-driven, techno-industrial development. Given a less
accommodating international environment, this will surely further unbalance China’s
global economic integration.
3

Beijing and Washington’s increasing focus on economic security will
compartmentalize globalization
The US and the Chinese economies display inverse strengths and weaknesses. China is
more dominant in the global trade than the US. Its commodity imports and industrial
goods exports both score around 0.7 out of 1.0 in their respective MCII index components,
making it hard to imagine the country ceding this influence in the short- or medium-term.
At the same time, China is weak when it comes to the global integration of its financial
economy – a field in which the US’s MCII index components hover just below 1.
In addition, the US and China are beginning to limit bilateral engagement in a growing
number of critical sectors. With supply constrained in certain fields, both will have to find
other countries that can act as substitute suppliers. The US will likely ha ve to do this for
industrial goods and China in financial intermediation, advanced technologies and
financial assets to invest in. Barring any global conflict, the leadership of the US and China
in different areas of global economic integration will lead t o an incremental re -
organization of globalization.
Concretely, third countries could position themselves as intermediaries of bilateral
exchanges, based on needs and capacities. Some early evidence of a more fragmented
globalization is already visible in fields that have suffered from tensions between Chin a
and the US. Since 2018, the two countries’ worsening trade dispute has, for example, seen
Southeast Asia and Mexico import more from China and export more to the US as regional
value chains have shifted. In research cooperation, a drop in bilateral cooperation on
artificial intelligence has been partially offset by more engagement with other regions,
especially Europe.
4

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 12
This slow but steady compartmentalization of globalization is likely to accelerate. The two
superpowers look set to redouble their strategic competition while being unable to offer
a comprehensive package for third countries to fully align with them. Europe has already
gone through this unsettling experience, aligning with the US on financial sanctions, while
continuing to rely heavily on Chinese manufacturing imports.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 13
ANNEX I: THE COMPONENTS OF THE MERICS CHINA
INTERNATIONALIZATION INDEX (MCII)
The MERICS China Internationalization Index (MCII) shows how China’s economic
integration with the rest of the world has evolved since 2000. The Cambridge Dictionary
calls economic integration “a process in which the economies of different countries
become more connected.” In this spirit, the MCII measures economic integration relative
to the domestic economy of the country in question and the rest of the world. This
prevents the MCII from becoming simply a measure of the size of an economy.
For most of the economic activities it covers, the MCII depicts a measure of that activity
both as a proportion of that activity in the rest of the world and relative to the size of the
domestic economy of the county in question. For example, total imports of a particular
good are expressed as a share of total imports of the same good across the rest of the
world and as a share of the importer’s GDP. In the case of a rapidly growing economy such
as China’s, declines in economic integration can be caused by the dynamic growth of the
domestic economy as much as by an increase in international exchanges.
To contextualize China’s integration with the world economy, MERICS charted the
economic integration of other countries.

Components and computations
To reflect the complexity of economic activity, the MCII on tier one is composed of two tier
two subindexes, one for the real economy, the other for the financial economy. Each of
these is composed of three tier three component indexes covering between five and

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 14
eighteen fields of economic activity, which are based on subindexes (cf. Annex II) on tier
four. The second-tier subindexes are weighted to reflect their relative importance in the
economic internationalization of an economy.
Each tier four component index is normalized from 0 for the absence of any integration to
1 for total integration into the world economy. Maximum integration is based on the
theoretical maximums of several variables tracking different economic activities, as listed
in detail in Annex II (below).
The tier two sub -indexes are weighted to reflect the traditional prevalence of the real
economy (60 percent weighting) over the financial economy (40 percent). The former
covers the economic activity of producing and trading tangible goods and services,
including directs input used in production, the latter the exchange of financial products,
such as money in return for shares, or credit for cash.

1. The real economy
The real economy is subdivided into the trade of goods and services (50 percent), foreign
direct investments (25 percent), and the flow of people and ideas (25 percent).
1.1 Trade
Trade in goods and services is further subdivided into the trade in commodities (20
percent), the trade in manufactured goods (40 percent), the trade in services (20 percent),
as well as the complexity of the products traded to give an idea of the economic quality of
the exchanges (20 percent). Indicators of de jure trade openness in goods and services are
included in dedicated subindexes, with the level of tariffs for the former and the degree of
openness to foreign players in the domestic services market.
Trade in commodities is depicted by exchanges of oil, coal and iron ore, two energy -
related commodities, and one commodity used in construction and industry. Two
variables describe each one: import volumes as a share of domestic consumption and as a
share of other countries’ imports.
For the trade in goods, imports and exports of finished products and intermediate goods
are taken into account. Each series is then benchmarked against the country’s GDP and
against imports or exports in the rest of the world. For the de jure dimension, a simple
average of tariffs at the HS6 level is used.
Trade in services is represented by two variables – total trade as a share of total world
trade in services or as a share of the GDP of the country in question. An additional variable
depicts the average share of the country in world trade in services in t he 11 sectors as
defined in the official nomenclature of the balance of payments system (albeit without
intellectual property, as described below).
Three variables capture the complexity of traded products: the share of domestic value
added in exports of information and communications technology (ITC); the share of value
added in exports of ICT from OECD countries that actually originates in the count ry
concerned; a trade complexity index.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 15
1.2 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
FDI integration is depicted by both FDI stocks and flows: the country’s stock of outward
FDI as a share of the rest of the world's total FDI; the country’s stock of inward FDI as a
share of the rest-of-the-worlds total; the country’s inward and outward FDI as a share of
both the country’s and the world’s capital formation. The de jure integration indicator is
the country's OECD FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index.
1.3 People and ideas
The global integration of the population is depicted by two variables for cross -border
flows of people, four for flows of students, and one for the de jure openness. The exchange
of intellectual property (IP) is captured by two variables: the country’s imp orts of IP
services as a share of its domestic GDP and the country’s exports of such services as a
share of such exports by the rest of the world.
Easily accessible international air travel figures are used to show the integration of
passenger flows. They depict the number of international air passengers from the country
under consideration as a share of domestic air passengers and as a share of the total
number of international air passengers worldwide.
The four variables for cross -border flows of students combine the number of students
from the country in question studying abroad as well as the number of international
students in that country. These are compared with the total number of students in the
country and the number of international students worldwide . De jure openness to flows
of people and information is depicted by variables from an index compiled by the Swiss
Economic Institute (KOF) at the Federal Institute of Technology Zurich.

2. The financial economy
The financial economy is composed of measures of the country's financial markets (50
percent), its financial services sector (30), and its currency (20 percent).
2.1 The financial markets
Two variables each for bonds, equities and loans (or “other investments” in official
parlance) show the international integration in each of these financial products based on
the balance of payments categories of the country in question. One variable shows the
stock of investment in the country as a share of the domestic market. The other shows the
share of external investment as a share of the G7 stock of external investments, as world
data are not available. Two other variables show the de jure openness of financial markets
and the cross-border flows of portfolio investment as simple averages.
2.2 Financial services sectors
The sub -index depicting the financial sector comprises three sets of five variables,
covering banking, insurance and other financial services (primarily wealth management).
For each of these segments, two variables capture the foreign presence in the domes tic
market, one relative to the total assets of the rest of the G20 and the other relative to the
domestic market. Two other variables capture the footprint of domestic companies

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 16
abroad, one relative to the G20 markets and the other relative to the domestic market.
Each set has a variable to capture de jure openness, as provided by the OECD.
For the banking sector, the total assets of foreign-funded banks in the country are shown
as a proportion of the total value of the domestic banking assets. The foreign assets of
domestic banks are compared with the size of the total banking sector in other G20
member countries.
Data limitations mean that the presence of foreign companies in the Chinese insurance
market is expressed as the share of foreign -funded insurance profits in total insurance
profits in China. The foreign presence of Chinese insurance companies is assumed t o be
zero, as Chinese insurers face severe restrictions on doing business abroad. The domestic
footprint of foreign players in other countries is derived from the share of domestic
insurance operations of domestically owned institutions. The foreign footpr int of
domestic players from countries other than China is estimated on the basis of the value of
their exports of insurance services as reported in their balance of payments statistics.
For other parts of the financial sector, the variables are based on wealth and asset
management activities. The share of wealth management products offered by foreign -
invested institutions is used as a proxy for foreign presence in the domestic market in
question. As Chinese financial institutions also face severe restrictions on engaging in
wealth or asset management activities abroad, these variables are set at zero. For others,
dedicated OECD statistics for balance of payments are used. The domestic mark et is
calibrated to the value of the total assets of different financial institutions.
2.3 Currency
Currency integration is depicted by fewer variables because it has fewer dimensions than
financial markets or financial services. In addition, currencies do not lend themselves to
the distinction between a world and a country perspective. This is due to the international
nature of the foreign exchange (FX) market, which makes the distinction between
domestic and offshore currency markets redundant. The subcategories used are
payments, the FX market, FX reserves, and foreign holdings of the currency.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 17 November 2024 l 17
ANNEX II: THE VARIABLES UNDERLYING THE MERICS CHINA INTERNATIONALIZATION INDEX (MCII)

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 18 November 2024 l 18

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 19 November 2024 l 19

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 20 November 2024 l 20

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 21 November 2024 l 21

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 22
ENDNOTES

1 Jacob Gunter, Max Zenglein (2023). The party knows best: Aligning economic actors with China's strategic goals. MERICS.
2 Alexander Brown, Jacob Gunter, Max Zenglein (2021). Course correction: China’s shifting approach to economic
globalization. MERICS
3 Katja Drinhausen, Helena Legarda (2022). "Comprehensive National Security" unleashed: How Xi's approach shapes
China's policies at home and abroad. MERICS
4 Arcesati R., Kai von Carnap, W. Chang and A. Hmaidi, “AI entanglements: Balancing risks and rewards of European-
Chinese collaboration”, November 2023, MERICS https://merics.org/en/report/ai-entanglements-balancing-risks-and-
rewards-european-chinese-collaboration#msdynttrid=e_VxBfq7jnoDakS5OMGY21uyyuDDakMM949rRZ1VfCc

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
MERICS Report
MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies November 2024 l 23

This "MERICS Report" was made possible with support from the “Dealing with a
Resurgent China” (DWARC) project, which has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under grant agreement
number 101061700.
Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union. Neither the European Union nor the
granting authority can be held responsible for them.

IMPRINT
CONTACT
François Chimits
Senior Economist, MERICS
francois.chimits@merics.de
EDITORIAL TEAM
Claudia Wessling
Director Communications
and Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
Gerrit Wiesmann
Freelance Editor
GRAPHICS
STOCKMAR+WALTER Kommunikationsdesign
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Alte Jakobstraße 85–86
10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
