
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
June 2021 ∙ John Lee & Jan-Peter Kleinhans
Mapping China’s
semiconductor
ecosystem in
global context
Strategic Dimensions
and Conclusions

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
2
Executive Summary
Historically, the semiconductor value chain has flourished thanks to transnational
divisions of labor that supported high levels of economic efficiency and innovation.
As a result, interdependencies throughout this value chain exist between different
regions around the globe. The US-China technology rivalry, the COVID19 pandemic
and global shortages in semiconductors have led many governments to scrutinize
these interdependencies in the transnational semiconductor value chain. The US
government for example has completed a review of the semiconductor supply chain.
Europe’s new industrial strategy focuses on assessing and managing strategic de-
pendencies in different technology ecosystems, including semiconductors.
China’s capabilities in the semiconductor value chain play a key role in these con-
siderations. China’s government is making great efforts to raise the competitiveness
of Chinese industry in the semiconductor sector, building on and supporting China’s
role in global electronics manufacturing and emerging technological ecosystems.
With growing strategic concerns in the US and Europe about China, a better un-
derstanding and systematic assessment of China’s capabilities in producing semi-
conductors is needed. What is the position within the semiconductor value chain
of Chinese companies? In which areas is China highly reliant on foreign technology
providers? How likely is China to catch up within this decade in a particular produc-
tion step?
This report provides a framework for assessing the national interest vis-à-vis Chi-
na’s role in the semiconductor value chain. We draw conclusions across three stra-
tegic dimensions – industry competitiveness, national security and resilience of the
global supply chain – that impact the interests of all nations, given the importance
of semiconductors in the modern world. Understanding China’s role throughout the
value chain in terms of these strategic dimensions helps policy makers to identify
current and future interdependencies with China, and to balance or prioritize be-
tween competing interests. With this picture, European decisionmakers are better
equipped to best position EU countries for a world in which technological interde-
pendence is increasingly contested, weaponized and fraught with national risk.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
3
Table of Contents
Executive Summary 2
Introduction 5
1. Analytical approach 7
 Focus on the value chain 7
 Assessment of strategic dimensions for each production step 8
2. China’s semiconductor ecosystem 12
 Larger national policy context 12
 China’s policy for the semiconductor industry over the past decade 12
 The future of China’s policy for the semiconductor sector 17
 Situation and prospects for China’s semiconductor sector 18
3. Analysis of the production steps 21
 Chip Design ( process step ) 21
 Electronic Design Automation ( input ) 25
 Intellectual Property ( input ) 30
 Wafer Fabrication: The Front-End ( process step ) 34
 Equipment ( SME ) ( input ) 40
 Chemicals and Materials ( input ) 45
 Wafers ( input ) 48
 Assembly, Test and Packaging: The Back-End ( process step ) 51
4. Conclusion and implications for Europe 57
Annex 1: Technical Terms Glossary 60
Annex 2: Chinese Terms and Acronyms Glossary 62
Annex 3: Chinese official policy documents and
selected other sources 64
References 73

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
4
This joint project between Stiftung Neue Verantwortung ( SNV ) and the Mer -
cator Institute for China Studies ( MERICS ) was made possible by the gener -
ous support of the German Federal Foreign Office. The views expressed in this
paper do not necessarily represent the official positions of the ministry.
The authors would like to thank ( in alphabetical order ) Douglas Fuller, Stew-
art Randall and John VerWey for substantial feedback and helpful discus-
sions about earlier drafts of this report. Furthermore, the authors would like
to thank ( in alphabetical order ) Juliana Bouchaud ( MERICS ), Tashi Götzmann
( MERICS ) and Julia Hess ( SNV ) for their help preparing this report.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
5
Introduction
Semiconductors are the foundation of almost every application of electronics. Often
combined in an “integrated circuit” ( IC ) and commonly called “chips, ” semiconduc-
tors are a strategic technology on which national power is increasingly dependent.
Yet their value chain is among the most globalized of any industry.
This value chain is extensive, complex and built on a transnational division of la-
bor, due to economic pressure to innovate and thus, to specialize. This division of
labor has created a host of cross-border interdependencies, with different global
regions specializing in different production steps. A particular semiconductor of-
ten is designed in the United States ( US ), manufactured in Taiwan using chemicals
from Japan and Germany and equipment from the Netherlands, and assembled and
packaged in China. Within this complex value chain, many process steps and inputs
are indispensable but are often under the control of only a few companies. In some
cases, a particular input can be effectively monopolized by a single company.
The transnational nature of the value chain conflicts with the national interest per -
spective now increasingly brought to the semiconductor sector by governments,
politicians and policy commentators. What exactly “strategic importance” means in
the context of the semiconductor value chain is often not well articulated. However,
these policy debates recognize the critical role of the value chain’s end products in
a range of applications, and the potential for the value chain’s interdependencies
to be ‘weaponized’ by one nation against another. 1 These national interest factors
are driving efforts to reduce dependency on foreign providers by strengthening the
domestic semiconductor ecosystem—the complex of enterprises, research institu-
tions, skilled labor, investment capital and other factors that underpin research and
development ( R&D ) and production.
Given growing political concerns in Western countries about China, China’s position
in the semiconductor value chain and in the applications built on top of chips is
seen as a potential threat that must be mitigated. But the cost of mitigation meas-
ures based on cutting China out of the global value chain is potentially large, and
the success of such efforts uncertain. 2 It is also unclear whether European nations
would benefit from such decoupling to the same degree as the US and other players
in the semiconductor value chain. The starting point for such discussions should be
a comprehensive understanding of China’s semiconductor ecosystem, its role in the
global value chain and the implications from a national interest perspective, with as
much specificity as possible.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
6
This report provides an overview of China’s position in the semiconductor value chain
by analyzing its position in the different production steps and providing an analyti-
cal framework for drawing conclusions about the strategic implications. In section
1, we explain our general approach focusing on the value chain’s distinct production
steps, and for each step, on China’s domestic ecosystem in the global context. For
each step, we offer conclusions from a national interest perspective, organized by
three strategic dimensions that capture the differing implications of these interests.
In section 2, we provide an overview of China’s semiconductor ecosystem in general,
focusing on the most recent phase of state-led policy for the semiconductor sector.
In section 3, we analyze the eight distinct production steps in the value chain sepa-
rately, following the template described in section 1. Glossaries for technical terms
and for Chinese institutions and documents ( including acronyms ) are provided in
annexes 1 and 2, respectively, at the end of the report. A list of selected Chinese
documents concerning the semiconductor sector is provided in Annex 3.
In section 4, we draw summary conclusions about China’s role in the global value
chain as a whole, focusing on important takeaways for European policymakers. A
second report published in late 2021 will look further into these conclusions in the in-
ternational context and offer policy recommendations from a European perspective.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
7
1. Analytical approach
Focus on the value chain
Because the global semiconductor value chain is fragmented functionally and geo-
graphically, it should be understood within the context of distinct production steps.
We identify eight production steps: They consist of three process steps ( design,
fabrication, and assembly, test and packaging ) and five inputs in the process steps
( software, intellectual property ( IP ), equipment, chemicals and wafers; see Fig. 1 ).
Focusing on these generic production steps allows us to analyze the competitive-
ness of China’s domestic semiconductor value chain, its dependence on foreign
technology providers and the likelihood of China’s increased self-reliance and inter-
national competitiveness in the future. In section 3, we look at all eight production
steps separately, China’s position within them and the implications from a national
interest perspective, according to the following template:
• Overview: What is the general function of the production step, and how does it
relate to the rest of the value chain?
• Market structure: What is the current market situation? Who are the dominant
players? Are there monopolies or oligopolies?
• Barriers to entry: How hard would it be for a new company to enter this market
profitably?
• The Chinese government’s effort to increase self-reliance: To what extent has
the production step received policy attention from the Chinese government? How
effective has this been?
Fig. 1:
Production steps
( process steps
and inputs ) in the
semiconductor
value chain

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
8
• Competitive position of the Chinese industry: What is the competitive position of
Chinese companies in this production step?
• Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years: How likely is it that China’s
industry will catch up with the global market leaders in the coming decade?
• Strategic dimensions: How do these elements affect national interests, in gener-
al terms and in relation to China’s position in this specific production step?
Assessment of strategic dimensions for each production step
After mapping each production step based on the template above, we offer a short
assessment of the strategic importance of the step. We structure this assessment in
terms of three strategic dimensions. Each dimension corresponds to three criteria
for assessing strategic importance, which distill insights from the mapping. These
dimensions and criteria represent different aspects of national interest. Together,
they explain why in the context of a particular production step governments are mo-
tivated to take measures that promote their own industry and that of allies or con-
strain the capabilities available to adversaries.
Strategic dimensions and criteria
The competitiveness dimension captures commercial and technical implications of
the production step’s market landscape, which affect the economic and technolog-
ical bases of national power, in the context of a competitive international environ-
ment. Criteria include the following:
• Revenue capture: The financial returns that accrue with dominant market share.
Financial returns vary between production steps, with some significantly more
lucrative than others.
• Barriers to entry: The difficulty of a new player establishing itself in this produc-
tion step. High barriers to entry are significant when dominant market share is
held by a few actors, because they make efforts to replicate these capabilities
costly and uncertain of success.
• Spillover benefits: The potential for capabilities in this production step to stimu-
late activity elsewhere in the value chain, or in other industry sectors.
The national security dimension involves a production step’s significance for ze-
ro-sum competition between nation-states. These implications reflect the potential
for ‘weaponization’ by national governments to actively damage the interests of oth-
er nations. Criteria include the following:
• Espionage risk: The potential for manipulation of a given production step to facil-
itate intelligence gathering against or sabotage of the interests of rival nations.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
9
For example, assembly, test and packaging ( ATP ) present relatively significant
opportunities for espionage activity.
• Military utility: The significance to national military capabilities. For example,
chip design capabilities are more important than those in ATP for the capacity of
a national economy ( or an alliance of economies ) to build sophisticated military
platforms, such as fighter aircraft.
• Chokepoint: The potential for dominant market share in a production step to be
weaponized against nations lacking these capabilities, for example, through na-
tional and multilateral export controls that target specific nations.
The resilience dimension addresses the semiconductor value chain as a whole, that
is, on a global scale. As the value chain is globally integrated, disruptions have nega-
tive impacts on national interests generically, regardless of adversarial relations be-
tween particular nations. Every nation suffers from a resilience failure that disrupts
the international value chain as a whole. Criteria include the following:
• Concentrated point of failure: These failure points represent business continuity
risks to the global value chain as a whole from natural disasters, pandemics or
political interventions. Such points are a product of decades of technical spe-
cialization and transnational division of labor.
• Spillover damage: This represents the potential for the disruption of a given pro-
duction step to flow to other segments of the global value chain, and to other
industrial sectors. An example can be seen in the current problems facing the au-
tomobile manufacturing industry worldwide, stemming from constraints in wafer
fabrication.
• Replicability: The implications of attempting to replicate a given production step,
through government intervention, in nations where it is not currently concentrat-
ed. Replicating production in this way can increase the global value chain’s resil-
ience through national and geographic diversification. However, such efforts also
risk wasting resources and hampering innovation, by changing the economies of
scale and transnational division of labor that have given the semiconductor value
chain its current form.
Distinguishing between these strategic dimensions allows us to understand why a
national government would try to strengthen its own semiconductor ecosystem, in-
cluding in cooperation with allies, or to undermine that of its adversaries. For exam-
ple, even if there are few economic reasons ( such as low revenue capture, high bar-
riers to entry ) to invest in domestic capabilities for a particular production step, if it
constitutes a chokepoint for domestic industry due to reliance on foreign technology
providers, a nation might try to strengthen its own industry in that production step.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
10
These strategic dimensions in each production step are not specific to China: Bar -
riers to entry, espionage risk, spillover damage and the other criteria all have the
same implications from the perspectives of all nations. Thus, our matrix ( see Fig. 2 )
provides a generic overview or heat map of the semiconductor value chain across
the strategic dimensions we describe in the mapping. The color codes show to what
extent one of the criteria applies to a specific production step. For example, the bar-
riers to entry ( for any company, in any nation ) for a given production step can be low,
moderate, substantial or high.
The matrix provides the basis for assessments in the strategic dimensions section
in each production step chapter. In these sections, we explain the strategic impor -
tance of each production step, listed by the criteria we described above. We also
provide conclusions specifically about China’s current position in each production
step and the country’s likely progress over the next decade. We evaluate China’s be-
havior and include evaluations of responses by other nations.
For example, the military utility of end products based on chip design capabilities is
a substantial reason for the Chinese government to promote chip design capabili-
ties domestically, but from a U.S. viewpoint, this is a substantial reason to restrict
such development in China. These imperatives are compounded by the progress Chi-
na has made in this production step, as well as China’s potential to support further
progress with demand for semiconductors generated by other sectors of the Chi-
nese economy.
This approach helps the reader to compare national interests and risks that differ in
type and operate in different contexts, which potentially implies conflicting choices
in response. What to prioritize, and how to resolve trade-offs, are for the reader to
decide. In the conclusion in section 4, we highlight what we consider the most im-
portant issues from a European viewpoint.
The following examples illustrate how to read this matrix, in conjunction with the
strategic dimensions analysis for each production step:
• Design: Given high revenue capture, high spillover benefits and low barriers to
entry, China will likely continue to substantially support its domestic chip design
ecosystem. China also has substantial incentives in terms of potential benefits
for supporting the development of chips that have military utility, representing a
source of risk for nations that view China as a potential adversary.
• SME: Despite a relatively low revenue capture and substantial barriers to entry,
China will try to decrease its reliance on foreign semiconductor manufacturing
equipment ( SME ) vendors because SME provides the US and its allies with a
substantial chokepoint to exploit against China. If China succeeds in establish-
ing competitive domestic SME vendors, there will be substantial spillover bene-
fits, because SME is a critical input for wafer fabrication.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
11
• ATP: Assembly, test and packaging ( ATP ) has relatively low revenue capture and
currently, only moderate spillover benefits. As the importance of advanced pack-
aging is increasing, these aspects will certainly change in the future. The high
espionage risk associated with this production step is of little concern to China,
as it holds a substantial share of the packaging market. Thus, it is highly likely
that China will try to upgrade its packaging ecosystem to ensure a strong market
position in the future.
Fig. 2: Strategic
dimensions per
production step
( overview )

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
12
2. China’s semiconductor ecosystem
Larger national policy context
China’s policy for the semiconductor sector sits within a larger framework for sci-
ence and technology development, which is articulated in various directive policy
statements issued by China’s central government authorities. Key principles under-
lying this framework include the following:
• The assessment that information technology ( IT ) and digitalization have become
foundational to national economies and therefore, to national power, in a com-
petitive international environment;
• The continued centrality of the physical ( “real” ) economy and manufacturing,
and the need to deeply integrate the real economy with IT to achieve broad-based
technological leadership;
• Recognition that China is still lagging global leaders in core technologies, a
source of national vulnerability that must be mitigated by increasing China’s rel-
ative capabilities;
• Recognition that closing the gap in technological capabilities requires maintain-
ing a degree of international openness in China’s economy and connections to
foreign technological leaders.
China’s policy for the semiconductor industry over the past decade
Semiconductors have been targeted by official Chinese policies for several decades,
although progress in closing the gap with foreign industry leaders across the value
chain remains limited.3 In the following paragraphs, we describe the important as-
pects of the most recent phase of Chinese official policy for the semiconductor sec-
tor. These aspects are captured by a schematic representing how Chinese state-led
policy operates across the entire sector ( Fig. 3 ).
China’s senior leaders seem to have understood Chinese industry’s critical foreign
dependencies since at least 2009, when national agencies instituted the 02 Special
Project. This aimed to “break China’s dependence on imports” across various seg-
ments of the semiconductor value chain, by assigning R&D projects to enterprises
and research institutions.4 A 2017 progress report identified some successes 5: For
example, it claimed that Chinese suppliers had commercialized 16 types of front-
end wafer fabrication equipment; one product was approved by global foundry lead-
er TSMC for an advanced ( 7 nanometer, ‘nm’ ) process node.6

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
13
The 2014 National IC Industry Development Outline
In 2014, the State Council, China’s highest executive government agency, issued the
National Integrated Circuit Industry Development Outline ( the 2014 Outline ). This
is often identified as starting the current phase of China’s semiconductor policy,
marked by less direct state intervention than in the past and by extensive state-led
funding across the board rather than favoring of a few selected firms.7
The 2014 Outline sought to improve centralized policy coordination by creating a
national steering committee ( Leading Small Group, LSG ), supported by an adviso-
ry expert committee. The IC Industry LSG’s director is a Vice-Premier of the State
Council and member of the Chinese Communist Party’s ( CCP ) Politburo, Ma Kai, and
its deputy director ( often the key executive role in such bodies ) is the head of the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology ( MIIT ), Miao Wei. Both men hold
corresponding positions in a separate LSG for “building China into a manufactur -
ing superpower, ” reflecting the connections between semiconductors and the wider
electronics and manufacturing sectors.8
It is unclear to what extent the national IC LSG remains active or involved in pol -
icymaking. In June 2021, media reporting suggested that the impetus behind na-
tional-level policymaking for the semiconductor industry was shifting to the LSG
for ‘reform of the national science and technology system and building an innova-
tion system’ ( ST&I LSG ).9 This body is headed by Liu He, chief economic adviser to
Chinese President Xi Jinping, and China’s lead negotiator for trade talks with the
U.S. government during the Trump administration. The precise relationship between
these two LSGs is unclear. The same is true for the extent of coordination with ‘lead-
ing small groups’ for semiconductor policy created by several subnational govern-
ments in the last few years ( Annex 2 ).
The 2014 Outline listed development targets for chip design, fabrication, packaging
and test, manufacturing equipment and materials.10 It aimed to promote upgrades in
all these segments of the value chain through direct financing and tax relief meas-
ures, and through state-linked equity investment funds at the national and regional
levels.11 Accordingly, the 2014 Outline established the National Integrated Circuit In-
dustry Investment Fund ( Big Fund ), incorporated in late 2014 with registered capital
of RMB 98.72 billion ( more than USD 15 billion ).
State-linked investment funds
The Big Fund represents a type of state-led industrial policy instrument now com-
mon in China across foundational and emerging technology sectors: the so-called

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
14
‘government guidance fund. ’ Such funds use the limited partnership structure typ-
ical of equity finance worldwide, but they are set up by state agencies that provide
anchor capital and influence investment decisions. State involvement aims to at-
tract investment from other sources such as China’s private sector and foreign in-
vestors, although in practice a dominant role is often played by state-owned en-
terprises and other state-linked actors.12 These state-linked investment funds may
also be a means of avoiding World Trade Organization ( WTO ) restrictions on direct
subsidies: the Big Fund was named in a U.S. complaint at the WTO in 2018.13
The Big Fund is overseen by the MIIT and the Ministry of Finance.14 Most sharehold-
ers are state-owned enterprises and other government guidance funds; the bulk of
the capital raised during Phase I came from the Ministry of Finance and the state-
owned China Development Bank ( CDB ).15 The Big Fund’s managing entity ( Sino-IC
Capital ) has been run in succession by two executives from CDB, which also owns
45% of Sino-IC.16
Subnational IC investment guidance funds were also established during 2014 in ex-
isting centers of China’s semiconductor industry.17 The Shanghai government-linked
fund was established in partnership with a private investment fund, a common mod-
el for government guidance funds that seeks to leverage private sector expertise. 18
As of mid-2020, 14 province-level governments had set up their own investment
funds for the IC sector, totaling around RMB 300 billion ( USD 45 billion ).19
Phase I of the Big Fund closed in 2019, having raised RMB 138.7 billion ( more than
USD 20 billion ).20 Around two thirds of the fund’s investments went to fabrication
and the other manufacturing-related categories of SME and materials, while ap-
proximately 20% were made in the chip design sector and around 10% in assembly,
test and packaging.21 At the close of Phase I, Sino-IC Capital declared that the total
capital expenditure in China’s semiconductor sector had doubled over 2014–2017,
compared to the preceding four years. 22 Chinese state media reported that Phase I
attracted five times the sum of capital it raised ( that is, around RMB 500 billion ) to
China’s semiconductor sector from other financing sources.23
Phase II of the Big Fund was incorporated in October 2019 with registered capital
of RMB 204.15 billion ( more than USD 32 billion ). The shareholder mix expanded to
include entities representing a wider geographical spread of China’s semiconductor
sector, which may improve the overall quality of the investments.24 The state hopes
that Phase II achieves the same 1:5 investment multiplier ratio that was claimed for
Phase I.25 This would result in an additional RMB 1 trillion ( more than USD 150 bil -
lion ) of investment in China’s semiconductor sector. However, this amount of funding
does not appear to be guaranteed by Chinese authorities, although it is sometimes
portrayed this way in international media reporting.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
15
The Big Fund’s Phase I prioritized investments in fabrication, as directed in the 2014
Outline. Chinese state media reporting when Phase II was incorporated indicated
that future investments would focus more on SME and on applications downstream
in the value chain, thus dragging along development of upstream sectors. Cited as
precedent for such an outcome is the previous upgrading of China’s mobile device
supply chain that was driven by Apple’s manufacturing operations in China.26
Other supporting policies for the semiconductor sector
In 2015, the State Council issued the Made in China 2025 ( MiC 2025 ) industrial up-
grading plan, which set widely reported targets of attaining 40% self-sufficiency in
China’s total IC consumption by 2020, and 70% by 2025. An accompanying roadmap
prepared by the Chinese Academy of Engineering listed more specific targets for
technology development, including for the semiconductor sector. 27 In 2017, a na-
tional ‘IC Industry Technical Innovation Strategic Alliance’ was established to coor-
dinate among research and industry actors with the aim of “making China’s IC indus-
try technology innovation capabilities reach internationally leading levels in 5-10
years” .28
In response to U.S. export controls that have targeted multiple Chinese firms by
exploiting the Chinese industry’s foreign dependencies in electronic design auto-
mation ( EDA ) and SME ( including indirectly, through dependence on non-mainland
firms such as TSMC ), since mid-2020 Chinese national agencies have introduced
three sets of measures providing targeted support that include tax relief, direct fi-
nancing and subsidies, regulatory guidance and skills development. 29 These meas-
ures build on similar policy packages issued by national authorities over the last
decade, notably in 2011.30
Subnational governments are also taking measures to provide sustained support to
Chinese firms operating in the semiconductor sector. For example, in March 2021,
the Lingang Special Area in Shanghai’s designated free trade zone released a five-
year plan to develop the IC industry, including a bonded R&D and manufacturing
zone where materials and inputs can be imported duty-free.31

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
16
Fig. 3: China’s
semiconductor
ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
17
The future of China’s policy for the semiconductor sector
China’s evolving approach to building its semiconductor sector since 2014 has been
characterized as a fast-follower strategy, which recognizes the structural barriers
to reaching the global technological frontier and the advantages of focusing at least
initially on lower value-added positions in the global value chain.32 The state aims to
let the market “play a guiding role, ” while keeping its hands on key policy and financ-
ing levers. Policies seek to leverage the international value chain and thus, emulate
the success of Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. In the 1960s, these countries had
been comparable to or even lagging behind China in the IC sector but now occupy
much higher value-added positions in the value chain.33
The key question now is whether China’s leaders, facing growing decoupling pres-
sures from the US and its allies, persist with the fast-follower approach or decide
to bet on less proven pathways for accelerated technological catchup and leap-
frogging. There are signs of movement toward the latter approach, although in ways
consistent with “proactive integration” into global technological innovation systems,
rather than a return to older models of autarkic development. China’s 14th Five-Year
Plan ( FYP ), released in March 2021, treated semiconductors ( unlike the 13th FYP ) as
an independent category, one of seven frontier technologies prioritized for national
breakthroughs.
In May 2021, the MIIT presented to the ST&I LSG about the forthcoming 14 th Five-
Year Plan for Science & Technology Innovation ( 14th FYP S&TI ), which will address
priorities set in the 14 th FYP . The meeting also discussed the post-Moore era of
semiconductors.34 This refers to alternative materials and techniques that will po-
tentially allow IC design to transcend the growing physical challenges to increasing
computing power that are expressed in Moore’s Law. Success in such alternative
pathways might open up opportunities to leapfrog China’s lag in existing processes
( to “change lanes and overtake others”35 ) or at least to capture a leading position in
emerging markets.36
In this context, the 14th FYP prioritizes “development of silicon carbide, gallium nitride
and other wide-bandgap semiconductors.” Such third-generation semiconductors
are also targeted in IC industry development plans issued by multiple subnational
governments. In addition to the 14th FYP S&TI, China is likely to issue a new National
Medium & Long-Term Plan for Science & Technology Development ( NMLTP ) during
2021 for the period 2021–2035.37 Since the 02 Special Project was instituted under
the previous NMLTP , evaluation of its success and the introduction in 2021 of a new
national special project for semiconductors will likely be key elements shaping pol-
icy for this sector.38

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
18
Situation and prospects for China’s semiconductor sector
As of 2020, China’s self-sufficiency in ICs ( including China-based operations by
non-mainland Chinese firms ) was estimated at just 16%.39 China’s IC imports for the
first five months of 2021 rose 30% compared to the same period in 2020. 40 Unsur-
prisingly, Chinese authorities now rarely cite the MiC 2025 targets. Greater emphasis
is now given to developing China’s IC sector as an integrated ecosystem, and under-
lying resources in which China remains deficient: R&D capacity and human talent.
This aligns with the general emphasis in the 14 th FYP on ongoing improvement of
China’s innovation resources and systems, including through exchanges with lead-
ing foreign firms and experts.
By one 2019 estimate, the entire Chinese semiconductor sector’s R&D spending
was less than that of a single U.S. company, Intel. 41 However, some innovation in-
dices indicate that Chinese actors are increasing their contribution to the global IP
pool for semiconductor technologies. For example, semiconductor-related filings
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office by applicants based in China rose 30%
compared to 2020, although they still accounted for less than 10% of total applica-
tions.42 As Chinese firms spend a share of revenue on R&D comparable to their for -
eign counterparts, national R&D spending should expand in tandem with the growth
of the whole semiconductor industry.
However, low market share in many subsectors limits the progress that many firms
can expect to make in R&D spending without assistance. 43 This may be partially
offset by the reported growing involvement in the sector of well-resourced state-
owned entities such as China Electronics Technology Corporation ( CETC ) and China
Railway Construction Group, in addition to the Big Fund’s investments.44
The China Semiconductor Industry Association ( CSIA ) assessed that as of 2019,
around 512,000 people were directly engaged in China’s IC sector. 45 For compari-
son, the sector would, according to one estimate, have needed 700,000 personnel by
2020 to realize sales of RMB 1 trillion, the approximate target implied by the 2014
Outline.46 However, given that actual sales in 2020 of ICs produced in China were
barely one seventh of that figure ( USD 22.8 billion ),47 it is questionable whether the
sector really faces drastic labor shortages. The CSIA assessed in 2019 that overall
labor supply was keeping pace with demand.48
The key constraints are likely to be access to the cream of the global talent pool
and to personnel with sufficient practical experience to perform higher-level func-
tions: those who have “sat ten years on the cold bench” working in the industry, as
one Chinese insider put it.49 First-hand accounts suggest that mid- and senior-level
engineers at semiconductor fabrication plants ( fabs ) in China are still typically Tai-

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
19
wanese, Japanese and Korean expatriates.50 Continuing reports of talent-poaching
activities targeting Taiwanese and South Korean firms reinforce this picture of a per-
sistent dearth of expertise in mainland China’s labor pool when it comes to commer-
cial applications.51
Domestically trained expertise is also unlikely to substitute soon for top-level tal -
ent nurtured at leading firms outside mainland China, particularly PRC citizens who
have returned to work in China and Taiwanese; both groups have played a critical
role in developing China’s semiconductor sector.52 Nonetheless, measures are being
taken to build up deeper expertise at home. In April 2021, one of China’s leading
microelectronics schools at Tsinghua University set up a new IC Institute to pro-
mote “cross-fertilization of basic research and cutting-edge engineering technology
across many fields” .53
Despite the government’s aspiration to “let the market play a guiding role,” state in-
volvement remains at a level that may significantly distort China’s semiconductor
sector.54 According to one estimate, state-backed firms collected 60% of the RMB
213.6 billion ( USD 33 billion ) China spent in 2020 on semiconductor industry sub-
sidies.55 In Shanghai’s recently established Star Market exchange, where a growing
number of China’s promising IC firms are listing, an estimated 70–80% of investors
are state-linked entities.56 Even managers of state-linked IC investment funds ex -
press doubts about whether these huge sums will be used effectively or wasted, and
whether state-led funding will crowd out private investment.57
But given that lack of money has been a long-term development constraint for Chi-
nese semiconductor firms, copious funding is probably a net benefit for the sector,
especially as Chinese firms can rely on ongoing massive growth in demand for semi-
conductors. Official statistics show that China’s total IC output in May 2021 rose
37.6% compared to May 2020, and that the sector’s value-added industrial output
grew by 60% in Q1 2021, compared to Q1 2020. In 2020, there were 413 private eq-
uity deals in China’s semiconductor sector worth a total of RMB 140 billion ( USD 21
billion ).58
In addition to access to foreign technologies and expertise, the key factors for the
future success of China’s IC sector are likely to be ( a ) how much cooperation and
synergies are realized among Chinese firms at different positions in the domestic
semiconductor value chain; and ( b ) how much the sector as a whole can leverage
China’s world-leading growth in emerging digital technology ecosystems that rely
heavily on semiconductors, such as intelligent manufacturing, the Internet of Things
( IoT ) and self-driving vehicles.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
20
This whole-ecosystem, demand-led approach seems to have general support
among industry experts and government planners. 59 China’s domestic markets are
now large and mature enough to support commercial expansion and technical de-
velopment. Moreover, the presence of Chinese digital products and firms in foreign
markets is unlikely to be completely curtailed by U.S. political pressure. 60 However,
that pressure can only be expected to grow. In addition to general U.S. alarm about
China’s growing competitiveness in this key field, particular concerns about China’s
‘civil-military fusion’ approach to technology development and military capabilities
are gaining ground, as reflected in the stated reasons for existing and proposed U.S.
export controls targeting Chinese semiconductor firms.61
To some extent, this will likely force semiconductor firms worldwide to at least make
an appearance of picking national sides.62 Even if broad-based decoupling from Chi-
nese industry does not occur, this pressure will have distorting effects on the glob-
al value chain. Shanghai’s new IC sector development plan describes the situation
as follows: “the global supply chain … is no longer based solely on market mecha-
nisms ... but more on supply chain security and other factors. ”63

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
21
3. Analysis of the production steps
Chip Design ( process step )
Chip design is the first step of the production process and results in a design file
that is given to a fab for wafer fabrication. Designing different types of chips re-
quires different skills and process flows. One can roughly distinguish among digital,
analog, radio frequency ( RF ) and mixed-signal chips. Designing an analog chip on a
180nm process node is very different from designing a microcontroller on a 40nm
process node or a mobile system on a chip ( SoC ) on a 5nm process node. The design
process is very skill-intensive ( highly educated talent ), relies on high R&D costs and
has the highest value-add ( around 50% ) of all production steps.64
A chip design is always based on a process node from a particular company. Found-
ries release process design kits ( PDKs ) for their process nodes that are used by chip
designers to develop a chip on this process node.65 Chips designed on, for example,
TSMC’s 5nm node cannot be produced on Samsung’s 5nm node: Most of the chip
would need to be redesigned first. Thus, choosing a foundry and deciding on a pro-
cess node are often long-term, strategic decisions for chip designers—especially
for cutting-edge chips.
Chip designers rely not only on close collaboration with their fabs but also on elec-
tronic design automation ( EDA ) tools and IP providers. EDA tools provide the de-
velopment environment, and IP vendors supply crucial design blocks, from simple
USB interfaces to fully fledged processing cores, to chip designers. IC design service
companies also play a crucial role in helping chip designers navigate this increas-
ingly complex ecosystem.66
The Market
Worldwide, the number of companies designing their own chips is increasing. The
chip design market is becoming more diverse because of the need for applica-
tion-specific chips, such as artificial intelligence ( AI ) accelerators. Today, consumer
electronics companies, hyperscalers and car makers all develop special-purpose
chips to gain a competitive advantage. The US has, by far, the largest chip design in-
dustry: U.S. chip design ( “fabless” ) and system IC companies67 have a market share
( sales ) of 64%. Second are Taiwanese chip design firms, such as MediaTek and Re-
altek, with a total market share of 18% and then, Chinese firms, such as HiSilicon
and Unigroup, with a total market share of 15%.68 European, South Korean and Jap-
anese chip design companies have only a miniscule share ( around 1% each ).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
22
Barriers to Entry
Compared to other segments of the semiconductor value chain, chip design has rel-
atively low market-entry barriers. For smaller startups, the steep licensing fees for
EDA tools and IP can be a challenge, and several initiatives try to lower this barrier to
entry.69 Furthermore, in the past, venture capital tended to focus on software start-
ups more than on chip design companies.70
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
Using rapid growth in China’s chip design sector to drive development of the Chi-
nese semiconductor manufacturing industry was an explicit goal in the 2014 Out-
line. Growth in global demand for smartphones, with manufacturing concentrated
in China, created some comparative advantage for Chinese firms to pursue chip de-
sign. With relatively low barriers to entry, Chinese firms rapidly gained market share,
although only a few companies, such as HiSilicon, Goodix ( fingerprint sensors ) and
OmniVision ( image sensors ), have approached the global technological frontier.
Policymakers aim to harness this market-driven success in chip design to pull up
firms in other IC sectors with relatively higher entry barriers and lower customer de-
mand, and where previous state-led supply-side efforts have clearly failed, as with
EDA tools.71 Demand-led growth also helps to attract overseas industry leaders to
partner with local firms. For example, in 2014 the Taiwanese chip design leader Me-
diaTek invested USD 48.9 million in one Shanghai IC fund, with the express goal of le-
veraging China’s semiconductor sector to boost MediaTek’s global market position.72
The 2014 Outline emphasized driving China’s chip design sector to the global front
rank in key areas such as network communications and using the sector to accel -
erate development of emerging fields like cloud computing and the IoT, while “im-
proving support for deep integration of information technology and industrialization.”
This two-track approach of targeting mature markets and emerging technologies
was reflected in the MiC 2025 roadmap, which specified that chip design should fo-
cus on applications with high-volume demand ( server and desktop computer CPUs,
embedded CPUs, memory, FPGAs ) and leading-edge activities ( SoC, ESL and 3D-IC
design ).
Subnational governments have also focused on chip design, which is emphasized
in multiple policy documents issued within the last two years by province- and
city-level governments. Shanghai’s Lingang Special Area showcases China’s efforts
to promote and exploit chip design by co-locating work in this sector with other IC

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
23
production steps and R&D activities. The zone incorporates an innovation hub that
hosts leading Chinese chip design firms, such as Cambricon and Horizon Robotics.73
Competitive position of the Chinese industry
The number of IC design firms in China almost doubled from 2015 to 2020, but may
suffer from excessive fragmentation. According to one estimate, in 2019 the com-
bined revenue of some 500 Chinese design firms was less than 70% that of U.S.
industry leader Qualcomm.74 Most of the Chinese design sector’s products remain,
in performance terms, in the middle to lower end of the global market. In 2017, the
chief executive officer ( CEO ) of one Chinese EDA tools vendor expressed the view
that many Chinese IC design firms were too immature to use the available invest-
ment money effectively.75 The reliance of the firms with the highest revenue on the
mobile communications market is a potential source of vulnerability as smartphone
demand slows with market saturation.76
However, Chinese design firms will benefit from Beijing’s commitment to promoting
multiple fields that support chip design activity, including intelligent manufacturing,
the IoT, future telecom networks and artificial intelligence.77 These trends have led
China’s cash- and data-rich internet platform and consumer device giants, such as
Baidu, Alibaba and Xiaomi, to invest heavily in chip design.78 Zhaoxin, a joint venture
between the Shanghai government and Taiwan’s VIA Technologies ( the only non-U.S.
firm licensed to use Intel’s x86 instruction set architecture for CPU design ) has de-
veloped a CPU series that seems good enough for state agencies trying to reduce
exposure to U.S. technology.79
This expanding demand is reflected in design firms’ success in raising capital. Hori-
zon Robotics, for example, recently raised USD 150 million from domestic and inter-
national investors, less than two years after the firm’s previous funding round raised
USD 600 million.80 Horizon illustrates how Chinese design firms are relatively favored
domestically and globally. Investors include Intel and South Korea’s SK, the firm has
benefited from Chinese government contacts, and its services are in demand from
firms in China’s fast-developing self-driving car sector.81 Chinese analysts also ex -
pect the design sector to “share the dividends of IC foundry advancement, ” as foreign
and domestic companies invest in massive foundry expansion across China.82
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
The potential negative impact of U.S. export controls on Chinese IC design firms are
reflected in the fate of HiSilicon, which since 2019 has suffered plunging revenues

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
24
and loss of skilled staff as a result of U.S. export controls. However, as the main ben-
eficiaries of HiSilicon’s decline appear to be other Chinese firms, the efficacy of such
measures to stunt the overall progress of China’s chip design sector is questionable.
More serious may be the reduced access to top-level human talent nurtured in for -
eign firms. China’s long-running effort to develop secure and controllable infrastruc-
ture that depends less on foreign technology may help to drive developments in chip
design, as shown by Zhaoxin’s CPUs.
The scale of expansion in digital applications within China buoys prospects for Chi-
nese chip design firms. For example, China is projected to lead the world in number
of 5G connections by 2023.83 Xiaomi, Huawei and Alibaba have developed consumer
IoT ecosystems that are driving chip design advances, with Alibaba releasing what is
reportedly the world’s most powerful RISC-V-based processor in 2020. 84 In electric
vehicles ( EVs ), China accounts for more than 40% of the global market, with China’s
domestic EV market projected to grow 50% during 2021.85 Self-driving technology is
linked to EV development, and many industry leaders are investing in this ecosys-
tem’s expansion within China.
The key question in this value chain segment is whether Chinese firms can raise
their share of the rapidly growing proportion of worldwide semiconductor revenues
that is accruing to chip design companies, or whether this growth will be largely
captured by foreign fabless leaders like Nvidia and Qualcomm.86 Overall, chip design
is probably the value chain segment in which Chinese firms have the best chance of
competing at the global technological frontier during the coming decade.
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
Rapid growth in fabless design firms’ share of global semiconductor revenues means
that Chinese success in this area could significantly affect the global industry’s bal-
ance, as more profits are captured in China and flow to firms elsewhere along the
value chain. These spillover benefits would extend to multiple economic sectors,
given the concentration of electronics manufacturing in China and growth in its do-
mestic markets for ICT applications. Relatively low barriers to entry mean Chinese
success would not by itself imply atrophy of chip design capabilities in other coun-
tries. However, the link between design and applications means foreign firms might
be pushed out of emerging sectors such as self-driving cars in which the technolog-
ical ecosystem is advancing relatively faster in China, thus favoring Chinese fabless
design firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
25
National security dimension
Chip design capabilities are not a key chokepoint in the global value chain, as they
are distributed internationally and are based on range of factors that are difficult
to restrict completely across borders. However, Chinese fabless companies, such
as HiSilicon, Tianjin Phytium Technology, Sunway Microelectronics and others, have
been targeted with export restrictions by the U.S. government. The reason given for
these restrictions was that the entities concerned “are involved in activities that
support China’s military actors ( and ) military modernization efforts.”87
These U.S. measures reflect concern about the military utility of advanced proces-
sor chips, given the expected rise in importance of artificial intelligence and other
functions based on computing power in military applications. In this context, the
accumulation of design capabilities that support development of such chips has im-
plications for the international military balance. The issue here is not the production
step itself but the end products that it supports, in a national adversarial context.
The design process itself is not efficient in enabling espionage, given the complexity
and resources required to successfully compromise a chip. Thus, the espionage risk
inherent in this production step is very limited, especially compared to back-end
processes like assembly, test and packaging ( ATP ).
Resilience dimension
Chip design capabilities represent a relatively small risk in this context, as they do
not constitute points of failure that could compromise the wider value chain or re-
sult in significant negative spillovers if disrupted. These capabilities are relative-
ly easily replicated, because they require comparatively small capital investments
and economies of scale. However, developing a large labor pool in design skills takes
years, and most nations would likely struggle to achieve this in isolation.
Electronic Design Automation ( input )
Electronic design automation ( EDA ) tool vendors provide the development envi-
ronment for chip designers to design, verify, test, validate and simulate their chips.
Without access to these highly specialized and increasingly complex software tools,
it is nearly impossible to develop modern chips. EDA vendors work closely with
foundries to support a fab’s process nodes as much as possible, so that chip design-
ers can utilize the nodes’ technology features in their chip designs. 88 Together with
research organizations such as imec, EDA vendors also help fabs to research, devel-
op and improve their process nodes.89 Furthermore, EDA vendors closely collaborate
with equipment vendors in developing future manufacturing equipment.90 Last, EDA
tools facilitate access to third-party IP suppliers, such as ARM, thus allowing chip

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
26
designers to include external IP in their designs. 91 In essence, EDA tools facilitate
the close collaboration among all actors across the three production steps: design,
fabrication and ATP .92
The market
The EDA market is highly concentrated, with three U.S. companies—Synopsys, Ca-
dence and Mentor ( acquired in 2017 by the German electronics giant Siemens )—
capturing around 70% of global revenues for many years. 93 Especially for advanced
logic chip design, such as processors or mobile system on a chip ( SoC ), access to
these three vendors is paramount. Large chip design companies might use software
from all three vendors as each EDA tool might be particularly good in a certain ar -
ea.94 There are many smaller EDA companies, but they do not provide tools for the
entire design flow; instead, they focus on one niche. 95 Additionally, the “Big Three”
have very aggressive M&A strategies to stay at the cutting edge. 96 Synopsys alone
has acquired more than 50 technologies and companies since 2010.97
Barriers to entry
The market-entry barriers are moderate for EDA startups, but challenging the Big
Three is extremely hard and highly unlikely within the next five years. Successful -
ly establishing an alternative to Synopsys, Cadence or Mentor faces several chal -
lenges. First, EDA vendors spend more than 30% of their revenue on R&D to stay
at the cutting edge in a highly innovative and fast-paced value chain. 98 Second, as
the Big Three have been the quasi-standard for more than a decade, chip designers
are familiar with these tools and reluctant to change. Third, EDA vendors need very
close business relationships with foundries and IP suppliers that take many years
to establish.
There are some efforts to “democratize” chip design and lower the barriers to entry
and the learning curve for chip designers, such as DARPA’s OpenROAD initiative. 99
But it is highly likely that cutting-edge chip design will continue to rely on access to
the Big Three.
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
The Chinese state began trying to promote domestic EDA tools development during
the 1980s.100 As a result of limited progress, in 2000–2001 IC Design Bases ( centers )
were set up in seven cities with seed funding from the central government, with the

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
27
objective of making EDA tools, including foreign-owned ones, generally available
to Chinese firms through licensing rights. This initiative also generally performed
poorly, with successful Chinese design firms avoiding the centers’ services in fa-
vor of options outside mainland China. 101 Subsequently, the centers have produced
some achievements in chip design ( in the case of the Shanghai center, enough to be
recently blacklisted by the U.S. government 102 ), but they also reinforce the market
dominance of foreign EDA vendors by making their tools widely accessible.103
EDA tools were initially neglected by the Chinese government’s current IC policy
phase, and did not appear in the 2014 Outline or the MiC 2025 roadmap. As of mid-
2020, less than 1% of the Big Fund’s investments were assigned to domestic EDA
firms. But this situation appears to have begun changing, as U.S. export controls
targeting Chinese firms have highlighted the vulnerability of EDA as a chokepoint.
As one example, Phase II of the Big Fund invested 20 times more in the EDA startup
Shenzhen Giga-da than Phase I did in the long-established domestic EDA vendor
Huada Empyrean.104
After ZTE was placed on the U.S. Entity List, EDA tools were prioritized in China’s
2016 National Informatization Plan. U.S. controls targeting Huawei in mid-2020,
which expressly identified EDA tools as controlled items, were followed by Beijing’s
August 2020 semiconductor tax incentive package, which included corporate in-
come tax reductions or exemptions for young EDA firms.
Domestic development of EDA will probably also benefit from its prioritization since
2020 by multiple subnational governments. EDA may benefit especially from atten-
tion in Shanghai’s new five-year IC development plan, given the city’s outsize role in
successes within China’s chip design and fabrication sectors.
Competitive position of the Chinese industry
The Big Three U.S. vendors accounted for 90% of China’s EDA market in late 2020,
although Chinese firms offer “credible tools in several EDA categories, ” according to
a study commissioned by Cadence.105 However, to date, only one Chinese firm ( Hua-
da Empyrean ) offers tools covering a complete design flow, limited to analog chips.
Other Chinese firms concentrate on narrow tool sets.106 This is reflected in the firms’
paltry 10% share of China’s EDA market, with leading Chinese design and foundry
firms continuing to use the Big Three’s tools, although HiSilicon’s access has been
reportedly curtailed by U.S. export controls. 107 Widespread use of pirated tools in
China likely harms the Big Three less than local EDA firms, which are incentivized by
low sales to distribute their products in more convenient but less secure formats.108

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
28
EDA vendors must also compete for a limited pool of software engineers, with the
Big Three and with Chinese technology giants, such as Alibaba, Tencent and Huawei.
In 2018, Huada Empyrean estimated that of 1500 individuals working in EDA R&D
across China, only 300 worked for Chinese research institutions and companies, half
of them for Huada; the rest worked for the Big Three. 109 In  comparison, Synopsys
alone has around 5000 engineers engaged in R&D on EDA tools.110 Cadence and Syn-
opsys have invested significantly in operations in China over the last few years.111
Consolidation in China’s chip design sector may harm Chinese EDA vendors, as Chi-
nese design firms increasingly have the money to access the Big Three’s tools. 112
The commercial imperatives for design firms to use EDA tools that are in sync with
manufacturing developments also incentivize Chinese customers to stick with the
Big Three, given the latter’s privileged working relationships with leading foundries.
Nonetheless, commercial demand is growing in China for domestically sourced EDA
tools, to mitigate the risk if U.S. export controls are expanded. Responding to this
demand, three new Chinese EDA vendors were set up in 2020, each founded by or
hiring executives and engineers from Cadence and Synopsys. These firms are backed
by Chinese government and major private investors, including Synopsys itself.113 Fol-
lowing the 2019 U.S. export controls targeting Huawei, Synopsys set up a joint ven-
ture ( JV ) in China, and industry rumors suggest another of the Big Three is planning
to establish a Chinese JV.
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
The Cadence-commissioned study assessed that Chinese EDA suppliers are well
positioned to replace U.S. vendors if the latter are cut off from the Chinese market,
noting that these Chinese suppliers’ product roadmaps “aim to provide full-flow of-
ferings for IC design at advanced nodes by 2025.” 114 Although leading Chinese firms
are unlikely to prefer domestic EDA suppliers, if that choice is removed by expanded
U.S. export controls, the result will likely be growing market share for Chinese EDA
vendors in categories of chips with simpler designs and in solutions tailored to Chi-
nese customers.115
But even under these conditions and with abundant funding, Chinese EDA firms are
unlikely to be able to provide solutions for chips at the global cutting edge. There is
also a risk that lavish state-led funding and guaranteed procurement will lead Chi-
nese EDA firms to plateau comfortably at capabilities that trail the global technical
frontier, a result with many precedents in different ICT sectors in China.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
29
Another critical factor would be availability of the Big Three’s tools despite expand-
ed U.S. export controls. This availability might remain extensive, for several reasons.
As EDA tools are software, they can be hacked; Synopsys has already sued one Chi-
nese business for such behavior.116 Alternatively, the Big Three might ignore piracy,
because even illegal use of their tools in China works against the rise of Chinese
competitors. Enforcing U.S. export restrictions on EDA may prove challenging. At
least one Chinese firm on the U.S. Entity List reportedly set up a shell company as a
front for EDA licenses, and other U.S. vendors might follow Synopsys in establishing
Chinese JVs to facilitate access to their tools for firms like Huawei that have been
individually targeted by U.S. export controls.117
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
The EDA tools market has substantial barriers to entry at the cutting edge but small
value-add, the highest R&D margin across the value chain and necessarily deep
cooperation with ( cutting-edge ) fabs. Thus, absent U.S. export controls, it is highly
likely that the oligopoly of the Big Three ( Synopsys, Cadence and Mentor ) in China
and around the world will continue. U.S. export controls might create a window of
opportunity for new Chinese players to enter the market, but whether they will be
able to challenge the Big Three long term, and thus, change the market features, is
far from certain.
National security dimension
The Big Three’s dominance provides the U.S. government with a chokepoint with-
in the value chain that can be exploited through export controls. This chokepoint’s
utility has already been demonstrated in the case of the export restrictions against
Huawei. Even if access to EDA tools is obtained through pirated copies or hacking,
the need for continual software updates from the vendors to keep the tools useful
for cutting-edge applications makes it very difficult for Chinese firms to circumvent
this chokepoint. Therefore, it is highly likely that ( a ) the U.S. government will contin-
ue to utilize EDA as a chokepoint, and ( b ) the Chinese government will increasingly
invest in its domestic EDA industry.
Resilience dimension
In contrast to the manufacturing process steps and tangible goods ( equipment,
chemicals, wafers ) whose supply can be disrupted by natural disasters and acci-
dents, supply chain resilience considerations have little relevance for EDA software.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
30
Intellectual Property ( input )
Intellectual property ( IP ) plays a critical role throughout the semiconductor val -
ue chain. The chip design process, in particular, has become so complex that chip
designers rely not only on EDA tools but also on third-party IP suppliers, to avoid
having to reinvent the wheel for each product. Modern processors and system on a
chip ( SoC ) need memory interfaces, AI accelerators, power management, security
features and wireless connectivity, to name just a few. These functionalities are li-
censed from third-party IP suppliers for implementation in chip designs.
Suppliers of semiconductor IP have an incentive to make it as easy as possible for
chip designers to use their IP . Therefore, the suppliers collaborate with foundries to
ensure that IP blocks work on a particular process node.118 The advantage for found-
ries is that their process nodes become more popular with design customers in tan-
dem with the quality of the IP ecosystem they can offer.119
Being able to utilize third-party IP plays such a crucial role in today’s chip designs
that DARPA recently started its “toolbox initiative” to streamline access for their re-
searchers to third-party IP suppliers 120: “DARPA performers are frequently encum-
bered by having to negotiate access to tools, IP , and services, and execute complex le-
gal agreements that take the time away from what they do best—advancing science
to benefit the nation.”121
The market
IP suppliers are somewhat similar to chip design companies: They do not sell entire
chips, only functional blocks. As in chip design, many IP suppliers are U.S. compa-
nies. Among the largest IP suppliers by revenue are Arm Ltd. ( UK ), Synopsys ( US ),
Cadence ( US ), Imagination Technologies ( UK ), Ceva ( US ), Silicon Storage Technology
( US ) and VeriSilicon ( China ).122 The IP supplier market, in general, is highly competi-
tive and fast-moving.123
A special type of semiconductor IP is instruction set architecture ( ISA ). The ISA de-
fines the basic design architecture of any processor chip. The most important ISAs
globally are x86, ARM and RISC-V.
The proprietary x86 architecture is controlled by Intel ( US ), AMD ( US ) and VIA ( Tai-
wan ). Historically, it has been the most important and dominant processor architec-
ture for desktops, laptops and servers. In March 2021, Intel stated that it would, for
the first time, offer x86 core IP alongside foundry services to other firms seeking to
build chips, under Intel’s recently announced integrated device manufacturer ( IDM )
2.0 initiative.124

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
31
What x86 is to the desktop and server market, the ARM architecture is to mobile
chips. Essentially, all smartphones and tablets are based on Arm Ltd. ’s proprietary
architecture that the company offers via licenses. 125 Apple, Samsung, Huawei and
MediaTek all develop their own mobile chipsets, but they are all based on the ARM
architecture. In recent years, the ARM architecture has spread to almost every ver -
tical, from automotive to industrial applications and super-computers. 126 This in-
creasing dominance of ARM architecture is why parts of the chip design industry
are worried about the planned acquisition of Arm Ltd. ( currently owned by Japanese
SoftBank ) by Nvidia ( US ).127
In contrast to x86 and ARM, RISC-V is a free and open ( non-proprietary ) processor
architecture. A relatively simpler ISA, RISC-V lends itself more than ARM architec-
tures to smaller chip design teams and shorter product development cycles, fea-
tures that may work to the advantage of design firms that are less established than
industry leaders but enjoy proximity to large and dynamic markets for developing
semiconductor applications ( this describes most Chinese chip design firms ).128 Al-
though RISC-V lacks ARM’s strong IP ecosystem and development environment, 129
RISC-V has become popular worldwide in recent years, partly due to its flexibility
and extendibility.130
Barriers to entry
New IP suppliers face relatively low market-entry barriers, when compared to oth-
er supplier markets and process steps in the semiconductor value chain. Like chip
design, developing semiconductor IP is very skill-intensive with high R&D costs but
involves relatively low capital investment.
One exception is ISAs, because of strong lock-ins due to network effects. Software
does not automatically work on different ISAs but must be adapted. Thus, no matter
how much potential a new ISA has, if programmers are not interested in developing
compatible software for the processor, the design is doomed to fail.131
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
Chinese authorities have long recognized the need to improve the nation’s human
resources for generating IP and IP protection systems to incentivize development,
although progress on both fronts has been slow. For the IC sector specifically, the
MiC 2025 roadmap emphasized both priorities. The 2016 14 th Five-Year Plan for the
Development of National Strategic Emerging Industries called for supporting the
improvement of services provided by third-party IP enterprises in the IC sector. The

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
32
State Council’s August 2020 measures addressed IP , while subnational governments’
IC industry plans also prioritize IP development and acquisition. One ( Chengdu ) is
giving IC design enterprises 50% subsidies for IP purchases, with specific reference
to foundry IP modules and EDA tools.132
ISA has been relatively neglected by government policy for the semiconductor sec-
tor. However, in 2018 a RISC-V Consortium was established in Shanghai, and the
Shanghai government began subsidizing RISC-V-based chip development and mass
production.133
Competitive position of the Chinese industry
VeriSilicon is often identified as the only Chinese firm that is a significant IP pro-
vider: Its IP is used in chips developed by Google, Facebook and Amazon.134 In 2019,
VeriSilicon, which has investment backing from Intel, Samsung and Xiaomi, ranked
seventh worldwide for IP license revenue and claimed to be conducting R&D for 5nm
processes.135
Media reports suggest that Arm China, a subsidiary of the UK-based owner of ARM
architecture, may have moved beyond selling and licensing its parent company’s IP
to developing its own, including a design that allows Chinese-made chips to run a
cryptographic algorithm built by China’s State Cryptography Administration. Report-
edly, clients for Arm China’s IP include HiSilicon, and in 2019, Arm China claimed it
would release three new chip design blueprints annually.136
However, a power struggle between the company’s CEO, its UK parent and the lat-
ter’s major investor Softbank raises questions about Arm China’s prospects, as well
as about the wider environment for IP protection ( and corporate governance gener-
ally ) in China. Furthermore, the prospect of Arm Ltd. ’s ( UK ) acquisition by the U.S.
company Nvidia raises the risks to Chinese industry of continuing to rely on ARM
architecture, although Chinese regulators may deny approval for this acquisition or
stall until it falls through.137 Arm Ltd. ( UK ) recently assessed that its latest ISA is not
subject to U.S. export controls, meaning that at present, Chinese companies can
continue to use this architecture for chip design.138
Beyond VerSilicon and potentially Arm China, Chinese industry commentators ac-
knowledge that domestic firms are still “lagging far behind” in IP , and require years
of progressive knowledge accumulation before becoming competitive in this field.139
However, RISC-V’s potential to support a range of applications, and potentially, to
displace ARM as the leading ISA in some sectors, may create leapfrog opportuni-
ties for China’s design firms and the larger domestic ecosystem supporting them to

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
33
build up proprietary IP , at least for processors. Chinese design firms have focused
on RISC-V-based products for some time, and quantifiable results are starting to
appear.140 For example, in 2020 Alibaba released what it claimed at that point in time
was the world’s most powerful RISC-V-based processor.141
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
The skill-intensive nature of IP development for the IC sector means that its growth
in China has depended on experienced individuals who returned after working
abroad for foreign industry leaders. VeriSilicon was founded by such a returnee who
built his skills working in the US ( other notable Chinese IC firms such as SMIC and
Spreadtrum were also founded by returnees ).142 With growing pressure for techno-
logical decoupling, opportunities to gain experience abroad will be increasingly con-
strained, although this will also become less of an issue as China’s IC sector matures.
The Chinese industry’s clear deficiencies in IP may become a focus for government
authorities’ lingering tendency to resort to directive supply-side policy to plug ob-
vious gaps, creating risks of wasted effort and resource misallocation. For exam-
ple, one of Guangdong’s IC sector plans directs the province’s research institutions
and IC design enterprises to pursue development of “independent IP for sub-28nm
processes. ”143 This raises questions about how well informed or realistic the plan’s
drafters were about Chinese industry’s limitations, and where efforts would be most
effectively concentrated.
Perhaps the best prospects for the development of Chinese IP lie in the emerging
RISC-V-based development ecosystem. Because the RISC-V Foundation is head-
quartered in Switzerland, RISC-V IP is relatively insulated from potential U.S. export
controls, and it is receiving considerable attention from China’s chip design sector.144
China’s central role in global electronics manufacturing and rapid build-out of digital
infrastructure arguably gives China a good chance to be first in defining the optimal
use cases ( applications ) for RISC-V and in scaling them commercially. Nonetheless,
RISC-V is just one type of IP , and it is nearly impossible for Chinese IP suppliers to
provide internationally competitive IP for all or most categories within the next 10
years.
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
An internationally competitive domestic IP ecosystem provides significant spillover
benefits, as it is a prerequisite for successful chip design. This, in combination with

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
34
relatively low barriers to entry, makes it likely that China will seek to build more do-
mestic IP suppliers and continue to try to acquire foreign IP vendors. Given the over-
all situation of China’s semiconductor ecosystem and the larger electronics man-
ufacturing sector, in the future there will almost certainly be more internationally
competitive Chinese IP suppliers similar to VeriSilicon.
National security dimension
Third-party IP poses a negligible espionage risk but can be utilized as a chokepoint
against nations that depend on access to foreign IP suppliers. Because the IP mar -
ket can be highly concentrated for special types of IP , export restrictions could be ef-
fective in limiting foreign firms’ chip design capabilities. Therefore, China’s deficient
position in IP is a vulnerability, although the importance of China’s markets provides
some counter-leverage. For example, many observers expect the U.S. firm Nvidia’s
acquisition of Arm ( UK ) to be effectively blocked by Chinese regulators, dampening
prospects for U.S. export controls to cut off Chinese access to Arm’s ISA.
Resilience dimension
Similar to EDA, as a software component in the semiconductor industry, IP has little
to no impact on the supply chain’s overall resilience.
Wafer Fabrication: The Front-End ( process step )
In a fabrication plant ( “fab” ), the chip design is transferred onto a wafer. This process
is called “wafer fabrication” or “front-end. ” Wafer fabrication is conducted in a clean
room with the strictest contamination requirements. 145 Fabrication can consist of
more than 1000 process steps, involving around 50 different types of manufacturing
equipment and up to 400 different chemicals and materials. 146 Cutting-edge wafer
fabrication also consumes a lot of electricity and water. 147 Thus, fabs depend sub-
stantially on a multitude of equipment, chemical and wafer suppliers, predominant-
ly from the US, Japan, Europe and Taiwan.
Fabs are operated by either an integrated device manufacturer ( IDM ) or a found-
ry. An IDM designs, manufactures and sells chips by itself. Examples are Intel ( US ),
Infineon ( EU ) and SK Hynix ( KR ). A foundry offers contract manufacturing to chip
design companies that do not own fabs, such as Apple ( US ), Huawei ( CN ) and Medi-
aTek ( TW ). Foundries have an incentive to make it as easy as possible for chip design
companies to use the foundries’ process nodes. To that end, foundries work closely
with EDA vendors and IP suppliers.
All fabs aim for high yield and utilization rates. Yield is the share of working chips
on a wafer after the fabrication process.148 When fabs switch to a new manufactur -

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
35
ing process, the yield rates are typically low and must be quickly improved to make
the process economically profitable. The utilization rate is the amount of time the
equipment is used to manufacture chips. 149 Front-end fabs have to run 24/7 to en-
sure very high utilization rates to recuperate the high investment costs within a few
years.
Wafer fabrication differs depending on the type of semiconductor. Logic semicon-
ductors, such as general-purpose processors, graphic chips and AI accelerators,
rely on increasingly complex fabrication processes to squeeze more transistors
on a square millimeter of wafer so that more complex and powerful chips can be
designed.150 This development, often referred to as “node scaling” or “More Moore
scaling, ” led to a tenfold increase of transistors per square millimeter in the past 10
years.151 Thanks to “More Moore scaling, ” today’s 3nm process nodes can produce
significantly smaller transistors than 28nm process nodes in 2011. Mature nodes,
which are not subject to constant innovation and increasing complexity, are also es-
sential to the market. In the following analysis, we focus on cutting-edge and trail -
ing-edge wafer fabrication for logic chips.
The Market
Because of the economics of node scaling ( skyrocketing fab costs paired with
stupendously complex manufacturing processes ), many companies dropped out
of this “More Moore race. ” The number of companies operating cutting-edge fabs
dropped from almost 30 in 2001 to 2 in 2021. 152 Currently, only Samsung ( KR ) and
TSMC ( TW ) successfully operate 5nm fabs. Intel struggled in recent years to stay at
the cutting-edge but plans to compete again at 7nm and below.153 The customers of
TSMC’s and Samsung’s most advanced process nodes are mainly U.S. chip design
companies ( more than 80% of estimated capacity ), such as AMD, Apple, Nvidia and
Qualcomm.154 Samsung155 and TSMC156 plan to invest substantially in fabs in the US
within the next three to five years, but until then, cutting-edge wafer fabrication is
available only in Taiwan and South Korea. Even after Samsung’s and TSMC’s invest-
ments in the US, the majority of cutting-edge wafer fabrication capacity globally will
most likely remain in Taiwan and South Korea.157
In comparison, trailing-edge wafer fabrication ( process nodes at 10nm and above )
is less consolidated in terms of companies and less geographically concentrated.
In addition to TSMC and Samsung, UMC ( TW ), Globalfoundries ( US ), SMIC ( CN ) and
Huahong ( CN ) operate process nodes at 14nm and above. Although 28nm nodes
were introduced a decade ago, these trailing-edge fabrication processes are still
in high demand for applications such as automotive, industrial, the IoT and many
more, because designing and manufacturing chips on these nodes are significantly
cheaper than at the cutting edge.158

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
36
In general, Taiwan, South Korea and China established themselves as fabrication
hubs, with the latter also as a hub for foreign IDMs and foundries, not least because
of substantial government support in the form of investment incentives and loans at
below market rates.159 The U.S. Semiconductor Industry Association ( SIA ) estimates
that the 10-year total cost of ownership of a new fab is 30% higher in the US than
in Singapore, South Korea or Taiwan and even 37–50% higher than in China. Around
40–70% of this cost differential is due to government support.160
Barriers to Entry
Cutting-edge wafer fabrication has some of the highest barriers to entry compared
to the other process steps in the semiconductor value chain. Skyrocketing capital
investments led to cutting-edge fabs costing around USD 20 billion ( 80% of that
are equipment costs ).161 In early 2021, TSMC announced162 that it would invest USD
100 billion over the next three years, and Samsung plans to invest USD 151 billion
by 2030 in its logic chip and foundry capacity.163 But cutting-edge wafer fabrication
is more than just a money game. Fabs need extensive process knowledge to achieve
and sustain high yield after they introduce a new process node. They collaborate
closely with research institutes such as imec in Belgium, equipment manufacturers
and chemical suppliers to develop new process technologies that are constantly ad-
vancing the industry’s cutting edge.164 As long as More Moore scaling continues, mar-
ket-entry barriers will be insurmountable. Therefore, it is highly likely that TSMC and
Samsung will continue to be the dominant and perhaps even the only cutting-edge
foundries. Only Intel could become a third player if they are able to establish a suc-
cessful foundry business.165
Trailing-edge wafer fabrication has lower barriers to entry, but they are still sub-
stantial compared to the other process steps. One challenge is the high demand
for manufacturing equipment, as all major foundries and IDMs plan to expand their
fabs. Lead times for new equipment can be 18 months, and even used equipment is
scarce and increasingly expensive.166 Entering wafer fabrication, even at the trailing
edge, means significant capital investment and establishing a supplier network for
materials, chemicals and equipment.
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
Throughout the 1990s, China tried to upgrade its fabrication technology through a
hands-on state policy, which aimed to develop domestic IP through joint ventures
with foreign industry leaders and reliance on China’s domestic markets. A combina-
tion of these efforts’ poor results, obligations to liberalize the sector that came with

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
37
China’s entry into the World Trade Organization and relaxation of U.S. export controls
towards China meant that during the 2000s, China’s front-end fabrication sector de-
veloped mainly through direct operations by foreign and Taiwanese industry leaders,
and the growth of one relatively successful Chinese foundry firm that was started by
a Taiwanese engineer ( SMIC ).167
The 2014 Outline declared that mass production by Chinese firms at 32/28nm pro-
cess nodes should be achieved by 2015, and at 16/14nm nodes by 2020, with the
latter goal reiterated in the MiC 2025 roadmap. The 2014 Outline directed that the
Big Fund’s initial investments should prioritize fabrication, and almost half of its
Phase I investments were assigned accordingly, with another 15% or so committed
to categories ( materials and SME ) that directly support fabrication.168
By 2019, Chinese media reports suggested that Phase II would focus less on fabri-
cation, and in April 2021, the Big Fund trimmed its holding in SMIC.169 Fabrication is
also not targeted in the latest group of subnational governments’ IC development
plans, except in the case of specialty products and advanced processes. Howev -
er, Chinese firms however are expanding fabrication capacity massively at mature
nodes, with an estimated USD 160 billion of investment in fabs planned over the
next five to seven years.170
Chinese planners have also targeted memory chips, whose relatively lower com-
plexity of fabrication provides a more accessible path to technical upgrading, and
where Chinese players can benefit from continuing massive growth in demand due
to the boom in digital devices and infrastructure throughout China and the world.171
Chinese memory maker YMTC ( a product of the Wuhan city government’s long-term
commitment to developing a local fabrication sector, mergers with other Chinese
firms and technology licensing from foreign industry leaders ) is developing cur -
rent-generation NAND technology.172 However, to date, the yield rates and market
share achieved by YMTC remain very low.173
Competitive position of the Chinese industry
Measured against the 2014 Outline’s goals, which admittedly were highly ambitious,
China’s progress has been lackluster. SMIC is the only Chinese firm with a 14nm
process, but more than 90% of SMIC’s revenue comes from mature nodes at 40nm
and above. The next-leading Chinese foundry ( Huahong ) has yet to progress beyond
28nm. In contrast, global leader TSMC earns nearly half its revenue from 7nm and
5nm nodes, and the firm is commencing risk production with its 3nm node in 2021.174
Contrasting with the MiC 2025 goal of 40% self-sufficiency by 2020, China-located
fabrication in 2020 accounted for less than 16% of China’s IC consumption, a num-

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
38
ber forecast to rise by only 3.5% by 2025. Furthermore, domestic firms produced
barely a third of this China-based output; the rest was produced by foreign and Tai-
wanese firms.175
This dominance of non-mainland Chinese firms in China’s fab market has attracted
national concern. There was a vigorous debate in early 2021 over TSMC’s expansion
of its 28nm fab in Nanjing. Some Chinese commentators argue that such “dumping”
will squeeze out local foundries, while others argue that expanded capacity is jus-
tified by demand and will help local chip design firms turn designs into products. 176
But even with huge capacity expansion ( 28 fabs were under construction in 2020,
mostly Chinese firms177 ) China-based IC production is forecast to reach only 7–10%
of the global IC market by 2025. 178 However, China’s share is significantly larger at
less sophisticated technological levels. In 200mm wafers, for example, China-based
fabs accounted for 16% of global capacity.179
Even if policy ambitions are trimmed to expanding production capacity at mature
nodes to serve China’s booming demand for various types of chips, the amount of
investment funding now available creates potential for waste on a grand scale in
the fabrication sector, given its capital-intensive nature and local governments’
readiness to support the building of foundries that may not contain proven process
technologies. The recent collapse of Wuhan-based HSMC’s “7nm” project, involving
astounding levels of fraud and embezzlement, shows the risks of relying on invest-
ment-led progress in such a technically complex field.180
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
Fabrication is the one production step where, barring a major technological ga-
mechanger, Chinese firms have no prospect of competing on level footing with the
global leaders. The lag between China’s leading foundry SMIC and industry leader
TSMC is often estimated as at least five years, an assessment recently endorsed
by TSMC’s founder.181 SMIC’s inability to acquire Dutch firm ASML’s EUVL technolo-
gy—a problem that SMIC faced even before the firm was included on the U.S. Entity
List—severely constrains the firm’s prospects of commercializing a 7nm process
node. One of SMIC’s co-CEOs claimed in December 2020 that the firm was ready to
introduce mass production at 7nm by April 2021. However, in a February earnings
call, the other co-CEO said that U.S. licenses are still needed for equipment to ex -
pand production at mature nodes.182
Even at 10nm, SMIC’s ability to achieve mass production is uncertain if the firm is
constrained from importing older-generation lithography equipment ( DUVL ), as was
recently advocated by the U.S. National Security Commission on Artificial Intelli-

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
39
gence.183 In contrast, in May 2021, TSMC claimed a breakthrough in developing a fu-
ture 1nm process.184 TSMC and Samsung together are projected to account for 43%
of capital investment in fabrication worldwide in 2021,185 with TSMC alone spending
USD 30 billion, most of which is assigned to leading-edge nodes.186
Huawei is reportedly engaged in a venture with the state-owned Shanghai IC De-
sign Centre to build a “de-Americanized” fab, aiming for production at 28nm by the
end of 2021 and 20nm by the end of 2022. Even if Huawei achieves these goals, it
is doubtful whether such a fab could produce commercially competitive chips or
would extensively employ domestically produced SME. One analysis claims that a
fab using only Chinese equipment is unachievable before 2026.187 Chinese firms not
yet targeted by U.S. controls are likely to be engaged in costly risk mitigation efforts.
For example, YMTC has reportedly dedicated years and hundreds of personnel to
audit its supply chain and try to replace US-based suppliers.188
Although it is nearly impossible for China to compete with cutting-edge foundries
within the next 10 years, China’s share of trailing-edge wafer fabrication will almost
certainly continue increasing. China’s prospects for scaling up competitive domestic
firms ( YMTC and CXMT ) in advanced memory chip fabrication are notably better. 189
Last, China’s leaders now seem to be focused on “post-Moore disruptive technolo-
gies”: using non-silicon materials and new fabrication paradigms for performance
gains.190
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
The rise of the foundry business model streamlined the division of labor between
chip designers and contract manufacturers to the point that there are very limited
spillover benefits ( commercially ) for domestic foundry capacity. Although the glob-
al foundry market is expected to grow to nearly USD 100 billion by 2025,191 only cut-
ting-edge foundries ( meaning TSMC, Samsung and possibly, Intel ) enjoy high profit
margins and therefore, benefit from significant revenue capture. The lack of bene-
fits combined with increasingly high barriers to entry ( not just at the cutting edge )
explain why governments’ pushes for domestic wafer fabrication are not commer -
cially motivated. China’s efforts to promote domestic fabrication are driven by the
threat of U.S. restrictions on inputs to fab production hobbling the capabilities of
Chinese firms across a range of applications.
National security dimension
There is a limited risk of espionage during wafer fabrication. Implementing a “hard-
ware backdoor” during the back-end processes is much more efficient and effec-

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
40
tive. Advanced wafer fabrication capabilities also impact military utility, as armed
forces generally rely on domestic fabs. Most military-use chips are still made at
trailing-edge nodes, but future uses such as AI functions might need cutting-edge
fabrication. This explains the U.S. government’s placement of SMIC on the U.S. En-
tity List in December 2020: “Items uniquely required to produce semiconductors at
advanced technology nodes 10 nanometers or below will be subject to a presumption
of denial to prevent such key enabling technology from supporting China’s military
modernization efforts.”192
Resilience
Because cutting-edge wafer fabrication is limited to Taiwan and South Korea, in-
creasing the resilience of the manufacturing supply chain by diversifying fabs geo-
graphically has strategic importance for several governments. Cutting-edge wafer
fabrication constitutes a concentrated point of failure in case of natural disasters
or geopolitical conflicts with severe spillover damage in many industries, shown by
the current “chip crunch” affecting the automotive manufacturing sector. But bar -
riers to replicability make it highly unlikely that cutting-edge fabrication will move
away significantly from Taiwan and South Korea for many years. Resilience would be
increased to some extent by the fabs TSMC and Samsung recently announced that
they would build in the US, but TSMC has made clear that most of its investments
and its most advanced process nodes will remain in Taiwan.
Equipment ( SME ) ( input )
Semiconductor manufacturing equipment ( SME ) can be roughly divided into two
categories: front-end equipment for wafer fabrication and back-end equipment
for assembly, test and packaging ( ATP ). The front-end ( wafer fabrication ) can con-
sist of more than 1000 production steps. Therefore, today’s fabs rely on roughly 50
different types of highly specialized manufacturing equipment. 193 Even the largest
SME suppliers specialize in developing equipment only for certain production steps,
such as deposition, lithography, cleaning or process control. Thus, to successfully
set up a process node, fabs need equipment from a variety of suppliers. Wafer fab-
rication equipment vendors have close research collaborations with fabs, chemical
suppliers and research organizations. Generally speaking, back-end equipment is
less complex and less expensive, and the back-end consists of fewer process steps
resulting in fewer types of equipment and thus, significantly lower investment costs
for a new back-end fab.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
41
The market
Although there are many different SME suppliers, the equipment necessary for each
manufacturing step is often controlled by only a very few companies, resulting in a
highly concentrated market for certain types of equipment.194 The largest SME sup-
pliers by revenue are Applied Materials, KLA and Lam Research in the United States,
Tokyo Electron in Japan and ASML in the Netherlands. ASML is the only supplier
for the most advanced type of lithography equipment, necessary to manufacture
chips below 7nm. Tokyo Electron holds more than 90% of the photoresist processing
market.195 Applied Materials controls most of the market for deposition and doping
equipment.196
The global SME market grew from USD 22 billion in 2003 to around USD 69 billion in
2020.197 Not surprisingly, the countries with the highest investments in fab capacity
( South Korea, Taiwan and China ) are also the most important sales markets for SME
suppliers. In 2020, the three countries together accounted for 73% of equipment
sales.
Barriers to entry
How hard it is to enter the SME market and successfully compete with the market
leaders depends on various factors. First, SME suppliers have significant R&D costs;
R&D margins are typically 11–16%. Second, especially for the most advanced types
of equipment, such as extreme-ultraviolet ( EUV ) lithography, suppliers rely on a vast
supply chain ( in the case of ASML, more than 5000 suppliers ).198 Third, SME suppli-
ers have very close, decades-long business relationships with fabs. That said, there
are types of equipment, especially in the back-end, that are easier to manufacture
and thus, lower barriers to entry for new companies. However, compared to other
process steps and inputs in the semiconductor value chain, front-end equipment
certainly has among the highest market-entry barriers.
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
The 02 Special Project, instituted in 2009, aimed to generally localize required equip-
ment for 90nm processes, develop equipment prototypes for 65nm and make tech-
nological breakthroughs for 45nm and below. 199 The MiC 2025 roadmap directed that
Chinese enterprises should reach the “international first echelon” by 2030 in pro-
cess equipment at nodes of 90nm and below, and in lithography technology includ-
ing EUV. IC equipment was also prioritized in the 13th Five-Year Plan for S&T Innova-
tion ( 2016–2020 ), which listed goals including 14nm etching equipment and 28nm

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
42
immersion lithography machines.200 The 14th Five-Year Plan ( 2021–2025 ) summary
released in March 2021 listed R&D in IC priority equipment and breakthroughs in IC
advanced industrial processes among key challenges to tackle in frontier S&T fields.
The imperative to import substitute SME increased sharply when U.S. export con-
trols were introduced in 2020 targeting Huawei and SMIC. The declared intention for
the Big Fund’s Phase II is to provide “a sustained high level of support” for develop-
ment of specific SME categories. 201 In 2020, Beijing instituted significant tax relief
for firms engaged in semiconductor manufacturing at nodes of 65nm and below. 202
This was followed in March 2021 with the suspension of import taxes until 2030 on
certain SME parts and materials where the domestic industry cannot provide the
required performance.203
Subnational governments have also focused on SME development in multiple IC de-
velopment plans over the last two years. Shanghai’s 2021–2025 IC plan, for example,
includes supporting R&D and industrialization for “12-inch high-end etching, clean-
ing, ion implantation, lithography, thin film, wet process, heat treatment and optical
measurement equipment.”204 Shanghai’s Lingang Special Area for developing the IC
industry includes a bonded manufacturing zone, where components can be import-
ed duty-free.205
Chinese authorities also seem to have pushed largely unsuccessful foreign M&A at-
tempts in the SME sector. The stymied 2016 bid by Fujian Grand Chip for the German
equipment maker Aixtron, for example, was backed by the Big Fund and linked to
various Chinese state-owned enterprises and government agencies.206
Competitive position of the Chinese industry
The U.S. export control measures targeting Huawei and SMIC have highlighted the
dependence of China’s semiconductor industry on foreign SME. In mid-2020, a for -
mer director of China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology said that
90% of Chinese industry’s SME needs were imported. 207 According to one foreign
estimate in early 2021, China’s SME sector met less than 8% of the Chinese indus-
try’s demand, with “little to no capacity to build ( for ) photolithography, wafer inspec-
tion, advanced ion implantation, atomic layer etching, and testing advanced logic
chips. ”208
The global market share of Chinese SME vendors in 2019 was estimated at less than
2% in every major category except equipment for packaging and test. 209 Except for
Naura and AMEC, in 2020 Chinese SME vendors had revenues of less than USD 150
million210; for comparison, one U.S. firm ( Applied Materials ) reported USD 17.2 billion

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
43
revenue in fiscal 2020.211 A survey in early 2021 of 10 leading Chinese SME vendors
revealed that only one ( AMEC ) was making products for sub-14nm processes, al -
though many offered products for 28nm processes.212 Most equipment produced by
Chinese firms goes not to wafer fabs but to semiconductor ATP , and to manufactur-
ing of solar panels and flat-panel displays.213
In May 2021, Chinese media claimed that for 22–45nm processes, the nation had
achieved the technical capability to substitute for foreign sources in SME, except-
ing photolithography.214 In this production step, China’s foreign dependence extends
well beyond the cutting-edge process nodes for which ASML is the sole supplier. The
one notable Chinese supplier, SMEE, has achieved mass production only at 90nm.
The firm aims to commercialize a 28nm machine as early as Q4 2021. SMEE is re-
portedly the government’s bet to eventually substitute for ASML, Canon and Nikon.215
In 2020, a Chinese state institute published internationally peer-reviewed research
indicating progress in 5nm laser lithography, but by the researchers’ own admission,
this remains “far away” from production technology.216
Chinese firms are now reportedly trying more systematically to switch to domestic
SME suppliers to mitigate the risk of new U.S. measures further cutting off access
to foreign sources, partly due to pressure from Chinese authorities to do so.217 How-
ever, according to one estimate, in 2020 Chinese firms reduced their purchases of
US-sourced equipment by 16% foreign SME vendors continue to see strong sales
growth in China.218 In 2020, China became the largest market globally for SME sales,
growing by 39%.219
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
Although the Chinese industry still has miniscule market share, significant basic re-
search progress seems to have been achieved, and Chinese firms have some pres-
ence in every SME category.220 In this context, the picture could change significantly
over the decade with scale production rolled out by domestic firms in some SME
categories, particularly with involvement of well-resourced state-owned conglom-
erates like CETC. However, even if Chinese SME vendors catch up in certain types of
equipment ( more likely in the back-end than in the front-end ), it is nearly impossi-
ble for China to “de-Americanize” within this decade across the dozens of types of
equipment necessary for wafer fabrication.
In May 2021, research progress on immersion lithography equipment ( necessary for
Chinese lithography to advance below 90nm ) was reported by Chinese media as in a
“state of steady progress, ” suggesting that near-term breakthroughs are not expect-
ed. EUVL development ( critical for commercial-scale production below 14nm ) has

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
44
also progressed in some aspects but remains far from manufacturing implementa-
tion.221 Even with a well-resourced and coordinated national R&D effort to achieve
functional EUVL, it remains many years away given the number of complex systems
that must be developed and integrated, barring technical assistance from foreign
industry leaders.222
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
Increasing the competitiveness of China’s SME suppliers is important to the Chi-
nese government because of significant spillover benefits. Chinese fabs today face
a dilemma: Relying on US-origin SME creates business continuity risk, due to po-
tential export restrictions relying. However, on currently far inferior Chinese-origin
SME results in lower yield and lower utilization, making it impossible to compete
internationally even at mature nodes. An internationally competitive domestic SME
industry would allow Chinese-owned fabs to “de-Americanize” faster and thus,
significantly reduce risk from U.S. export controls. Therefore, Chinese government
authorities will continue to focus on supporting China’s SME industry despite ( in
fact, precisely because of ) substantial barriers to entry, especially for cutting-edge
front-end equipment, such as EUV lithography.
National security dimension
SME is an effective chokepoint vis-à-vis China as shown by U.S. export controls
targeting Huawei, although Chinese progress with import substitution might pro-
gressively ameliorate this issue. Restricting the export of certain types of SME to
curb adversaries’ technological progress has a long history in the US. 223 Today, the
Wassenaar Arrangement lists around 20 types of SME that fall under the dual-use
regulation for which member states impose export restrictions.224
Although there is neither a direct espionage risk nor immediate military utility
from SME, the national security dimension ( limiting an adversary’s technological
advancements ) is the main motivation for SME export controls. In this context, the
U.S. National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence recently recommend-
ed internationally coordinated restrictions on export to China of SME for process
nodes at 16nm and below, to impede development by China of AI-based military
capabilities.225
Resilience dimension
Cutting-edge front-end SME in some ways constitutes a concentrated point of fail-
ure with potentially significant spillover damage, but disruptions in the supply chain
typically do not have an immediate impact, because the supply is not consumable.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
45
Foundries and IDMs acquire SME only when building or upgrading a fab. Thus, com-
pared to consumable supplies such as chemicals or wafers, the resilience of the
international SME supply chain is less of an issue for governments than industry
competitiveness and adversarial actions by national rivals. Barriers to entry mean
that replicating SME production domestically is unattractive, unless conditions
align to attract foreign industry leaders. Taiwan’s government, for example, is trying
to leverage the island’s dominance in fabrication to persuade foreign SME vendors
to locate business activities in Taiwan.226
Chemicals and Materials ( input )
The semiconductor industry relies on an extensive number of chemicals and mate-
rials for wafer fabrication ( front-end ) and assembly, test and packaging ( back-end ).
The whole manufacturing process utilizes as many as 400 chemical products, many
of which are protected by trade secrets. 227 To ensure node shrinkage, highly pure
chemicals, gases and materials are necessary; contamination requirements are of-
ten in the range of a few parts per trillion ( ppt ) with dozens of control parameters.228
Generally speaking, during assembly, test and packaging, fewer chemicals are used,
and the purity requirements are less strict than during wafer fabrication. Front-end
fabs rely on materials such as photomasks and photoresists, specialty gases and
wet chemicals. Back-end fabs rely on organic substrates, ceramic packages, resins,
and bonding wires. 229 Chemical suppliers closely collaborate with equipment ven-
dors and fabs during research and development. As fabs depend on a steady supply
of highly pure chemicals, chemical suppliers undergo an extensive quality control
process before being allowed to supply chemicals to a specific foundry or IDM.230
The market
Because of the range of materials necessary for the semiconductor production pro-
cess, there are dozens of different suppliers most of which are in Japan, the Unit-
ed States and Europe. Yet the market can be highly concentrated when looking at
chemicals for particular process steps. For example, three Japanese EUV photoresist
suppliers ( Tokyo Ohka Kogyo, JSR and Shin-Etsu Chemical ) have a combined market
share of more than 90%.231 Moreover, as photoresists are fine-tuned for specific pro-
duction processes fabs often single-source photoresists.232 However, like the rest of
the chip industry, chemicals and materials are always evolving, not just to ensure
node shrinkage but increasingly also in the back-end for advanced packaging.
Barriers to entry

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
46
The market-entry barriers vary depending on the chemical or material and produc-
tion process step. The purity requirements for materials used during assembly, test
and packaging are less strict, and new suppliers might have an easier time enter -
ing this market. The highly pure wet chemicals and gases needed for wafer fabri-
cation are often produced by large suppliers, such as BASF, DuPont, Air Liquide and
Shin-Etsu. For smaller suppliers, barriers to entry are high. It is hard to achieve the
necessary economies of scale to constantly invest in better purification mecha-
nisms in their plants to ensure the necessary levels of purity for electronic-grade
chemicals.233
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
Materials development was emphasized in the 02 Special Project. 234 Photoresists
were prioritized in the 2014 Outline and in the 14th FYP ( March 2021 ), and photomask
materials in the MiC 2025 roadmap. Materials generally, including many specific cat-
egories like photoresists, “high-purity chemicals” and “high-end electronic chemi-
cals, ” are emphasized in the current IC development plans of several subnational
governments, always in the context of developing a wider IC production cluster and
value chain. The tax relief measures introduced nationally in April 2020 and March
2021 include import tariff exemptions for raw materials that “cannot be produced
domestically or whose performance cannot meet their needs, ” with specific refer -
ence to photoresists and photomasks.
 The Big Fund’s Phase II is reportedly prioritizing investments in cleaning and chem-
ical grinding equipment.235 National and subnational-level industry plans also focus
on development of compound semiconductor materials, such as silicon carbide and
gallium nitride, a developing field that seems to be receiving attention from senior
national leaders.236
Competitive position of the Chinese industry
In early 2021, one expert assessed that Chinese firms still lagged in critical mate-
rials, such as IC-grade polysilicon, EUV materials and photoresists. 237 However, the
research efforts driven by the 02 Special Project have helped Chinese firms progress
toward limited capacity for import substitution in this sector, although not toward
near-term global competitiveness. For example, in 2020 the Chinese firm Nata Op-
toelectronic Materials produced an argon fluoride ( ArF ) photoresist material that
passed tests for use in 50nm processes. Although this achievement is notable, this
product is unlikely to support viable production by Chinese fabs at sub-50nm nodes,
and very unlikely at sub-10nm. 238 In  January 2021, another firm ( Suzhou Crystal

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
47
Clear Chemical ) imported equipment that the firm claims will allow it to produce
photoresists on a large scale for use at 45–28nm nodes within three years.239
China has one potential advantage in materials: global dominance in extraction and
processing for critical minerals used in the semiconductor value chain. For rare
earths, one April 2021 study estimated that of the 17 rare earth elements, China
led in extraction for 9 and in refining for 14. Although steps are being taken by the
US, Australia and Japan to reduce Chinese dominance, China remains the primary
source for rare earths used in memory, logic and analog semiconductors. 240 China
also accounts for 80% of the world’s supply of tungsten, another mineral critical
for semiconductor production, and 60% of the global semiconductor industry’s con-
sumption of fluorspar.241
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
Chinese suppliers should benefit from the vast amounts of funding now available for
anything semiconductor-related and efforts by subnational governments to promote
materials production in integration with other value chain segments—especially in
Shanghai, the most promising hub of China’s semiconductor industry. Thus, for types
of materials with less strict purity requirements especially in the back-end Chinese
suppliers most likely will play a stronger role over the next years. For high-perfor -
mance materials used in cutting-edge wafer fabrication, the market-entry barriers
are substantial. It is unlikely that Chinese suppliers will be able to successfully en-
ter this market segment and challenge international incumbents within the next 10
years.
In critical minerals, China is unlikely to exploit its dominance to the advantage of its
domestic semiconductor materials sector in view of the international blowback that
this would cause. However, in a worsening geopolitical climate, this action cannot be
completely ruled out.
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
There are significant barriers to entry for production of cutting-edge front-end
chemicals. However, there are also strong spillover benefits for China from raising
the international competitiveness of Chinese chemical suppliers. The main such
benefit is to become less reliant on U.S. chemicals suppliers and thus, “de-American-
ize” semiconductor manufacturing, similar to import substitution efforts in China’s
SME sector that are motivated by risk of additional U.S. export restrictions. In this

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
48
decade, it is highly likely that Chinese suppliers will be able to increase their global
market shares for bulk chemicals and materials with less strict purity requirements.
National security dimension
There is no espionage risk from chemicals and very limited military utility, but sev-
eral chemicals constitute a chokepoint that can be exploited through export re-
strictions. The export of various etching gases, photoresists and masks has been
restricted for a long time. For example, U.S. suppliers need a license to export these
materials to China.242 Chokepoint exploitation has not been limited to China. In 2019,
the Japanese government restricted the export of key chemicals ( photoresists, etch-
ing gases, hydrogen fluoride ) to South Korea without an export license. 243 This led
South Korea to invest significantly in its own capacity to produce these chemicals.244
Resilience dimension
There is potential for significant spillover damage from this sector, because fabs
depend on a steady supply of chemicals and materials sourced from a global supply
chain with concentrated points of failure. Several semiconductor materials are cur-
rently in short supply due to natural disasters, fires in production plants, increasing
demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic and lack of economic incentives to immedi-
ately increase production capacity.245 This shortage has contributed to constraints
on the global supply of semiconductors, affecting many industrial sectors worldwide.
Entry barriers to replicating production of high-end chemicals create obstacles to
diversifying the global value chain in this field, although particular governments may
be able to leverage existing advantages in other steps of the value chain. For exam-
ple, Taiwan is trying to leverage its dominance in fabrication to attract foreign in-
dustry leaders in other processes and inputs. For critical minerals, the prospects for
significantly diversifying the global supply away from China remain uncertain over
the next decade, although the US and some of its allies are investing considerable
resources toward this goal.246
Wafers ( input )
Wafers form the basis of semiconductor manufacturing, and fabs rely on a steady
supply of highly pure and highly plane wafers. The equipment for a fab’s process
node is designed for wafers with a specific diameter, such as 300mm, 200mm or
150mm. Wafers use various materials. The most important one, by far, is silicon ( Si ).
Apart from silicon wafers, there are “compound” wafers, such as silicon carbide
( SiC ), gallium nitride ( GaN ) and gallium arsenide ( GaAs ). Because the physical prop-
erties of these wafers differ from those of silicon, these materials excel at certain
applications where resistance to heat, high voltage or high frequencies is neces-

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
49
sary.247 However, these compound or wide-bandgap ( WBG ) wafers are more costly to
produce, and although their market share is quickly growing for certain applications,
it is still miniscule.
The market
The global silicon wafer market has been stable at around USD 11 billion for the
past three years. 248 But the market is also highly concentrated. With the success-
ful acquisition249 of Siltronic ( Germany ) by GlobalWafers ( Taiwan ), four companies
will control more than 90% of the global market: Shin-Etsu ( Japan ), Sumco ( Japan ),
GlobalWafers ( Taiwan ) and SK Siltron ( Korea ).250
Silicon wafers are cut out of monocrystalline ingots made from polycrystalline sil -
icon. The supplier market for this highly pure ( 99.999999999% )251 polycrystalline
silicone is similarly concentrated. Wacker ( Germany ), Hemlock ( US ) and Tokuyama
( Japan ) control more than 80% of the market.
Compared to silicon, the global market for SiC wafers is significantly smaller, around
USD 400 million, and less concentrated. 252 Important SiC wafer suppliers are Cree
( US ), Showa Denko ( Japan ), Rohm ( Japan ) and GT Advanced Technologies ( UK ).253
Barriers to entry
Similar to chemicals and other semiconductor materials, key barriers to entry are
the high purity and planeness requirements. The quality of the wafer has a direct
impact on the yield rate of the fab. At the same time, 300mm silicon wafers account
for only around 5% of a fab’s operational costs. Thus, fabs are hesitant to switch to
new wafer suppliers.254
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
The 2014 Outline and the MiC 2025 roadmap targeted 300mm and 200mm wafers as
a “production line key material. ” In 2019, it was estimated that the state subsidized
around 20% of the raw wafer price for purchases by Chinese firms.255 Raw wafer pro-
duction is heavily emphasized in the current crop of subnational governments’ IC de-
velopment plans, perhaps reflecting anticipation of constraints on foreign-sourced
supplies due to the worsening international political climate.
Competitive position of the Chinese industry

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
50
China’s wafer production capacity remains relatively low by international standards.
Many Chinese firms have developed technology for 300mm and 200mm wafers, al -
though the quality and production still appear to significantly lag those of the global
leaders.256
The 14th Five-Year Plan highlighted compound or “third-generation” wafer materials
as a development priority, and in May 2021, they were likely discussed under the ru-
bric of “post-Moore disruptive technologies” at a meeting of the ST&I SLG concern-
ing implementation of the Five-Year Plan.257 Shanghai’s 2021–2025 IC Development
plan emphasizes development of 300mm wafer production and third-generation
wafer materials ( SiC and GaN ), with ambitions for a “silicon carbide valley” concen-
trating SiC-related materials production. 258 A National Innovation Centre for Third
Generation Semiconductors was approved in early 2021 to be located in the Suzhou
Industrial Park, a high-tech development zone close to Shanghai and several na-
tionally leading institutes in Suzhou conducting semiconductor-related research.259
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
Although raw wafers could be viewed as a commodity in the semiconductor value
chain, they are a foundational component in which quality and reliability are at a
premium. Thus, Chinese producers are unlikely to be able to compete on price alone
with international customers. As is often the case across the value chain, the dom-
inant market share and technological advancement of existing leaders in this sec-
tor outside China mean that Chinese firms will likely remain restricted to lower-end
products and domestic customers over the next 5 to 10 years in the case of silicon
wafers.260
However, China’s prospects in SiC/GaN look better. In 2016, an expert identified a
concerted effort to develop an “integrated compound semiconductor value chain, ”
by leveraging China’s huge market for relevant applications ( lighting and power man-
agement electronics ), the Big Fund’s support and recruitment of foreign industry
experts. This position was reflected in significant Chinese representation on SEMI’s
newly established Power and Compound Semiconductors Committee in 2015. 261
Huawei’s leveraging of GaN-based power amplifiers for radio antennas in 5G market
leadership is an early sign of what might be possible for Chinese firms in this field.262
Strategic dimensions

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
51
Competitiveness dimension
The low revenue capture combined with moderate spillover benefits and substan-
tial market-entry barriers make silicon wafers an unlucrative market to enter from
an economic perspective. At the same time, high-quality wafers are a prerequisite
for China’s increased self-reliance in fabs. Moreover, the market is less concentrat-
ed than in other areas and has relatively high growth potential in compound semi-
conductors, making the wafer production market more lucrative for China to enter.
Spillover benefits are potentially higher for compound semiconductors, given the
demand from China’s wider manufacturing sector for relevant applications such as
power semiconductors and radio frequency chips.
National security dimension
In theory, silicon wafers are a substantial chokepoint for Chinese fabs as they al -
most exclusively rely on non-Chinese wafer suppliers. However, this chokepoint has
not been exploited by the U.S. government because there are no dominant U.S. wa-
fer suppliers, or U.S. firms dominant in the upstream value chain for foreign wafer
suppliers. This explains why ( compared to other critical inputs, such as chemicals,
SME or EDA ) wafers have not played a key role in the US–China technology rivalry.
However, silicon wafers have been subject to U.S. export restrictions in the past.263
Resilience dimension
In the case of a supply shortage, there would be substantial spillover damage. With-
out wafers, fabs cannot manufacture chips. However, the silicon and compound wa-
fer markets are less concentrated than other inputs and process steps, and fabs
typically source from several suppliers. The trend toward increased wafer produc-
tion capacity in China may also increase the resilience of the global supply chain:
Raw wafer production does not imply espionage risk, and much Chinese wafer pro-
duction will likely ( due to its relatively lower quality ) service domestic demand, mak-
ing more capacity available in wafer fabs outside mainland China.
Assembly, Test and Packaging: The Back-End ( process step )
Assembly, test and packaging ( ATP ) is the last step in the semiconductor manufac-
turing process after wafer fabrication. The finished silicon wafer must be sliced, and
the individual chips must be tested and packaged. Just like front-end fabs, back-
end fabs rely on equipment and chemicals suppliers. The back-end processes are
significantly less complex, the equipment less expensive and the requirements for
the purity of chemicals lower. IDMs and foundries either have their own back-end
fabs or rely on outsourced semiconductor assembly and test ( OSAT ) companies that
specialize in these process steps. The back-end processes are labor-intensive and
have lower profit margins.264 OSAT companies maintain very close relationships with

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
52
IP and EDA vendors as well as fabs. New packaging technologies become increas-
ingly important to ensure cost-effective and energy-efficient chips. In this regard,
heterogenous integration is an innovation with high potential. 265 Advanced packag-
ing also increases the complexity of back-end processes and leads to necessarily
closer collaboration between front-end and back-end as well as chip design.266
The Market
Market consolidation, as a typical feature of the semiconductor value chain, applies
to the OSAT market as well. The 20 largest companies held 92% of the market in
2019 and are geographically concentrated. Today, 9 of the 10 largest OSAT provid-
ers are located in mainland China, Taiwan and Singapore.267 China and Taiwan alone
make up more than 60% of the global OSAT capacity. North America accounts for
only 3% of the global OSAT capacity.268
The global packaging market had a value of USD 43 billion in 2019. 269 The largest
OSAT company by revenue is ASE Group ( Taiwan ) with USD 8.5 billion revenue in
2019.270 Second in line is the only large OSAT company headquartered in the United
States: Amkor Technologies ( USD 4.31 billion revenue ),271 which fabricates in Korea,
Taiwan, China and Malaysia.272, 273 The OSAT market in Singapore and Malaysia has
lost market share over the last 10 years, but Chinese companies, such as JCET ( third
largest global OSAT company 274 ), increased their share significantly to 19%, com-
pared to ASE Group with 26% in 2019.275
Barriers to Entry
Although the market consolidated over the past 15 years, it is less concentrated
than cutting-edge wafer fabrication, and there are fewer barriers to entry in compar-
ison. Similar to fabrication, OSAT companies rely on equipment suppliers and chem-
icals. But market entry for OSAT companies requires less capital, due to cheaper
and less complex equipment and chemicals. Because IDMs and foundries are OSAT
companies’ customers, establishing these relationships is a market-entry barrier.276
However, the market’s standout feature is labor intensity, and high labor costs are
inevitable. For that reason, back-end processes have been primarily outsourced, re-
sulting in their current geographic concentration.
One key to success in ATP is close cooperation with EDA vendors and IP suppliers
as well as foundries. As chips become more complex, and advanced packaging be-

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
53
comes more important, OSAT companies need to be linked to the ecosystem with
material and equipment suppliers as well as access to R&D.277
The Chinese government’s efforts to increase self-reliance
China instituted multiple packaging-related R&D projects under the 02 Special
Project, and the 2014 Outline, MiC 2025 roadmap and 2016 National Informatization
Plan all emphasized developing various packaging techniques. By 2017, authorities
claimed that China’s “packaging enterprises had moved from low-end to high-end,
and three-dimensional high-density integration technology had reached internation-
ally advanced levels.” 278 Combined with the market’s structural features, this ad-
vancement has allowed Chinese firms to capture their largest market share across
the global value chain in this process step.
The 2014 Outline also advocated consolidation of the domestic packaging and test
sector through corporate mergers. With this approach, China’s three leading firms in
this sector more than tripled their share of the global top 10 companies’ revenues
over 2011–2017, moving on to international acquisitions. 279 In 2015, the Big Fund
helped underwrite a USD 780 million buyout by state-backed JCET of the world’s
then-fourth largest packaging and testing firm in Singapore. In 2016, the Big Fund
supported the creation of a joint venture between Tongfu and U.S. industry leader
AMD’s subsidiaries in China and Malaysia, giving Tongfu access to more advanced
packaging technologies.280 However, this outbound M&A has met obstacles in the
packaging and test sector, as elsewhere. For example, Tsinghua Unigroup’s attempt-
ed simultaneous acquisitions in 2015 of Taiwan’s second, third and fourth largest
chip assembly firms were blocked by Taiwanese authorities for security reasons.281
Chinese authorities are also watching global trends in modular manufacturing and
other cutting-edge developments in packaging. The city of Zhuhai’s 2020–2025 IC
Development Plan aims to build a RMB 10 billion manufacturing cluster around
compound semiconductors, modular manufacturing and packaging and test. 282 In
2019, the Big Fund’s managing entity stated that its Phase II investments would
seek to promote integration of ATP with equipment and fabrication in a “virtual IDM
model” .283 Multiple subnational governments are providing subsidies for ATP-related
items, including with specific reference to applications and materials such as power
semiconductors or compound semiconductors ( silicon carbide and gallium nitride )
that were prioritized in the 14th Five-Year Plan.
Competitive position of the Chinese industry

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
54
Between 2012 and 2019, China’s share of the global ATP sector increased from 5%
to 20%, and three of the top six firms by sales are now Chinese, compared to one
six years ago.284 More than 20% of the world’s assembly and test facilities are now
located in China. 285 However, this rapid growth was driven heavily by foreign M&A
activity, which for political reasons is unlikely to continue. Political concerns about
Chinese firms may also remove another component of domestic firms’ success in
this segment of the value chain: joint ventures with foreign industry leaders, which
are unusual as multinationals in China’s semiconductor sector are typically present
as branch offices or wholly foreign-owned enterprises.286
Worsening political relations with the US may also impact business operations of
Chinese ATP firms. Even if these firms can securely source equipment from non-US
suppliers, the firms are exposed on the demand side due to U.S. dominance in other
value chain segments. Tongfu, for example, makes around half its revenue from U.S.
customers.287 This risk is aggravated by relatively slim operating margins.288
The innovation activity of Chinese firms in this sector also appears lower com-
pared to chip design or manufacturing, as measured by patent filings in mainland
China. However, these filings also reflect a high degree of indigenization. Domestic
rights-holders account for 91% of these ATP-related patents and hold more patents
in each category than foreign rights-holders.289
Likelihood of China catching up within 5 to 10 years
As a downstream production step, ATP in China will benefit from growth in the Chi-
nese chip design and fab sectors. Domestic firms are now competitive in this field,
and ATP’s role in the value chain means that foreign firms have little incentive to
avoid Chinese providers, barring interference by foreign export controls. Combined
with Chinese authorities’ quest for “leapfrog” solutions, these factors are likely to
focus government support on pushing technological developments in the domes-
tic ATP sector. Some Chinese experts advocate for advanced packaging as the best
way to drive forward China’s entire semiconductor sector, if access to cutting-edge
lithography equipment is cut off.290
However, unless Chinese firms can stay abreast of advances in packaging technolo-
gy, the firms may suffer from a shift in comparative advantage to firms higher up in
the value chain, as this process step becomes less labor-intensive and increasingly
driven by capital and accumulated intellectual property. High-end advanced pack -
aging remains dominated by non-mainland Chinese firms. TSMC leads in this seg-
ment, and Intel ( US ) is also investing heavily.291 Security concerns about packaging
will exert pressure to avoid outsourcing ATP to China, potentially reducing opportu-

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
55
nities for Chinese ATP firms to drive their own technological development by working
with global leaders in design and fabrication.
Strategic dimensions
Competitiveness dimension
Historically, ATP has had significantly lower value-add and profit margins than chip
design or fabrication, making market dominance in ATP relatively less significant
in revenue terms. As a labor-intensive downstream process step, ATP provides low
spillover benefits within the semiconductor value chain. Because there are only
moderate barriers to entry, this step is less geographically concentrated and con-
solidated at the firm level than some of the other production steps.
If ATP becomes more skill-intensive due to the increasing importance of advanced
packaging and less labor-intensive due to higher automation, the value of market
dominance in this production step from a national interest viewpoint is likely to
increase.
National security dimension
 ATP has strategic importance because of the high espionage risk.292 Compromising
a chip in a back-end fab is significantly easier than during design or wafer fabrica-
tion.293 This poses a conflict of interest between governments and industry. From a
national security perspective, the back-end fab should be a trusted entity ideally
within the same jurisdiction. From a business perspective, the back-end process
has been outsourced to Taiwan and China due to low profit margins, low value-add
and high labor costs. 294 The risk of espionage might lead the U.S. government and
others to pressure or compel their firms not to outsource the ATP process to China.
However, efforts to mitigate such risks will face commercial obstacles until more
advanced techniques make the economics of re-shoring OSAT to the US and its ad-
vanced-economy allies more feasible. The likely alternative locations to China ( bar-
ring Taiwan ) are Southeast Asian countries, which are increasingly closely integrat-
ed economically with China. Thus, shifting ATP processes to these countries may not
adequately mitigate security concerns relating to China.
Resilience dimension
Compared to EDA or cutting-edge fabrication, the global ATP sector is not exces-
sively concentrated at the firm level. However, ATP is geographically concentrated
in China and Taiwan, and a significant disruption in both jurisdictions at once ( for
instance, in the event of a military conflict across the Taiwan Strait ) would have se-
rious ramifications for the global value chain.295

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
56
Generally speaking, disruptions in the back-end cause limited spillover damage in
the semiconductor value chain itself, but there is potential for substantial spillover
damage in the broader economy. This can be seen in the current chip shortages
worldwide that are partly due to disruptions in the ATP sector.
The concentration of ATP processes in China, Taiwan and Southeast Asia exposes
front-end manufacturers to business continuity risks.296 However, replication of this
production step elsewhere is relatively easily achieved, given the relatively low bar-
riers to entry and the competitive position of U.S. firms in pushing forward packag-
ing developments. Leadership in advanced packaging techniques will also reduce
the opportunity costs of diversifying ATP processes away from their current loca-
tions of concentration.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
57
4. Conclusion and implications for Europe
China has a significantly stronger position across the entire semiconductor value
chain today compared to 10 years ago. Despite persistent inefficiencies and weak -
nesses in the Chinese ecosystem for semiconductor R&D and production, China
should be expected to continue strengthening its national position in the global
value chain during this decade. Our analysis of the different production steps has
illustrated various reasons for which China will continue to invest in its domestic
semiconductor ecosystem, with different strategic implications associated with
each production step. Our three strategic dimensions and their criteria provide a
framework for assessing the implications of a Chinese semiconductor ecosystem
that is slowly but steadily increasing its capabilities across the board.
From a European perspective, the main takeaways can be summarized as follows.
Competitiveness dimension: The production steps in which China’s efforts are main-
ly driven by economic incentives are chip design, IP, trailing-edge wafer fabrication,
chemicals and ATP . In some of these production steps, China’s domestic industry
is already significantly stronger than Europe’s: China’s global market shares in chip
design, trailing-edge wafer capacity and ATP are multiple times larger than those of
Europe.297 In these production steps, Europe risks not only falling behind still further
but also increasingly relying on Chinese technology providers. In the case of chem-
icals, European suppliers already enjoy a strong market position but might face in-
creasing competition from Chinese suppliers in the future, especially for chemicals
and materials needed in ATP and wafer fabrication at mature nodes. If the Chinese
government continues to substantially invest in its domestic chemicals suppliers, a
similar development could unfold as with the solar industry, in which Chinese sup-
pliers rapidly displaced European ones in markets worldwide.298
National security dimension: Especially in EDA and SME, national security con-
siderations trump all other strategic considerations for China. Both are effective
chokepoints vis-à-vis China that the U.S. government will most likely continue to
utilize. Europe has critical suppliers in both production steps ( ASML for SME and
Mentor for EDA due to the acquisition by Siemens ). Thus, the U.S. government will
most likely push for bilateral agreements to achieve more extensive restrictions on
exports to China than are presently contained in multilateral agreements like Was-
senaar. SME vendors, especially for lithography equipment, rely on various Europe-
an component suppliers ( such as Zeiss ( DE ) for lenses and Trumpf ( DE ) for lasers ).
Therefore, Chinese SME vendors are likely to try sourcing these components instead
of the complete equipment, and increasingly as their capabilities generally improve.
The question is whether Europe will align with the U.S. government’s approach of
expanding export restrictions via these chokepoints.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
58
Resilience dimension: The process step with the highest geographic concentration
is certainly cutting-edge wafer fabrication. Although the Chinese government is
unlikely to succeed in bringing cutting-edge wafer fabrication to China within this
decade, the same is most likely true for Europe. 299 The U.S. is currently in the best
position to increase the resilience of the global cutting-edge wafer fabrication sup-
ply chain through Samsung’s and TSMC’s investments in new US-based fabs within
the next five years. However, the ATP supply chain, especially for future advanced
packaging approaches, must also be geographically diversified. In this, success for
Europe is much more likely, not least because of significantly lower barriers to entry.
The European Union ( EU ) has introduced a range of initiatives to promote the Euro-
pean semiconductor industry. The Important Project of Common European Interest
( IPCEI ) on Microelectronics 2 allows member states to subsidize the construction
of fabs and first industrial deployments. 300 A joint declaration among 22 member
states in December 2020 declared they would strategically invest in the EU’s semi-
conductor ecosystem.301 Semiconductors also play a central role in the EU’s 2030
Digital Compass302 and its New Industrial Strategy.303
However, Europe increasingly needs to account for U.S. pressure for coordinated
measures regarding China’s semiconductor industry. Two days before China passed
its Counter-Sanctions Law, the U.S. Congress passed the USD 250 billion US Inno-
vation and Competition Act, directed at equipping the US for long-term science and
technology competition with China. 304 The act provides for USD 52 billion in subsi-
dies to promote the U.S. semiconductor industry.305 U.S. President Biden declared in
his press release concerning the act’s passage, “We are in a competition to win the
21st century, and the starting gun has gone off. ”306 Competition with China on a glob-
al scale, particularly in strategic technologies including semiconductors, appears to
be a primary concern of the Biden administration that will shape the future of the
US–Europe relationship across many areas.307
Semiconductors were reportedly discussed by European and U.S. policymakers in
June 2021 at the G7-Plus summit. This forum was also attended by South Korea
and Japan, two U.S. security allies that occupy key roles in the semiconductor value
chain. The Leaders’ Communique from this summit declared that the G7 nations will
“consider mechanisms and share best practices to address risks to the resilience of
the critical global supply chains, in areas such as critical minerals and semiconduc-
tors, reflecting on models used elsewhere such as stress-testing. ”308
Straight after the G7-Plus summit, the EU and the U.S. agreed on a Trade and Tech-
nology Council to coordinate “to coordinate approaches to key global trade, econom-
ic, and technology issues” , although reporting suggests that European officials have
qualified expectations for this process.309 The NATO summit in June 2021 set a stron-

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
59
ger tone for potential U.S.–European cooperation on strategic technology matters
involving China, declaring that “China’s growing influence and international policies
can present challenges that we need to address together as an Alliance. ”310
In crafting the best policy mix to address all these issues, consideration must be giv-
en to China’s increasing readiness to punish other countries and their firms for real
or perceived measures that discriminate against Chinese entities. In June 2021, Chi-
na adopted a Counter-Sanctions Law that empowers Chinese authorities to claim
damages or seize assets from entities deemed to be aiding enforcement of measures
by foreign governments that are deemed discriminatory to Chinese interests.311 This
potentially includes export and investment controls concerning semiconductors.
China has also adopted or will soon adopt a range of other laws, including laws cov-
ering export controls, data governance and foreign investment, that provide for such
retaliatory measures.312 As the president of the European Chamber of Commerce in
China recently put it, in this environment European firms “increasingly feel that they
will be used as sacrificial pawns in a game of political chess.”313
However, it is important that European decisionmakers do not interpret this situa-
tion as a Chinese quest for technological autarky, at least within the next 10 years.
China’s leaders have made clear their intention for China’s economy, including the
semiconductor sector, to remain integrated with the outside world. A Chinese tech-
nical expert stated recently, “The development of ICs has to be globalized … There’s
no future for unilateralism pushed by certain countries.” 314 The challenge from the
European viewpoint is that Chinese authorities will try to shape such globalization
to operate on terms that are increasingly beneficial for China, and to move Chinese
firms into a position of international leadership that will inevitably challenge some
European interests.
European leaders need to find the optimal balance on semiconductor policy across
this range of issues that serves European interests, rather than being led by pres-
sure from other national actors, force of circumstance or excessive focus on one
strategic dimension of national interest at the expense of others. This report has
provided a framework for assessing these issues in terms of China’s position in the
global value chain, and the impacts this position has on other actors’ national inter-
ests. A second report, to be published by the end of 2021, will dive deeper into the
implications from a European viewpoint in the global context.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
60
Annex 1: Technical Terms Glossary
AI Artificial Intelligence
ATP assembly, test & packaging
ArF argon fluoride
Back-end assembly, test & packaging ( ATP )
Compound Semiconductors Semiconductors composed of two or more elements
CPU Central Processing Unit
CSIA China Semiconductor Industry Association
DRAM Dynamic Random Access Memory
DUV deep-ultraviolet lithography ( EUV predecessor )
EDA electronic design automation
ESL Electronic System Level
EUVL extreme-ultraviolet lithography
EV electric vehicles
Fab fabrication plant
Foundry company that does contract chip manufacturing
FPGA field programmable gate array 
Front-end Wafer fabrication ( process steps before ATP )
GaAs gallium arsenide
GaN gallium nitride
ICT Information and communications technology
IDM Integrated Device Manufacturer
Imec Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre
IC integrated circuit ( also called “chips” )

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
61
IT Information technology
IoT Internet of Things
IP Intellectual Property
ISA instruction set architectures
NAND non-volatile flash memory
OSAT outsourced semiconductor assembly and test
PDK process design kits
RF radio frequency
S&T Science & Technology
S&TI Science, Technology & Innovation
SME Semiconductor manufacturing equipment
SoC System on Chip
Si silicon
SIA US Semiconductor Industry Association
SiC silicon carbide
WBG wide-bandgap

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
62
Annex 2: Chinese Terms and Acronyms Glossary
Big Fund National Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund
( 国家集成电路产业投资基金 )
Government Guidance Fund
IC Industry Dev LSG
Government Guidance Fund
( 国家集成电路产业投资基金 )
Leading Small Group for Development of the National Integrated Circuit
Industry ( 国家集成电路产业发展领导小组 )
LSG Leading Small Group ( 领导小组 )
Mic 2025 Roadmap “Made in China 2025” Roadmap of Key Technologies
( 《中国制造2025》重点领域技术路线图 )
MiC 2025 Made in China 2025 ( 中国制造2025 ) industrial upgrading strategy
MIIT Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
( 工信部/工业和信息化部 )
MOF Ministry of Finance ( 财政部 )
MOST Ministry of Science and Technology ( 科技部 )
NDRC National Development and Reform Commission
( 发改委/国家发展和改革委员会 )
NML TP National Medium & Long Term Plan for Science and Technology
( 2006–2020 ) ( 国家中长期科学和技术发展规划纲要2006–2020 )
( new iteration for the period 2021-2035 forthcoming )
SOE State Owned Enterprises ( 国有企业 )
State Council
ST&I LSG
State Council ( 国务院 )
Leading Small Group for Reform of the National Science and Technology
System and Building an Innovation System ( 国家科技体制改革和创新体系
建设领导小组 )
Third Generation Semiconductor Compound semiconductors ( 第三代半导体 )
02 Special Project 02 Special Project for Very Large Scale Integrated Circuit Manufacturing
Equipment and Complete Processes ( 极大规模集成电路制造装备及成套工
艺02专项, under NMLTP ( 2006–2020 ) )
13th FYP 13th Five Year Plan for Economic and Social Development ( 2016–2020 )
( 十三五规划/中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划纲要 )

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
63
14th FYP 14th Five Year Plan for Economic and Social Development ( 2021–2025 )
and 2035 Long-Term Vision ( 十四五规划/中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发
展第十四个五年规划和2035年远景目标纲要, March 2021 )
14th FYP S&TI 14th Five Year Plan for Science & Technology Innovation ( forthcoming )
( “十四五”国家科技创新规划 )
2014 Outline National Integrated Circuit Industry Development Outline
( 国家集成电路产业发展推进纲要 ( 2014 ) )

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
64
Annex 3: Chinese official policy documents and
selected other sources
( By category, in descending chronological order )
1. National-level policies
Title Issuing Authority
National Medium & Long Term Plan for Science and
Technology ( 2006-2020 )
国家中长期科学和技术发展规划纲要2006-2020
State Council ( 2005 )
National Integrated Circuit Industry Development
Outline 2014 ( “2014 Outline” )
国家集成电路产业发展推进纲要 ( 2014 )
State Council ( 2014 )
Made in China 2025 Roadmap of Key Technologies
( “MiC Roadmap” )
《中国制造2025》重点领域技术路线图
Chinese Academy of Engineering ( 2015 )
13th Five-Year Plan for the Development of National
Strategic Emerging Industries
“十三五”国家战略性新兴产业发展规划
State Council ( 2016 )
13th Five-Year National Informatization Plan
“十三五”国家信息化规划
State Council ( 2016 )
Guiding Catalogue for Strategic Emerging Industries
Key Products and Services
战略性新兴产业重点产品和服务指导目录
NDRC ( 2017 )
Catalogue of Encouraged Foreign Investment ( 2019 )
鼓励外商投资产业目录（2019年版）
NDRC ( 2019 )
Implementation Opinions on Promoting the
Improvement of the Quality of Manufacturing
Products and Services
工业和信息化部关于促进制造业产品和 服务质量提升的
实施意见
MIIT ( 2019 )
Outline for the Integrated Development of the Yangtze
River Delta
长江三角洲区域一体化发展规划纲要
CCP Central Committee, State Council ( 2019 )
Some Policies to Promote the High-Quality Develop-
ment of the Integrated Circuit and Software Industry
in the New Era
新时期促进集成电路产业和软件产业高质量发展的若干
政策
State Council ( 2020 )

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
65
Title Issuing Authority
Announcement on the Enterprise Income Tax Policy
for Promoting the High-quality Development of the
Integrated Circuit and the Software Industry
关于促进集成电路产业和软件产业高质量发展企业所得
税政策的公告
MOF , MIIT, NDRC ( 2020 )
Circular on Import Tax Policies for Supporting the
Development of the Integrated Circuit and Software
Industry
关于支持集成电路产业和软件产业发展进口税收政策的
通知
MOF , General Administration of Customs, State
Taxation Administration ( 2021 )
14th Five Year Plan for Economic and Social Develop-
ment ( 2021-2025 ) and 2035 Long-Term Vision
十四五规划/中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四
个五年规划和2035年远景目标纲要
State Council ( 2021 )
14th Five Year Plan for Science & Technology
Innovation ( forthcoming )
“十四五”国家科技创新规划
State Council ( 2021 )
National Medium & Long Term Plan for Science and
Technology ( 2021-2035 ) ( forthcoming )
国家中长期科学和技术发展规划纲要2021-2035
State Council ( 2021 )
2. Province-level policies
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Fujian Provincial People´s Government Opinions
on Accelerating the Development of the Integrated
Circuit Design Industry
福建省人民政府加快发展集成电路设计业的意见
Office of Fujian Provincial People´s Government
( 2007 )
Shanghai Municipal People´s Government Policies to
Further Encourage the Development of the Software
and Integrated Circuit Industries
上海市人民政府关于本市进一步鼓励软件产业和集成电
路产业发展的若干政策
Shanghai Municipal People´s Government ( 2012 )
Anhui Provincial People´s Government Opinions on
Accelerating the Development of the Integrated
Circuit Industry
安徽省人民政府办公厅关于加快集成电路产业发展的
意见
Office of Anhui Provincial People´s Government
( 2014 )

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
66
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Shandong Provincial People’s Government Opinions
on Accelerating the Development of Integrated
Circuit Industry by Implementing No.4 Document
( 2014 ) of the State Council
山东省人民政府关于贯彻国发( 2014 )4号文件加快集成
电路产业发展的意见
Shandong Provincial People´s Government ( 2014 )
Hubei Province Action Plan for the Development of
the Integrated Circuit Industry
湖北省集成电路产业发展行动方案
Hubei Provincial People´s Government ( 2014 )
Hunan Province Development Plan for the Integrated
Circuit Industry ( 2015-2020 )
湖南省集成电路产业发展规划（2015-2020年）
Office of Hunan Provincial People´s Government
( 2015 )
Jiangsu Provincial Government Opinions on
Accelerating the Development of the Integrated
Circuit Industry in the Whole Province
江苏省政府关于加快全省集成电路产业发展的意见
Jiangsu Provincial People´s Government ( 2015 )
Tianjin Municipality Implementation Plan for
Constructing a National Advanced Manufacturing
Research and Development Base ( 2015-2020 )
天津市建设全国先进制造研发基地实施方案 
( 2015–2020年 )
Tianjin Municipal People´s Government ( 2015 )
Hubei Province Industry “13th Five-Year”
Development Plan
湖北省工业“十三五”发展规划
Hubei Provincial People´s Government ( 2016 )
Anhui Province “13th Five-Year Plan” for Strategic
Emerging Industries
安徽省战略性新兴产业“十三五”发展规划
Office of Anhui Provincial People´s Government
( 2016 )
Beijing Municipality Guiding Opinions on Acceler-
ating Scientific and Technological Innovation and
Developing the Integrated Circuit Industry
北京市加快科技创新发展集成电路产业的指导意见
Beijing Municipal People´s Government ( 2017 )
Jiangxi Province “13th Five Year Plan” Industry
Economic Development Plan
陕西省“十三五”工业经济发展规划
Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform
Commission ( 2017 )
Office of Zhejiang Provincial People’s Government
Implementation Opinions on Accelerating the
Development of Integrated Circuit Industry
浙江省人民政府办公厅关于加快集成电路产业发展的
实施意见
Office of Zhejiang Provincial People’s Government
( 2017 )
Gansu Province Special Action Plan for the
Development of the Advanced Manufacturing
Industry
甘肃省先进制造产业发展专项行动计划
Gansu Provincial People´s Government ( 2018 )

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
67
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Anhui Province Integrated Circuit Development Plan
( 2018–2021 )
安徽省半导体产业发展规划( 2018-2021年 )
Office of Anhui Provincial People´s Government
( 2014 )
Shandong Province Special Action Plan for the
New Generation Information Technology Industry
( 2018-2022 )
山东省新一代信息技术产业专项规划（2018-2022年）
Shandong Provincial People´s Government ( 2018 )
Some Policies for Accelerating the Development of
the Integrated Circuit Industry in Chongqing Circuit
Industry in Chongqing
重庆市加快集成电路产业发展若干政策
Office of Chongqing Municipal People´s Government
( 2018 )
Implementation Plan for Semiconductor Technologi-
cal Innovation in Chongqing ( 2018–2022 )
重庆市集成电路技术创新实施方案( 2018–2022年 )
Office of Chongqing Municipal People´s Government
( 2018 )
Special Action Plan of Chongqing to Promote the
High-Quality Development of the Manufacturing
Industry ( 2019-2022 ) 重庆市推动制造业高质量发展专
项行动方案 ( 2019–2022年 )
Chongqing Municipal People´s Government ( 2019 )
Sichuan Integrated Circuit and New-Type Display
Industry Cultivation Plan
四川省集成电路与新型显示产业培育方案
Office of Sichuan Province Leading Contact and
Guidance Mechanism for the Integrated Circuit and
New-Type Display Industries ( 2019 )
Hubei Province Suggestions on the High-Quality
Development of Ten Key Industries
湖北省十大重点产业高质量发展意见
Hubei Provincial Development and Reform
Commission ( 2019 )
Some Opinions on Accelerating the Development of
Semiconductor and Integrated Circuit Industry in
Guangdong Province
广东省加快半导体及集成电路产业发展的若干意见
General Office of Guangdong Provincial People’s
Government ( 2020 )
Opinions of the People’s Government of Guangdong
Province on Cultivating and Developing Strategic
Pillar Industry Clusters and Strategic Emerging
Industry Clusters
广东省人民政府关于培育发展战略性支柱产业集群和战
略性新兴产业集群的意见
Guangdong Provincial People´s Government ( 2020 )
Sichuan Provincial People´s Government Opinions
on Promoting the High-Quality Development of the
Manufacturing Industry
四川省人民政府关于推动制造业高质量发展的意见
Sichuan Provincial Party Committee, Sichuan
Provincial People´s Government ( 2020 )
Action Plan of Guangdong Province on Cultivating
Strategic Emerging Industry Clusters of
Semiconductors and Integrated Circuits ( 2021-2025 )
广东省培育半导体及集成电路战略性新兴产业集群行动
计划 ( 20212025年 )
Guangdong Provincial Development and Reform
Commission, Guangdong Provincial Department
of Science and Technology, Guangdong Provincial
Department of Industry and Information Technology
( 2020 )

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
68
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Hebei Provincial People´s Government Work Plan to
Implement the State Council´s “Policies to Promote
the High-Quality Development of the Integrated
Circuit and Software Industry in the New Era”
河北省人民政府关于落实国务院《新时期促进集成电路
产业和软件产业高质量发展的若干政策》的工作方案
Office of Hebei Provincial People´s Government
( 2020 )
Digital Liaoning Development Plan ( 1.0 )
数字辽宁发展规划（1.0版）
Office of Liaoning Provincial People´s Government
( 2020 )
Shanxi Province Policies for Promoting the
High-Quality Development of the Integrated Circuit
and Software Industries in Shanxi Province in the
New Period
山西省新时期促进集成电路产业和软件产业高质量发展
若干政策
Shanxi Provincial People´s Government ( 2020 )
The Task List of Yunnan Province to Implement the
Policies on Promoting the High-quality Development
of the IC Industry and the Software Industry in the
New Era
云南省贯彻落实新时期促进集成电路产业和软件产业高
质量发展若干政策的任务清单
Office of Yunan Provincial People´s Government
( 2021 )
Guangdong 14th Five Year Plan for National
Economic and Social Development and Outline of
the 2035 Long-Term Goals
广东省国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和2035年
远景目标纲要
Guangdong Province People´s Government ( 2021 )
Report on the Analysis of Patents in the Semicon-
ductor and Integrated Circuit Industry in Guangdong
广东省半导体及集成电路产业专利导航分析报告 
Guangdong Administration for Market Regulation
( Guangdong Intellectual Property Administration )
( 2021 )
3. City-level and District-level Policies
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Tianjin Binhai New District Strategic Plan for the
Development of an Integrated Circuit Industry
Cluster ( 2014–2020 )
天津市滨海新区集成电路产业集群化发展战略规划
( 2014–2020 )
Tianjin Binhai New District People´s Government
( 2014 )
Tianjin Binhai New District Opinions on Accelerating
the Development of the Integrated Circuit Design
Industry
天津市滨海新区加快发展集成电路设计产业的意见
Tianjin Binhai New District People´s Government
( 2014 )

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
69
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Dalian Municipal People´s Government Implementa-
tion Opinions for Promoting the Development of the
Integrated Circuit Industry
大连市人民政府关于促进集成电路产业发展的实施意见
Dalian Municipal People´s Government ( 2015 )
Xiamen Municipality Implementation Opinions on
Accelerating the Development of the Integrated
Circuit Industry
厦门市加快发展集成电路产业实施意见
Xiamen Municipal People´s Government ( 2016 )
Nanjing Municipal Government´s Opinions on
Advancing the Development of the Integrated Circuit
Industry
南京市政府关于加快推进集成电路产业发展的意见
Nanjing Municipal People´s Government ( 2016 )
Wuxi Municipality Policy Opinions on Accelerating
the Development of the Integrated Circuit Industry
无锡市加快集成电路产业发展的政策意见
Wuxi Municipal People´s Government ( 2016 )
Ningbo Municipality Integrated Circuit Industry
Three-year Action Plan 2017-2019
宁波市集成电路产业三年攻坚行动计划2017-2019
Ningbo Municipal People´s Government ( 2017 )
Ningbo Municipal People´s Government Implementa-
tion Opinions on Accelerating the Development of the
Integrated Circuit Industry
宁波市人民政府办公厅关于加快推进集成电路产业发展
的实施意见
Ningbo Municipal People´s Government ( 2017 )
Dalian Municipality Measures for the Administration
of Special Funds for Promoting the Development of
Integrated Circuit Industry
大连市促进集成电路产业发展专项资金管理办法
Dalian Economic and Informatization Municipal
Commission, Dalian Bureau of Finance ( 2017 )
Hangzhou Municipal Integrated Circuit Development
Plan 杭州市集成电路产业发展规划
Office of Hangzhou Municipal People´s Government
( 2017 )
Kunshan Municipal Plan for the Development of the
Integrated Circuit Industry ( 2017–2021 )
昆山市集成电路产业发展规划 ( 2017–2021年 )
Office of Kunshan Municipal People´s Government
( 2017 )
Wuxi Municipality Policy Opinions on Further
Supporting the Development of the Integrated Circuit
Industry ( 2018–2022 )
无锡市关于进一步支持集成电路产业发展的政策意见 
( 2018–2020 )
Wuxi Municipal Bureau of Commerce ( 2018 )
Office of Xiamen Municipal People´s Government
Adjusted Detailed Implementation Regulations for
Accelerating the Development of the Integrated
Circuit Industry in Xiamen
厦门市人民政府办公厅关于调整加快发展集成电路产业
实施细则的通知
Office of Xiamen Municipal People´s Government
( 2018 )

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
70
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Implementation Plan for Promoting the Development
of the Integrated Circuit Industry Development in
Jinpu New Area
金普新区促进集成电路产业发展实施方案
Dalian Jinpu New District Management Committee
( 2019 )
Nanjing Municipality Landmark Action Plan for Build-
ing an Integrated Circuit Industry
南京市打造集成电路产业地标行动计划
Nanjing Municipal People´s Government ( 2019 )
Xi´an Municipal Photoelectric Chip ( Integrated
Circuit ) Industry Development Plan ( 2018–2021 )
西安市光电芯片( 集成电路 )产业发展规划  
( 2018–2021年 )
Xi´an Science and Technology Bureau ( 2019 )
Action Plan of Shenzhen to Further Promote the De-
velopment of Integrated Circuit Industry ( 2019–2023 )
深圳市进一步推动集成电路产业发展行动计划
( 2019–2023年 )
Shenzhen Municipal People´s Government ( 2019 )
Some Policies for Accelerating the Development of
the New Generation Semiconductor and Integrated
Circuit Industry in Changsha
长沙市加快新一代半导体和集成电路产业发展若干政策
Office of Changsha Municipal People´s Government
( 2019 )
Wuhan Municipal People´s Government Opinions
on Advancing the High Quality Development of Key
Industries
武汉市人民政府关于推进重点产业高质量发展的意见
Wuhan Municipal People´s Government ( 2019 )
Implementation Plan on Accelerating the
Construction of Digital Shaoxing ( 2019–2022 )
关于加快数字绍兴建设的实施方案 ( 2019–2022年 )
Shaoxing Municipal People´s Government ( 2020 )
Supplementary Notice of Xiamen Municipal Bureau
of Industry and Information Technology on Improving
the City´s Integrated Circuit Industrial Policy
厦门市工业和信息化局关于完善我市集成电路产业政策
的补充通知
Xiamen Municipal Bureau of Industry and Informa-
tion Technology ( 2020 )
Nanjing Municipality Three Year Action Plan for the
Development of the Digital Economy ( 2020–2022 )
南京市数字经济发展三年行动计划 ( 2020–2022年 )
Nanjing Industry and Information Technology Bureau
( 2020 )
Ningbo Hangzhou Bay New Zone IC Industry Planning
宁波杭州湾新区集成电路产业规划
Office of Ningbo Hangzhou Bay New Zone ( 2020 )
Some Policies on Supporting Integrated Circuit
Design Industry Development in the Chengdu
High-tech Industry Development Zone
成都高新技术产业开发区关于支持集成电路设计产业发
展的若干政策
Management Committee of Chengdu High-tech Zone
( 2020 )

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
71
Titel Issuing Authority/Date
Integrated Circuit Industry Development Plan of
the Zhuhai High-tech Zone ( 2020–2025 )
珠海高新区集成电路产业发展规划 ( 2020–2025年 )
Management Committee of Zhuhai High-tech Zone
( 2020 )
Opinions on Staunchly Supporting the Development
of the Integrated Circuit Industry in Zhuhai
珠海市大力支持集成电路产业发展的意见
Office of Zhuhai Municipal People´s Government
( 2020 )
Some Implementation Policies to Promote the Devel-
opment of the Integrated Circuit Industry in Zhuhai
关于促进珠海市集成电路产业发展的若干政策措施
Office of Zhuhai Municipal People´s Government
( 2020 )
Some Policies on Accelerating the High-Quality
Development of the Integrated Circuit Industry in
Wuhan
武汉市加快集成电路产业高质量发展若干政策
Wuhan Municipal People´s Government ( 2020 )
Implementation Plan to Advance an Economic
Development Zone to Innovate and Build New
Heights in Reform and Opening Up
南京市推进经济开发区创新提升打造改革开放新高地
实施方案
Nanjing Municipal People´s Government ( 2021 )
Special Plan for the Integrated Circuit Industry in
the Lingang New Area of China ( Shanghai ) Pilot Free
Trade Zone ( 2021–2025 )
中国( 上海 )自由贸易试验区临港新片区集成电路产业专
项规划 ( 2021–2025 )
China ( Shanghai ) Lingang New Pilot Free Trade Zone
( 2021 )
Wuxi Hi.-Tech Zone Policy Opinions on Further
Accelerating the High-Quality Development of the
Integrated Circuit Industry ( Trial Implementation )
无锡高新区关于进一步加快推进集成电路产业高质量发
展的政策意见( 试行 )
Wuxi National High-tech Industrial Development
Zone Management Committee ( 2021 )
2020 White Paper on the Development of Integrated
Circuit Industry in Suzhou
2020年苏州市集成电路产业发展白皮书
Suzhou Municipal Industry and Information Bureau
( 2021 )
Some Measures to Promote the High-Quality Devel-
opment of the Integrated Circuit Industry in Suzhou
苏州市促进集成电路产业高质量发展的若干措施
Suzhou Municipal People´s Government ( 2021 )
Zhuhai 14th Five Year Plan for National Economic
and Social Development and Outline of the 2035
Long-Term Goals
珠海市国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三
五年远景目标纲要
Zhuhai Development and Reform Commission ( 2021 )
Office of Shijiazhuang Municipal People´s Govern-
ment Implementation Opinions on Promoting the
High Quality Development of the Integrated Circuit
and Software Industries in a New Era
石家庄人民政府办公室关于新时期促进集成电路产业和
软件产业高质量发展的实施意见
Office of Shijiazhuang Municipal People´s
Government

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
72
4. Other sources
Title Source
China Integrated Circuit Industry Talent White Paper
( 2019–2020 )
中国集成电路产业人才白皮书( 2019–2020年版)
China Semiconductor Industry Association ( CSIA )
Special Press Conference on “Large-scale
Integrated Circuit Manufacturing Equipment and
Complete Process”
国家科技重大专项“极大规模集成电路制造装备及成套工
艺”专项新闻发布会
Major Special Projects of the Office of the Ministry of
Science and Technology
Semiconductors–Forging Ahead, Supporting
the Investment Layout of the Integrated Circuit
Industry Fund
砥砺前行, 助力产业—集成电路产业基金投资布局
Tianfeng Securities
Pan, J., Chen, J.
Understanding the Layout of the Big Fund Phase 1,
Looking Ahead to the Second Phase
一文看懂国家大基金一期布局，展望二期看点
Guoxin Securities
Ou Yang, S., Tang, H.
After the Fruitful First Phase of the Big Fund,
the Second Phase is Ready
大基金一期投资硕果累累，二期蓄势待发
East Money
Wang, H.
Discussion on the Recent Trends and Core Issues in
the Semiconductor Industry
半导体产业近期趋势及核心问题讨论
CITIC Securities

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
73
References
1 Farrell, H., & Newman, A. L. ( 2019 ). Weaponized Interdependence: How Global Economic Networks Shape State
Coercion. https:/ /direct.mit.edu/isec/article/44/1/42/12237/Weaponized-Interdependence-How-Global-Economic
2 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
3 Fuller, D. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers; Fuller, D. B. ( 2020 ). Cutting Off Our Nose to Spite Our Face: US Policy towards China in
Key Semiconductor Industry Inputs, Capital Equipment and Electronic Design Automation Tools. SSRN Electronic
Journal. https:/ /doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3672079; Verwey, J. ( 2019a ). Chinese Semiconductors Industrial Policy: Past
and Present. https:/ /ssrn.com/abstract=3441951; Verwey, J. ( 2019b ). Chinese Semiconductor Industrial Policy: Pro-
spects for Future Success. https:/ /ssrn.com/abstract=3441959.
4 National Major Projects website. ( 2009 ). National Science and Technology Major Project Promotion Meeting for the
“Large Scale Integrated Circuit Manufacturing Equipment and Complete Sets of Technology” Was Held in Beijing.
http:/ /www.nmp.gov.cn/gzdt/200912/t20091215_1673.htm ( CN )
5 Sciping. ( 2017 ). National Science and Technology Major Project Special Press Conference on “Large-scale Integra-
ted Circuit Manufacturing Equipment and Complete Processes. ” https:/ /www.sciping.com/28271.html ( CN )
6 He. ( 2018 ). Narrowing the Gap: China’s Great Chip Challenge ( HSBC ), 3; Zhihu. ( 2020 ). Semiconductor Equipment
Industry Chain Combing: The Localization of Equipment Industry Chain Is Expected to Speed Up. https:/ /zhuanlan.
zhihu.com/p/112269192 ( CN )
7 See e.g. Verwey, J. ( 2019a ). Chinese Semiconductors Industrial Policy: Past and Present. https:/ /ssrn.com/abs-
tract=3441951; Ernst, D. ( 2016 ). China’s Bold Strategy for Semiconductors: Zero-sum Game or Catalyst for Coope-
ration? https:/ /papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2836331; Fuller, D. B. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers, Hidden
Dragons. Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Technological Development, chapter 5; Comments by Jimmy
Goodrich. ( 2020, Nov. 17 ). Webinar: Examining China’s Semiconductor Self-Sufficiency: Present and Future Pro-
spects. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/events/sia-webinar-examining-chinas-semiconductor-self-sufficien -
cy-the-present-and-future-prospects/
8 China Vitae. ( NN ). Miao Wei. https:/ /www.chinavitae.com/biography/Miao_Wei ; China Vitae. ( NN ). Ma Kai. https:/ /
www.chinavitae.com/biography/Ma_Kai
9 Bloomberg. ( 2021 ). Xi Jinping Picks Top Lieutenant to Lead China’s Chip Battle Against U.S. https:/ /www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2021-06-17/xi-taps-top-lieutenant-to-lead-china-s-chip-battle-against-u-s ; Che Pan. ( 2021 ).
US-China tech war: Xi Jinping’s right-hand man Liu He to test whole-country approach on ‘next-generation’ chips
but obstacles remain high. South China Morning Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3137952/us-
china-tech-war-xis-right-hand-man-liu-he-test-whole-country.
10 CSIA. ( 2019 ). The Outline for Promoting the Development of the National Integrated Circuit Industry was Officially
Promulgated. http:/ /www.csia.net.cn/Article/ShowInfo.asp?InfoID=88343
11 Ernst, D. ( 2016 ). China’s Bold Strategy for Semiconductors: Zero-sum Game or Catalyst for Cooperation?. https:/ /
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2836331
12 Luong, N., Arnold, Z., & Murphy, B. ( 2021 ). Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds: An Analysis of Chi-
nese-Language Sources. Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds–Center for Security and Emerging
Technology ( georgetown.edu )
13 WTO. ( 2018 ). China’s Trade-Disruptive Economic Model Communication From The United States. WT/GC/W/745. htt-
ps:/ /docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.aspx?filename=q:/WT/GC/W745.pdf&Open=True
14 China Government Network. ( 2014 ). The National IC Industry Investment Fund Is Formally Established. http:/ /www.
gov.cn/xinwen/2014-10/14/content_2764849.htm ( CN )
15 China Development Bank Capital. ( 2014 ). The National IC Industry Investment Fund Is Formally Established. https:/ /
www.cdb-capital.com/GKJR/coverage/17081114521011?pidx=0
16 Caixin. ( 2020 ). Head of Firm That Runs National Chipmaking Investment Fund Steps Down. https:/ /www.caixing-
lobal.com/2020-12-23/head-of-firm-that-runs-national-chipmaking-investment-fund-steps-down-101642641.
html
17 Leng, T. ( 2017 ). Cross-Strait Economic Relations and China’s Rise, 164. http:/ /www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/j.ctt-
1w76wpm.12
18 Summitview Capital. ( 2014 ). Shanghai Launches 10 Billion IC Fund. http:/ /www.summitviewcapital.com/plus/view.
php?aid=30 ( CN ); Leng, T. ( 2017 ). Cross-Strait Economic Relations and China’s Rise, 164. http:/ /www.jstor.org/stab-
le/10.1525/j.ctt1w76wpm.12

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
74
19 Wang, H. ( 2019 ). After the Fruitful First Phase of the Big Fund, the Second Phase Is Ready. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/
pdf/H3_AP201912311373119321_1.pdf?1577789587000.pdf ( CN )
20 Pan, J., & Chen, J. ( TF Securities ) ( 2019 ). Semiconductors–Forging Ahead, Supporting the Investment Layout of the In-
tegrated Circuit Industry Fund, 3. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP201905051326608713_1.pdf?1557083214000.
pdf ( CN )
21 Wang, H. ( 2019 ). After the Fruitful First Phase of the Big Fund, the Second Phase Is Ready. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/
pdf/H3_AP201912311373119321_1.pdf?1577789587000.pdf ( CN ); Ou Yang, S., & Tang, H. ( 2019 ). Understanding
the Layout of the First Phase of the Big Fund, Looking Ahead to the Second Phase. http:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_
AP201910081368240918_1.pdf ( CN )
22 China Securities Journal via STCN. ( 2019 ). Good News for the IC Industry! The Second Phase of the Big Fund IS
Established with a Total Capital of About 200 Billion. http:/ /news.stcn.com/2019/0726/15277294.shtml; CN ); China
Securities Journal via NBD. ( 2019 ). The Second Phase of the Big Fund Is Established With More Than 2 Billion! The
First Phase Invests in More A-Shares. http:/ /www.nbd.com.cn/articles/2019-10-27/1381515.html ( CN )
23 China Securities Journal. ( 2019 ). The Second Phase of the Big Fund Is Established With More Than 2 Billion! The
First Phase Invests in More A-Shares. http:/ /www.nbd.com.cn/articles/2019-10-27/1381515.html ( CN )
24 China Securities Journal. ( 2019 ). The Second Phase of the Big Fund Is Established With More Than 2 Billion! The
First Phase Invests in More A-Shares. http:/ /www.nbd.com.cn/articles/2019-10-27/1381515.html ( CN )
25 China Securities Journal. ( 2019 ). Good News for the IC Industry! The Second Phase of the Big Fund IS Established
with a Total Capital of About 200 Billion. http:/ /news.stcn.com/2019/0726/15277294.shtml; http:/ /www.nbd.com.
cn/articles/2019-10-27/1381515.html ( CN )
26 China Securities Journal. ( 2019 ). The Second Phase of the Big Fund Is Established With More Than 200 Billion in
Capital! The First Phase Invests in More A-Shares. http:/ /www.nbd.com.cn/articles/2019-10-27/1381515.html ( CN )
27 Chinese Academy of Engineering. ( 2015 ). “Made in China 2025”: Roadmap of Key Technologies. http:/ /www.cae.cn/
cae/html/files/2015-10/29/20151029105822561730637.pdf. ( CN )
28 China Integrated Circuit Industry Technical Innovation Strategic Alliance website. http:/ /www.ictia.cn/cont-
ents/8/75.html ( CN ).
29 State Council. ( 2020 ). Some Policies to Promote the High-Quality Development of the Integrated Circuit and Software
Industry in the New Era. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2020-08/04/content_5532370.htm ( CN ); Ministry of
Finance, State Taxation Administration, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, National Development and
Reform Commission. ( 2020 ). Announcement on the Enterprise Income Tax Policy for Promoting the High-quality De-
velopment of the Integrated Circuit and the Software Industry. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2020-12/17/
content_5570401.htm ( CN ); Ministry of Finance, Customs Administration, State Taxation Administration. ( 2021 ).
Circular on Import Tax Policies for Supporting the Development of the Integrated Circuit and Software Industry.
http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2021-03/29/content_5596564.htm ( CN )
30 Duchatel, M. ( 2021 ). The Weak Links in China’s Drive for Semiconductors, 42. https:/ /www.institutmontaigne.org/
en/publications/weak-links-chinas-drive-semiconductors ; State Council. ( 2011 ). Several Policies for Further En-
couraging the Development of the Software Industry and Integrated Circuit Industry. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zwgk/2011-
02/09/content_1800432.htm ( CN )
31 Special Plan for the Integrated Circuit Industry in Lingang New Area of China ( Shanghai ) Pilot Free Trade Zone
( 2021–2025 ) available at https:/ /www.yicai.com/news/100966145.html ( CN ); Lingang Special Area website: Indust-
rial Distribution Model of Oriental IC Port. http:/ /en.lgxc.gov.cn/2020-10/30/c_562262.htm
32 Verwey, J. ( 2019 ). Chinese Semiconductor Industrial Policy: Past and Present, 14. https:/ /ssrn.com/abs-
tract=3441951
33 Fuller, D. B. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons. Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Technological Develop-
ment, 118.
34 China Government Network. ( 2021 ). Liu He Chaired the 18th Meeting of the Leading Group on the Reform of the
National Science and Technology System and the Construction of the Innovation System. http:/ /www.gov.cn/
guowuyuan/2021-05/14/content_5606512.htm ( CN ); Che Pan. ( 2021 ). US-China tech war: Xi Jinping’s right-hand
man Liu He to test whole-country approach on ‘next-generation’ chips but obstacles remain high. South China Mor-
ning Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3137952/us-china-tech-war-xis-right-hand-man-liu-he-
test-whole-country.
35 Deng, I. ( 2021 ). China Must Pursue Chip Assembly, Packaging Breakthroughs to Catch Up with Semiconductor Lea-
ders, Experts Say. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3136688/china-must-pursue-chip-assembly-packa-
ging-breakthroughs-catch

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
75
36 Che, P . ( 2021 ). Can China Innovate Itself into a Lead in the Chip Industry as Moore’s Law Nears its Physical Limit? ht-
tps:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3133819/can-china-innovate-itself-lead-chip-industry-moores-law-ne-
ars-its.
37 China Government Network. ( 2019 ). The National Medium–and Long-Term Plan for Science and Technology De-
velopment ( 2021-2035 ) Special Research Project on the Development Strategy of Basic Science Launches in Bei-
jing. http:/ /www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-05/03/content_5388386.htm ( CN )
38 China Innovation Funding Website: Science and Technology Major Special Project website. http:/ /chinainnovation-
funding.eu/zh/national-st-megaprojects-2/
39 The Information Network. ( 2020 ). Mainland China’s Semiconductor and Equipment Markets: A Complete Analysis
of the Technical, Economic, and Political Issues, 3-15. https:/ /www.theinformationnet.com/product-page/main-
land-china-s-semiconductor-equipment-markets
40 Ye, J. ( 2021 ). China’s semiconductor output in May hits all-time high amid chip shortage and tech war with US. South
China Morning Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3137537/chinas-semiconductor-output-may-
hits-all-time-high-amid-chip-shortage.
41 Pan, J., & Chen, J. ( TF Securities ) ( 2019 ). Semiconductors–Forging Ahead, Supporting the Investment Layout of the In-
tegrated Circuit Industry Fund, 3. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP201905051326608713_1.pdf?1557083214000.
pdf ( CN )
42 IAM-Media. ( 2021 ). Data Reveals Patenting in Semiconductors Is on the Rise, with Asia Accelerating its Output.
https:/ /www.iam-media.com/market-developments/data-reveals-patenting-in-semiconductors-tear-asia-acce-
lerating-its-output
43 Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2020 ). China’s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value Chain. https:/ /semiwiki.com/chin-
a/285941-chinas-position-in-the-global-semiconductor-value-chain/
44 Bloomberg. ( 2021 ). Xi Jinping Picks Top Lieutenant to Lead China’s Chip Battle Against U.S. https:/ /www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2021-06-17/xi-taps-top-lieutenant-to-lead-china-s-chip-battle-against-u-s.
45 CSIA. ( 2020 ). Talent Development is Getting Attention, the Latest Chinese IC Talent White Paper is Published. http:/ /
www.csia.net.cn/Article/ShowInfo.asp?InfoID=96439 ( CN )
46 DigiTimes in HRM Asia Newsroom. ( 2018 ). China’s Semiconductor Industry in Serious Talent Shortage. https:/ /hrma-
sia.com/chinas-semiconductor-industry-in-serious-talent-shortage
47 IC Insights. ( 2021 ). Sales of Logic ICs Account for Largest Share of China’s IC Market in 2020. https:/ /www.icinsights.
com/news/bulletins/Sales-Of-Logic-ICs-Account-For-Largest-Share-Of-Chinas-IC-Market-In-2020/ ( 15.9% of
USD 143.4 billion ).
48 CSIA. ( 2020 ). Talent Development Is Getting Attention, the Latest Chinese IC Talent White Paper Is Published. http:/ /
www.csia.net.cn/Article/ShowInfo.asp?InfoID=96439 ( CN )
49 Ding, J., & Laskai, L. ( 2019 ). ChinAI #56: The Sour Past of “China Chips” . https:/ /chinai.substack.com/p/chinai-56-
the-sour-past-of-china
50 Comments by Jimmy Goodrich. ( 2020, Nov. 17 ). Webinar: Examining China’s Semiconductor Self-Sufficiency: Pre-
sent and Future Prospects. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/events/sia-webinar-examining-chinas-semiconduc-
tor-self-sufficiency-the-present-and-future-prospects/
51 Addison, C. ( 2021 ). Are Taiwan’s Job-Hopping Chip Engineers Traitors or Patriots? https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-
war/article/3131245/are-taiwans-job-hopping-chip-engineers-traitors-or-patriots; Kölling, M. ( 2021 ). Taiwan Wants
to Stop the Brain Drain to China. https:/ /www.handelsblatt.com/politik/international/halbleiter-taiwan-will-ab-
wanderung-von-chip-experten-nach-china-stoppen/27178996.html?ticket=ST-2741294-OLgrVulgxdzKBnBwTT -
FE-ap3; Herh, M. ( 2020 ). Chinese Companies Recruiting Korean Semiconductor Engineers. http:/ /www.businessko-
rea.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=50789
52 Lee, J. ( 2017 ). The New Chinese Diaspora. https:/ /www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/new-chinese-diaspora;
Fuller, D. B. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons. Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Technological Develop-
ment, chapters 5-6.
53 Ding, Y . ( 2021 ). Tsinghua Sets Up School to Support Semiconductor Self-Sufficiency in China. https:/ /www.caixinglo-
bal.com/2021-04-26/tsinghua-sets-up-school-to-support-semiconductor-self-sufficiency-in-china-101700076.
html; Li, Y . Wang, X. ( 2021 ) Eyeing “China Chips” , Tsinghua establishes Institute of Integrated Circuit. http:/ /edu.
people.com.cn/BIG5/n1/2021/0422/c1006-32085204.html ( CN )
54 Fuller, D. ( 2019 ). Growth, Upgrading and Limited Catch-Up in China’s Semiconductor Industry, 262-303. https:/ /www.
researchgate.net/publication/333263560_Growth_Upgrading_and_Limited_Catch-Up_in_China%27s_Semicon-
ductor_Industry

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
76
55 Cho, Y . S. ( 2021 ). Eyeing US, China Wields $33bn Subsidies to Bolster Chips, Defends. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Po-
litics/International-relations/US-China-tensions/Eyeing-US-China-wields-33bn-subsidies-to-bolster-chips-de-
fense
56 Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2020 ). China’s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value Chain. https:/ /semiwiki.com/chin-
a/285941-chinas-position-in-the-global-semiconductor-value-chain/; Comments by Jimmy Goodrich. ( 2020, Nov
17 ). Webinar: Examining China’s Semiconductor Self-Sufficiency: Present and Future Prospects. https:/ /www.se-
miconductors.org/events/sia-webinar-examining-chinas-semiconductor-self-sufficiency-the-present-and-fu -
ture-prospects/
57 Wang Huilian quoted in Hexun. ( 2020 ). The Second Phase of the Large Fund Is Expected to Drive Trillion Yuan of
Funds into the Market. http:/ /funds.hexun.com/2020-03-23/200720285.html ( CN )
58 Ye, J.( 2021 ). China’s semiconductor output in May hits all-time high amid chip shortage and tech war with US. South
China Morning Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3137537/chinas-semiconductor-output-may-
hits-all-time-high-amid-chip-shortage ; Che, P . ( 2021 ). China’s State Semiconductor Fund Trims Holdings in SMIC
as Beijing Focuses on Next Wave of Development. South China Morning Post. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/big-
tech/article/3129892/chinas-state-semiconductor-fund-trims-holdings-smic-beijing-focuses
59 See e.g. Liu, L. ( 2019 ). Countdown: How Close is China to 40% Chip Self-Sufficiency? https:/ /www.eetimes.com/
countdown-how-close-is-china-to-40-chip-self-sufficiency/; Zhang, Y . ( 2021 ). Building Global Influence! Shanghai
Lingang New Area Released a Special Plan for the Integrated Circuit Industry. ( reproduces full text of Special Plan
for the Integrated Circuit Industry in Lingang New Area of China ( Shanghai ) Pilot Free Trade Zone ( 2021-2025 ) ) ( CN )
https:/ /www.yicai.com/news/100966145.html ( CN )
60 See generally Lee, J. ( June 2021 ). The Connection of Everything: China and the Internet of Things. www.merics.org
61 Kania, E.B. & Laskai, L. ( 2021 ). Myths and Realities of China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy. Center for a New
American Security. https:/ /www.cnas.org/publications/reports/myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusi-
on-strategy ; U.S. Department of Commerce Press Release ( 2021, April 8 ). Commerce Adds Seven Chinese Super -
computing Entities to Entity List for their Support to China’s Military Modernization, and Other Destabilizing Efforts.
https:/ /www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/04/commerce-adds-seven-chinese-supercomputing-en-
tities-entity-list-their; National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. ( 2021 ). Final Report, 499–500. htt-
ps:/ /www.nscai.gov/2021-final-report/.
62 Borak, M. ( 2021 ). US-China Tech War: Taiwan’s TSMC Joins American Chip Coalition in Another Blow to China’s
Self-sufficiency Drive. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/article/3133235/us-china-tech-war-taiwans-tsmc-
joins-american-chip-coalition-another
63 Special Plan for the Integrated Circuit Industry in Lingang New Area of China ( Shanghai ) Pilot Free Trade Zone
( 2021-2025 ) available at https:/ /www.yicai.com/news/100966145.html ( CN )
64 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
65 Worthman, E. ( 2014 ). A Guide To Advanced Process Design Kits. https:/ /semiengineering.com/a-guide-to-advan-
ced-process-design-kits/.
66 Siripitakchai, N., Miyazaki, K., & Ho, J. C. ( 2015 ). Partnership ecosystem of IC design service companies: The case of
Taiwan. Technology in Society, 43, 199–208. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2015.09.004.
67 System IC companies only develop chips for their own products and do not sell these chips to others. Example of
system IC suppliers are Apple, Amazon, Tesla and many more.
68 IC Insights. ( 2021 ). Chinese Companies Hold Only 5% of Global IC Marketshare. https:/ /www.icinsights.com/news/
bulletins/Chinese-Companies-Hold-Only-5-Of-Global-IC-Marketshare/
69 See the DARPA-funded OpenROAD project https:/ /theopenroadproject.org/; the open source PDK from Google and
SkyWater foundry https:/ /github.com/google/skywater-pdk; or Multi Project Wafers ( MPW ) from EUROPRACTICE.
https:/ /europractice-ic.com/about/who-we-are/
70 Lee, J. L. ( 2021 ). U.S. Chip Startups, Long Shunned in Favor of Internet Bets, Stir Excitement Again. https:/ /www.
reuters.com/article/venture-capital-semiconductors-funding-idINKBN2CM10S
71 Fuller, D. B. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons. Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Technological Develop-
ment, 163-164.
72 Wang, L. ( 2014 ). MediaTek Investing in Chinese Technology Fund. http:/ /www.taipeitimes.com/News/biz/archi-
ves/2014/11/25/2003605216

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
77
73 Yang, Z. ( 2021 ). Shanghai Wants to Be China’s Chip Capital–Protocol —The People, Power and Politics of Tech. htt-
ps:/ /www.protocol.com/china/shanghai-china-chip-capital ; Lingang Special Area website: Industrial Distribution
Model of Oriental IC Port. http:/ /en.lgxc.gov.cn/2020-10/30/c_562262.htm ; Lingang Special Area website: Functio-
nal Zones http:/ /en.lgxc.gov.cn/2020-07/22/c_516810.htm.
74 Pan, J., Chen, J. ( 2019 ). Semiconductors–Forging Ahead, Supporting the Investment Layout of the Integrated Circuit
Industry Fund, 3. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP201905051326608713_1.pdf?1557083214000.pdf ( CN )
75 Yoshida, J.( 2019 ). Is China’s “Big Fund” Enough? https:/ /www.eetasia.com/is-chinas-big-fund-enough/
76 The Information Network. ( 2020 ). Mainland China’s Semiconductor and Equipment Markets: A Complete Analysis
of the Technical, Economic, and Political Issues. https:/ /www.theinformationnet.com/product-page/mainland-chi-
na-s-semiconductor-equipment-markets
77 See generally Lee, J. ( 2021, June ). The Connection of Everything: China and the Internet of Things. www.merics.org
78 Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2020 ). China’s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value Chain. https:/ /semiwiki.com/chin-
a/285941-chinas-position-in-the-global-semiconductor-value-chain/.
79 Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2020 ). China’s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value Chain. https:/ /semiwiki.com/chin-
a/285941-chinas-position-in-the-global-semiconductor-value-chain/.
80 Liao, R. ( 2020 ). Horizon Robotics, a Chinese Rival to Nvidia, Seeks to Raise Over $700M. https:/ /techcrunch.
com/2020/12/21/horizon-robotics-700-million-funding/.
81 Liao, R. ( 2019 ). Korean Conglomerate SK Leads $600M Round for Chinese Chipmaker Horizon Robotics. https:/ /
techcrunch.com/2019/02/26/horizon-robotics-raises-600m/; Gasgoo China Automotive News. ( 2021 ). Great Wall
Motor Said to Tap Chip Industry. http:/ /autonews.gasgoo.com/china_news/70017983.html.
82 Pan, J., & Chen, J. ( TF Securities ) ( 2019 ). Semiconductors–Forging Ahead, Supporting the Investment Layout of the In-
tegrated Circuit Industry Fund, 10. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP201905051326608713_1.pdf?1557083214000.
pdf ( CN )
83 Cisco. ( 2020 ). Cisco Annual Internet Report ( 2018-2023 ). https:/ /www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/exe-
cutive-perspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.pdf
84 Burt, J. ( 2020 ). Alibaba on the Bleeding Edge of RISC-V With XT910. https:/ /www.nextplatform.com/2020/08/21/
alibaba-on-the-bleeding-edge-of-risc-v-with-xt910/.
85 Sean. ( 2021 ). EV Sales in China to Grow by More Than 50% in 2021. https:/ /www.nextplatform.com/2020/08/21/
alibaba-on-the-bleeding-edge-of-risc-v-with-xt910/.
86 IC Insights. ( 2021 ). The McClean Report. https:/ /www.icinsights.com/services/mcclean-report/
87 U.S. Department of Commerce Press Release ( 2021, April 8 ). Commerce Adds Seven Chinese Supercomputing Enti-
ties to Entity List for their Support to China’s Military Modernization, and Other Destabilizing Efforts. https:/ /www.
commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/04/commerce-adds-seven-chinese-supercomputing-entities-enti-
ty-list-their
88 Synopsys Website. ( 2020 ). Synopsys and GLOBALFOUNDRIES Collaborate to Expand Fusion Compiler Benefits
for Latest Platforms. https:/ /news.synopsys.com/2020-09-24-Synopsys-and-GLOBALFOUNDRIES-Collabora-
te-to-Expand-Fusion-Compiler-Benefits-for-Latest-Platforms
89 Design&Reuse. ( 2014 ). Synopsys and Imec Expand TCAD Collaboration to 5 nm and Beyond. https:/ /www.de-
sign-reuse.com/news/36133/synopsys-imec-tcad-collaboration-5-nm.html
90 Applied Materials. ( 2015 ). Cadence And Applied Materials Collaborate On Joint Development Program To Optimi-
ze Planarization Process Through Advanced CMP Modeling. https:/ /www.appliedmaterials.com/company/news/
press-releases/2015/06/cadence-and-applied-materials-collaborate-on-joint-development-program-to-optimi-
ze-planarization-process-through-advanced-cmp-modeling
91 Synopsys Website. ( 2021 ). Synopsys and Arm Deliver Comprehensive Solutions to Increase Performance and Ac-
celerate Time-to-Market for High-Performance Computing, Data Center and AI SoCs. https:/ /news.synopsys.
com/2021-04-27-Synopsys-and-Arm-Deliver-Comprehensive-Solutions-to-Increase-Performance-and-Accelera-
te-Time-to-Market-for-High-Performance-Computing,-Data-Center-and-AI-SoCs
92 Bailey, B. ( 2019 ). EDA Grabs Bigger Slice of Chip Market. Semiconductor Engineering. https:/ /semiengineering.com/
will-tool-vendors-break-out-in-2019/
93 Ting-Fang, C., & Li, L. ( 2020 ). China Aims to Shake US Grip on Chip Design Tools. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/
China-tech/China-aims-to-shake-US-grip-on-chip-design-tools
94 Fuller, D. B. ( 2020 ). Cutting Off Our Nose to Spite Our Face: US Policy towards China in Key Semiconductor Industry
Inputs, Capital Equipment and Electronic Design Automation Tools. https:/ /doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3672079

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
78
95 Xiao-Ru Wang, E., Yang, S., & Cacciola, S. ( 2020 ). An Economic Analysis of the Effects of Stricter, Unilateral U.S.
Export Controls for Electronic Design Automation Technology on Chinese Electronic Design. Compass Lexecon. ht-
tps:/ /downloads.regulations.gov/BIS-2021-0011-0040/attachment_2.pdf ( Compass Lexecon report commissioned
by Cadence )
96 Wagner, M. ( 2016 ). Managing disruptive innovation with technology acquisitions: the informing case of software-ba-
sed high-technology industries. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management, 28( 8 ), 979–991. https:/ /doi.org/10.
1080/09537325.2016.1181736
97 Synopsys Website. ( 2020 ). Strategic Acquisitions. https:/ /www.synopsys.com/company/acquisitions.html
98 Fuller, D. B. ( 2021 ). China’s Counter-Strategy to American Export Controls in Integrated Circuits. https:/ /ssrn.com/
abstract=3798291
99 Kahng, A. B., & Spyrou, T. ( 2020 ). The OpenROAD Project: Unleashing Hardware Innovation. https:/ /theopenroadpro-
ject.org/
100 Fuller, D. B. ( 2020 ). Cutting Off Our Nose to Spite Our Face: US Policy towards China in Key Semiconductor Industry
Inputs, Capital Equipment and Electronic Design Automation Tools. https:/ /doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3672079
101 Fuller, D. B. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons. Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Technological Develop-
ment, 163-164.
102 Yu, Y . ( 2021 ). US Targets Supercomputers in Biden’s First Move Against Chinese Tech. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Poli-
tics/International-relations/US-China-tensions/US-targets-supercomputers-in-Biden-s-first-move-against-Chi-
nese-tech
103 Progammer Sought. ( NN ). Six Domestic CPUS: Feiteng, Kunpeng, Loongson, Haiguang, Shenwei, Zhaoxin. https:/ /
www.programmersought.com/article/80795575504/; Stewart Randall, S. ( 2021, May 28 ). China Tech Investor Pod-
cast #75: The past, present, and future of Bytedance, with Zheping Huang ( plus Kuaishou earnings ). https:/ /podcasts.
apple.com/us/podcast/cti-75-past-present-future-bytedance-zheping-huang/id1440576420?i=1000523376211
104 Ramani, P ., & Arcuri, T. ( 2020 ). Global Semiconductors: China EDA Deep Dive Part 2 ( UBS ).
105 Wang, E. X., Yang, S., & Cacciola, S. ( 2020 ). An Economic Analysis of the Effects of Stricter, Unilateral US Export
Controls for Electronic Design Automation Technology on Chinese Design, 72. https:/ /downloads.regulations.gov/
BIS-2021-0011-0040/attachment_2.pdf ( Compass Lexecon report commissioned by Cadence )
106 Fuller, D. B. ( 2021 ). China’s Counter Strategy to American Exports Controls in Integrated Circuits, 9. https:/ /www.
prcleader.org/fuller
107 Ramani, P ., & Arcuri, T. ( 2020 ). Global Semiconductors: China EDA Deep Dive Part 2 http:/ /www.wenku120.com/
doc-101258.html#p6 ; Randall, S. ( 2019b ). China’s Design Tools Conundrum. https:/ /technode.com/2019/11/07/
silicon-chinas-design-tools-conundrum/
108 Randall, S. ( 2019a ). Why Chinese EDA Tools Lag Behind. https:/ /technode.com/2019/11/13/silicon-why-chinese-
eda-tools-lag-behind/ ; Randall, S. ( 2019b ). China’s Design Tools Conundrum. https:/ /technode.com/2019/11/07/
silicon-chinas-design-tools-conundrum/ ; Fuller, D. B. ( 2020 ). Cutting Off Our Nose to Spite Our Face: US Policy
towards China in Key Semiconductor Industry Inputs, Capital Equipment and Electronic Design Automation Tools.
https:/ /doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3672079
109 TechSugar. ( 2018 ). Domestic EDA Tool Research Talent Only Accounts for 300 People? Semiconductor Industry in
Urgent Need of Talent! https:/ /zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/41163209
110 Randall, S. ( 2019b ). Why Chinese EDA Tools Lag Behind. https:/ /technode.com/2019/11/13/silicon-why-chinese-
eda-tools-lag-behind/
111 Cheng, T., & Lauly, L. ( 2020 ). China Aims to Shake US Grip on Chip Design Tools. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/
China-tech/China-aims-to-shake-US-grip-on-chip-design-tools
112 Fuller, D. B. ( 2020 ). Cutting Off Our Nose to Spite Our Face: US Policy towards China in Key Semiconductor In-
dustry Inputs, Capital Equipment and Electronic Design Automation Tools. SSRN Electronic Journal. https:/ /doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.3672079
113 Cheng, T., Lauly, L. ( 2020 ). China Aims to Shake US Grip on Chip Design Tools. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/
China-tech/China-aims-to-shake-US-grip-on-chip-design-tools
114 Wang, E. X., Yang, S., & Cacciola, S. ( 2020 ). An Economic Analysis of the Effects of Stricter, Unilateral US Export
Controls for Electronic Design Automation Technology on Chinese Design, 73. https:/ /downloads.regulations.gov/
BIS-2021-0011-0040/attachment_2.pdf ( Compass Lexecon report commissioned by Cadence )
115 Randall, S. ( 2019b ). China’s Design Tools Conundrum. https:/ /technode.com/2019/11/07/silicon-chinas-de-
sign-tools-conundrum/ ; Ramani, P ., & Arcuri, T. ( 2020 ). Global Semiconductors: China EDA Deep Dive Part 2 ( UBS ).

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
79
116 Synopsis Inc vs InnoGrit Corp. ( 2019 ). https:/ /www.docketbird.com/court-documents/Synopsys-Inc-v-InnoG-
rit-Corp/Order-by-Judge-Lucy-H-Koh-Denying-52-Motion-to-Dismiss-lhklc3S-COURT-STAFF/cand-5:2019-
cv-02082-00066
117 Fuller, D. ( 2021 ). China’s Counter Strategy to American Exports Controls in Integrated Circuits. https:/ /www.prclea-
der.org/fuller
118 i-Micronews. ( 2021 ). Rambus Expands High-Performance Memory Subsystem Offerings with HBM2E Solution on
Samsung 14/11nm. https:/ /www.i-micronews.com/rambus-expands-high-performance-memory-subsystem-offe-
rings-with-hbm2e-solution-on-samsung-14-11nm/
119 TSMC. ( NN ). IP Alliance. https:/ /www.tsmc.com/english/dedicatedFoundry/oip/ip_alliance
120 DARPA. ( 2021 ). Toolbox Initiative.https:/ /www.darpa.mil/work-with-us/darpa-toolbox-initiative
121 DARPA. ( 2020 ). DARPA Increases Access to Critical Tools, IP to Accelerate Innovation. https:/ /www.darpa.mil/news-
events/2020-12-16a
122 Esteve, E. ( 2021 ). Design IP Sales Grew 16.7% in 2020, Best Growth Rate Ever! https:/ /semiwiki.com/ip/297995-
design-ip-sales-grew-16-7-in-2020-best-growth-rate-ever/
123 Ceva. ( 2021 ). Annual Report 2020. https:/ /www.ceva-dsp.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CEVA_Annual_Re-
port_2020.pdf
124 Cutress, I. ( 2021 ). Intel’s x86 Designs No Longer Limited to Intel on Intel: IP Blocks for Foundry, Cores on TSMC.
https:/ /www.anandtech.com/show/16575/intels-x86-designs-no-longer-limited-to-intel-on-intel-ip-blocks-for-
foundry-cores-on-tsmc
125 Gayde, W. ( 2020 ). How Arm Came to Dominate the Mobile Market. https:/ /www.techspot.com/article/1989-arm-in-
side/
126 Cutress, I. ( 2020 ). New #1 Supercomputer: Fugaku in Japan, with A64FX, take Arm to the Top with 415 PetaFLOPs.
https:/ /www.anandtech.com/show/15869/new-1-supercomputer-fujitsus-fugaku-and-a64fx-take-arm-to-the-
top-with-415-petaflops
127 Bloomberg. ( 2021 ). Google, Microsoft, Qualcomm Protest Nvidia’s Acquisition of Arm Ltd. https:/ /www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2021-02-12/google-microsoft-qualcomm-protest-nvidia-s-arm-acquisition
128 China Money AI. ( 2021 ). Chinese Chip Firms Bet on RISC-V to Counter US Bans and Grab New Markets. https:/ /www.
chinamoneynetwork.com/2021/03/06/chinese-chip-firms-bet-on-risc-v-to-counter-us-bans-and-grab-new-
markets
129 McGregor, J. ( 2018 ). The Difference Between ARM, MIPS, x86, RISC-V and Others in Choosing a Processor Architec-
ture. https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/tiriasresearch/2018/04/05/what-you-need-to-know-about-processor-archi-
tectures/
130 Engheim, E. ( 2020 ). What Is Innovative About RISC-V?. https:/ /medium.com/swlh/what-is-innovative-about-risc-v-
a821036a1568
131 Casadesus-Masanell, R., &Yoffie, D.B. ( 2007 ). Wintel: Cooperation and Conflict. Management Science, 53( 4 ), 584–
598. http:/ /people.bu.edu/furman/html/srf/2005%20papers/wintel_april_6_NEW.pdf
132 Management Committee of Chengdu High-tech Zone. ( 2020 ). Some Policies on Supporting Integrated Circuit De-
sign Industry Development in the Chengdu High-tech Industry Development Zone. http:/ /www.cdht.gov.cn/cdhtz/
c143045/2020-07/10/content_0e73e81e60164083b650af8f3f332f4d.shtml
133 China Daily. ( 2018 ). Consortium Established for Development of RISC-V Industry. http:/ /en.zjsfq.gov.cn/2018-
09/27/c_276476.htm ; EEWorld. ( 2019 ). Shanghai Staunchly Supports R&D and Mass Production of RISC-V Chips.
http:/ /news.eeworld.com.cn/IoT/2019/ic-news01114822.html ( CN )
134 Randall, S. ( 2021, May 12 ). China Tech Investor podcast #74: China’s Evolving Semiconductor Landscape. https:/ /
technode.com/2021/05/12/china-tech-investor-chinas-evolving-semiconductor-landscape-with-stewart-ran-
dall/ ; Yoshida, J. ( 2019 ). Is China’s Big Fund Big Enough? https:/ /www.eetasia.com/is-chinas-big-fund-enough/
135 Tech Monitor. ( 2020 ). VeriSilicon Floats in Shanghai, Quadruples Market Cap in Minutes. https:/ /techmonitor.ai/lea-
dership/finance-and-procurement/verisilicon-ipo
136 Chen, T. ( 2019 ). Beijing’s Latest Tech Ally in US Clampdown: Arm China. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Economy/Tra-
de-war/Beijing-s-latest-tech-ally-in-US-clampdown-Arm-China
137 Shead, S. ( 2021 ). Nvidia’s Arm Acquisition May Be Delayed by Chinese Regulators. https:/ /www.cnbc.
com/2021/06/08/nvidias-acquisition-of-arm-set-to-be-delayed-by-chinese-regulators.html

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
80
138 Makchuik, D. ( 2021 ). Huawei Free to License Latest ARM Architecture: Report. https:/ /asiatimes.com/2021/04/hua-
wei-free-to-license-latest-arm-architecture-report/
139 Liu, L. ( 2019 ). Countdown: How Close Is China to 40% Chip Self-Sufficiency? https:/ /www.eetimes.com/countdown-
how-close-is-china-to-40-chip-self-sufficiency/
140 Arcesati, R., & Meinhardt, C. ( 2021 ). China Bets on Open-Source Technologies to Boost Domestic Innovation. https:/ /
merics.org/en/short-analysis/china-bets-open-source-technologies-boost-domestic-innovation ; China Money AI.
( 2021 ). Chinese Chip Firms Bet on RISC-V to Counter US Bans and Grab New Markets. https:/ /www.chinamoneynet-
work.com/2021/03/06/chinese-chip-firms-bet-on-risc-v-to-counter-us-bans-and-grab-new-markets
141 Burt, J. ( 2020 ). Alibaba on the Bleeding Edge Of RISC-V With XT910 ( nextplatform.com ). https:/ /www.nextplatform.
com/2020/08/21/alibaba-on-the-bleeding-edge-of-risc-v-with-xt910/
142 Ding, J., & Laskai, L. ( 2019 ). ChinAI #56: The Sour Past of “China Chips” . https:/ /chinai.substack.com/p/chinai-56-
the-sour-past-of-china
143 General Office of Guangdong Provincial People’s Government. ( 2020 ). Several Opinions of General Office of Guang-
dong Provincial People’s Government on Advancing the Development of Semiconductor and Integrated Circuit In-
dustry in Guangdong Province. http:/ /www.gd.gov.cn/zwgk/jhgh/content/post_2895230.html
144 Ganbei. ( 2021, April 13 ). Ganbei Podcast: A Deep Dive on China’s Semiconductor Industry. https:/ /ganbei.simplecast.
com/episodes/a-deep-dive-on-chinas-semiconductor-industry-mec_G_bf
145 EESEMI. ( 2003 ). Cleanrooms. https:/ /www.eesemi.com/cleanrooms.htm
146 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
147 Chang, H., & Chen, L. R. ( 2020 ). Does Taiwan Have Enough Power for TSMC? https:/ /english.cw.com.tw/article/artic-
le.action?id=2766
148 WikiChip. ( NN ). Yield. https:/ /en.wikichip.org/wiki/yield
149 Integrated Circuit Engineering Cooperation. ( NN ). Fab Benchmarking. http:/ /smithsonianchips.si.edu/ice/cd/
CEICM/SECTION4.pdf
150 ITRS. ( 2015 ). International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors. 2015 Edition. More Moore. https:/ /www.semi-
conductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/5_2015-ITRS-2.0_More-Moore.pdf
151 Jones, S. W. ( 2021 ). Logic Leadersgip in the PPAC-Era. https:/ /semiwiki.com/events/294639-iss-2021-scotten-w-
jones-logic-leadership-in-the-ppac-era/
152 Hebner, K., Priest, W. W., & Chan, M. W. ( 2021 ). Moore’s Law & the Race for the Rest of the Chessboard. http:/ /www.
eipny.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Moores-Law_Insight_FINAL.pdf
153 Cutress, I. ( 2021 ). Intel’s New IDM 2.0 Strategy: $20b for Two Fabs, Meteor Lake 7nm Tiles, New Foundry Services,
IBM Collaboration, Return of IDF . https:/ /www.anandtech.com/show/16573/intels-new-strategy-20b-for-two-
fabs-meteor-lake-7nm-tiles-new-foundry-services-ibm-collaboration-return-of-idf
154 Gai, D. ( 2021 ). Foundry Industry’s Robust Revenue Growth to Continue in 2021. https:/ /www.counterpointresearch.
com/foundry-industry-revenue-growth-continue-2021/
155 Shilov, A. ( 2021 ). Samsung Foundry: New $17 Billion Fab in the USA by Late 2023. https:/ /www.anandtech.com/
show/16483/samsung-in-the-usa-a-17-billion-usd-fab-by-late-2023
156 TSMC. ( 2021 ). 2021 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co Ltd Earnings Call. https:/ /investor.tsmc.com/eng-
lish/encrypt/files/encrypt_file/reports/2021-04/8b5438593d7b5d2181406a1b92d7304d6944c098/TSMC%20
1Q21%20transcript.pdf
157 Jones, S. ( 2021 ). How to Spend $100 Billion Dollars in Three Years. https:/ /semiwiki.com/semiconductor-manufac-
turers/298361-how-to-spend-100-billion-dollars-in-three-years/
158 Amazon.com Inc. ( 2021 ). Comment on Risks in the Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain in response to the Bureau of Industry and Security’s ( BIS ) Notice of Request for Public Comment published on
March 15th 2021. https:/ /downloads.regulations.gov/BIS-2021-0011-0084/attachment_1.pdf
159 Varas, B. A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2020 ). Government Incentives and US Competitiveness in
Semiconductor Manufacturing. Semiconductor Industry Association. https:/ /www.bcg.com/publications/2020/in-
centives-and-competitiveness-in-semiconductor-manufacturing
160 Varas, B. A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2020 ). Government Incentives and US Competitiveness in
Semiconductor Manufacturing. Semiconductor Industry Association. https:/ /www.bcg.com/publications/2020/in-
centives-and-competitiveness-in-semiconductor-manufacturing

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
81
161 Varas, B. A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2020 ). Government Incentives and US Competitiveness in
Semiconductor Manufacturing. Semiconductor Industry Association. https:/ /www.bcg.com/publications/2020/in-
centives-and-competitiveness-in-semiconductor-manufacturing
162 Wu, D. ( 2021 ). TSMC to Spend $100 Billion Over Three Years to Grow Capacity. https:/ /www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2021-04-01/tsmc-to-invest-100-billion-over-three-years-to-grow-capacity
163 Yonhap News Agency. ( 2021 ). Samsung to Invest 171 tln Won for Logic Chips, Foundry by 2030. https:/ /en.yna.co.kr/
view/AEN20210513004500320
164 Clarke, P . ( 2009 ): TSMC to Base Expanded European R&D Effort At IMEC. https:/ /www.eetimes.com/tsmc-to-ba-
se-expanded-european-rd-effort-at-imec/
165 Jones, S. ( 2021 ). Intel’s IDM 2.0. https:/ /semiwiki.com/semiconductor-manufacturers/intel/297403-intels-idm-2-0/
166 Zhou, S. ( 2021 ). The Global Chip Shortage: The Solution May Have Already Been Manufactured. https:/ /www.forbes.
com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/04/28/the-global-chip-shortage-the-solution-may-have-already-been-manu-
factured/
167 Fuller, D. ( 2016 ). Fuller, D. B. ( 2016 ). Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons. Firms and the Political Economy of China’s Tech-
nological Development, 118-131; Meijer, H. ( 2016 ); Li, Yin “State, Market, and Business Enterprise: Development
of the Chinese Integrated Circuit Foundries. ” China as an Innovation Nation, edited by Y . Zhou, W. Lazonick, Y . Sun,
( Oxford: Oxford University Press 2016 ) 192-214, 200-203; Meijer, H. ( 2016 ). Trading With the Enemy: The Making of
US Export Control Policy Towards the People’s Republic of China, 270-274.
168 Wang, H. ( 2019 ). After the Fruitful First Phase of the Big Fund, the Second Phase Is Ready. https:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/
pdf/H3_AP201912311373119321_1.pdf?1577789587000.pdf; Ou Yang, S., & Tang, H. ( 2019 ). Understanding the
Layout of the First Phase of the Big Fund, Looking Ahead to the Second Phase. http:/ /pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_
AP201910081368240918_1.pdf ( CN )
169 Che, P . ( 2021 ). China’s State Semiconductor Fund Trims Holdings in SMIC as Beijing Focuses on Next Wave of de-
velopment. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/article/3129892/chinas-state-semiconductor-fund-trims-hol-
dings-smic-beijing-focuses
170 The Information Network. ( 2020 ). Mainland China’s Semiconductor and Equipment Markets: A Complete Analysis of
the Technical, Economic, and Political Issues, 2–7.
171 Ernst, D. ( 2016 ). China’s Bold Strategy for Semiconductors: Zero-sum Game or Catalyst for Cooperation? https:/ /
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2836331
172 Ernst, D. ( 2016 ). China’s Bold Strategy for Semiconductors: Zero-sum Game or Catalyst for Cooperation? https:/ /pa-
pers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2836331 ; Leopold, G., Yoshida, J. ( 2020 ). Wuhan: Manufacturing Hub
& China’s Optic Valley. https:/ /www.eetasia.com/wuhan-manufacturing-hub-chinas-optics-valley/
173 Foster, S. ( 2021 ). Get Real about the Chinese Semiconductor Industry. https:/ /asiatimes.com/2021/01/get-re-
al-about-the-chinese-semiconductor-industry/
174 TSMC. ( 2021 ). Q1 2021 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co Ltd Earnings Call https:/ /investor.tsmc.com/eng-
lish/encrypt/files/encrypt_file/reports/2021-04/8b5438593d7b5d2181406a1b92d7304d6944c098/TSMC%20
1Q21%20transcript.pdf
175 IC Insights. ( 2021 ). Sales of Logic ICs Account for Largest Share of China’s IC Market in 2020. https:/ /www.icinsights.
com/news/bulletins/Sales-Of-Logic-ICs-Account-For-Largest-Share-Of-Chinas-IC-Market-In-2020/
176 Xin, Z., & Pan, C. ( 2021 ). Why Has TSMC’s Nanjing Expansion Plan Stirred Up a Hornets’ Nest in Beijing and Taipei?”
https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/article/3131823/why-has-tsmcs-nanjing-expansion-plan-stirred-hornets-
nest-beijing-and; https:/ /t.cj.sina.com.cn/articles/view/1481944214/5854ac9602700v98c ( original interview with
Xiang Ligang )
177 The Information Network. ( 2020 ). Mainland China’s Semiconductor and Equipment Markets: A Complete Analysis of
the Technical, Economic, and Political Issues, 2–14.
178 IC Insights. ( 2021 ). The McClean Report. https:/ /www.icinsights.com/services/mcclean-report/
179 The Information Network. ( 2020 ). Mainland China’s Semiconductor and Equipment Markets: A Complete Analysis of
the Technical, Economic, and Political Issues, 3–15.
180 Zang, J. ( 2021 ). China’s Semiconductors: How Wuhan’s Challenger to Chinese Chip Champion SMIC Turned from
Dream to Nightmare. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/tech-trends/article/3126124/chinas-semiconductors-how-wu-
hans-challenger-chinese-chip-champion
181 Ting-Fang, C., & Li, L. ( 2021 ). TSMC’s Morris Chang Calls on Taiwan to Defend Its Chip Industry. https:/ /asia.nikkei.
com/Business/Tech/Semiconductors/TSMC-s-Morris-Chang-calls-on-Taiwan-to-defend-its-chip-industry

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
82
182 Zafar, R. ( 2020 ). SMIC & Chinese Pursuit of Latest 5nm Chip Process Will Be Gutted By C.E.O. ’s Sudden Departure.
https:/ /wccftech.com/smic-china-5nm-chipmaking-process-disrupt/ ( includes link to Liang Mong Song’s resigna-
tion letter ); Zhang Haijiun in Ye, J. ( 2021 ). Semiconductor Giant SMIC Rewards Senior Taiwanese Executives with
Hefty Compensation as China Builds Up Chip Sector’s Hi-Tech Talent Pool. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/
article/3128650/semiconductor-giant-smic-rewards-senior-taiwanese-executive-hefty
183 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. ( 2021 ). Final Report, 499–500. 2021 Final Report | NSCAI
184 Silov, A. ( 2021 ). TSMC’s Morris Chang Calls on Taiwan to Defend Its Chip Industry. https:/ /www.tomshardware.com/
news/tsmc-makes-1nm-breakthrough; Strong, M. ( 2021 ). Taiwan’s TSMC Claims Breakthrough on 1nm Chips. htt-
ps:/ /www.taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/4206524
185 IC Insights. ( 2021 ). Samsung and TSMC Seeking to Spend Their Way to Worldwide Domination of Advanced IC Tech-
nology. https:/ /www.icinsights.com/news/bulletins/Samsung-And-TSMC-Seeking-To-Spend-Their-Way-To-World-
wide-Domination-Of-Advanced-IC-Technology/
186 Lapedus, M. ( 2021 ). Foundry Wars Begin. https:/ /semiengineering.com/foundry-wars-begin/
187 Fuller, D. ( 2021 ). China’s Counter Strategy to American Exports Controls in Integrated Circuits, 11. https:/ /www.
prcleader.org/fuller
188 Cheng, T., Lauly, L. ( 2021 ). US-China Tech War: Beijing’s Secret Chipmaking Champions. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/
Spotlight/The-Big-Story/US-China-tech-war-Beijing-s-secret-chipmaking-champions
189 Patterson, A. ( 2020 ). China’s YMTC is Poised to Lead in NAND Flash Technology. https:/ /www.eetasia.com/chinas-
ymtc-is-poised-to-lead-in-nand-flash-technology/ .
190 Che, P . ( 2021 ). Can China Innovate Itself Into a Lead in the Chip Industry as Moore’s Law Nears Its Physical Limit? ht-
tps:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3133819/can-china-innovate-itself-lead-chip-industry-moores-law-ne-
ars-its
191 IC Insights. ( 2020 ). Pure-Play Foundry Market On Pace For Strongest Growth Since 2014. https:/ /www.icinsights.
com/news/bulletins/PurePlay-Foundry-Market-On-Pace-For-Strongest-Growth-Since-2014/
192 Rule by the Industry and Security Bureau. ( 2020 ). Addition of Entities to the Entity List, Revision of Entry
on the Entity List, and Removal of Entities From the Entity List. https:/ /www.federalregister.gov/docu-
ments/2020/12/22/2020-28031/addition-of-entities-to-the-entity-list-revision-of-entry-on-the-entity-list-and-
removal-of-entities
193 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
194 Fuller, D. B. ( 2020 ). Cutting Off Our Nose to Spite Our Face: US Policy towards China in Key Semiconductor In-
dustry Inputs, Capital Equipment and Electronic Design Automation Tools. SSRN Electronic Journal. https:/ /doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.3672079
195 Tokyo Electron. ( 2021 ). Tokyo Electron Corporate Update. https:/ /www.tel.com/ir/library/corporate-update/cms-fi-
le/IR-STD-2021.03.11E.pdf
196 Citi. ( 2020 ). China Semiconductors. Citi Research Deep Dive.
197 Kleinhans. ( 2020 ). The Lack of semiconductor Manufacturing in Europe, SNV Policy Paper. https:/ /www.stiftung-nv.
de/sites/default/files/eu-semiconductor-manufacturing.april_.2021.pdf
198 ASML. ( 2020 ). Integrated Report. https:/ /www.asml.com/-/media/asml/files/investors/financial-results/a-re-
sults/2019/2019-integrated-report-based-on-ifrs.pdf
199 NetEase. ( 2021 ). Implementation of China’s 15 year ’02 Special Project’ is coming to a close. What is the progress in
constructing a whole industry chain of domestically produced chips? https:/ /www.163.com/dy/article/G9KUVEMK-
05523HWI.html ( CN )
200 State Council. ( 2016 ). State Council Notice on the Publication of the 13th Five Year Plan for Science and Technology
Innovation. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-08/08/content_5098072.htm ( CN )
201 Hexun. ( 2020 ). The Second Phase of the Big Fund Is Expected to Drive a Trillion Yuan of Capital into the Market.
http:/ /funds.hexun.com/2020-03-23/200720285.html ( CN )
202 State Council. ( 2020 ). Some Policies to Promote the High-Quality Development of the Integrated Circuit and Soft-
ware Industry in the New Era. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2020-12/17/content_5570401.htm ( CN );
Ministry of Finance, State Taxation Administration, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, National De-
velopment and Reform Commission. ( 2020 ). Announcement on the Enterprise Income Tax Policy for Promoting the
High-quality Development of the Integrated Circuit and the Software Industry. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhen-
gceku/2020-12/17/content_5570401.htm ( CN )

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
83
203 Ministry of Finance, Customs Administration, State Taxation Administration. ( 2021 ). Circular on Import Tax Policies
for Supporting the Development of the Integrated Circuit and Software Industry. http:/ /www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhen-
gceku/2021-03/29/content_5596564.htm ( CN )
204 Special Plan for the Integrated Circuit Industry in Lingang New Area of China ( Shanghai ) Pilot Free Trade Zone
( 2021-2025 ) ) available at https:/ /www.yicai.com/news/100966145.html ( CN ); Yu, X. ( 2021 ). Shanghai Lingang New
Area Releases Special Plan for IC Industry Development. https:/ /finance.sina.com.cn/china/gncj/2021-03-03/
doc-ikftpnnz1371155.shtml ( CN )
205 Lingang Special Area website: Industrial Distribution Model of Oriental IC Port. http:/ /en.lgxc.gov.cn/2020-
10/30/c_562262.htm
206 Wubbeke et al. ( 2016 ). Made in China 2025. https:/ /merics.org/en/report/made-china-2025
207 Tang, F . ( 2020 ). Chinese Officials Bemoan ‘Significant Catch-Up’ Needed With US on Chipmaking, as Industrial De-
coupling Looms. https:/ /www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3092673/chinese-officials-bemoan-si-
gnificant-catch-needed-us
208 Hunt, W., Khan, S. M., & Peterson, D. ( 2021 ). China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment: Accele-
rants and Policy Implications, 11. https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinas-Progress-in-Se-
miconductor-Manufacturing-Equipment.pdf
209 Hunt, W., Khan, S. M., & Peterson, D. ( 2021 ). China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment: Accele-
rants and Policy Implications, 11. https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinas-Progress-in-Se-
miconductor-Manufacturing-Equipment.pdf . ( VLSI data, excluding Assembly & Packaging category )
210 Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2020 ). China’s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value Chain. https:/ /semiwiki.com/chin-
a/285941-chinas-position-in-the-global-semiconductor-value-chain/
211 Applied Materials website. ( 2020 ). Applied Materials Announces Fourth Quarter and Fiscal Year 2020 Results https:/ /
www.appliedmaterials.com/company/news/press-releases/2020/11/applied-materials-announces-fourth-quar -
ter-and-fiscal-year-2020-results
212 Cho, Y . ( 2021 ). China’s Progress in Advanced Semiconductor Technology Slows. Struggle of Chip Equipment Ma-
kers Indicates Difficulty in Becoming Self-Sufficient. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/Tech/Semiconductors/
China-s-progress-in-advanced-semiconductor-technology-slows; EET-China. ( 2021 ). Survey on the Strength of the
Chip Industry Chain in Mainland China. https:/ /www.eet-china.com/mp/a50486.html
213 Fuller, D. B. ( 2021 ). China’s Counter Strategy to American Exports Controls in Integrated Circuits, 9. https:/ /www.
prcleader.org/fuller
214 NetEase. ( 2021 ). Implementation of China’s 15 year ’02 Special Project’ is coming to a close. What is the progress in
constructing a whole industry chain of domestically produced chips? https:/ /www.163.com/dy/article/G9KUVEMK-
05523HWI.html ( CN ).
215 Ting-Fang, C., & Li, L. ( 2021 ). US-China Tech War: Beijing’s Secret Chipmaking Champions. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/
Spotlight/The-Big-Story/US-China-tech-war-Beijing-s-secret-chipmaking-champions
216 Li, X. ( 2020 ). 5nm Laser Lithography Breakthrough May Lift Chinese Chip-Making. https:/ /www.globaltimes.cn/con-
tent/1194063.shtml
217 Expert interview by authors, June 2021.
218 Applied Materials. ( 2021 ). Comments on Risks in the Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Sup-
ply Chain in response to the Bureau of Industry and Security’s ( BIS ) Notice of Request for Public Comment publis-
hed on March 15th 2021 https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/BIS-2020-0029-0047; Applied Materials website:
Quarterly Earnings https:/ /ir.appliedmaterials.com/financial-information/quarterly-results
219 Cision PR Newswire. ( 2021 ). 2020 Global Semiconductor Equipment Sales Surge 19% to Industry Record $71.2
Billion, SEMI Reports. https:/ /www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/2020-global-semiconductor-equipment-sa-
les-surge-19-to-industry-record-71-2-billion-semi-reports-301265581.html
220 https:/ /www.eetasia.com/chip-equipment-could-be-next-trade-war-target/ ( cited for the list of major players by
SME category, including Chinese firms )
221 NetEase. ( 2021 ). Implementation of China’s 15 year ’02 Special Project’ is coming to a close. What is the progress in
constructing a whole industry chain of domestically produced chips? https:/ /www.163.com/dy/article/G9KUVEMK-
05523HWI.html ( CN ).
222 Hunt, W., Khan, S. M., & Peterson, D. ( 2021 ). China’s Progress in Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment: Ac-
celerants and Policy Implications, 26–27. https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-Chinas-Pro-
gress-in-Semiconductor-Manufacturing-Equipment.pdf; Thoss, A. ( 2019 ). EUV Litography Revised. https:/ /www.
laserfocusworld.com/blogs/article/14039015/how-does-the-laser-technology-in-euv-lithography-work

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
84
223 Buchsbaum, S. J. ( 1976 ). An Analysis of Export Control of U.S. Technology—a DOD Perspective. A Report of the De-
fense Science Board Task Force on Export of U.S. Technology. https:/ /apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a022029.pdf.
224 Khan, S. M. ( 2020 ). US Semiconductor Exports to China: Current Policies and Trends. Georgetown Center for Security
and Emerging Technology. https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/U.S.-Semiconductor-Exports-to-Chi-
na-Current-Policies-and-Trends.pdf.
225 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. ( 2021 ). Final Report. https:/ /www.nscai.gov/2021-final-re-
port/
226 Oung, A. ( 2020 ). Industry Groups Sign Memorandum on Semiconductor Equipment Production. https:/ /www.taipei-
times.com/News/biz/archives/2020/12/03/2003747985 ; Cheng, T., & Lauly, L. ( 2020 ). In Win for Taiwan, ASML Open
Chip-Tool Training Center for TSMC. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/Technology/In-win-for-Taiwan-ASML-opens-
chip-tool-training-center-for-TSMC
227 Kim, S., Yoon, C., Ham, S., Park, J., Kwon, O., Park, D., Choi, S., Kim, S., Ha, K., & Kim, W. ( 2018 ). Chemical Use in the
Semiconductor Manufacturing Industry. International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health, 24( 3–4 ),
109–118. https:/ /doi.org/10.1080/10773525.2018.1519957
228 Plepys, A., & Schischke, K. ( 2004 ). Beyond the Walls of Semiconductor Fabs: Energy Intensity of High-Grade Mate-
rials. Electronics Goes Green 2004+: Driving Forces for Future Electronics. https:/ /www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/262275784_Beyond_the_walls_of_Semiconductor_Fabs_Energy_Intensity_of_High-grade_Chemical_Manu-
facturing
229 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
230 SkyWater. ( 2021 ). Docket No. 210310–0052–Risks in the Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging
Supply Chain. US Bureau of Industry and Security. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/BIS-2021-0011-0047
231 Tsukimori, O. ( 2019 ). Japanese Manufacturers Use Decades of Experience to Dominate Key Chemical Market for Cut-
ting-Edge Chips. https:/ /www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2019/10/09/business/japanese-manufacturers-use-deca-
des-experience-dominate-key-chemical-market-cutting-edge-chips/
232 SkyWater. ( 2021 ). Docket No. 210310–0052–Risks in the Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging
Supply Chain. US Bureau of Industry and Security. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/BIS-2021-0011-0047
233 SEMI. ( 2020 ). Comments from SEMI on the Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Identification and Review
of Controls for Certain Foundational Technologies. BIS 2020-0029. https:/ /downloads.regulations.gov/BIS-2020-
0029-0044/attachment_1.pdf
234 National Science and Technology Major Projects “Large Scale Integrated Circuit Manufacturing Equipment and
Complete Process” 2009 Project Guide
235 Hexun. ( 2020 ). The Second Phase of the Big Fund Is Expected to Drive a Trillion Yuan of Capital into the Market.
http:/ /funds.hexun.com/2020-03-23/200720285.html ( CN )
236 Ernst, D. ( 2016 ). China’s Bold Strategy for Semiconductors: Zero-sum Game or Catalyst for Cooperation? https:/ /
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2836331 ; Pan, C. & Chen, C. ( 2021 ). US-China tech war: TSMC helps
make breakthrough in semiconductor materials that could push back the ‘end’ of Moore’s Law. https:/ /www.scmp.
com/tech/tech-war/article/3134078/us-china-tech-war-tsmc-helps-make-breakthrough-semiconductor
237 Triolo, P . ( 2021 ). The Future of China’s Semiconductor Industry. American Affairs Journal. https:/ /americanaf-
fairsjournal.org/2021/02/the-future-of-chinas-semiconductor-industry/
238 Zafar, R. ( 2020 ). Chinese Firm Develops Key Material For Creating Local Chip Industry. https:/ /wccftech.com/chi-
na-nata-opto-electronicc-arf-photoresist-development/
239 Zhang, Y . ( 2021 ). China’s Crystal Clear Chemical Skyrockets on Arrival of ASML Chip Lithography Sets. https:/ /www.
yicaiglobal.com/news/china-crystal-clear-chemical-skyrockets-on-arrival-of-asml-chip-lithography-sets
240 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
241 Semiconductor Industry Association. ( 2021 ). Written Comments on Risks in the Semiconductor Manufacturing and
Advanced Packaging Supply Chain in response to the Bureau of Industry and Security’s ( BIS ) Notice of Request
for Public Comment published on March 15th 2021, 36. https:/ /downloads.regulations.gov/BIS-2021-0011-0080/
attachment_2.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
85
242 Khan, S. M. ( 2020 ). US Semiconductor Exports to China: Current Policies and Trends. https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/
wp-content/uploads/U.S.-Semiconductor-Exports-to-China-Current-Policies-and-Trends.pdf
243 METI. ( 2019 ). Update of METI’s licensing policies and procedures on exports of controlled items to the Republic of
Korea. https:/ /www.meti.go.jp/english/press/2019/0701_001.html
244 Japan Chemical Daily. ( 2021 ). Japanese Semiconductor Materials Companies Look to Procurement Alternatives
as Japan—South Korea Saga Drags On. https:/ /www.japanchemicaldaily.com/2021/03/18/japanese-semiconduc-
tor-materials-companies-look-to-procurement-alternatives-as-japan-south-korea-saga-drags-on/
245 SEMI. ( 2021 ). The Substrate Crisis Deepens. https:/ /www.semi.org/en/blogs/business-markets/the-substrate-cri-
sis-deepens
246 Johnson, K., & Gramer, R. ( 2020 ). U.S. Falters in Bid to Replace Chinese Rare Earths U.S. Struggles to End Reliance
on Rare-Earth Minerals From China ( foreignpolicy.com ); Boyd, J. ( 2020 ). U.S. and Japan Seeking to Break China’s
Grip on Rare Earths Production. U.S. and Japan Seeking to Break China’s Grip on Rare Earths Production–IEEE
Spectrum
247 Sumitomo Electric Industries. ( NN ). Compound Semiconductor. https:/ /global-sei.com/sc/com_semi_e/
248 Semi. ( 2021 ). 2020 Global Silicon Revenue Remains Stable as Wafer Area Shipments Edge Up Despite Covid-19
Disruption. https:/ /www.semi.org/en/news-media-press/semi-press-releases/silicon-shipment-2020
249 Bundeskartellamt. ( 2021 ). Semiconductor Industry: Bundeskartellamt Has No Objections Under Competition Law
to the Proposed Acquisition of Siltronic AG by GlobalWafers Co. Ltd. https:/ /www.bundeskartellamt.de/Shared-
Docs/Meldung/EN/Pressemitteilungen/2021/09_02_2021_GlobalWafers_Siltronic.html
250 Lapedus, M. ( 2019 ). Mixed Outlook for Silicon Wafer Biz. https:/ /semiengineering.com/mixed-outlook-for-sili-
con-wafer-biz/
251 SUMCO. ( 2021 ). Annual Report. https:/ /ssl4.eir-parts.net/doc/3436/ir_material10/157382/00.pdf
252 Emilio, M. D. P . ( 2020 ). Silicon Carbide Boosts Power Electronics. https:/ /www.eetimes.com/silicon-carbi-
de-boosts-power-electronics/
253 Flaerty, N. ( 2021 ). Infineon Signs Showa Denko for Silicon Carbide Wafer Supply. https:/ /www.eenewseurope.com/
news/infineon-signs-showa-denko-silicon-carbide-wafer-supply
254 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse.
255 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse.
256 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse.
257 Che, P . ( 2021 ). Can China Innovate Itself Into a Lead in the Chip Industry as Moore’s Law Nears Its Physical Limit? ht-
tps:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3133819/can-china-innovate-itself-lead-chip-industry-moores-law-ne-
ars-its
258 Special Plan for the Integrated Circuit Industry in Lingang New Area of China ( Shanghai ) Pilot Free Trade Zone
( 2021–2025 ) available at https:/ /www.yicai.com/news/100966145.html ( CN ); SiC Epitaxial Wafer and Other Fields,
Contracts for 216 projects with a Total Investment of 489.8 Billion Yuan Signed. https:/ /moore.live/news/272578/
detail/ ( CN )
259 Xinhua ( 2021 ). Suzhou Bears Scientific and Technological responsibility: Third Generation Semiconductor Technology
Innovation Center Has Been Added to the Industrial Park. http:/ /www.js.xinhuanet.com/2021-03/31/c_1127277469.
htm ( CN )
260 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse.
261 Ernst, D. ( 2016 ). China’s Bold Strategy for Semiconductors: Zero-sum Game or Catalyst for Cooperation?, 12–13.
https:/ /papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2836331
262 Lore, M. ( 2020 ). The People’s Front of Open RAN vs. the Open RAN People’s Front. https:/ /www.lightreading.com/5g/
the-peoples-front-of-open-ran-vs-the-open-ran-peoples-front/a/d-id/761822
263 Rule by the Industry and Security Bureau. ( 2020 ). Implementation of Certain New Controls on Emer -
ging Technologies Agreed at Wassenaar Arrangement 2019 Plenary. https:/ /www.federalregister.gov/do-
cuments/2020/10/05/2020-18334/implementation-of-certain-new-controls-on-emerging-technolo-
gies-agreed-at-wassenaar-arrangement-2019

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
86
264 Varas, A., Varadarajan, R., Goodrich, J., & Yinug, F . ( 2021 ). Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Supply Chain
in an Uncertain Era. SIA & BCG. https:/ /www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/SIA-BCG-Report_
Strengthening-the-Global-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain_April-2021.pdf.
265 Palacios, M. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Sup-
ply Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 94. Intel Corporation. https:/ /www.regulations.
gov/comment/BIS-2021-0011-0095
266 Ekmark, K. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 52. SEMI. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/
BIS-2021-0011-0053
267 Anonymous ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Sup-
ply Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 83. Amazon Inc. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/
comment/BIS-2021-0011-0084
268 Ekmark, K. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 52. SEMI. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/
BIS-2021-0011-0053
269 Yole. ( 2020 ). Advanced Packaging: OSATs, Foundries, and IDMs All Want to Be Part of the Game. http:/ /www.yole.fr/
AdvancedPackaging_Industry_Update_SYNAPS.aspx
270 Yole. ( 2020 ). Top 25 OSATs: 2019 Revenue. http:/ /www.yole.fr/iso_album/illus_status_advanced_packaging_top25_
osat_2019revenue_yole_july2020.jpg
271 Chakravarty, S. ( 2019 ). Top 10 OSAT Companies in World. https:/ /www.marketresearchreports.com/blog/2019/04/24/
top-10-osat-companies-world
272 Ekmark, K. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 52. SEMI. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/
BIS-2021-0011-0053
273 Leonard, E. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 70. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/BIS-2021-
0011-0071
274 Chakravarty, S. ( 2019 ). Top 10 OSAT Companies in World. https:/ /www.marketresearchreports.com/blog/2019/04/24/
top-10-osat-companies-world.
275 Kleinhans, J.P ., & Baisakova, N. ( 2020 ). The Global Semiconductor Value Chain: A Technology Primer for Policy
Makers. https:/ /www.stiftung-nv.de/de/publikation/global-semiconductor-value-chain-technology-primer-po-
licy-makers
276 Anonymous. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Sup-
ply Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 83. Amazon Inc.. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/
comment/BIS-2021-0011-0084
277 Palacios, M. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Sup-
ply Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 94. Intel Corporation. https:/ /www.regulations.
gov/comment/BIS-2021-0011-0095
278 Sciping. ( 2017 ). National Science and Technology Major Project Special Press Conference on “Large-scale Integra-
ted Circuit Manufacturing Equipment and Complete Processes. ” https:/ /www.sciping.com/28271.html ( CN )
279 He. ( 2018 ). Narrowing the Gap: China’s Great Chip Challenge ( HSBC ), 5.
280 Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2019 ). Big Fund = Big Impact? ‘Winning the Future’ of the Semiconductor Industry. https:/ /www.
linkedin.com/pulse/big-fund-impact-winning-future-semiconductor-industry-van-hezewijk/;
281 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse. Wu, D., & Cheng, T. ( 2016 ). Tsinghua Unigroup-SPIL Deal Axed on Policy
Worries. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Business/Tsinghua-Unigroup-SPIL-deal-axed-on-policy-worries
282 Zhuhai Hi-Tech Zone. ( 2020 ). Zhuhai Hi-Tech Zone Integrated Industry Development Plan ( 2020–2025 ). https:/ /www.
icdata.com.cn/platform/electronics/newsCollection/detail.do?guid=f4c16b5ea944408795033616de3babf7
283 Wang, H. ( 2019 ). After the Fruitful First Phase of the Big Fund, the Second Phase is Ready, section 3.2 https:/ /pdf.
dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP201912311373119321_1.pdf?1577789587000.pdf ( CN ); Hexun. ( 2020 ). The Second Phase
of the Big Fund Is Expected to Drive a Trillion Yuan of Capital into the Market. http:/ /funds.hexun.com/2020-03-
23/200720285.html ( CN )

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
87
284 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse ; Hezewijk, B. V. ( 2020 ). China’s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value
Chain. https:/ /semiwiki.com/china/285941-chinas-position-in-the-global-semiconductor-value-chain/
285 Khan, S. M., Mann, A., & Peterson, D. ( 2021 ). The Semiconductor Supply Chain: Assessing National Competitiveness.
https:/ /cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/The-Semiconductor-Supply-Chain-Issue-Brief.pdf
286 Deloitte. ( 2019 ). Semiconductors—the Next Wave: Opportunities and Winning Strategies For Semiconductor Com-
panies. https:/ /www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/
deloitte-cn-tmt-semiconductors-the-next-wave-en-190422.pdf
287 He, F . ( 2018 ). China Semiconductors: Narrowing the Gap–China’s Great Chip Challenge. HSBC Global Research,
Equity Research Report.
288 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse. ( citing Chinese firms in this area as having operating margins in mid-sing-
le digits ).
289 China Semiconductor Industry Association Intellectual Property Office, Shanghai Intellectual Property Exchange
Center. ( 2019 ). China Integrated Circuit Industry Intellectual Property Annual Report ( 2019 ). http:/ /www.csia.net.
cn/Article/ShowInfo.asp?InfoID=97639 ( CN )
290 Jin Yufeng as quoted in Che, P . ( 2021 ). Can China Innovate Itself into a Lead in the Chip Industry as Moore’s Law Nears
Its Physical Limit? https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3133819/can-china-innovate-itself-lead-chip-in-
dustry-moores-law-nears-its; Deng, I. ( 2021 ). China Must Pursue Chip Assembly, Packaging Breakthroughs to
Catch Up with Semiconductor Leaders, Experts Say. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3136688/chi-
na-must-pursue-chip-assembly-packaging-breakthroughs-catch
291 Nigam, M., Abrams, R., Han, K., Wong, K., Tseng, C., Su, J., & Cheung, C. ( 2019 ). Asia Technology Strategy–China: Can
It Gain Tech Independence? Credit Suisse ; Mitchell, R. ( 2021 ). Intel Investing $3.5B in Advanced Packaging. https:/ /
www.electropages.com/blog/2021/05/intel-investing-35b-advanced-packaging
292 Ekmark, K. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 52. SEMI. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/
BIS-2021-0011-0053
293 Huang, A. ( 2019 ). Supply Chain Security Talk. BlueHat IL 2019. https:/ /www.bunniestudios.com/blog/?p=5519
294 Perez, T. D., & Pagliarini, S. ( 2020 ). A Survey on Split Manufacturing: Attacks, Defenses, and Challenges. IEEE Access,
8, 184013–184035. https:/ /doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3029339
295 Ekmark, K. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 52. SEMI. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/
BIS-2021-0011-0053
296 Ekmark, K. ( 2021 ). Public Comment on 86 FR 14308 Semiconductor Manufacturing and Advanced Packaging Supply
Chain NOI ( Bureau of Industry and Security ). Public Comment 52. SEMI. https:/ /www.regulations.gov/comment/
BIS-2021-0011-0053
297 Kleinhans, J.P ., & Baisakova, N. ( 2020 ). The Global Semiconductor Value Chain. SNV Policy Paper. https:/ /www.stif-
tung-nv.de/sites/default/files/the_global_semiconductor_value_chain.pdf
298 Pepermans, A. ( 2017 ). The Sino-European Solar Panel Dispute: China’s Successful Carrot and Stick Approach To-
wards Europe. Journal of Contemporary European Research, 13( 4 ).
299 Kleinhans, J.P . ( 2021 ). The Lack of Semiconductor Manufacturing in Europe. SNV Policy Paper. https:/ /www.stif-
tung-nv.de/sites/default/files/eu-semiconductor-manufacturing.april_.2021.pdf
300 IPCEI Website: What is IPCEI. https:/ /www.ipcei-me.eu/what-is/
301 European Commission. ( 2021 ). Joint Declaration On Processors And Semiconductor Technologies. https:/ /ec.euro-
pa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/73940
302 European Commission. ( 2021 ). 2030 Digital Compass: The European Way for the Digital Decade. https:/ /eur-lex.eu-
ropa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52021DC0118&from=en
303 European Commission. ( 2021 ). European Industrial Strategy. https:/ /ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priori-
ties-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age/european-industrial-strategy_en
304 Franck, T. ( 2021 ). Senate Passes $250 Billion Bipartisan Tech and Manufacturing Bill Aimed at Countering China.
https:/ /www.cnbc.com/2021/06/08/senate-passes-bipartisan-tech-and-manufacturing-bill-aimed-at-china.html
305 Sanger, D. Edmonson, C., McCabe, D., & Kaplan, T. ( 2021 ). Senate Poised to Pass Huge Industrial Policy Bill to Coun-
ter China. https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2021/06/07/us/politics/senate-china-semiconductors.html

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
88
306 White House Press Release. ( 2021, June 8 ). Statement of President Joe Biden on Senate Passage of the U.S. In-
novation and Competition Act. The White House. https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-relea-
ses/2021/06/08/statement-of-president-joe-biden-on-senate-passage-of-the-u-s-innovation-and-competiti-
on-act/
307 See Leary, A., & Davis, B. ( 2021 ). Biden’s China Policy Is Emerging—and It Looks a Lot Like Trump’s. https:/ /www.wsj.
com/articles/bidens-china-policy-is-emergingand-it-looks-a-lot-like-trumps-11623330000; Shapiro, J. ( 2021 ). Bi-
den Talks a Big Game on Europe. But His Actions Tell a Different Story. https:/ /www.politico.com/amp/news/maga-
zine/2021/06/04/biden-administration-europe-focus-491857
308 Carbis Bay G7 Summit Communique. ( June 2021, 11–13 ). https:/ /www.consilium.europa.eu/media/50361/car-
bis-bay-g7-summit-communique.pdf
309 European Commission. ( 2021 ). EU-US launch Trade and Technology Council to lead values-based global digital
transformation. https:/ /ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_2990 ; Politico. ( 2021 ). US and Eu-
rope to forge tech alliance amid China’s rise. https:/ /www.politico.eu/article/eu-us-trade-tech-council-joe-biden-
china/
310 NATO. ( 2021 ). Brussels Summit Communiqué. https:/ /www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_185000.htm
311 Sundaran, N. S. ( 2021 ). China Anti-sanctions Law to Put Squeeze on Foreign Companies. https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/
Politics/China-anti-sanctions-law-to-put-squeeze-on-foreign-companies
312 MERICS. ( 2021 ). China Fights Back Against Western Sanctions and Blacklists. https:/ /merics.org/en/short-analysis/
china-fights-back-against-western-sanctions-and-blacklists
313 Tian, Y . ( 2021 ). China Passes Law to Counter Foreign Sanctions. https:/ /www.usnews.com/news/world/ar -
ticles/2021-06-10/china-passes-law-to-counter-foreign-sanctions
314 Deng, I. ( 2021 ). China Must Pursue Chip Assembly, Packaging Breakthroughs to Catch Up with Semiconductor Lea-
ders, Experts Say. https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3136688/china-must-pursue-chip-assembly-packa-
ging-breakthroughs-catch

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
89
About the Stiftung Neue Verantwortung
The Stiftung Neue Verantwortung (SNV) is an independent, non-profit think tank
working at the intersection of technology and society. The core method of SNV is col-
laborative policy development, involving experts from government, tech companies,
civil society and academia to test and develop analyses with the aim of generating
ideas on how governments can positively shape the technological transformation.
To guarantee the independence of its work, the organization has adopted a con-
cept of mixed funding sources that include foundations, public funds and corporate
donations.
About MERICS
MERICS has established itself as the go-to European think tank on China. With
about 20 full-time international researchers, from all over Europe, the United States,
Australia and Singapore, MERICS is currently the largest European research insti-
tute focusing solely on the analysis of contemporary China and its relations with Eu-
rope and the wider world. Our experts cover a range of scientific qualifications and
methodological skills. It plays an active role in informing European public debates
on China and in providing senior decision-makers across Europe with in-depth Chi-
na-related insights critical to their portfolios.

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
90
About the Authors
John Lee is a Senior Analyst at MERICS, where he coordinates work in the research
cluster on China’s use of digital technologies. John’s main areas of research focus
are China’s semiconductor ecosystem, cyberspace and data governance, and future
digital networks encompassing next-generation telecommunications and the In-
ternet of Things. John’s academic background includes strategic studies, political
science and international relations, history and international law. He holds Masters
degrees from the King’s College London Department of War Studies and from the
Australian National University. John previously worked for the Australian Depart-
ment of Defence and Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade.
Jan-Peter Kleinhans is director of the "Technology and Geopolitics" project. Cur -
rently his work focuses on the intersection of global semiconductor supply chains
and geopolitics. Previously Jan-Peter worked on 5G security and presented his work
at the German parliament's committee on foreign affairs and the NATO parliamen-
tary assembly. After joining SNV in 2014 Jan-Peter analyzed why the market failed
to produce reasonably trustworthy consumer IoT devices. He explored if and how
standardization, certification and market surveillance can create economic incen-
tives for IoT manufacturers to produce secure and trustworthy IoT devices. He is Fel-
low of the Transatlantic Digital Debates 2016 and studied communication sciences
in Uppsala, Sweden and business informatics in Darmstadt.
Contact the Author:
John Lee
John.Lee@merics.de
Jan-Peter Kleinhans
jkleinhans@stiftung-nv.de

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
Policy Brief
June 2021
China’s semiconductor ecosystem
91
Imprint
Stiftung Neue Verantwortung e. V.
Beisheim Center
Berliner Freiheit 2
10785 Berlin
T: +49 ( 0 ) 30 81 45 03 78 80
F: +49 ( 0 ) 30 81 45 03 78 97
www.stiftung-nv.de
info@stiftung-nv.de
Design:
Make Studio
www.make-studio.net
Layout:
Jan Klöthe
This paper is published under CreativeCommons License ( CC BY-SA ). This allows
for copying, publishing, citing and translating the contents of the paper, as long as
the Stiftung Neue Verantwortung is named and all resulting publications are also
published under the license “CC BY-SA” . Please refer to http:/ /creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ for further information on the license and its terms and
conditions.
