
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
No 10 | June 2021
MERICS
PAPERS
ON CHINA
THE CCP'S NEXT CENTURY
Expanding economic control,
digital governance and national security

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE CCP'S NEXT CENTURY
Expanding economic control,
digital governance and national security
Edited by: Nis Grünberg | Claudia Wessling
Authors: Katja Drinhausen | Mikko Huotari | John Lee | Helena Legarda

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Introduction
Unlocking anti-fragile China: how Xi reinforces the party state for global leadership
Nis Grünberg ........................................................................................................................ 6
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics ......................... 13
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
Nis Grünberg .................................................................................................................... 19
Key findings ............................................................................................................... 21
1. Turning 100, the CCP can celebrate its economic power ..................................... 21
2. Building an economic order around party leadership ....................................... 23
3. Beijing sees the party state ascendant over the liberal state ...............................31
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
Katja Drinhausen, John Lee .............................................................................................. 37
Key findings ............................................................................................................... 39
1. Devising an institutional system for managing digitalization .................................39
2. Generating support for CCP-rule through smart governance ............................... 41
3. Harnessing digital technologies for political control ........................................... 43
4. Closing gaps to achieve a secure and controllable digital ecosystem ..................45
5. ICT is not a fail-safe for securing China’s and the CPP’s future .............................. 47
China’s new international paradigm: security first
Helena Legarda ................................................................................................................ 53
Key findings ................................................................................................................ 55
1. The party goes on the offensive: the era of low-profile foreign policy
 has been left behind .............................................................................................. 55
2. A new model: national security is redefined and governs the party’s agenda ....57
3. International environment: the CCP is on the alert for external threats
 to domestic stability ............................................................................................. 59
4. A new preemptive posture: the CCP will proactively confront potential
 challenges to its rule ............................................................................................. 60
5. Full steam ahead: the CCP feels confident of its chances of success ...................63
Outlook
Systemic competition on new terms – what a crisis-driven, globally ascending
party state means for European stakeholders
Mikko Huotari ................................................................................................................... 67
1. China’s ambition has moved beyond achieving resilience and adaptation ............. 69
2. China’s weaknesses and crisis anticipation make for a new type
 of systemic competition ........................................................................................ 70
3. China’s struggle mode and the prospects of an “anti-fragile”
 Xi-system carry major risks for international counterparts ................................. 71
4. Embracing China risks and recalibrating Europe’s balancing
 and hedging strategies ......................................................................................... 73
Contributors ..................................................................................................................... 74
Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
| 5
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Exhibits:
State-owned enterprises remain a core part of China’s economy ............................................................ 24
Share of national GDP by non-financial SOEs
Large state-owned enterprises dominate strategic sectors ..................................................................... 25
Ten biggest non-financial SOEs and five biggest private firms in China
State funds can raise vast amounts of capital ............................................................................................ 29
Raised capital as percentage of national GDP
The regulatory take-down of the Ant Group
The party state's stricter approach to fintech and big private firms ............................................................. 30
The business environment is becoming more politicized .......................................................................... 32
Recent examples of consequences for crossing red lines and pledges of CCP support
The CCP has driven internet uptake to world-leading levels .................................................................... 40
China’s internet users have grown quickly and embraced a wide variety of services
Political control trumps data protection in the party’s vision of a 'healthy' internet ............................ 44
Key policy tasks of internet regulation
China strives for domestic growth and global leadership in key technologies ...................................... 46
Digital development and innovation are key items of the 14th Five-Year Plan
China's adoption of high-tech innovations and digital state control go hand in hand .......................... 48
Key numbers for China's digital economy and information ecosystem
The party has established a new national security system ...................................................................... 56
The National Security Commission coordinates all national security work and priorities
Xi Jinping introduced the new concept of "comprehensive national security" ....................................... 58
This concept brings together 16 different policy fields, with the long-term stability
and survival of the system at the center
China attempts to control the narrative internationally ............................................................................ 62
Comparison of sanctions exchanged between the EU, the UK, Canada, the US and China

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Introduction
Introduction
Unlocking anti-fragile China: how Xi reinforces
the party state for global leadership
Nis Grünberg
As the CCP celebrates its 100 th anniversary, it presents itself as a political goliath brimming
with pride and ambition. The CCP’s Marxist historiography always saw the party progress -
ing towards a better future, but the increasingly confident messaging out of Zhongnanhai
is more than the former rags-to-riches narrative. Looking at the past years, China’s leaders
are convinced that the governance model of the party state is proving itself as the superior
political system.
After four decades of rapid economic growth and impressive social development, confi-
dence in the party’s ability to lead China’s ‘national rejuvenation’ is not without merit. The
belief in party-state governance is deepened by Beijing’s sobering view of global trends,
including the state of the economic and political capabilities of China’s peers. The tumul -
tuous impact of President Trump’s four years in power, the inability by most Western peers
to curb the Covid-19 pandemic, and the unraveling of the US-led global system are seen as
The belief in party-
state governance
is deepened by
Beijing’s sobering
view of global
trends
KEY FINDINGS
 China’s leaders are convinced that the
governance model of the party state
is proving itself as the superior politi-
cal system. “The West is in chaos, Chi-
na is in order” is the CCP’s diagnosis of
current global affairs, and the leader-
ship has announced the beginning of
a “New Development Stage.”
 The evolving party state is aware of
the systemic fault lines that weaken
its power. Institutional reforms ini-
tiated under Xi Jinping are meant to
address governance shortcomings by
employing the CCP’s ‘power tools’ of
political centralization, mobilization
and control.
 Digitalization has become a crucial
element in the CCP’s governance ap-
proach. It serves both better gover-
nance and public service, but also en-
hances the party state’s surveillance
and monitoring capabilities.
 The party leadership considers this
to be the most challenging period of
its rule. Potential threats to regime
security lie round every corner. In re-
sponse, everything is viewed through
a “comprehensive national security”
paradigm.
 Under Xi, China has left behind its
defensive stance. The party state is
translating its more muscular posture
at home into its status abroad.
 The sustainability of Beijing’s type of
authoritarianism is unclear. Despite
the narrative of China’s superior mod-
el of governance, it invests growing
amounts of resources into a balloon-
ing security apparatus – desperately
trying to extinguish any threat to sta-
bility.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
| 7
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Introduction
a new order. At the US-China meetings in Anchorage, State Councilor Yang Jiechi made it
clear that China’s tolerance for what it perceives as being spoken to “… in a condescending
way from a position of strength” has come to an end. China wants to be seen and treated
as an equal.
A number of analyses have viewed China’s domestic and international challenges as po -
tential last straw moments. China is a fragile superpower, so the thinking goes, awaiting
one precipitous, terminal event. Yet others see China as increasingly anti-fragile. For Xi
and his fellow CCP leaders, building an anti-fragile China entails not only being able to
“get through” systemic shocks such as financial crises, pandemics or disruptions in tech
supply chains. It requires an ability to benefit from such uncertainty and stress, emerging
from crises even stronger by exploiting others’ weaknesses and eliminating vulnerabilities
in the institutional setup.
“The West is in chaos, China is in order” is the CCP’s diagnosis of current global affairs, and
the leadership has announced the beginning of a “New Development Stage.” During this new
stage, China aims to become a middle-income country by 2035 and a global economic center
by mid-century. As a key part of the process, the country requires full strategic autonomy
in resources, supply chains and technology. Xi Jinping wants to be the figure that marked
the departure from Dengist reform and opening-up into a distinct Chinese modernity. With
term limits abolished, and 10 years of preparing and streamlining the party apparatus
around him, Xi is set to become the torch bearer for a China with a global status of wealth
and power.
“No one can defeat us or crush us! Accelerating the construction of a new development
pattern will enhance our survivability, competitiveness, development and sustainabil -
ity in the midst of various foreseeable and unforeseeable storms and turbulent waves
and ensure that the process of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation will not be
delayed or even interrupted.” – Xi Jinping
Much of the core politics of Xi Jinping remain centered around domestic development. The
aim is to show the CCP has not forgotten its socialist roots – putting “the people as [sic]
the center” of the modernization project. China’s chief economic planner Liu He identified
inequality and “out of touch” national governments as two key causes of the 2008 global
financial crisis. The poverty alleviation program and now the rural revitalization drive are
therefore crucial for the new stage of development, which must establish a broader distri-
bution of wealth.
The evolving party state is aware of the systemic fault lines that weaken its power. Many of
the institutional reforms initiated under Xi are meant to address governance shortcomings
(短板) by employing the CCP’s well-known “power tools” of political centralization, mobi-
lization and control.
Not only has political authority been centralized around Xi as “core leader”, but the party
center’s decisions are meant to serve as “top-level design” – governance blueprints for the
entire system. Fragmented bureaucracy and selective local implementation of central-lev -
el policy are targeted. More centralized decision-making and strong messaging reminds
officials to strive towards centrally defined objectives. The strong degree of centralization,
however, is by many seen as detrimental to local policy innovation.
To the leadership
in Beijing, a strong
party state is the
key for unlocking
institutional
advantages in a
systemic competition

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Political mobilization has always been part of the CCP’s toolbox, but under Xi Jinping it is
being normalized as a governance tool throughout society and economy. The handling of
the Covid-19 crisis has shown how effective mass mobilization can be. Deep integration and
institutionalization of CCP within social services, public administration and security was
taken to new levels. Technological advances in governance and policing are aiding public
service and government efficiency. But the sprawling surveillance networks are increasing -
ly putting citizens private lives under the microscope.
Since control is better than trust, sustained rounds of audits, and frequent discipline and
anti-corruption inspection teams paying visits to local governments and administrative
branches add an incentive to toe the central party line. Xi wants to make sure the vast
party state is stable and disciplined enough to pull into one centrally concerted direction,
attempting to end centuries of central-local disparities in policy making. Non-compliance
with Xi’s political priorities has often been the focus of anti-corruption investigations, and
it remains to be seen how effective a sustained discipline pressure on officials is for pushing
governance to become more uniform across China.
The unprecedented institutionalization of party rule under Xi is not simply about personal
power. It represents a carefully concerted long-term effort to cement the party state as a gov-
ernance system. The CCP is attempting to build a resilient and adaptive state – an anti-frag -
ile China – that is capable of taking the global lead over the next decades. It aims to do this
by building on the development experience of past decades, banking on the economic pow -
er of China’s large economy and mobilizing a network of party organizations, a disciplined
administration, and a vast security apparatus. To the leadership in Beijing, a strong party
state is the key for unlocking institutional advantages in a systemic competition.
1. PARTY-STATE CAPITALISM: INTEGRATING THE ECONOMY UNDER POLITICS
To steer the forces of economic liberalization, globalization and marketization, the CCP is
turning China’s decentralized state capitalism into an organic “party-state capitalist” model.
Here, the CCP’s authority remains the key driver and veto power in strategic economic deci-
sion making – at both government and corporate levels.
The goal is to forge an economy generally operating like a market economy, but in which
main flows of capital can be steered and economic activity is disciplined by a common set of
politically defined development objectives. For this task the public sector, i.e., state-owned
enterprises (SOEs), maintains a vital function. The deeper integration of state-controlled
capital into the economy has two functions. Firstly, it will allow for increased macro steer -
ing of economic development. Secondly, it is supposed to inject more market discipline into
SOEs, making them leaner and less wasteful.
Systemic shocks such as the global financial crisis have also convinced the leadership that
more political oversight is necessary. This is especially the case in finance (including the
platform economy), which, if left unfettered, is seen as a source of imbalances and systemic
risks. Finally, the CCP-led national project of modernization is increasingly expected to be
part of the corporate mission among industry leaders, and the CCP is calling for patriotic
sentiments and support in the private sector.
The goal is to
forge an economy
in which main
flows of capital
can be steered
and activity is
disciplined by
politically defined
development
objectives
Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
| 9
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
2. DIGITALIZATION: LEVERAGING SMART GOVERNANCE AND CCP CONTROL
To remain at the vanguard of (and not just responding to) social and political development,
CCP leaders are advancing digitalization forcefully throughout the system. Digitalization
has become a crucial element in the CCP’s governance approach. It serves both better gov -
ernance and public service, but also enhances the party state’s surveillance and monitor -
ing capabilities.
The deployment of digital technology to handle the Covid-19 pandemic is seen as a suc -
cessful test of the capabilities of digital tools. On one hand, digitalization generates citizen
support through better services. On the other, it is creating an unprecedented surveillance
state that enforces its norms via the digital space. Digitalization also fuels China’s drive for
more self-reliance, as it remains dependent on foreign technology. The prospects of tech-
nological breakthroughs are driving vast state-driven development programs intended to
break the dependence on imports from non-Chinese industry leaders.
3. SECURITY FIRST: VIEWING THE WORLD THROUGH A LENS OF NATIONAL
SECURITY CHALLENGES
The party leadership considers this to be the most challenging period of its rule. Potential
threats to regime security lie round every corner. In response, everything is viewed through
a “comprehensive national security” paradigm. This now covers a disparate range of is -
sues, from education, media, the environment, to supply-chains, resource politics and for -
eign actors. This tendency to view virtually everything through a lens of national security
makes China more confrontational in its presence and interactions with the world. Under
Xi Jinping, China has left behind its defensive posture.
In dealing with what are viewed as domestic issues, the party is increasingly assertive.
This can be seen in the more aggressive policies towards Hong Kong, Taiwan and Xinjiang.
Within Mainland China, securitization continues to grow, preemptively policing citizens’
physical and digital lives even more than before.
China’s foreign relations are also becoming more proactive. Government policy aims to
shape global standards according to its preferences. It also responds more confrontational -
ly when acting on behalf of overseas Chinese interests. Where there are perceived threats to
Chinese interests, reaction comes with less restraint. This happens whether those interests
be economic, political or in global narratives. The party state is translating its more muscu -
lar posture at home into its status abroad. This more direct imposition of Chinese interests
internationally is part of the securitization of international behavior, carried out in order to
foster a safer environment for China’s rise.
CONCLUSION: THE WORLD NEEDS TO BE PREPARED FOR AN EVER MORE ASSERTIVE
CCP – AND A CHINA ENGAGING IN SYSTEMIC COMPETITION
The leadership in Beijing believes China is engaged in systemic competition, and that it is
winning. They see the relative performance and stability of the party state as confirmation
of its viability and legitimacy as a system. In foreign relations, they exude increasing confi-
dence. At home, China is doubling down - strengthening its party-state capitalist model by
enforcing discipline and central control.
In dealing with
what are viewed
as domestic
issues, the party
is increasingly
assertive
Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Beijing wants to bolster its defenses against what it views as Western containment of its rise.
More effective legal and regulatory tools are being developed in response. Extraterritorial
application of Chinese law and pre-emptive action will become more frequent. The rapid
retaliation to European sanctions against Chinese officials exemplifies China’s new strategy.
The CCP’s organic integration with the political system ties the party’s political program and
China’s national interest ever closer. Nowhere is this more starkly exemplified than in its
“comprehensive national security” concept. This will increasingly spill over to international
arenas - creating more friction when Chinese, or the CCP’s, interests are perceived under
threat. For public actors this means less compromise and a more offensive stance on a broad
array of Chinese interests in international relations. For foreign firms this means that boy -
cotts and souring business ties over political sensitivities will become more frequent.
China’s digitalization drive has turned the country into a laboratory for new solutions and
approaches to business and governance unseen elsewhere. These include new markets and
industries, but also a politically controlled surveillance apparatus more capable than ever.
China’s wish to be a shaping actor in the global digital economy will be increasingly chal -
lenging to navigate for external stakeholders.
Despite calls for more self-reliance and a more proactive defense of national interests, Chi-
na will need to remain an open economy, albeit more on its own terms than before. Home
advantages and state support for priority sectors will remain in place, and a “level playing”
field is further out of reach as both US and EU governments consider how to create protec -
tive regimes of their own.
Reliance on foreign technology and vital resources make decoupling impossible at this
point. But the inward-looking economic development model will cause greater issues. Chi-
na’s partners in trade and businesses, hoping to grow their markets in China, will increas -
ingly find this being linked to political concessions and strategic commitments to the Chi-
nese market. Normative and legal considerations will make collaboration on technological
development and trade in high-tech more difficult. Already, overseas firms are struggling to
keep supply chains clear of potential issues concerning human rights, labor and environ-
mental standards. This challenge will only grow.
The party state under Xi Jinping is geared towards stability and security more than ever. In
its attempt to streamline and control China's heterogenous population under a CCP-defined
vision of society, it is disenfranchising political, ethnic and other minorities, and risks to
deepen existing rifts in society. In pursuit of this control, it is deploying its favored power
tools, centralization, mobilization and control. The sustainability of this type of authoritar -
ianism is unclear. Despite Beijing’s narrative of China’s superior model of governance, it
invests vast and growing amounts of resources into a ballooning security apparatus – des -
perately trying to extinguish any threat to stability.
The increasingly politicized business environment is making Sino-foreign joint ventures
more difficult. The low threshold for sudden political issues with foreign partners, when,
e.g., hit by boycotts over statements made outside China, will lead Chinese actors to stay
away from cooperation.
Introduction
Reliance
on foreign
technology and
vital resources
make decoupling
impossible at
this point

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
| 11
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Introduction
Europe should expect Xi Jinping to stay in power unchallenged for at least one more 5-year
term. He has rallied key allies around him and eliminated leadership contenders. In doing
so, he is driving the systemic remake of the party state. Recent years have seen both central
administration and provincial leadership posts staffed by Xi loyalists. There are no indica-
tions a successor to Xi will emerge before the next CCP Congress in 2022. Only a truly unpre-
dicted, existential crisis – precisely the kind of “black swan” event the party state is getting
better at handling – threatens this trajectory. His increasingly marginalized adversaries will
watch on; mostly in hope, likely in vain.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Who is the CCP?
Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics
Source: Central Organization Department of the CCP
© MERICS
Source: Central Organization Department of the CCP and National Bureau of Statistics of China
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party
in infographics
CCP members
(m.)
Increase in members compared
to the previous year (%)
CCP members as a proportion
of the total population (%)

0
10
0
1
2
3
4%
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 m.
+2.4 +2.7 +2.9 +2.9 +3.1
+1.1
+0.8
+1.3
+1.8
+1.2 +1.5
+0.1
88.8 89.5
78.0 82.6 86.7 89.6 90.6 91.9

21.1 %
'08
5.7 5.8 6.0 6.1 6.3 6.4 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.6
'09 '10 '11 '12 '13 '14 '15 '16 '17 '18 '20
Overall growth
2008 – 2019:
 Applications for membership (m.) Admitted new members (m.)
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
21.8
10.3
22.2
10.0
20.3
9.49.4
19.319.3
9.29.2
19.219.2
9.29.2
19.019.0
9.09.0
The CCP continues to grow steadily
Membership development since 2008
Recruitment of new members CCP members is slowing down after 2015
Applications for membership and admittance of new members (2014-2019)

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
| 15
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics
Source: Central Organization Department of the CCP
39.7 39.1 38.6
38.1 37.938.3 37.5 36.9 35.9 35.3 34.835.7
37.1
38.6
41.6
40.0
44.3
45.9
43.0
49.6
50.7
48.3

Workers and farmers (%)
Members with
academic degrees (%)
50%
40
30
'09 '10 '11 '12 '13 '14 '15 '16 '17 '18 '19
Source: Central Organization Department of the CCPSource: Organization department of the CCP (2018)
© MERICS
 Younger than 35 years (%) Between 35 to 60 years (%)
 Older than 60 years (%)
'18
28.2 24.4
46.9
'19
24.228.9
46.9
'17
28.2
46.9
24.9
27% 73%
Out of the
private companies in China,
15.61 million
73 percent
have a party cell
installed.
The party enters into businesses
Share of private companies with
party cells
The party is aging
Share of different age groups in the CCP
The CCP is becoming more elitist
Share of different professional groups

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
1
0
2
9
26
29
© MERICS
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics
* The inner cabinet is made up of the Premier, four Vice-Premiers and five State Councilors.
 Information on membership ratio: 2019 data, leading bodies: February 2021.
 Source: MERICS
Government authorities
27 .9%
72.1%
Male/female ratio in the CCP
Women
Men
70
1
1
25
31
Leading CCP bodies
Politburo Standing Commitee
Politburo
Secretaries of provincial
party committees
State Council (inner cabinet)*
Ministers
Provincial-level governors
Chances for promotion are slim for women
Gender distribution in top positions in party and state bodies

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
| 17
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics
1) Written application
Candidates place a request with the local party cell explaining their interest
and motivation. Within one month, the party cell sends a contact person to the
candidate to outline the rest of the process.
2) Acceptance as a candidate
The candidate must provide a CV and information on their family,
social connections and the political background of their parents.
The party cell appoints two party members as mentors and
supervisors.
4) Official acceptance process
Candidates can officially apply for party membership.
They must name two guarantors (usually the two mentors).
A superior party organization reviews the application in three
to six months and interviews the candidate.
5) One-year trial membership
If the organization accepts the admission, the candidate is registered,
sworn in and begins a trial membership. Depending on income,
members must pay between 0.5 and 2 percent of their net income
annually as a membership fee.
6) Official membership
If there is no breach of party discipline or law, official membership is
granted after one year.
3) One-year preparation period
The candidate must, at a minimum, complete a three-day course
(e.g., at the party school). They must present a reflective report
on Marxism-Leninism, the guidelines of the CCP and current po-
litical developments every three months. The party cell verifies
the candidate‘s information and political commitment by inter-
viewing at least eight colleagues, neighbors and acquaintances.
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
The path to CCP membership
Five main application steps have to be taken

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Who is the CCP? Facts about the Chinese Communist Party in infographics
Source: MERICS
 Party politics Foreign relations Economic development
The CCP wins the
second civil war with the
Kuomintang and establishes
the People’s Republic of
China.
October 1, 1949
The Great Leap Forward,
intended to propel China’s
steel output to surpass
US and UK levels,
leads to famine
claiming millions
of lives.
January 1958 – 1962
Start of the Long March:
Mao gains prominence for
his military doctrine and the
party gained support of rural
population.
October 16, 1934
The Communist Party of
China (CCP) is officially
founded in Shanghai.
July 1, 1921
China starts what is later
popularised as the „Great
Firewall of China“ to
filter sensitive political
information online.
2003
Beijing Olympics 2008
launches China onto
the global stage as an
emerging economic power.
August 8, 2008
China becomes home to
the world’s biggest popula-
tion of internet users.
2008
China overtakes Japan
to become the world’s
second-largest economy.
2010
Xi is named “core leader”
of the party, solidifying his
power over the governance
of China.
October 27 , 2016
The Belt and Road Initiative
is written into CCP
constitution, affirming the
initiative as a permanent core
plan of action for China.
October 24, 2017
A law is revised to send
minorities “influenced by
terrorism” to vocational training
in Xinjiang, repression of ethnic
minorities becomes legally
justified.
2018
The two-term presidency
limit is removed, ending
a policy put in place to
avoid a repeat of Mao
dictatorship.
March 11, 2018
The Cultural Revolution
rips apart China’s economy
and society. Millions die
from political campaigns
and in labor camps.
May 1, 1966
Mao dies,
an era ends.
September 9, 1976
The PRC is officially
admitted into the UN and
replaces Taiwan in the UN
Security Council.
October 25, 1971
Deng Xiaoping launches China’s
“Reform and opening up”
policy. Foreign investments
pour in, China starts to expand
economically.
December 13, 1978
Tiananmen square protests end
in bloodshed, showing the extent
the CCP will go to suppress
dissent against its rule. Party
leader Zhao Ziyang is purged,
and Jiang Zemin assumes power.
June 4, 1989
Deng dies.
February 19, 1997
China joins the WTO, gains
greater access to trading
partners and a seat in the
global trading body.
December 11, 2001
Hong Kong returns to
China, ending over 150
years of British rule over
the territory.
July 1, 1997
The Hong Kong National
Security Law is enacted
to persecute and suppress
critical voices.
May 28, 2020
China declares full eradication
of extreme poverty, achieves
goal of becoming “moderately
prosperous society.”
January 1, 2021
Centennial anniversary
of the founding of
the CCP.
July 1, 2021
Xi Jinping is elected as
CCP General Secretary,
begins a new era
of leadership and
governance in China.
November 8, 2012
Xi consolidates power, creates
and chairs supra-ministerial
committees to oversee
cybersecurity, national security
and economic reforms.
2013
The Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank is
established, expanding
China’s global economic
and political influence.
December 25, 2015
Yuan officially
becomes fifth reserve
currency of IMF’s reserve
asset, expanding China’s
economic influence.
2016
© MERICS
From rags to riches
How the CCP shaped China over the past 100 years

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
| 19
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the
economy with political objectives
Nis Grünberg

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
| 21
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
Nis Grünberg
1. TURNING 100, THE CCP CAN CELEBRATE ITS ECONOMIC POWER
As it celebrates its 100 th anniversary, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is stronger than
ever before. It is firmly in charge of the world’s second largest economy – one set to overtake
the United States in only a few years’ time. For China’s leaders, the CCP’s centenary serves
not only to highlight the party’s own rags-to-riches story, but more broadly China’s eco -
nomic and geopolitical rise. In this official narrative, economic growth and development
come hand in hand with party leadership. “Without the CCP , there is no new China” (没有共
产党，没有新中国), as the saying goes.
The CCP’s guiding principles of party hegemony and the primacy of politics over economics
are long familiar, indeed today’s “Xi Jinping thought on socialism with Chinese characteris -
tics for a new era” has many things in common with the party discourse of the last decades.1
But the enormous authority of the General Secretary of the CCP (and President of the Peo -
ple’s Republic of China) and the means available to him through a modernized party-state
apparatus mean that Xi has more power than any Chinese leader before him to put many of
the party’s ideas into practice.
Xi’s unprecedentedly
powerful, ideology-
infused political
steering of the
economy is
establishing a new
economic order
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the
economy with political objectives
KEY FINDINGS
 For China’s leaders, the CCP’s cente-
nary serves not only to highlight the
party’s own rags-to-riches story but
also, more broadly, China’s economic
and geopolitical rise.
 Under Xi, the idea of China converging
towards liberal economic systems is
thoroughly dismantled. China wants
to present the world with a better
governance model able to control and
resolve the dangerous imbalances
caused by laissez faire capitalism and
poorly regulated finance.
 The public economy, led by state-
owned enterprises, remains crucial
to China’s socio-economic fabric. The
private economy is much larger, but
SOEs dominate strategic sectors and
are considered vital for the national
interest.
 China will unlikely nationalize private
players like Alibaba, Tencent or Hua-
wei. But Beijing has signaled that
tolerance of their dominant market
positions is dependent on their active
alignment with party politics.
 China’s current direction of travel is
clearly towards a business environ-
ment in which CCP leadership and ob-
jectives point the way.
 In its systemic competition with liber-
al capitalism, Beijing is convinced that
its political control, flexible economic
governance and technological break-
throughs will eventually lead it to su-
perpower status.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
The vision is one of
China governed as
one social unit in an
organic relationship
between the party
state and the
economy
In a speech delivered in early 2021, Xi pointed out that China has entered a “new develop -
ment stage.” 2 The way Xi’s administration now governs the economy has become so dis -
tinctive that scholars have shifted from talking about the familiar state capitalism to a more
recent “party-state capitalism,” 3 or from thinking in terms of “China Inc.” to “CCP Inc.” 4
Xi’s unprecedentedly powerful, ideology-infused political steering of the economy is estab -
lishing a new economic order. 5 This party-state capitalism is characterized by centralized
leadership, a hybrid economy that blends market capitalism with macro-economic devel -
opment plans based on objectives outlined by the center, and private and public economic
actors working with or alongside each other in various constellations.
Xi and the leadership he has gathered around him consider the system they have forged
to have withstood major economic and social shocks – the result of financial crises or the
Covid-19 pandemic – better than many so-called developed economies. Beijing sees the par -
ty state as the better governance system and party-state capitalism as the better economic
model. Modernization and economic growth seen as the success story of party-state capital -
ism have lent Xi’s regime significant financial means and legitimacy. The material develop -
ment success, growing technological capabilities and faith in China’s ability to withstand
major shocks comparatively well (such as the global financial crisis and Covid-19), are fuel -
ing the conviction of the party state’s systemic advantage.
Under Xi, the idea of China converging towards the liberal economic systems is thoroughly
dismantled, and Beijing is entrenching its party-led and state-driven economy. In his suc -
cinct analysis of the global financial crisis, Liu He (currently China’s most senior econom-
ic policy planner) diagnosed that “the world is expecting the arrival of a new theory” for
economic governance. He also channeled Henry Kissinger, predicting a new world power
every century.6 This is what China wants to present the world with, at the CCP’s 100 th anni-
versary: a better governance model able to control and resolve the dangerous imbalances
caused by laissez faire capitalism and poorly regulated finance, and economic governance
disconnected from political and social priorities.
In its purest, ideal type form the vision is one of China governed as one social unit in an
organic relationship (under hierarchy) between the party state and the economy. This new
governance model is seen as more resilient and adaptive than the fragile liberal economies
of the West.
Party-state capitalism is geared towards stability and control over the domestic arena, rath-
er than solely market efficiency. China’s leaders are willing to grapple with this continual
trade off because they see this systemic feature as an advantage in a time in which the in-
ternational order is beginning to shift. A more organic integration of economic governance
under political leadership is not only for more control, but it gives China more adaptiveness
in the face of “black swan events”: sudden critical and unforeseen shocks to the system. It
enables the leadership to mobilize economic resources towards political ends much more
directed than most other systems. Looking at major Western economies struggling to deal
with Covid-19, Beijing is ever more confident it will come out top in what it deems deep
systemic competition with liberal democracies.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
| 23
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Finally, the “new era” also comes with a “new pattern” of global integration. The Dual Cir -
culation concept again takes national economic priorities or “the great internal cycle” or
as the foundation for policy making. China is and remains highly integrated in the global
economy, but in the new era its ascent as world power will mean the economic center of
gravity will shift to China. This entails more bargaining and norm-setting power in supply
chains, technology, finance and economic governance in ways that aid, or at least doesn’t
harm Chinese domestic interests.
Of course, there are limits to the CCP’s control and its all-of-society governance capa-
bilities, especially in the economy. But the direction of travel of the past years show it is
unwise to disregard Beijing’s willingness and ability to implement political plans more
forcefully than before. In the economy we see these shifts unfolding in important ways,
as will be discussed in this chapter.
2. BUILDING AN ECONOMIC ORDER AROUND PARTY LEADERSHIP
The party leads, the market allocates resources, is the often-recited logic of China’s so-
called “socialist market economy.” It insists on the “public economy as the backbone of the
economy,” and dominant state-owned enterprises (SOEs), but allows for market capitalism
to exist at the same time. For the most part, China’s economy is a highly competitive market
economy, but the party state reserves its rights to control strategic sectors, support prior -
ity industries, and use its ownership and control rights in the public economy, as well as
regulatory and financial incentives to steer development towards key political objectives. 7
2.1 The CCP cements state-owned enterprises as the economic foundation
Direct control and natural monopolies in strategic sectors have long been a feature of Chi-
na’s economy. Controlling energy, information networks and other types of infrastructure
ensures Beijing’s ability to govern China as a whole. The country’s leaders value the role
of SOEs as macro-economic levers, and developments over recent years show that SOEs re-
main the backbone of Xi’s party-state economy. When the job market slumped in early 2020
due to the Covid crisis, the “national team” of central SOEs were told to jump in to boost
employment and aid pandemic fighting efforts. 7
Dual circulation
The dual circulation concept was put forth in 2020 describing a reorientation of
China’s economic system. Of the two cycles, internal and external, emphasis is
now on strengthening the domestic economy, including consumption, innovation
and reduced dependence on foreign imports of vital resources and technology.
This does not mean a hard decoupling from global markets, but a push to
climb up from the lower-end positions in global value chains.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
The SOE-led public economy is crucial to China’s socio-economic fabric. Employing at least
60 million people, SOEs are a corner stone of the job market. They contribute 20 - 25 per -
cent to the country’s gross domestic product (GDP), a figure that has remained constant for
many years as the Chinese economy and SOEs grew in co-step to become significant global
players today.11 The private economy is much larger, but SOEs dominate energy, transpor -
tation, public utilities and other strategic sectors where they hold “natural monopolies” 12
considered vital for the national interest. In these sectors 96 “national champions” are
overseen by the central state, while leaders are vetted by the central party apparatus.
Xi Jinping: “[…] we must improve at making SOEs bigger and better...and
increase the public economy’s competitiveness, innovation, control, influence
and resilience against crises.” 8
Xi Jinping: “We must […] build bigger, better and stronger SOEs, unswervingly
strengthen their control, influence, risk-prevention ability, and realize the
protection and expansion of state-owned capital.” 9
Hao Peng (Director of China’s SOE watchdog): “Whether it is a state-owned
company or a private company, they all are Chinese companies […]” 10
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
Exhibit 1
1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018*
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
State-owned enterprises remain a core part of China’s economy
Share of national GDP by non-financial SOEs
*Note: Incomplete data for 2018
Source: Bateson 2020 Gavekal Dragonomics/Macrobond
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
| 25
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
SOEs are still less efficient and less profitable than private companies. SOE reforms have
long been on the agenda, but efforts to establish modern corporate governance and in-
crease efficiency are moderated by more important political considerations. The Third Ple-
num of the CCP’s 18 th Congress in 2013 declared a “decisive role of the market in resource
allocation.” Two years later, new guidelines outlined a modern corporate governance with
Chinese characteristics and stated that party leadership should be “the core of the corpo -
rate governance system.” 13 This latter move gave each SOE’s party group, in effect its high-
est leadership body, formal power of decision over strategy, major investments, leadership
personnel and issues relating to national security.
In 2020, a new regulation again stressed the requirement that SOEs must establish party
groups.14 China’s SOE reform does not entail privatization, equal treatment or independent
corporate governance. SOEs are seen as important state asset meant to protect and increase
state-owned capital. While commercialization and profit-driven strategies are part of the re-
forms, differential treatment, political involvement and beneficial policies will remain in place.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
Exhibit 2
Source: Fortune Global 500 (2020)
© MERICS
COMPANY TYPE SECTOR REVENUE (USD BILLION)
Sinopec SOE Energy
State Grid SOE Energy
China National Petroleum SOE Energy
China State Construction
Engineering
SOE Construction
Huawei Private Telecom-
munications
China Railway Engineering SOE Construction
SAIC Motor SOE Automotive
China Railway
Construction
SOE Construction
China National Offshore Oil SOE Energy
China Mobile SOE Telecom-
munications
Pacific Construction Private Construction
Amer International Group Private Metals
JD.com Private Internet
services
China Southern Power Grid SOE Energy
Hengli Private Chemicals
407
384
379
206
124
123
122
120
109
109
98
89
84
82
81
Large state-owned enterprises dominate strategic sectors
Ten biggest non-financial SOEs and five biggest private firms in China
 State-owned enterprises (SOE) Private companies

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Party leaders are meant to serve as directors on company boards, further integrating party
leadership and corporate governance in SOEs. For them, the political utility of SOEs as
owners, operators and investors in infrastructure and strategic sectors is often more im-
portant than mere profit.
Party-state control over SOE’s capital allows targeted investments in an increasing number
of ways. While China continues to support state-owned enterprises and their strategic in-
dustries, large state-owned investment funds are playing an ever-bigger role in advancing
industrial policy and development targets beyond the scope of SOEs. Capital earmarked
to support industrial-policy targets (including those of the Five-Year Plans) is channeled
through specialized “state guidance funds” ( 政府引导基金), set up to raise funds for invest -
ment into priority industries. There are over 1700 of such funds controlling around 700
billion USD (see exhibit 3). 15
The perhaps most prominent example is the National Integrated Circuit Industry Invest -
ment Fund that was created in 2014 and charged with developing a domestic semiconduc -
tor industry.16 In two fundraising calls it has raised over 50 billion USD, investing in both
private and publicly owned companies. The second round was also followed by an incorpo -
ration of the fund. 17 Fund managers are evaluated by return on investment, but the fund is
a hedging mechanism as much as generator of returns.
As an investor, the party state wants to back multiple players in the sector and work to -
wards a clear political objective – developing a homegrown semiconductor industry. Com-
pared to direct subsidies and cash-gifts to SOEs of the earlier days, the evolving state guid -
ance funds also show how Beijing is learning and trying to tweak its development steering
mechanisms.
The rise of state-owned investment funds is meant to bring more market discipline to allo -
cating resources to high-impact projects, but they have not been a silver bullet against poor
investment returns. Their ultimate goal is not profit maximization, but technological devel -
opment and breakthroughs in priority industries – as defined by the party-state leadership,
e.g., via Five-Year Plans.
There are many reports about bankruptcies, illicit uses of funds and failed investments due
to poor due diligence.18 Tens of thousands of companies in the semiconductor industry have
been established in the last few years alone, encouraged by the vast amounts of capital
that sprung out of government support for the sector.19 Beijing bets on the potential of a few
players achieving technological breakthroughs in strategic emerging industries, a feat that
will outweigh the economic cost of poor investments with no or little returns. 20
Party-state capital is also being used strategically to absorb the risks of downward swings
in markets. Economic shocks such as the global financial crisis and the collapse of large
conglomerates like Anbang and HNA Group have shaken China’s financial system and rat -
tled the leadership, which has made financial risks a top priority for regulators.
When an equity crisis sent stock prices tumbling in 2015-16, Beijing realized it could not
control China’s increasingly complex financial markets. SOEs and state investment funds
were ordered to step in to stabilize collapsing stock prices that were endangering dozens of
listed companies and millions of private investors. Initially seen as providing a quick fix for
market turmoil, state entities have since not retreated from the stock market and continue
to invest in public and private companies. 21
The party state
wants to back
multiple players
in the sector and
work towards
a clear political
objective
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
| 27
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
2.2 The CCP has an eye on strategic emerging industries
Alibaba, Huawei, Tencent, Bytedance and other private companies in China have emerged
as industry leaders in sectors like information communication technology (ICT), artificial
intelligence (AI), media and fintech. They are driving innovation in technology that also
powers official information service platforms and have developed into system-relevant
players through their economic size alone. They are also central to China’s digital infra-
structure – infrastructure that provides the party state with the means to build up its own
surveillance and governance capacities (see chapter by Drinhausen and Lee) – and allows
political elites to benefit from the huge profits of these new industry leaders. 22
China will unlikely nationalize useful private players like Alibaba, Tencent or Huawei. But
Beijing has signaled that its tolerance of their dominant market positions in strategical -
ly crucial sectors like fintech, media and ICT is dependent on their active alignment with
political priorities, including preventing financial risks. For example, the consumer loans
market is worth over CNY 14 trillion, and popular microlender Ant Group alone has around
CNY 1.7 trillion worth of consumer loans, enough to make regulators nervous about finan-
cial risks and potential black swan events in the fintech sector. 23 Their answer has been a
mix of more political oversight, stronger regulation and intense anti-corruption efforts in
the state-dominated banking and finance sector.
The implicit deal – letting China’s private national champions do what they do best as long
as they comply with party state rules and norms – seems to be approaching its limits. Com-
panies such as Alibaba have become so large that they are considered by regulators to be
“too big to fail” and so have potential to become systemic risks. 24
At the same time, industry leaders and innovators in the private sector are enlisted to achieve
the technological breakthroughs and research in frontier technologies and strategic emerg -
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
Exhibit 3
State funds can raise vast amounts of capital
Raised capital as percentage of national GDP
Source: Chinaventure (2019), Natural Bureau of Statistics
© MERICS
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.74 %
0.03 %
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
ing industries, outlined in the 14 th Five-Year Plan for 2021-25.25 Companies such as Huawei
and Baidu are vital parts of the technology development clusters evolving around state plans.
As a result, the party state finds new strategies to better monitor and control them. As dis -
cussed above, state-owned funds have increased their investments in and cooperation with
private companies, especially the larger ones. It is also using equity stakes to deepen its ties
with – and information disclosure from – corporations in the private sector. This gives the
party state deeper insights into new markets and the private sector, while the entrepreneurs
it has co-opted gain access and secure special deals like tax breaks. 26
2.3 The CCP wants a seat in corporate board rooms
The party state is pursuing the integration of party organizations also with private enter -
prises. Party leadership is being written into corporate charters and governance systems,
and regulation has become tougher and more ideologically informed.
China’s Company Law requires any company with three or more party members to establish a
party group. Smaller private companies long viewed this as a meaningless formality, but un-
der Xi the institutionalization and use of party groups for political mobilization is rising. More
than 70 percent of all private companies have established party groups, according to the CCP .27
Although they do not have formal decision-making powers in private companies, party
groups are meant to play a consultative role in the “modern enterprise system with Chinese
characteristics.” 28 Regulations encourage the groups to recruit their leaders from company
management or people representing the “business backbone” ( 业务骨干) to integrate corpo-
rate officers and the company’s CCP leadership. 29
New forms of party-state interaction with private firms are also being developed. The city of
Hangzhou in 2019 started a pilot program that dispatched 100 CCP cadres as “government
affairs representatives” to 100 private firms, industry leaders such as Alibaba and Geely
among them.30 The program’s stated aim was to smoothen these companies’ relations with
local authorities. But it also institutionalized and deepened the formal links and informa-
tion channels between the party state and the private sector. Other localities have since
established similar programs. 31
Party groups in the private sector recently have been urged to take a proactive role in shap -
ing a sense of mission and political awareness within their companies. In September, the
CCP issued a new policy calling upon its United Front Department, which is charged with
integrating and aligning non-party organizations and groups with the “party line,” to in-
crease its ideological engagement with the private sector. 32
In a speech published two days after the document was released, the vice chairman of the
All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce, Ye Qing, laid out the intentions behind:
“Private enterprises can establish a monitoring and auditing department under the
leadership of the party organization. This department will be responsible for super -
vising the implementation of the enterprise’s compliance with laws and regulations as
well as company management structure, alerting and educating management and em-
ployees [about problems with the former], supervising unusual behavior on the part of
employees, investigating and handling disciplinary violations and rule-breaking, and
to conducting risk assessments in key business fields and other related work.” 33
Party groups are
meant to play a
consultative role
in the “modern
enterprise
system with
Chinese
characteristics"
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
| 29
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
But the motivations for more oversight are also about stability. Chen Yixin, chairman of
the Central Political and Legal Commission, the party organization overseeing legal issues,
underlined the need to better regulate and control online platforms and financial services
companies, in particular also in order to “prevent financial risks from spilling over into
areas of social stability or even political security.” 34 Fine-tuning the regulatory framework
to reflect changing economic risks and social imbalances is an important move in poorly
regulated and fast-growing industries.
The evolving approach to the burgeoning private sector follows a control-performance log -
ic, in which the former is being reinforced after years of relatively loose regulation, espe-
cially of China’s ballooning financial industry. As private fintech companies have forged a
valuable business sector of significant economic scope and growing strategic importance
for the economy, Beijing is pushing for better regulation, more effective monitoring and
stronger risk control – both political and economic.
2.4 The CCP calls for corporate allegiance
The integration of the party state and private companies through equity links and closer
supervision through regulatory changes have been flanked by an ideological push from
Beijing that invokes the patriotic role of entrepreneurship. Xi Jinping in July 2020 reminded
business leaders of their need for “patriotic sentiments” and pointed out that “great entre-
preneurs have a high sense of mission and a strong sense of responsibility for the country
[…] linking business development with national prosperity.” 35
Research shows that the use of ideological mobilization to engender support for the party
state in social issues can be as effective as coercive methods. 36 Stirring nationalism and pa-
triotism to stimulate political support is a common strategy in China. Foreign companies,
for one, now need to be increasingly careful about Beijing’s patriotic sensitivities and doz -
ens of them – from Audi to the NBA – have been forced to apologize for “hurting the feelings
of the Chinese people” in some way or another. 37
The Chinese leadership’s attitude towards private companies is based on the idea of an
organic relationship between party, state and society. Companies should see themselves
as “corporate citizens” and with this “citizenship” come benefits – and duties: Don’t only
ask how to get rich, ask how to contribute to the national project of development. For most
companies this means little more than ideological window dressing, but for strategically
important ones, and for those popping up on government radars because of political rea-
sons, it is an increasingly big issue.
Industry-leading companies and private firms seen as important have felt how recent ef -
forts to improve China’s regulatory regimes – in areas like anti-monopoly rules and fintech
– also had a political dimension. The party state’s treatment of Ant Group was driven by
important and arguably much-needed improvements in industry regulation but came cou -
pled with the demand for a pledge of allegiance. This highlights how industry regulation
and political control are two sides of one coin: trimming Ant to prevent it from becoming a
black swan by increasing political oversight, and by introducing better fintech industry and
anti-monopoly regulation that serve social and economic purposes (see exhibit 4).
Companies should
see themselves as
“corporate citizens”
with benefits – and
duties
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
Exhibit 4
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
The regulatory take-down of the Ant Group
The party state's stricter approach to fintech and big private firms
On November 2, 2020 founder Jack Ma and execu-
tives of Ant Group were summoned by regulatory
agencies and the People’s Bank of China, days
before its “biggest IPO in human history.” Ant
Group is an affiliate of the Alibaba Group. Ant owns
China’s largest digital payment platform, Alipay,
which has over 1 billion users. After the “regulatory
interview,” a company spokesperson said Ant would
“… implement the meeting opinions in depth …
embrace supervision .. and assist the development
of the economy and the people’s livelihoods.”
The IPO was postponed
indefinitely.
Prior to the summoning
Ma had given a speech
at the Bund Finance
Summit on October 24,
2020 criticizing state
banks as “pawnshops.”
In the following weeks,
Ma largely disappeared from public view. On April 12,
2021 regulators forced Ant to initiate a restructuring
into a holding company, and news platform Huxiu,
also part of the Alibaba group, was shut for a month
after it defended Ma’s criticism. Meanwhile, state
regulators announced new anti-monopoly rules and
a regulatory overhaul of the entire fintech industry
which had become “too big to fail.”
Chief financial regulator Guo Shuqing stated:
“[fintechs are] helpful to the real economy … but
we need to prevent their risks.” Beijing had become
too wary of “financial risks” posed by a ballooning
private finance industry.
The new anti-monopoly rules restrict Ant’s
lending operations and give state banks a bigger
share of the business, and cap any platform’s
lending-to-capital ratio at 25 percent. On April 10,
2021 Alibaba was further fined USD 2.8 billion,
around 4 percent of the
groups 2019 revenue, for
monopolistic behavior.
An “administrative
guidance” given on April
6, 2021 warned Ant to
adhere to anti-monopoly
rules and to create a
more consumer-friendly
platform.
Regulators also collected “pledges” from 34
leading platform companies to rectify practices
of using their market power to lock-in users on
their products, while blocking other companies
from offering services on their platforms. China’s
second biggest platform Tencent e.g., issued a
statement on April 14, 2021 pledging to create
a CNY 50 billion charity program for promoting
“sustainable social values.”

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
| 31
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Decades of economic
growth cemented
China’s belief in its
governance model
The CCP is deepening its organizational integration with businesses through party cells, is
co-opting business elites and strengthening its regulatory capacity. The biggest efforts to
influence corporate control yet remain limited to firms of certain size or impact. But the bal -
ance between control and performance has clearly shifted, and under Xi Jinping mobilizing
the CCP apparatus is used increasingly as “organizational weapon” for asserting more con-
trol over social organization at large. 38 Technological innovation and entrepreneurs willing
to take risks are hampered by an outdated and cumbersome bureaucracy – as a disgruntled
Jack Ma pointed out in his 2020 speech that angered regulators. 39
China’s current direction of travel is clearly towards a business environment in which CCP
leadership and norms point the way, powerful state agencies apply tougher regulation and
leading private enterprises are expected to pledge their support for political objectives – or
at the very least don’t openly resist the party line.
3. BEIJING SEES THE PARTY STATE ASCENDANT OVER THE LIBERAL STATE
China’s leadership sees the ability of party-state capitalism to steer economic development
and technological modernization as a distinct systemic advantage over free market cap -
italism. Decades of economic growth, broad provision of public goods and stability have
cemented China’s belief in its governance model. Recent months and years have proven its
ability to withstand systemic shocks.
Beijing believes in its mix of risk-preventing regulation, state-guided development plan-
ning, and an all-of society mobilization towards the CCP-led national project of China’s
revival as global power. The 20 th CCP Congress in 2022 will most likely see the ascent of Xi
to even more power, and with that deepen the organic integration of the economy under
politics.
Politically determined targets for development, state-led investment, state-owned equity
ties into the private sector, industrial policy and guidance funds will not go away. On the
contrary, leaders are calling for an all-of economy effort to “break the US tech blockade.” 40
State support will remain an important part of this effort, as highlighted again in the 14 th
Five-Year Plan. With improved investment screenings and policy learning from the numer -
ous experiences with finds, this way of economic mobilization will generate competitive
Chinese players in emerging industries in the coming decade.
Institutionalizing party organizations in corporate governance structures is intended to
establish a guiding mechanism to make sure private companies stay in line with national
interests. Private companies are currently under no legal obligation to comply with party
rules, but recent CCP regulation shows the party is keen to increase its political leverage
over all economic actors. On top of formal rules, ideologically-driven messaging is creating
a deeply politicized business environment.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
32 |
The complex relationships between China’s private companies and state enterprises means
foreign governments and non-Chinese companies will increasingly be confronted with ten-
sions over security, technology and market access when interacting with Chinese partners.
With more party state involvement in the economy, potential interfaces with public actors
and political sensitivities will increase also in commercial dealings. Foreign enterprises
operating in China will also have to make sure they are not seen as harming party-state
interests – and make sure they are seen as contributing to China’s economic and social
development (see exhibit 5).
These developments strongly suggest that the “level playing-field” that foreign companies
want for doing business in China is not in sight. On the contrary, systemic differences will
become an ever-greater challenge. Beijing’s vision for China’s political economic order is
blurring the lines between public and private ownership and drawing new priorities for
global integration. The dual circulation concept is not about decoupling China or severing
cooperation and trade, but about upgrading China’s place in the value chain, being more
self-reliant in essential resources and core technologies.
There are, of course, also limitations to the degree the leadership can push ideology into
the daily management concerns of companies. The CCP is still no monolithic all-encom-
passing power, and Beijing’s political strategies have always been met with local tactics
to shirk policy viewed as unreasonable or overreaching. Most companies operate freely by
following the law without proactively engaging in political activities.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives
DATE ACTOR/COMPANY CONSEQUENCE
October
2019
Daryl Morey, General Manager of the
Houston Rockets
Fans and Chinese business partners called
for boycotting the Houston Rockets, games
were not shown in China. Both Morey and
players apologized publicly to avoid more
damage to the NBA’s large Chinese market.
July
2020
HSBC, Jardines Group and other large
companies in Hong Kong
Having large footprints in Hong Kong and
China, corporations offered public statements
stressing their formal support for the Law.
This led to concerns raised by foreign stake-
holders, but appeased Beijing.
March
2021
H&M, Adidas and others The companies voiced concern over forced
Uighur labor in Xinjiang’s cotton industry.
Western fashion brands were faced with
boycotts and erasure of names on billboards
and ads and had dozens of sponsorship
contracts cancelled.
The business environment is becoming more politicized
Recent examples of consequences for crossing red lines and pledges of CCP support
© MERICS
Source: MERICS
Exhibit 5

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
| 33MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 9
How deep political
entrenchment in
the economy will go
is unclear, but few
things look likely
to alter the current
trajectory
However, the trends discussed in this paper should be seen as coordinated effort to improve
alignment with and compliance to central policy. Codifying party rules as state laws and
pushing party organizations in firms is advancing the party-state model of combining reg -
ulation with supervision, to enable both better regulatory and political-disciplinary line-of
sight into the economy. Often this is not about daily management, but about the potential
to steer strategic decisions.
How deep political entrenchment in the economy will go is unclear, but few things look
likely to alter the current trajectory. Party-state capitalism strives for political stability and
control over macro-economic developments – and has so far done so with a sufficient level
of economic performance. It accepts inefficiency as the price for control. Unanswered ques -
tions about its sustainability are many. But the reality is that China’s leaders believe in the
resilience and advantages of their model, and the new development concept is meant to
double down on its strengths and increase China’s political-economic resilience and adap -
tiveness.
Xi and his colleagues have been humble – and realistic – enough to publicly acknowledge
“challenges unseen in a century” ahead – like inequality, to mention but one. But they look
back at China’s last four decades and see an economic model that is constantly adapting
and getting better at overcoming shocks and crises.
However, the challenges China faces today are new and complex in nature, and Beijing’s
recipe to tackle them puts preventing economic risks, safeguarding political stability and
national security first. In its systemic competition with liberal capitalism, Beijing sees Chi-
na’s party-led state capitalist system winning. It is convinced that its political control, flex -
ible economic governance, readiness to incur economic losses for the sake of social and
political stability, and technological breakthroughs will eventually lead it to superpower
status.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Endnotes:
 1 | New York Times (2018). "Xi Jinping Thought Explained: A New Ideology for a New Era." February 26.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/26/world/asia/xi-jinping-thought-explained-a-new-ideology-for-a-
new-era.html. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 2 | Xi, Jinping (2021). 把握新发展阶段，贯彻新发展理念，构建新发展格局 (Grasp the new development stage,
implement a new development concept, construct a new development pattern). Qiushi, April 29.
http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2021-04/30/c_1127390013.htm. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 3 | Pearson, Rithmire, and Tsai (2020). “Party-State Capitalism in China”. HBS Working Paper 21-065.
 4 | Blanchette, Jude (2020). “From “China Inc.” to “CCP Inc.”: A New Paradigm for Chinese State Capital -
ism”. China Leadership Monitor.
 5 | Naughton, Barry (2019). “Grand Steerage: The Temptation of the Plan”. in: Thomas Fingar and Jean Oi,
eds. China: Choices and Challenges. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
 6 | Liu, He (2014). „Overcoming the Great Recession: Lessons from China”. M-RCGB Associate Working
Paper Series No. 33.
 7 | Crossley, Gabriel (2020). “China expands state jobs for graduates as coronavirus hits private sector.”
Reuters. July 27. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-economy-jobs-graduates-idUSKCN24R0UQ.
Accessed: May 21, 2021.; Renmin Ribao (2020) “ 企业“国家队” 抗疫勇担当” (“The corporate “national team”
bravely takes upon the fight against the epidemic”). February 19. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2020-02/19/
content_5480728.htm. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 8 | CCP-Net (2020). ”习近平主持召开中央全面深化改革委员会第十六次会议强调 全面贯彻党的十九届五中全会精神
推动改革和发展深度融合高效联动 李克强王沪宁韩正出席” (”Xi Jinping presides over the 16th meeting of the
Central Committee for Comprehensively Deepening Reform, stressing the comprehensive implemen-
tation of the spirit of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee to promote the deep
integration and efficient linkage of reform and development. Li Keqiang, Wang Huning and Han Zheng
attended”). November 2. http://www.12371.cn/2020/11/02/ARTI1604319222417265.shtml. Accessed:
May 21, 2021.
 9 | Xi, Jinping (2016). “习近平：理直气壮做强做优做大国有企业” (“Xi Jinping: self-confidently make SOEs
better and larger”). Xinhua. July 4. http://www.xinhuanet.com//politics/2016-07/04/c_1119162333.htm.
Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 10 | SASAC (2020). “郝鹏接受中央主流媒体采访 谈当前中央企业发展态势” (“Central media interview of Hao Peng
on the current development and situation of central enterprises”). August 11. http://www.sasac.gov.cn/
n2588020/n2877938/n2879597/n2879599/c15343606/content.html. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 11 | Bateson, Andrew (2020). “The State Never Retreats”. Gavekal Dragonomics.
 12 | Rosen, Leutert, and Guo (2018). “Missing Link: Corporate Governance in China’s State Sector”.
Asia Society.
 13 | Central CCP Committee General Office (2015). 中共中央办公厅印发《关于在深化国有企业改革中坚持党的领导
加强党的建设的若干意见》 (The General Office of the CPC Central Committee issues 《Several Opinions on
Deepening Reform, Adhering to Party Leadership and Strengthening Party Construction in State-owned
Enterprises》). August 20. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2015-09/20/content_2935714.htm. Accessed:
May 21, 2021.
 14 | Central CCP Committee (2020). 中共中央印发《中国共产党国有企业基层组织工作条例（试行）》 (Central CCP
Committee issues 《Regulations for the work of CCP grassroots organizations in SOEs (trial)》). January 5.
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2020-01/05/content_5466687.htm. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 15 | Luong et al. (2021). “Understanding Chinese Government Guidance Funds”, Center for Security and
Emerging Technology.
 16 | Lardy, Nicholas (2019) The State Strikes Back – The End of Economic Reform in China?. Washington, DC:
Peterson Institute for International Economics.
 17 | Dai, Sarah (2019). “China completes second round of US$29 billion Big Fund aimed at investing in do-
mestic chip industry”. South China Morning Post, July 26. https://www.scmp.com/tech/science-research/
article/3020172/china-said-complete-second-round-us29-billion-fund-will. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 18 | Luong et al. (2021).
 19 | Feng, Emily (2021). “ A Cautionary Tale For China's Ambitious Chipmakers”. NPR, March 25.
https://www.npr.org/2021/03/25/980305760/a-cautionary-tale-for-chinas-ambitious-chipmakers.
Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 20 | Naughton (2020). The Rise of China’s Industrial Policy 1978 – 2020. available on: https://dusselpeters.
com/CECHIMEX/Naughton2021_Industrial_Policy_in_China_CECHIMEX.pdf.
 21 | Chen and Rithmire (2020). „The Rise of the Investor State: State Capital in the Chinese Economy”.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12116-020-09308-3.
 22 | Wei, Lingling (2021) “China blocked Jack Ma’s Ant IPO after investigation revealed likely beneficiaries”.
Wall Street Journal, February 16. https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-blocked-jack-mas-ant-ipo-after-an-
investigation-revealed-who-stood-to-gain-11613491292. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 23 | Reuters (2021). “ Analysis: Chinese retail banks gain customer lending clout as fintechs fall out of favor”.
January 28. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-finance-loans-internet-analysis-idUSKBN29W2ZT.
Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 24 | Guo, Yingzhe (2020). “Fintech Giants Could Pose ‘New Systemic Risks,’ Warns Banking Watchdog
Chief”. Caixin, December 8. https://www.caixinglobal.com/2020-12-08/fintech-giants-could-pose-new-
systemic-risks-warns-banking-watchdog-chief-101637128.html. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 25 | Grünberg, Nis and Brussee, Vincent (2021). China’s 14th Five-Year Plan – strengthening the do-
mestic base to become a superpower. Available on: https://merics.org/en/short-analysis/chi-
nas-14th-five-year-plan-strengthening-domestic-base-become-superpower. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
| 35
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
 26 | Bai, Chon-En et al. (2020) Special deals for Special investors: The Rise of State-Connected Private Own-
ers in China, available on: https://www.nber.org/papers/w28170. Accessed 14.4.2021.
 27 | Grünberg, Nis (2021) Who is the CCP? China’s Communist Party in infographics. Available on: https://
merics.org/en/short-analysis/who-ccp-chinas-communist-party-infographics . Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 28 | Livingston, Scott (2021). “The New Challenge of Communist Corporate Governance”. Available on:
https://www.csis.org/analysis/new-challenge-communist-corporate-governance. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 29 | People’s Net (2018). 《中国共产党支部工作条例（试行）》 (Regulations for the work of CCP branches).
November 26. http://politics.people.com.cn/n1/2018/1126/c1001-30420219.html. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 30 | Horwitz, Josh (2019). „China to send state officials to 100 private firms including Alibaba”. Reuters,
September 23. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-alibaba-china-party-idUSKBN1W80DO. Accessed: May
21, 2021.; Sina (2019). “杭州抽调干部进驻阿里等民企 浙江媒体回应争议” (“Hangzhou transfers cadres to Ali-
baba and other private firms, Zhejiang media react with controverse debate”). Beijing Youth, August 22.
https://finance.sina.com.cn/china/gncj/2019-09-22/doc-iicezzrq7690983.shtml. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 31 | Xinhuanet (2020). “干部进驻企业 解决发展难题” (“Cadres dispatched to enterprises solve development
difficulties”). Chongqing Daily, November 2020. http://www.cq.xinhuanet.com/2020-11/09/c_1126715210.
htm. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 32 | Xinhua (2020). 中共中央办公厅印发《关于加强新时代民营经济统战工作的意见》 (Central CCP Committee
General Office issues 《Opinions on Strengthening United Front Work in the Private Economy in the New
Era》). August 15. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2020-09/15/content_5543685.htm. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 33 | Ye, Qing (2020). “叶青：推动党的领导制度体系与民企治理体系有机融合” (“Ye Qing: Promoting an organic
integration of the Party's leadership system and the governance system of private enterprises”). ACFIC,
September 17. http://www.acfic.org.cn/ldzc_311/jzhld/yq/yqgzhd/202009/t20200917_245057.html.
Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 34 | Chen, Yixin (2021). “陈一新：推动政法工作高质量发展，今年“十大重点”是主攻方向“ (“Chen Yixin: Promote
a high quality development of political work”, This year the „10 key points“ define the direction of
attack“). China Peace, February 2. http://www.chinapeace.gov.cn/chinapeace/c100007/2021-02/02/con-
tent_12446483.shtml. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 35 | Xi, Jinping (2020). “（受权发布）习近平：在企业家座谈会上的讲话” (“ Authorized release: Xi Jinping’s
speech at the Entrepreneur Symposium”). Xinhua, July 21. http://www.xinhuanet.com/poli-
tics/2020-07/21/c_1126267575.htm. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 36 | Mattingly, Daniel (2020). The Art of Political Control in China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 37 | Chen and Rithmire (2020)
 38 | Li, Ling. (2020). “The "Organisational Weapon" of the Chinese Communist Party China's - disciplinary
regime from Mao to Xi Jinping”. In: Law and the Party in China: Ideology and Organisation. R. Creemers
and S. Trevaskes, Cambridge University Press.
 39 | Xu, Kevin (2020). ”Jack Ma’s Bund Finance Summit Speech”. Interconnected, November 9. https://inter-
connected.blog/jack-ma-bund-finance-summit-speech/. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
 40 | Lu, Zhenhua (2021). „Party calls on provate sector to break U.S. tech blockade“. Caixin, January
25. https://www.caixinglobal.com/2021-01-25/party-calls-on-private-sector-to-break-us-tech-block-
ade-101655472.html. Accessed: May 21, 2021.
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Party-state capitalism under Xi: aligning the economy with political objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
| 37
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
The CCP in 2021: smart governance,
cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
Katja Drinhausen, John Lee

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Part 1: Resilience

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
| 39
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
Katja Drinhausen, John Lee
1. DEVISING AN INSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM FOR MANAGING DIGITALIZATION
For two decades, the CCP’s top leaders have recognized that “informatization” – the ap -
plication of digital technology throughout Chinese society – is key to achieving domestic
development goals and improving China’s position vis-à-vis the world’s leading nations.
Despite former US President Bill Clinton’s prediction that trying to control the internet
would be like “nailing jello to a wall,” the CCP has managed to maintain control in cyber -
space, while leveraging it as a multiplier for economic growth and technological progress.
The expansion of China’s internet-based economy has fueled national growth, while giving
China’s authorities new tools for surveillance and censorship.
Yet the CCP’s leaders still perceive significant threats from the digital environment, eyeing
the ongoing presence of foreign firms in China’s digital infrastructure and the dominant
US position in some critical capabilities. Achieving greater technological self-reliance is
integral to the CCP’s vision for the digitalization of China, and Chinese authorities continue
to extend and calibrate their control over a technological system, the internet, that was
originally designed for a largely uncontrolled global flow of information.
Under President Xi Jinping’s rule, China has devised an institutional system for managing
cyberspace and the effects of digitally networked technologies across society. 1 This system
coordinates and oversees a rapidly expanding network of legislation, regulation and pol -
The CCP has
successfully coopted
and disciplined
powerful new actors
that have arisen
from the digital
economy
The CCP in 2021: smart governance,
cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
KEY FINDINGS
 Achieving greater technological self-
reliance is integral to the CCP’s vision
for the digitalization of China, and
Chinese authorities continue to ex-
tend and calibrate their control over
the internet.
 China’s government has embraced
digitalization of government services,
leapfrogging developments in many
Western states.
 China’s government has built a solid
foundation of digital infrastructure.
Citizens and private sector have seen
tangible gains; a flourishing digital
economy, better access to goods and
improved public services.
 The CCP’s hope is that digital technol-
ogies can proffer new access chan-
nels to public goods and ultimately
bolster its legitimacy.
 Its all-encompassing understanding
of national security extends to cyber
and cultural security, where the fo-
cus is on cleansing China’s internet of
ideas and information that might be
harmful to the party’s hold on power.
 The CCP’s challenge is to keep open
international channels for technologi-
cal imports and exchanges in the face
of growing tensions with advanced
economies.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
680201
282 99.70%
0.30%
60.53%
39.47%
59.76%
40.24%
© MERICS
Sources: CNNIC (2021). The 47th China Statistical Report on Internet Development;
NBSC: Seventh National Population Census; calculations by MERICS.
 Urban, access
 Urban, no access
 Rural, no access
 Rural, access
Internet access of
urban and rural citizens
(in millions)
 Use
 Do not use
Percentage of citizens
that use e-government
services
 Use
 Do not use
Percentage of citizens
who use mobile
payments
 Mobile phone
 Without
mobile phone
Percentage of internet
users who use mobile
devices for access
The CCP has driven internet uptake to world-leading levels
China’s internet users have grown quickly and embraced a wide variety of services
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
20001999 200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015201620172018201920202021
309
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
Exhibit 1

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
| 41
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
icy reaching into every area of China’s cyberspace. The CCP has successfully coopted and
disciplined powerful new actors that have arisen from the digital economy, notably China’s
internet platform businesses, while policing and mobilizing the masses online. The activi-
ties of foreign entities are not exempt from this oversight and control.
Leadership in key digital technologies and applications coupled with control over infor -
mation transmitted through cyberspace, is seen as central to economic and systemic com-
petitiveness. The Chinese government has rapidly driven forward the country’s network
expansion. The number of Chinese internet users is set to cross the one billion mark in 2021,
or a penetration rate of more than 70 percent. Chinese citizens now account for one fifth of
global internet users. 2 The leadership strives to stay at the forefront of new technological
developments. China’s telecoms operators had installed around 819,000 5G telecoms base
stations by May 2021 (see exhibit 1).
Life in China has gone digital during the last decade, as services, sales and payments have
moved online. Chinese tech companies have flourished in this environment: China’s inter -
net companies are among the biggest global players. Xiaomi alone claimed to have 325 mil -
lion smart home appliances connected to its proprietary Internet of Things (IoT) platform
by the end of 2020. Using “top-level design,” an approach of guiding policy from the pin-
nacle of party-state authority, the CCP aims to control and harness economic digitalization
and the internet for its goal of “socialist modernization and national rejuvenation.”
2. GENERATING SUPPORT FOR CCP-RULE THROUGH SMART GOVERNANCE
Digitalization and informatization remain key items on China’s political agenda, with the ex-
plicit goal of using big data to modernize national governance. The 14th Five Year Plan (2021-
2025), adopted by the National People’s Congress (NPC) in March 2021, is supposed to usher in
a new chapter of smart and modern Chinese Communist Party (CCP) rule.3 Building on the “In-
ternet+”-strategy established in the previous five-year plan it focuses on leveraging informa-
tion and communication technologies (ICT) to improve governance efficiency across sectors.
The CCP’s hope is that digital technologies can proffer new access channels to public goods and
ultimately bolster the Chinese people’s trust in the party and its leadership. Whether in pover-
ty reduction, basic services or public security, digital technologies are expected to contribute
to sustainable economic and social development. For instance, smart cities are designed to
help manage urban areas sustainably – an urgent topic given the sheer number of large cities
in China, all of which use vast amounts of scarce resources such as water and energy, and
struggle with transport and social infrastructure bottlenecks due to high population density.4
Rural digital infrastructure and literacy still notably lags behind urban areas. The gov -
ernment plans to expand access to internet services and e-commerce platforms as well as
training in rural areas to promote economic growth and consolidate its poverty reduction
achievements.5 Even if rural residents won’t turn into online entrepreneurs overnight, this
has already provided faster and cheaper access to goods. 6
Digitalization is also intended to accompany institutional reforms in the areas of social
security and health. For example, a new digital social security card has been developed
and has already been issued to over 460 million citizens, allowing easier access to benefits
across regions – addressing a key challenge for China’s large domestic migrant population
of more than 200 million. 7
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
The CCP’s hope
is that digital
technologies can
proffer new access
channels to public
goods and bolster
people’s trust in the
party

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Under the “Healthy China” strategy of 2015, a national information system has been rolled
out. E-services and online consultations are intended to better connect doctors and pa-
tients, counteract the uneven regional distribution of medical care and make healthcare
more cost-efficient. 8 This task can only become more urgent, as China’s population is aging
rapidly due to the one-child policy.
China’s government has embraced digitalization of government services, leapfrogging de-
velopments in many Western states. A national e-government system has been in the works
since 2016. The new Five-Year Plan sets further goals for expansion. The aim is to offer a wide
variety of services online and ensure that citizens “do not have to appear in person more
than once.” Identity verification is increasingly offered online via digital ID or face recogni-
tion, implying significant time savings for users given the great distances often involved. 9
A number of cities, such as Fuzhou, have developed comprehensive local service apps to fa-
cilitate everything from buying tickets for local public transport, managing social security
accounts and starting a business, to paying for doctor's visits, electricity or other services. 10
Data-driven solutions are seen as essential for streamlining bureaucracy. China’s leadership
believes far reaching-digitalization will improve government agencies’ ability to identify
needs and risks, and to determine who is deserving of licenses and resources. Data-sharing
and integration across government agencies is emphasized, in order to generate better use
of big data analysis and AI to predict and prevent risks – from economic and environmental
to public health and political risks.
Since late 2019, the construction of an ecosystem of public databases has been in the works
under the label of "internet + monitoring," in which diverse data points on the behavior of
companies, non-governmental organizations, individuals and public institutions will be
collected. The most notable example of the governments endeavors is China’s Social Credit
System, which tracks the compliance of individuals, companies and institutions with laws
and regulations under unified identification numbers. 11
The party-state sees data, including personal data, primarily as a resource for governance
and the promotion of economic development. Despite the massive amounts of data collect -
ed, privacy and data security issues have been insufficiently addressed. Excessive data col -
lection and leaks by companies and public administrations have caused public discontent.
In a 2019 survey, more than 77 percent of internet users reported being affected. 12
The government is taking steps towards greater regulation. China’s first Personal Informa-
tion Protection Law as well as new privacy and data security regulations and restrictions
on the use of facial recognition and AI are in the making. However, they can be expected to
continue to mainly target the private sector. Government departments will have to adhere
to higher standards, but still face less stringent restrictions on what they can collect and
share.13 Most importantly, laws and regulations allow for broad national and public secu -
rity exemptions.
Despite the massive
amounts of data
collected, privacy
and data security
issues have been
insufficiently
addressed
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
| 43
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
3. HARNESSING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES FOR POLITICAL CONTROL
Safeguarding national and regime security remain top of the CCP’s political agenda. Chi-
na’s all-encompassing understanding of national security extends to cyber and cultural se-
curity, where the focus is on cleansing China’s internet of ideas and information that might
be harmful to the party’s hold on power. To implement its political project, the CCP deploys
technologies that were long conceived in Western countries as fostering pluralistic debate
and potential drivers of political liberalization.
Social stability and regime security is seen as resting on the state’s competency and capac -
ity to monitor and censor. From the mid-2000s, China has gradually shut out the major in-
ternational communication and media platforms from its market. Chinese companies have
flourished, developing their own innovative products while offering the state a high degree
of control over content.
To be economically successful and retain market share, Chinese companies must comply
with regulatory demands and institutional supervision; for instance, in-house CCP commit -
tees, licensing procedures and content review. These factors ensure that platforms self-gov -
ern in the desired direction and build products and services that only allow for controlled
civic engagement.14
The CCP is particularly concerned about the viral dissemination of information critical of
the government and spill-over effects that might result in protests or political movements
offline.15 A core component of media policy under Xi has therefore been building a “healthy
internet” in which negative information is contained and “positive energy” is spread by
state actors. In recent years, a lengthy series of laws and regulations for content control in
the digital space have been passed.
New regulations in January 2021 specifically targeted social media. 16 Responsibility for their
implementation has been put upon online media and communication platforms. A compre-
hensive system to detect and contain collective online actions harmful to the party is now in
place. This was visible in the early information management and containment of criticism
surrounding the government’s handling of the outbreak of the pandemic. 17 No such limita-
tions are placed on outbursts of nationalistic fervor, as visible in the boycott calls against
international companies. 18
The party state not only wants to monitor, shape and contain online behavior, it aims to
monitor and control citizens’ offline behavior, too. Over the past decades, it has built a
layered system of monitoring and surveillance platforms. 19 A key indicator is the growing
number of safe cities and residential communities. These reflect an intent to improve social
governance, with a heavy emphasis on ensuring “social stability” (see exhibit 2).
Most public spaces are covered by cameras - not just streets and train stations, but also
buses and taxis, schools and universities, places of religious worship, bars and restaurants.
Train and long-distance bus journeys are only possible with real name registration and
identity checks.
China now boasts the world’s most comprehensive surveillance coverage. Facial recogni-
tion is being widely applied in practice and development of smart, AI-driven policing en-
couraged. China’s success in containing Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted this compre-
hensive coverage and has domestically legitimized widespread surveillance.
In recent years, a
lengthy series of
laws and regulations
for content control
in the digital space
have been passed
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10

The intensity of control is highest in minority regions such as Xinjiang and Tibet, where
the distinct identities of ethnic and religious minority groups are seen as a latent threats
to state security. Measures in Xinjiang include, for example, the forced installation of spy -
ware and continuous monitoring of mobile devices. It also entails the use of various apps
through which cadres and other public personnel feed information into multiple databas -
es, most notably the Integrated Joint Operations Platform.
The platform has been built over the past five years to integrate and assess information
about individuals from ethnic and religious minority groups. The collected data is used to
identify behavior that deviates from state-defined norms. Rooted in highly discriminatory
state perceptions, the use of technology has contributed to wide-scale extra-legal detention
of more than a million people since 2016 and significant restrictions on freedom of move-
ment and expression in Xinjiang and beyond. 20
TASK PLANNER: HOW TO BUILD A HEALTHY AND CIVILIZED INTERNET
Provide correct public opinion guidance:
 Have all party and state organizations join social media, spread positive energy
 Actively monitor public opinion and swiftly respond to concerns, resolve doubts
 Provide incentives to companies and users to spread the word
Manage online information tightly:
 Resolutely clamp down on illegal content, hold those responsible accountable
 Clean up information that can harm public morality and political security,
 even if not illegal
 Encourage the masses to self-regulate and participate in the reporting
 of undesired information
Work on reforming the information ecosystem:
 Reign in uncontrolled data gathering and abuse by
 private actors, but ensure state access
 Improve anti-monopoly work and strengthen party
 leadership over corporations
 Improve national cybersecurity and prevent foreign interference
网警
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
Exhibit 2
Political control trumps data protection in the party’s vision of a 'healthy' internet
Key policy tasks of internet regulation
© MERICS
Source: MERICS, based on analysis of PRC policy documents.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
| 45
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
A key characteristic of China’s growing surveillance state is how it connects with and sup -
ports long established offline capacities in monitoring and policy enforcement. Public
security personnel, party officials and residential community workers are tasked with
maintaining social stability. In pursuit of their goal, they make use of digital solutions to
enter information and help enforce policy, identify risks, resolve issues and prevent pro -
tests. In addition, numerous apps and platforms seek to mobilize citizens to, for instance,
alert authorities to suspicious behavior or report ideological failings, such as an “incorrect”
understanding of the party and its historical contributions.
Automation levels within the various surveillance initiatives, especially those that are part -
ly locally-built, often remain relatively low. However, China’s government is pushing for
joint standards and better integration of data sources.
4. CLOSING GAPS TO ACHIEVE A SECURE AND CONTROLLABLE DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM
The CCP’s top leaders recognize that to secure this vision of a digitalized China, they must
achieve greater independence in the technologies that constitute cyberspace. As foreign
governments place more restraints on China’s freedom to import ‘core technologies’, ensur -
ing that Chinese firms are capable of producing these for themselves has become a first-or -
der priority.
However, the CCP also seems to have grasped that the complexity of new technologies and
the globally connected nature of the digitalized economy make complete autarky neither
realistic, nor desirable. The goal is to reshape global economic and technological systems
and supply chains increasingly on China’s terms (see exhibit 4).
The PRC’s techno-nationalist tradition of seeking independence in key technologies dates
from the Mao era, when it was focused on strategic weapons.21 As China opened up from the
1980s onwards, the CCP began instituting policies to catch up with advanced economies.
Policies sought to foster indigenous development of technologies that were seen as vital
for economic competitiveness and military competition, and to address the global shift in
technological innovation from defense to civilian industry. 22
Since coming to power, Xi has stressed that China’s “greatest hidden danger lies in core
technologies being under the control of others.” 23 China’s last five-year science and tech-
nology innovation plan (issued in 2016) emphasized growing the nation’s capacity for in-
dependent innovation, and national policy initiatives like ‘Made in China 2025’ were aimed
expressly at import substitution and industrial upgrading. 24
The urgency of boosting domestic technical capacities has increased with expanding US ex -
port controls and other measures that target leading Chinese digital technology firms, such
as Huawei, and technology exchanges with China in general. These imperatives combined
with the Covid-19 global economic slump have led the party-state to redouble efforts to
accelerate development of Chinese capabilities along all segments of technological supply
chains and applications.
The focus is on technologies that support the national roll-out of digital “new infrastruc -
ture,” such as 5G telecoms networks, and frontier technologies such as artificial intelli-
gence.25 The CCP’s ‘Fifth Plenum Proposal’ of October 2020, in anticipation of the 14 th Five
Year Plan (2021-2025), declared that self-reliance in science and technology was a “strategic
The CCP aims at
reshaping global
economic and
technological
systems and
supply chains
increasingly on
China’s terms
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

CATEGORY FOCUS AREAS MAIN GOALS IN THE 14 TH FIVE-YEAR PLAN
Key
technologies
Quantum information
sciences
Development of free-space quantum communication, quantum computing
prototypes and quantum precision measurement technologies.
Integrated circuits Improvement of R&D in circuitry design, key equipment and semiconductors.
Cloud computing Large-scale development of cloud services, including storage, computing
and virtualization.
Big data Innovation in big data collection, storage and analysis; development of
relevant standards, applications and procedures in this field.
Internet of Things Development of technologies such as sensors and software necessary for
autonomous vehicles, smart homes and other areas.
Industrial internet Promotion of an ecosystem of “internet+ smart manufacturing,” especially
development of standards, safety management and research in the use of
internet in industry and home appliances.
Blockchain Development of smart contracts, asymmetric encryption, use of blockchain in
financial technology, supply chain management and government services.
AI Development of dedicated chips for AI, deep learning, algorithmic decision-
making, as well as speech, image and video recognition.
Virtual reality and
augmented reality
Development of VR/AR and VR/AR-based software and hardware solutions.
Product
application
Smart transportation Autonomous driving, smart management of infrastructure (e.g. traffic signals)
and the use of smart tools in airports, ports, etc.
Smart resources Use of smart tools for efficient resource management and extraction,
such as in mines, oil and gas fields.
Smart manufacturing Development of technologies such as networked equipment, digital
production links, intelligent supply chain management, etc.
Smart agriculture and
water resources
Promotion of technologies for precision-use of agricultural resources
(e.g. seeds, fertilizier, pesticides); construction of a “smart water conservation
systems.”
Smart education Integration of online courses and other digital teaching tools, also to im-
prove quality of rural education.
Smart medicine and
health care
Development of smart medical devices and technologies to help diagnosis
and supervision. Establishment of electronic health and medical records,
digital prescriptions, etc. and promotion of data sharing across institutions.
Smart neighborhoods Integration of government service platforms, emergency systems and smart
monitoring systems for residential communities.
Smart household
appliances
Development of technologies such as voice control, remote control of home
appliances, e.g. smart lighting, security monitoring, wearables and service
robots.
Smart government services Development of “one-stop” online government services as well as electronic
certificates, signatures and files; improvement of review systems.
China strives for domestic growth and global leadership in key technologies
Digital development and innovation are key items of the 14th Five-Year Plan
© MERICS
Sources: 14th Five-Year Plan (2021 – 2025) for National Economic and Social Development and the Long-Term Objectives
for 2035 of the People’s Republic of China.
Exhibit 3

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
| 47
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
support” for national development and gave innovation a “core position” in the national
modernization project.
The CCP’s challenge is to keep open international channels for technological imports and
exchanges in the face of growing tensions with advanced economies while boosting do -
mestic capabilities to develop and build core technologies. Internally, greater self-reliance
is being pursued by stimulating self-contained domestic economic activity (“dual circula-
tion”) while making foreign technology providers conform increasingly to Chinese rules
(“secure and controllable”).
This aims to address the threat of foreign state intervention in China’s digital networks
which has exercised China’s leaders ever since Edward Snowden revealed the extent of US
government cyberspace capabilities and their potential exploitation of private US technol -
ogy providers.
Chinese firms are increasingly turning to domestic suppliers to mitigate the risk of losing
access to foreign inputs. This will raise the level of self-sufficiency in China’s domestic tech-
nological ecosystems. For instance, Huawei has reacted to targeted US pressure by cultivat -
ing domestic industry partnerships and investing in smaller firms that show potential to
substitute for foreign vendors.
Efforts to develop domestic capabilities despite US export controls also benefit from the
willingness of firms from other advanced economies to replace US vendors. However, in
some areas US supply chain dominance is so pronounced that it is hard to circumvent over
the short term.
Even as the party state tightens its surveillance and control over China’s cyberspace, it still
accommodates the developmental imperative for cross-border flows of information. For ex -
ample, trial projects to facilitate international data transfers are being developed in pilot
zones around China at the central authorities’ direction. 26
Xi Jinping recently reiterated the need to ‘proactively integrate’ China into global science
and technology networks. The CCP’s long-standing, pragmatic approach of “crossing the
river by feeling the stones” can be expected to inform future efforts to reconcile its seeming -
ly contradictory goals of control and interconnectedness in a digitalized society.
These contradictions are unlikely to be resolved by 2035. However, from the party’s view -
point the risks to control can be mitigated by leveraging the two-sided nature of interdepen-
dence; as Xi has put it, by building structural dependence on China into global production
chains.27 The willingness of foreign interests to continue investing and, increasingly, to
locate research and development operations in China has likely reinforced the viability of
this approach to the CCP leadership.
5. ICT IS NOT A FAIL-SAFE FOR SECURING CHINA’S AND THE CPP’S FUTURE
China’s leadership takes a two-pronged approach to using ICT in domestic governance.
To strengthen its legitimacy, the party state invests in efficiency and better services, while
building up capacities to safeguard its hold on power. China’s government has built a sol -
id foundation of digital infrastructure. Despite domestic criticism surrounding data priva-
cy risks and digital barriers for the elderly, disabled or poor, China’s citizens and private
Even as the party
state tightens
its control over
China’s cyberspace,
it accommodates
the developmental
imperative for cross-
border flows of
information
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
sector have seen tangible gains; a flourishing digital economy, better access to goods and
improved public services. Digital solutions will continue to be used to improve governance
efficiency in the coming years – including their application for repressive policies such as
censorship and surveillance. 28
In Beijing’s eyes, it is pioneering the future of modern governance, based on centrally guid -
ed and constant monitoring, surveillance and assessment. This assessment has become
part of the growing discourse within China of systemic competition, which sees “chaos in
the West and order in China” ( 西方之乱，中国之治).29
China’s data- and technology-driven governance model is contrasted with the outdated
Western approach to governance; centered on the rule of law and independent supervision
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy
China's adoption of high-tech innovations and digital state control go hand in hand
Key numbers for China's digital economy and information ecosystem
Based on an WSJ estimate,
China will have over
560 MILLION
surveillance cameras in
2021 – more than half of
the world's total and roughly
one per 2.4 citizens.
China is now home to
270
tech "unicorns"– internet
companies that manage
to raise more than
USD 1 billion on
stock markets.
The GDP share of China’s core
digital industries is set to rise
from 7.8 % during the
13th Five-Year Plan to
10 PERCENT
during the
14th Five-Year Plan.
The National Integrated Circuit Industry
Investment Fund was set up in 2014 to
make targeted investments to upgrade China's
semiconductor industry, with Phase 2 raising
CNY 204 BILLION
in capital in 2019.
China’s 5G rollout is progressing quickly.
More than
800,000
base stations have been installed as of February 2021.
Every second mobile phone sold domestically
is a 5G device.
As the CCP’s centenary
nears, more than
2 MILLION
online posts have been delet-
ed for promoting “historical
nihilism.” According to a
recent analysis by the James-
town foundation, the Chinese
government spent around 6.6
billion on censorship in 2020.
Sources: 14th Five-Year Plan (2021-2025), CNNIC 47th Statistical Report on Internet Development (2021), BBC (2020),
SCMP (2021), People’s Daily (2021), CCTV (2020), STCN (2019).
© MERICS
Exhibit 4

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
| 49
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
of state power through the separation of powers, press freedom and civil society. The gov -
ernment has adeptly framed its pandemic containment successes as a direct result of its
systemic advantage.30
Despite Beijing’s narrative of China’s superior model of governance, the sheer amount of
resources that are being invested to detect and contain perceived threats to stability and re-
gime security tells another story. China’s growing surveillance infrastructure is an indicator
of what the party state fears will happen if it cannot control its people and the various so -
cietal stakeholders. It is a costly undertaking. According to a recent analysis by the James -
town foundation, the Chinese government spent around USD 6.6 billion on censorship in
2020.31 Building this tight security network swallows public funds that could be spent on
addressing root causes of discontent – for instance social inequality, rising living costs and
gaps in the education and welfare system.
The leadership’s security-focused domestic approach also has international implications.
The party state has identified data that it sees as politically necessary and taken steps to
guarantee access to it. This includes legally mandating access rights for state organs and
setting strict data localization requirements. China’s integration into the international dig -
ital economy is therefore impeded by difficulties for Chinese and foreign actors wanting to
transfer data across borders. Pilot programs for special international data transfer rules in
free-trade zones around China can only partly alleviate this issue. 32
Broad “national security exemptions” permitting the state to demand information have
also harmed the perception and opportunities of Chinese companies abroad. Increasingly,
Huawei, ZTE, Bytedance and others are met with suspicion and regulation. 33 The trend is
being exacerbated by the tarnished reputations of companies which have taken part in
the suppression of dissent and discrimination or violated the human rights of ethnic and
religious minorities. 34
China faces significant obstacles to closing the gap with global industry leaders in core
digital technologies. In many supply chains for sophisticated digital technologies, more
complex inputs and intellectual property rights are often still dominated by US firms or
those of US allies. Yet despite mounting pressure on China’s access to cutting-edge research
and overseas products and processes, there is still little sign of a coordinated technological
blockade against it, even among technologically advanced liberal democracies.
China’s internal economy and innovation system is now probably capable of self-sufficien-
cy in most fields, albeit at performance levels that trail behind trailing global industry lead -
ers. If Chinese firms were faced with coordinated “decoupling” in digital technology by
the US and its allies, they would still probably not be confined to domestic markets, given
their extensive international presence and influence in emerging technological ecosystems.
Much growth in the global digital economy is occurring in regions where China’s economic
influence is relatively strong. For example, Southeast Asia’s digital economy is projected to
triple in value to 300 billion USD by 2025. 35
The CCP’s leadership has made clear that, even as it extends its control over China’s cyber -
space, it still seeks to both shape and adapt to the global digital economy. For example, the
government recently issued directions to promote greater harmonization of Chinese tech-
nical standards with international ones. Chinese actors remain engaged in international
cyberspace governance and technical standards-setting processes for digital systems.
The CCP’s leadership
has made clear that
it still seeks to both
shape and adapt to
the global digital
economy
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
At home, China is building a resource-intensive but effective system of digitally enabled so -
cial control and governance. Abroad, it is building a national profile in the integrated glob -
al digital economy, in which it currently remains internationally competitive. For the CCP to
realize its 2035 goals, its ability to reconcile this model with growing external pressures for
digital “decoupling” will be critical. It is proceeding through playing technological catch-
up with foreign industry leaders and by keeping open key foreign markets and partnerships
in the face of political pressure from the US government and other quarters.
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
| 51
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Endnotes:
 1 | Creemers, Rogier (2021). “Report: China’s Cyber Governance Institutions”. LeidenAsiaCentre. January 5.
https://leidenasiacentre.nl/en/report-chinas-cyber-governance-institutions/. Accessed: May 17, 2021.
 2 | Xinhua (2021a). “中国网民逼近10亿，意味着啥 (China's netizens approach one billion: what does this
mean?)”. February 18. http://www.xinhuanet.com/info/2021-02/18/c_139749373.htm. Accessed: May 25,
2021; China internet Network Information Center (2019). “ 第43次《中国互联网络发展状况统计报告》
(The 43rd China Statistical Report on internet Development)”. February 28. http://www.cac.gov.cn/2019-
02/28/c_1124175677.htm. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
 3 | State Council (2018). “Internet Plus: a life-changing initiative”. January 21. http://english.www.gov.cn/
premier/news/2018/01/21/content_281476021268046.htm. Accessed June 7, 2019.
 4 | Fan Yang (2018). “China’s Big Brother smart cities - Can the law protect the privacy of Chinese citizens?”
July 26. https://www.policyforum.net/chinas-big-brother-smart-cities/. Accessed: May 8, 2019.
 5 | Xinhua (2021b). “中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划 (14th Five-Year Plan for Economic and
Social Development of the People's Republic of China)”. March 13. http://www.xinhuanet.com/2021-
03/13/c_1127205564.htm. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
 6 | Couture, Victor, Benjamin Faber, Yizhen Gu, and Lizhi Liu (2021). “Connecting the Countryside via
E-Commerce: Evidence from China”. American Economic Review: Insights 3(1): 35-50.
 7 | China News (2021). “全国社保卡持卡人数13.4亿 社保基金累计结余6.4万亿 (The number of social security
card holders nationwide is 1.34 billion, the cumulative balance of social security funds is 6.4 trillion
RMB)”. April 26. https://www.chinanews.com/gn/2021/04-26/9464151.shtml. Accessed: May 25, 2021;
Cankao Xiaoxi (2017). “预计2020年中国仍有2亿左右流动人口 (It is estimated that by 2020, China will
have a floating population of around 200 million)”. February 14. http://www.cankaoxiaoxi.com/chi-
na/20170214/1687552.shtml. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
 8 | Stepan, Matthias and Jane Duckett (2018). “Serve the people - Innovation and IT in China’s social
development agenda”. MERICS Paper on China. October 18. https://merics.org/en/report/serve-people.
Accessed: May 25, 2021.
 9 | Cyberspace Administration of China (2018). “六成网民使用线上政务办事，政务新媒体助力政务服务智能化 (Sixty
percent of netizens use online government affairs, and new government media helps intelligent govern-
ment services)”. January 31. http://www.cac.gov.cn/2018-01/31/c_1122341540.htm. Accessed May 15, 2019.
10 | Xinhua (2019). “China eyes digital technologies to cut red tape”. May 3. http://www.xinhuanet.com/
english/2019-05/03/c_138032017.htm. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
11 | Drinhausen, Katja and Vincent Brussee (2021). “China’s Social Credit System in 2021: From fragmen-
tation towards integration”. MERICS China Monitor. March 3. https://merics.org/en/report/chinas-so -
cial-credit-system-2021-fragmentation-towards-integration. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
12 | Xinhua (2020). “防信息泄露，拒做透明人 (Prevent information leakage, refuse to be a ’transparent per -
son’)”. December 7. http://www.xinhuanet.com/2020-12/07/c_1126828874.htm. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
13 | Horsley, Jamie P . (2021). “How will China’s privacy law apply to the Chinese state?” January 26.
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/how-will-chinas-privacy-law-ap-
ply-to-the-chinese-state/. Accessed: May 17, 2021.
14 | Brussee, Vincent (2020). "Designed for Censorship”. MERICS Short Analysis. July 28. https://merics.org/
en/opinion/designed-censorship . Accessed: May 25, 2021.
15 | Godement, Francois et al. (2018). “The China Dream Goes Digital: Technology in the Age of Xi”.
European Council on Foreign Relations. October 25. https://ecfr.eu/publication/the_china_dream_digi-
tal_technology_in_the_age_of_xi/. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
16 | Hu, Minghe and Iris Deng (2021). “China Updates Rules on Social Media Accounts, Increasing the
Already High Cost of Moderation”. January 25. https://www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3119134/chi-
na-updates-rules-social-media-accounts-increasing-already-high-cost . Accessed: May 25, 2021.
17 | Cook, Sarah (2020). “Coronavirus Cover-ups, Disinformation, Netizen Pushback”. Freedom House China
Media Bulletin 143. https://freedomhouse.org/report/china-media-bulletin/2020/coronavirus-cov -
er-ups-disinformation-netizen-pushback-april-2020. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
18 | New York Times (2021). “How China's Outrage Machine Kicked Up a Storm Over H&M”. March 29.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/29/business/china-xinjiang-cotton-hm.html. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
19 | Batke, Jessica and Mareike Ohlberg (2020). “State of Surveillance - Government Documents Reveal New
Evidence on China's Efforts to Monitor Its People”. ChinaFile. October 30. https://www.chinafile.com/
state-surveillance-china. Accessed: May 25, 2021; Peterson, Dahlia (2020). “Designing Alternatives to
China’s Repressive Surveillance State.” CSET Policy Brief. https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/design-
ing-alternatives-to-chinas-repressive-surveillance-state/. Accessed: November 6, 2020.
20 | Human Rights Watch (2019). “China's Algorithm of Repression - Reverse Engineering a Xinjiang Police
Mass Surveillance App”. https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/report_pdf/china0519_web5.pdf.
Accessed: May 25, 2021.
21 | Feigenbaum, Evan A. (2003). China's Techno-Warriors: National Security and Strategic Competition from
the Nuclear to the Information Age. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
22 | Naughton, Barry (2021). The Rise of China’s Industrial Policy, 1978 to 2020. Mexico City: Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México.
23 | Xi, Jinping (2016) “Speech at the Work Conference for Cybersecurity and Informatization”, trans -
lated by Rogier Creemers. April 19. https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2016/04/19/
speech-at-the-work-conference-for-cybersecurity-and-informatization/. Accessed: 17 May, 2021.
24 | State Council (2016). “ 国务院关于印发“十三五”国家科技创新规划的通知 (Notice of the State Council on
Issuing the ’13th Five-Year Plan’ National Science and Technology Innovation Plan)”. June 28.
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-08/08/content_5098072.htm. Accessed: 17 May, 2021.
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
25 | Ockel, Laura (2020) “New Chinese Ambitions for 'Strategic Emerging Industries,' Translated” September
29. https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/new-chinese-ambitions-strate-
gic-emerging-industries-translated/. Accessed: 17 May, 2021.
26 | Ministry of Commerce (2020). “ 商务部关于印发全面深化服务贸易创新发展试点总体方案的通知 (Notice by the
Ministry of Commerce on Issuing the Overall Plan for Comprehensively Deepening the Pilot Program for
the Innovation and Development of Trade in Services)”. August 12. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zheng-
ceku/2020-08/14/content_5534759.htm. Accessed: 17 May, 2021.
27 | Xi Jinping (2020). “国家中长期经济社会发展战略若干重大问题 (Major issues with the national medium and
long-term economic and social development strategy)”. April 4. http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2020-
10/31/c_1126680390.htm. Accessed: 17 May, 2021.
28 | Xinhua (2021b); China internet Network Information Center (2021). “ 第47次《中国互联网络发展状况统计
报告》 (The 43rd China Statistical Report on internet Development)”. February 3. http://www.cac.gov.
cn/2021-02/03/c_1613923423079314.htm. Accessed: May 25, 2021; Ni, Vincent and Yitsing Wang (2020).
“How to Disappear on Happiness Avenue in Beijing”. BBC. November 24. https://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-55053978. Accessed: May 25, 2021; Mai, Jun (2021). “China Deletes 2 Million Online Posts
for ‘Historical Nihilism’ as Communist Party Centenary Nears”. SCMP . May 11. https://www.scmp.com/
news/china/politics/article/3132957/china-deletes-2-million-online-posts-historical-nihilism. Accessed:
May 25, 2021; People’s Daily (2021). “ 世界电信日：中国5G“扬帆起航” 赋能千行百业高质量发展 (World Tele-
communications Day: China’s 5G ‘sets sail’ to empower the high-quality development of thousands of
industries)”. May 17. http://finance.people.com.cn/n1/2021/0517/c1004-32105213.html. Accessed: May
25, 2021; CCTV (2020). “2020 年新增58万5G基站 覆盖所有地市 (580.000 new 5G base stations have been
installed in 2020, covering all places and cities)”. December 24. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2020-12/24/
content_5573126.htm. Accessed: May 25, 2021; STCN (2019). “ 集成电路产业利好！国家大基金二期募资完
成，规模2000亿左右 (The integrated circuit industry is favourable! The second big fundraising for the
national key fund has been completed, with a scale of around 200 billion RMB)”. July 26. http://news.
stcn.com/2019/0726/15277294.shtml. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
29 | Zhang, Weiwei (2017). “西方之乱与中国之治的制度原因 (The institutional causes of the west's chaos and
China's order)”. August 2. http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2017-08/02/c_1121422337.htm. Accessed:
May 25, 2021.
30 | Wang, Mengjie (2020). “China's Governance Model in Response to the Coronavirus Outbreak”. February
20. https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-02-20/China-s-governance-model-in-response-to-the-coronavirus-
outbreak-OcLTh8x9u0/index.html. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
31 | Fedasiuk, Ryan (2021). “Buying Silence: The Price of Internet Censorship in China”. Jamestown China
Brief 21(1). https://jamestown.org/program/buying-silence-the-price-of-internet-censorship-in-china/.
Accessed: May 25, 2021.
32 | German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (2020). “Policy Update on Innovative Develop -
ment of Trade in Services in Pilot Areas”. September 1. https://www.plattform-i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/
DE/Downloads/Publikation/China/policy-update-regulations-on-data.html. Accessed: May 17, 2021.
33 | Keane, Sean (2021). “Huawei Ban Timeline: Founder Wants to Expand Software to Make Up for US
Sanctions Hit”. May 24. https://www.cnet.com/news/huawei-ban-timeline-founder-wants-to-expand-
software-influence-us-sanctions/. Accessed: May 25, 2021.
34 | Whittaker, Zack (2021). “US Towns Are Buying Chinese Surveillance Tech Tied to Uighur Abuses”.
May 24. https://techcrunch.com/2021/05/24/united-states-towns-hikvision-dahua-surveillance/.
Accessed: May 25, 2021.
35 | Google (2020). “e-Conomy SEA 2020 Report”. https://economysea.withgoogle.com/. Accessed: May 17,
2021.
The CCP in 2021: smart governance, cyber sovereignty and tech supremacy

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
| 53
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm:
security first
Helena Legarda

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
| 55
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Helena Legarda
1. THE PARTY GOES ON THE OFFENSIVE: THE ERA OF LOW-PROFILE FOREIGN
POLICY HAS BEEN LEFT BEHIND
Over the last few years, but especially since Xi Jinping came to power in 2012, China has
adopted a substantially more assertive foreign policy and altered its international behavior.
Underlying this new approach is the party’s new and expanded concept of national securi-
ty, which encompasses almost every policy field. Even China’s all-important development
goals have been subsumed within the protection of China’s national security, with the ulti-
mate goal of preserving the long-term survival and stability of the system.
The change in approach, visible in traditional diplomacy and many other policy fields, re-
flects both the party’s confidence and ambitions - and its fears and insecurities. China’s
global push demonstrates confidence and forms part of the struggle for “the great rejuvena-
tion of the Chinese nation” ( 中华民族伟大复兴), a concept introduced by Xi in 2012. 1 Its goal
is to restore China to its former status as a global power by 2049. In Beijing’s eyes, China is
not a rising power, but a returning one. The Western-dominated global order is viewed as a
historical anomaly that therefore can – and must – be reversed.
China’s new international paradigm:
security first
KEY FINDINGS
 The CCP has established a centralized
and unified national security system
built around the concept of “compre-
hensive national security.” Reaching
into all areas of policy, the party aims
to increase its control over both its in-
ternal and external environments.
 Since Xi Jinping came to power, pro-
tecting China’s national security has
risen to the top of the party’s agenda.
Cooperation and compromise with the
West have been set aside in favor of a
more proactive mode of action meant
to make the world safer for the CCP in
the long run.
 From trade ties with other countries
to China’s global image and reputa-
tion – everything has become a matter
of national security.
 This new approach involves the par-
ty taking forceful preemptive action
against perceived threats to its rule,
pursuing the extraterritorial appli-
cation of Chinese laws and trying to
enforce formerly domestic red lines
overseas.
 Other countries must be prepared to
deal with a Chinese leadership that
will respond forcefully to any per-
ceived criticism or attack against its
interests, and that is ready to esca-
late any conflicts if matters of nation-
al security are concerned.
 As the party refocuses its efforts to-
wards achieving its 2035 and 2049
goals, this securitization of China’s
international behavior is only likely to
be intensified.
China’s new international paradigm: security first

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
The party’s belief is that China is in a “period of strategic opportunity” ( 战略机遇期), making
this the perfect time to take a more central role in the international arena. After two decades
of economic growth and military modernization, Beijing feels sufficiently confident in its
own strengths and capabilities. Furthermore, it regards the international environment as
unlikely to pose any significant challenges to China’s ambitions, with the West in decline
and distracted by its own internal issues.
At the same time, China’s new international posture must also be understood as a reflec -
tion of the CCP’s threat perceptions . It is an extension of the party’s fundamental mission,
which is to preserve regime stability and survival. The CCP’s worldview is marked by a
feeling of being under siege, surrounded by Western countries and their allies who are
intent on containing China and subverting the CCP’s hold on power, with the ultimate goal
of provoking regime change.
Exhibit 1

The party has established a new national security system
The National Security Commission coordinates all national security work and priorities
© MERICS
Source: MERICS
Ministries and
State Council
bodies
Party
organs
Military Provincial-
level
organs
Central Committee of the CCP
General secretary: Xi Jinping
Central National Security Commission
Chair: Xi Jinping
Vice chairs: Li Keqiang, Li Zhanshu
Other central
commissions
and leading
small groups
incl.
MFA, MOD,
MSS, MPS,
MOFCOM, NDRC,
SCIO, PBoC
incl.
Central Political
and Legal Affairs
Commission,
Central Foreign
Affairs
Commission
incl.
Party Secretariat,
International
Liaison Dept,
Propaganda
Dept, General
Office, CCDI
Central Military
Commission

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
| 57
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Under Xi, the party’s long-standing strategy of erecting barriers to keep threatening West -
ern ideas and influence out of China so as to guarantee the party’s survival has become
more rigid. However, an outward-looking parallel strategy has also been rolled out. A new
ideological and policy framework, built around Xi’s concept of “comprehensive national
security” ( 总体国家安全), has been established to tackle threats to China and the party that
flow from China’s growing integration in, and exposure to, the outside world.
The CCP has established a centralized and unified national security system with the Nation-
al Security Commission, chaired by Xi, at the top. And it has passed legislation in order to
institutionalize this new outlook, including the National Security Law, the National Intelli-
gence Law and the Cybersecurity Law, among others. Reaching into all areas of policy, the
party aims to increase its control over both its internal and external environments , with a
view to turning China into a global power by 2049 (see exhibit 1).
With this new model, the party has turned from the passive or reactive defense of China’s
national security to a more proactive, and at times even preemptive, approach meant to
tackle any threats to the current system and shape the international environment to make
it safer for the CCP in the long run. China’s national security state, formerly mostly kept
within China’s borders, is now expanding internationally.
2. A NEW MODEL: NATIONAL SECURITY IS REDEFINED AND GOVERNS THE PARTY’S
AGENDA
Preserving the system’s stability and survival has long been the party’s top priority; nation-
al security has always been seen as the bedrock of these efforts. At the foundation of the
People’s Republic of China (PRC), the leadership was initially laser-focused on traditional
security issues. The emphasis was on preserving China’s independence and territorial in-
tegrity against US or Soviet aggression, and on protecting the system from “counterrevolu -
tionary elements.”
It was only in the late 1970s, as the risk of war seemed to have receded, that the CCP incor -
porated non-traditional security elements into its concept of national security. As China
opened up to the world during a time of global economic growth and industrial moderniza-
tion, issues such as economic security, transnational crime and ideological security rose up
the party’s security agenda. New tools were needed as the military and other security forces
were no longer considered sufficient protection.
At the same time, however, this was a period when China’s development goals were at the
forefront of party policies. Without abandoning the focus on traditional security concerns,
the “reform and opening up” period also brought with it an understanding that guaran-
teeing China’s economic growth must take precedence. Economic development was seen
as the key to the country and the system’s long-term stability. This, in turn, would require
cooperation and compromise with the West.
For a while, China therefore pursued a path of integration into the international community
– joining the WTO and other international organizations and engaging in diplomacy and
exchanges with the rest of the world even on sensitive issues like human rights.
Preserving the
system’s stability
and survival has long
been the party’s top
priority
China’s new international paradigm: security first

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
Xi Jinping introduced the new concept of "comprehensive national security"
This concept brings together 16 different policy fields, with the long-term stability and survival of the system at the center
Sources: Central National Security Commission of the CCP; MERICS
© MERICS
Political security
(政治安全)
Societal security
(社会安全)
Cultural security
(文化安全)
Territorial security
(国土安全)
Military security
(军事安全)
Technological
security
(科技安全)
Economic security
(经济安全)
Cybersecurity
(网络安全)
Ecological security
(生态安全)
Security of over -
seas interests
(海外利益安全)
Resource security
(资源安全)
Nuclear security
(核安全)
Deep-sea security
(深海安全)
Biosecurity
(生物安全)
Space security
(太空安全)
Polar security
(极地安全)
Exhibit 2

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
| 59
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
Only with the arrival of Xi did the party put security front and center again: development
goals were subsumed within the protection of China’s national security. In response to glob-
al trends towards greater instability – and thus heightened threats to the party – after the
2008 global financial crisis and the United States’ pivot to Asia, Xi expanded on the tradi-
tional concept of national security. In 2014, shortly after coming to power, he articulated his
new concept of comprehensive national security during the first meeting of the newly estab-
lished National Security Commission. 2 This was a new vision of national security, intended
to bring together different policy fields and strands under an overarching framework.
The concept currently encompasses 16 types of security - though the number is constantly
growing - including traditional security areas such as political security, territorial security
and military security, alongside new areas such as cultural security, scientific security and
the security of China’s overseas interests (see exhibit 2). 3
The underlying logic behind this new outlook is the integration of development and security
(统筹发展和安全): development is seen as “the basis for security, and security as the con-
dition for development” ( 发展是安全的基础，安全是发展的条件 ).4 National security has thus
become the central element in the party’s strategy to maintain China’s economic growth
and continued development which is, in turn, one of the CCP’s main sources of legitimacy.
This view clearly connects national security to the party’s own struggle for long-term sta-
bility and survival. Since protecting China’s national security rose to the top of the party’s
agenda, cooperation and compromise with the West have been set aside in favor of a more
proactive mode of action.
3. INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT: THE CCP IS ON THE ALERT FOR EXTERNAL
THREATS TO DOMESTIC STABILITY
Links between internal and external security are seen as key issues for the new national se-
curity system to focus on. 5 National security has broadened from protecting China against
military attack by the US or others. The new, expanded template covers all policy areas and
actors – domestic or international – that could impact China’s development and therefore
the CCP’s legitimacy or harm political and social stability. From trade ties with other coun-
tries to China’s global image and reputation – everything has become a matter of national
security.
Developments over the last few years have only underscored the importance of the inter -
national side of this equation. The party, in a nutshell, sees clear external challenges to its
power and stability that must be tackled to reach its 2035 and 2049 goals. US trade sanc -
tions and the blacklisting of multiple Chinese firms has demonstrated the vulnerability
of China’s economy and industrial bases, given their dependence on foreign markets and
suppliers for key components, such as chips. 6
The emergence of a new transatlantic cooperation agenda that includes China policy and
extends to the NATO space, along with increased cooperation among the Quad member
countries, has highlighted the risk that a coalition to contain China’s rise may be in the
making.7 Ongoing debates in the West about China’s violations of human rights in Xinjiang
and Hong Kong have made clear to the party that its image as a responsible global power
that will rise peacefully is in jeopardy. And the Covid-19 pandemic has further clarified that
China’s security in the face of global challenges is dependent on the policies and decisions
of other countries.
National security
has become the
central element in
the party’s strategy
to maintain China’s
economic growth

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Under the new model, the passive defense of China’s national security is no longer felt to
be enough, as there are many developments that might turn into existential threats for the
party, if left unmanaged. The party has therefore decided to move towards proactively shap-
ing the international environment in order to make the world safer for the CCP in the long
run. Xi’s dictums that the party wants to build a “new type of international relations” ( 新型
国际关系)8 and a “human community with shared destiny” ( 人类命运共同体),9 one element of
which is a “security community” ( 安全共同体), and play a central role in reforming the glob -
al order are all logical next steps in this process. The CCP hopes that by increasing control
over its external environment and reshaping the global order in its image, it can preempt
any threats to its rule emanating from Western liberal democracies.
In essence, the party sees this as a fraught moment for China. Although the party has rap -
idly and efficiently expanded its domestic mechanisms of control, the international envi-
ronment remains a challenge. The 14 th Five-Year Plan (FYP), released in March 2021, notes
that China’s “development environment is facing profound and complex changes,” which
include a new scientific and technological revolution, industrial transformation and deep
shifts in the international balance of power. “Instability and uncertainty have increased
significantly,” according to the plan, as the world enters a period of turbulent change,
accelerated by the Covid-19 pandemic and its economic impact.
The plan cites current trends towards deglobalization – a veiled reference to US-China ten-
sions and efforts towards economic decoupling – and a volatile global political landscape. 10
These changes, which are indirectly blamed on the United States (“unilateralism, protec -
tionism and hegemony”) are seen as posing clear threats to the world’s and China’s peace
and development. Control over the international environment has turned into a matter of
self-defense for the party.
4. A NEW PREEMPTIVE POSTURE: THE CCP WILL PROACTIVELY CONFRONT
POTENTIAL CHALLENGES TO ITS RULE
Leaving behind the old defensive posture, the party has turned towards an increasingly
proactive approach to national security. This new approach involves the party taking force-
ful preemptive (or even preventive) action against perceived threats to its rule, pursuing
the extraterritorial application of Chinese laws and trying to enforce formerly domestic red
lines overseas by attempting to control China-related narratives internationally. In this new
paradigm, where all matters are seen though a security prism, the party may take any per -
ceived slight or attack against China’s citizens, companies, overseas interests or its image in
the world as an attack on its bottom line, warranting an aggressive response.
For the rest of the world, the implications of this shift have been quick to materialize. Ag -
gressive behavior and reactions formerly reserved for sensitive domestic issues, such as op -
position to CCP rule in Xinjiang or Tibet, calls for independence in Taiwan or human rights
activism on Chinese soil, are now increasingly common on the international stage as well.
Nowhere has this shift been clearer than over Hong Kong, a city that unites the interplay
between internal and external security with the CCP’s stronger extraterritorial focus and
preference for taking forceful preemptive action against potential threats. The National Se-
curity Law for Hong Kong (HKNSL), passed on June 30, 2020, as part of Beijing’s broader
effort to crack down on protests in defense of Hong Kong’s autonomy, nominally targets
subversion, secession, terrorism and foreign interference as well as the vague offense of
Control over the
international
environment has
turned into a matter
of self-defense for
the party
China’s new international paradigm: security first

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
| 61
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
“collusion” with foreign entities. In practice, however, its intention is to root out threats
to national security posed by the “ideological virus” that are the city’s liberal (i.e., West -
ern-influenced) political and civic values. 11
Tackling internal threats to the party’s rule is no longer enough, however. The protests that
rocked Hong Kong throughout 2019 and the pro-democracy camp’s victory in the Fall 2019
elections, were deemed events that could only be due to coercion or interference by foreign
actors intent on undermining the party’s rule. The HKNSL, therefore, included extraterri-
torial provisions that extend its jurisdiction to govern the actions of foreign individuals or
organizations, irrespective of their nationality, residence or whether they have any con-
nections to Hong Kong. A similar provision – although less expansive in nature as it only
targets the financing of activities that endanger national security – had previously been
included in China’s Criminal Law through its 2011 amendment. 12
Acting against China’s national security or supporting anyone who is deemed to be a threat
is now a crime worldwide, regardless of the nationality of the accused. The most recent
instance of these extraterritorial provisions being used was against Lee Henley Hu Xiang,
a Belizean national, who was arrested in November 2019 in Guangzhou city and charged
in April 2020 with “financing criminal activities against national security” according to ar -
ticle 107 of the Criminal Law. His crime was reportedly to have funded US-based “hostile
elements” and to have “colluded with overseas anti-China forces to intervene in Hong Kong
affairs.”13
The trend for applying Chinese laws to activities beyond China’s borders is only going to
accelerate. In early 2020, Minister of Justice Fu Zhenghua announced China would “im-
prove the standards and procedures for the extraterritorial application of existing laws,
strengthen the judicial practice of law enforcement in foreign countries, and enhance the
international influence of China’s judicial practice.” 14
Another example of the focus on applying Chinese laws extraterritorially in national securi-
ty matters was the March 2021 sanctions that China imposed on an array of individuals and
institutions in Europe, the UK, the US and Canada. The measure came as push-back against
coordinated sanctions censuring four Chinese officials and one entity for human-rights
abuses in Xinjiang imposed by Brussels, London, Washington and Ottawa. The official rea-
son behind the asymmetric escalation was that the sanctioned parties “spread lies and dis -
information” about China from overseas. China’s Foreign Ministry also framed it as a move
to “safeguard [China’s] national sovereignty, national security and development interests”15
(see exhibit 3).
Further examples of Beijing’s new preemptive approach and its efforts to enforce its own
red lines overseas are seen vis a vis international debates over the risks of Huawei’s inclu -
sion in overseas 5G networks, and steps taken following the Australian government’s calls
for an independent investigation on the origins of the Covid-19 pandemic. Both were seen
as threats against elements of China’s national security, such as its economic security and
global reputation. Party and state officials immediately intervened on behalf of Huawei,
ostensibly a private company, and issued veiled threats against Germany – or any other
country – should Huawei be banned from their 5G network rollouts. 16
The trend for
applying Chinese
laws to activities
beyond China’s
borders is only
going to accelerate

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Exhibit 3
China’s new international paradigm: security first
China attempts to control the narrative internationally
Comparison of sanctions exchanged between the EU, the UK, Canada, the US and China
**The US had already sanctioned Zhu Hailun, Wang Mingshan and the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps in July 2020.
**Previous Chinese sanctions against former US officials and other individuals remain in effect.
Sources: Council of the EU; Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office of the UK; Global Affairs Canada;
US Department of the Treasury; Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC
© MERICS
 MEASURES
EU, UK, US, CANADA
• Asset freeze
• Travel ban
• Persons and entities prohibited from making funds available to those targeted
EU, UK, CANADA AND US SANCTIONS OVER HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS IN XINJIANG
State structure
Zhu Hailun 朱海仑 *
Former Deputy Head of the
13th People’s Congress of the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous
Region (XUAR)
Chen Mingguo 陈明国
Director of the Xinjiang Public
Security Bureau and Vice-
Chairman of the XUAR
People’s Government
Entity
Xinjiang Production and
Construction Corps Public
Security Bureau
新疆生产建设兵团 公安局 *
Responsible for management
of detention centers
Party structure
Wang Junzheng 王君正
Party Secretary of the Xinjiang
Production and Construction
Corps and Deputy Secretary of
the Party Committee of XUAR
Wang Mingshan 王明山 *
Member of the Standing
Committee of the Party Com-
mittee of XUAR and Secretary
of the Political and Legal Af-
fairs Committee of the XUAR
CHINA’S RETALIATORY SANCTIONS
EU
4 entities
10 individuals
UK
4 entities
9 individuals
US
0 entities
2 individuals**
Canada
1 entity
1 individual
MEASURES
• Travel ban to Mainland China, Hong Kong and Macao (extended to families)
• Restriction against doing business with China for those sanctioned and entities associated with them

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
| 63
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Beijing was similarly outraged when the Australian government sponsored an April 2020
resolution at the World Health Assembly, seeking an investigation into the origins of the
Covid-19 pandemic. China ultimately accepted an investigation recast as a more collab -
orative effort. Meanwhile, though, it suspended Australian beef and barley imports and
launched an anti-dumping probe into Australian wine sales. Chinese diplomats called Aus -
tralia’s original motion a “betrayal” for “provoking trouble on issues involving China’s core
interests.”17
China’s reaction to the joint communique issued after the G7 foreign ministers’ meeting in
May 2021 was another interesting example of this trend. China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs
(MFA) accused the G7 countries of “interfering in China’s internal affairs and interests” and
of committing a “flagrant trampling on norms of international relations,” given the com-
munique’s condemnation of human rights violations in Xinjiang and Tibet, and of China’s
erosion of Hong Kong’s autonomy, among other issues.
While these accusations are very much in line with the current forceful language being used
by Beijing when defending China’s comprehensive national security, the irony is that MFA
spokesperson Wang Wenbin demanded that the G7 “stop the wrong practice of stretching
the national security concept.” 18 This is not the first time this line has been used by Beijing,
however. It has come up a few times before, often in the context of further US measures to
restrict tech transfers to Chinese firms. 19
5. FULL STEAM AHEAD: THE CCP FEELS CONFIDENT OF ITS CHANCES OF SUCCESS
Since Xi came to power, China has adopted a new, multi-faceted approach to national secu -
rity. The new system is intimately linked to the party’s and the system’s stability and surviv -
al and subsumes all other elements of policymaking, including China’s development goals.
A solid institutional and legal framework has been built to implement the new approach.
Although China’s official foreign policy principles remain unchanged, 20 the party has re-
framed ever-wider areas of policy - diplomatic, economic, military or cultural - in national
security terms. The new paradigm has produced a clear change in China’s behavior in the
international arena.
China’s expanded definition of national security has led to a correspondingly greater list of
issues that the leadership considers to be core interests, attacks on which trigger a much
stronger response from Beijing. This has had immediate consequences for China’s interna-
tional counterparts. Other countries must be prepared to deal with a Chinese leadership
that will respond forcefully and aggressively to any perceived criticism or attack against its
interests, and that is ready to escalate any conflicts if matters of national security are con-
cerned. This is often the case regardless of the impact on bilateral ties.
A clear example of this was Beijing’s decision to impose sanctions on a wide range of Euro -
pean actors, which triggered strong backlash across Europe and reduced the prospects for
the long-awaited EU-China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment (CAI) to be ratified.
The party’s stronger focus on extraterritoriality and on improving its ability to police nar -
ratives and behavior overseas will also impact other actors’ relations with China, both in
the public and private sectors. Foreign companies with a presence in China, in particular,
are likely to find themselves caught between the party’s demands that they respect China’s
red lines and abide by Chinese laws around the world, and their own (and their home coun-
China’s new international paradigm: security first
China has adopted a
new, multi-faceted
approach to national
security

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
tries’) values and interests. Additionally, the expansion of China’s extraterritorial applica-
tion of its laws is also likely to change the risk calculations of companies and individuals
considering traveling to China.
As the party refocuses its efforts towards achieving its 2035 and 2049 goals, this securiti-
zation of China’s international behavior is only likely to be intensified. The CCP wants to
preempt any challenges to the system, whether internal or external, to ensure the long-term
survival of its governance model. Underlining the interconnectedness between domestic
and international security, the CCP Central Committee has said that the goal of China’s
diplomacy is to “actively create a favorable external environment” that can allow China to
reach its development goals. 21
The way to achieve this is clear in the party’s mind: create a global national security state
that is under the CCP’s absolute control and has access to all the resources it needs to estab -
lish China as a global power in the face of Western opposition and other external threats.
This is likely to remain the party’s approach to international relations for the foreseeable
future, or at least until the party feels safe enough in the international arena.
The road ahead is unlikely to be smooth. China’s increasingly assertive – and at times even
aggressive – behavior in the international arena has triggered a growing pushback from
Western countries and other states. By alienating allies and potential partners in the name
of China’s comprehensive national security, Beijing may find itself increasingly isolated
against efforts to contain its attempts to reform the rules-based international order.
Recent efforts to reduce tensions in China’s relationships with Europe and the United States
are also unlikely to last. Sources of friction in China’s relations with the rest of the world
will continue to emerge and will keep escalating as long as the party continues to frame all
issues – no matter how minor they may seem – as a matter of national security and, thus,
attacks against its bottom line.
Despite this, the CCP seems confident in its ability to confront these challenges and come
out on top. As the party leadership puts it, “time and momentum” are in China’s favor, as
the “East rises and the West is in decline” ( 东升西降).22
The securitization
of China’s inter-
national behavior
is likely to be
intensified

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
| 65
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
Endnotes:
 1 | Xinhua (2012). “习近平：承前启后 继往开来 继续朝着中华民族伟大复兴目标奋勇前进 ” (Xi Jinping: build on
the past and prepare for the future, continue to march towards the goal of the great rejuvenation of
the Chinese nation). November 29. http://www.xinhuanet.com//politics/2012-11/29/c_113852724.htm.
Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 2 | Xinhua (2014). “中央国家安全委员会第一次会议召开 习近平发表重要讲话” (The first meeting of the Central
National Security Commission was held, Xi Jinping delivered an important speech). April 15.
http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-04/15/content_2659641.htm. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 3 | Science and Technology Daily (2021). “总体国家安全观的“16种安全”” (The "16 kinds of security" of the
comprehensive national security concept). April 14. http://www.stdaily.com/cehua/20210414/2021-04/14/
content_1114342.shtml. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 4 | People’s Daily (2014). “习近平：坚持总体国家安全观 走中国特色国家安全道路” (Xi Jinping: adhere to the com-
prehensive national security concept, take the road of national security with Chinese characteristics).
April 16. http://cpc.people.com.cn/n/2014/0416/c64094-24900492.html. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 5 | Tang, Aijun (2019). “总体国家安全观视域中的意识形态安全” (Ideological security in the context of the com-
prehensive national security concept). Socialism Studies 2019(5). http://socialismstudies.ccnu.edu.cn/
bencandy.php?fid=71&id=1985. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 6 | Bloomberg News (2021). “China Stockpiles Chips, Chip-Making Machines to Resist U.S.” February 2.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-02-02/china-stockpiles-chips-and-chip-making-ma-
chines-to-resist-u-s. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 7 | Cook, Lorne (2021). “US, Europe, NATO close ranks to counter ‘aggressive’ China”. March 24.
https://apnews.com/article/europe-antony-blinken-china-ursula-von-der-leyen-europe-6c7c4a-
0da00ed5a8f529efa3392975cd. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 8 | Liu, Jianfei (2018). “ 新型国际关系“新”在哪里“ (What is ‘new’ in the new type of international relations).
April 16. http://theory.people.com.cn/n1/2018/0416/c40531-29927502.html. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
 9 | Xi. Jinping (2021). “共同构建人类命运共同体” (Building a human community with shared destiny together).
January 1. http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/leaders/2021-01/01/c_1126936802.htm.
Accessed: May 20, 2021.
10 | Central Government of the People’s Republic of China (2021). “ 中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个
五年规划和2035年远景目标纲要” (14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and
Long-Range Objectives Through the Year 2035). March 13. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-03/13/con-
tent_5592681.htm. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
11 | Drinhausen, Katja (2020). “Eradicating Hong Kong’s "political virus"”. July 2. https://merics.org/en/
opinion/eradicating-hong-kongs-political-virus. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
12 | Central Government of the People’s Republic of China (2011). “ 中华人民共和国刑法修正案（八）”
(Amendment to the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China (VIII)). February 25.
http://www.gov.cn/flfg/2011-02/25/content_1857448.htm. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
13 | Al Jazeera (2020). “China to prosecute first foreigner over Hong Kong ‘meddling’”. April 24.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/4/24/china-to-prosecute-first-foreigner-over-hong-kong-med-
dling. Accessed: May 20, 2021 ; Safeguard Defenders (2021). “Foreign citizen accused of supporting an-
ti-China forces abroad paraded on Chinese TV giving confession”. April 14. https://safeguarddefenders.
com/en/blog/foreign-citizen-accused-supporting-anti-china-forces-abroad-paraded-chinese-tv-giving .
Accessed: May 20, 2021.
14 | Zhang, Yi (2020). “ Extraterritorial application of Chinese laws to be strengthened”. January 22.
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202001/22/WS5e27f2b9a310128217272ce3.html. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
15 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (2021). “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson
Announces Sanctions on Relevant EU Entities and Personnel”. March 22. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/
mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/t1863106.shtml. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
16 | Business Insider Deutschland (2019). “Streit um 5G und Huawei: China droht Deutschland — und der
Autoindustrie“. December 15. https://www.businessinsider.de/wirtschaft/streit-um-5g-und-huawei-chi-
na-droht-deutschland-und-der-autoindustrie/. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
17 | Karp, Paul and Davidson, Helen (2020). “China bristles at Australia's call for investigation into coronavi-
rus origin”. April 29. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/29/australia-defends-plan-to-inves-
tigate-china-over-covid-19-outbreak-as-row-deepens. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
18 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (2021). “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson
Wang Wenbin's Regular Press Conference on May 6, 2021”. May 6. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/
xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/t1873782.shtml. Accessed: May 20, 2021.
19 | Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (2021). “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson
Hua Chunying's Regular Press Conference on January 5, 2021”. January 5. http://de.china-embassy.org/
det/fyrth/t1844728.htm. Accessed: May 20, 2021 ; Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of
China (2020). “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian's Regular Press Conference on December 23,
2020”. December 23. https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/ce/cesb/eng/fyrth_17/t1842271.htm. Accessed: May 20,
2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
66 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s new international paradigm: security first
20 | Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence: mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual
non-aggression, mutual non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit,
and peaceful coexistence
21 | Xinhua (2017). “Full text of Xi Jinping's report at 19th CPC National Congress”. October 18.
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/19thcpcnationalcongress/2017-11/04/content_34115212.htm.
Accessed: May 20, 2021.
22 | Supreme People's Procuratorate (2021). “ 新发展阶段新在哪里？陈一新从八个方面进行阐释”
(What is new in the new development stage? Chen Yixin explains from eight perspectives). January 15.
https://www.sohu.com/a/444668793_118060. Accessed: May 20, 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
| 67
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Outlook
Systemic competition on new terms –
what a crisis-driven, globally ascending party
state means for European stakeholders
Mikko Huotari

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
68 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
| 69
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Mikko Huotari
For China’s current leadership, expanding the robustness of the Chinese state comes above
everything else. As previous chapters have laid out, Xi Jinping and his team are implement -
ing a hard charge to transform China’s governance system. They are reinforcing the cen-
ter’s grip on an organic party-state economy and leading with integrated digital governance
while increasing the global reach of China as a comprehensive national security state.
European stakeholders should expect a China that is doubling down on non-convergence.
They will meet a more offensive and less compromising China; presenting itself as a distinct
alternative model, seeking to pre-empt perceived attacks and prevent criticism, more condi-
tional in collaboration and “retaliating” against perceived misconduct by others.
When five years ago, MERICS authors proposed scenarios for China in 2025, they assessed
that there was no chance that the Chinese party-state is “developing into a liberal compet -
itive democracy under the current leadership.” In contrast, they predicted as China’s likely
development path until 2025 a “centralized and disciplined party and security state (the
Xi-system).” However, the prediction was, that this system would have to “moderate” itself
by granting significant concessions, specifically in terms of economic policy, considering
slowing growth rates and rampant economic inefficiencies. 1
Today, we have seen few signs of moderation and concessions, and must go one step fur -
ther in our assessment: China is not only not converging – its leadership is assembling an
anti-fragile, less efficient, but largely effective system of party-state governance capable of
coherent autonomous action that aims at robustness under uncertainty and in previously
unknown environments.
1. CHINA’S AMBITION HAS MOVED BEYOND ACHIEVING RESILIENCE AND ADAPTATION
Just in time to celebrate the CCP’s 100 th anniversary, China can present itself as a global
force that not only has withstood critical tests at home but is a dominant factor shaping
global developments. Leading the world once more in its economic recovery, the CCP is
leveraging China’s gravitational force abroad, consolidating its grip at home and in “pe-
riphery” regions, including Hong Kong and Xinjiang. The previous chapters have indicated
that China is not just temporarily operating from a position of strength; Xi’s team is pursu -
ing an ambitious re-structuring of the Chinese party state, seeking to benefit from global
turbulences and preparing for tougher times ahead.
Often ignored by international observers, China under Xi is on high alert. When he called
upon his fellow CCP leaders 2019 to take “strategic initiative to prevent and defuse major
risks” he was, with hindsight, making the right call. The party state began preparing the
country internally for an escalating trade and technology conflict with the only peer-com-
Outlook
Systemic competition on new terms – what a
crisis-driven, globally ascending party state
means for European stakeholders
Outlook
European
stakeholders
should expect
a China that is
doubling down on
non-convergence

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
70 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
petitor, the United States, and potentially other shocks, which soon enough materialized in
the form of a global pandemic emanating from China’s homeland.
Xi’s increasingly entrenched governing philosophy is built around crisis prevention and
risk management. It pervades all aspects of the new architecture of CCP power that has
been established since the 19th party congress in 2017. China’s government now has a full
integration of state and party organizations to enforce the CCP’s monopoly on political
power and ideology as deeply as possible. Doing so, the party state is proving not just re-
sponsive and adaptive to the changing societal, technological and global environment, but
proactive. Its leaders are leveraging digitalization and technological development while
adjusting China’s global economic interdependence to bounce back stronger from new do -
mestic and international challenges.
2. CHINA’S WEAKNESSES AND CRISIS ANTICIPATION MAKE FOR A NEW TYPE OF
SYSTEMIC COMPETITION
Much more clear-eyed about its own weaknesses and vulnerabilities than most interna-
tional observers, the CCP is preparing for “challenges unseen in a century” – disruptions at
home and profound global structural change.
 Politically, the coming year is probably the most precarious period in a decade. On the
road to the 20 th Party Congress in Fall 2022, Xi's men are trying to clear the ground for
extended Xi Jinping rule. Yet many of the costs for his break with the party's protocol for
leadership succession are still hidden within the system that has been forced in line, but
not necessarily convinced.
 Societally, growing nationalism and political performance requirements are only mask -
ing the challenges of mobilizing a fragmented, polarized and often exhausted society.
 Economically, Beijing will be overseeing a confluence of multiple challenges coming to
a head in coming years: productivity gains will be harder to achieve, social and regional
inequality are becoming more pronounced, high leverage leaves the financial system vul -
nerable, social insecurity and what the government describes as “disorderly expansion
of capital” will keep leaders in Beijing occupied.
 Technologically, CCP leaders are struggling to deal with deep dependence on critical in-
puts and components, and the threat of further decoupling from global markets as well
as sources of innovation looms large.
 In the international environment, leaders in Beijing are searching for support to respond
to growing alignment and nascent coalitions of ʻlike-minded countries’ against China’s
influence (seen as ʻhostile forces’) – as well as preparing for a Taiwan crisis.
This is, therefore, a new kind of ʻsystemic competition’ between China and Europe as well
as other liberal democracies. Under conditions of deep interdependence and global con-
nectivity. Beijing sees itself mostly competing for sources of political robustness and eco -
nomic stability, building up effective state capacity and dealing with what it perceives as
existential global risks.
For leaders in the West, this competition should less be about simple dichotomies such
as capitalism/democracy vs communism/dictatorship but about dealing with a one-party-
state successfully integrating with and restructuring global capitalism, shaping interna-
tional rules, and reinventing dictatorship under digital conditions.
Outlook
Xi’s increasingly
entrenched
governing
philosophy is
built around crisis
prevention and
risk management

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
| 71
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Does all of this make conflict inevitable? Many international observers – including at MER -
ICS – continue to hope that with such challenges ahead, China’s current leaders could con-
clude that it is in China’s best interest to turn back to more open, liberal, cooperative and
decentralized approaches. But the track record of Xi’s decision-making patterns from the
past seven years makes it clear that a more likely trajectory – considering predictable crises
– sees China in permanent struggle mode, more radical internally and restricting interna-
tional connections that are perceived as risky.
3. CHINA’S STRUGGLE MODE AND THE PROSPECTS OF AN “ANTI-FRAGILE”
XI-SYSTEM CARRY MAJOR RISKS FOR INTERNATIONAL COUNTERPARTS
China’s leaders appear convinced they do not need “the West” anymore, or only very selec -
tively. And where they depend on such global connections, they seem confident that they
can co-opt and disunite foreign counterparts to maximize China’s state interests. Under
such conditions, Beijing makes cooperation with China more conditional, expecting com-
pliance in return.
While the CCP-led government is driving this development, growing domestic (cyber) na-
tionalism and an increasingly difficult environment for foreign residents and business are
likely to have an amplifying effect. Fueled by years of intense patriotic education, but also
the real successes of China’s government, its hardline global posturing and the propaganda
surrounding it, emotions and societal perceptions will shape relations with China much
more than in the past.
This more nationalist, non-compromising and self-centered China will seek to further limit
and excessively control access to information and political actors in China as part of its risk
management strategy. It is a key characteristic of the Xi Jinping era that externals know too
little about the internal deliberations and divergences within the Chinese leadership. While
tight control of narratives, and the space for debate, might make sense seen from Zhong -
nanhai, Chinese leaders will know less and be faced with growing myopia abroad. This is
likely to result in a greater possibility for tensions to escalate and for accidents to occur.
More specifically, international counterparts will need to prepare for:
Integrating and competing with a party-state economy that is expanding globally
As the CCP expands control over the economy, foreign business needs to prepare for further
politicization and greater need to toe the party-line. Companies will have to further localize
while acting as ʻgood corporate citizens’ on CCP terms. In Beijing’s eyes, this means shifting
profits and value-added production to domestic actors and proving their investment utility
by contributing to Chinese domestic development.
Hopes that international agreements or internal pressure will lead to a level playing field
for foreign companies in China remain pipedreams. They will need to compete with Chi-
nese firms in an extremely challenging environment. In effect, foreign firms are not only
competing with their peers but often with integrated industrial systems. In China, realizing
the ideal of ʻcompetitive neutrality’ remains an illusion. A networked party-state capitalism
drives innovation and leverages domestic advantages in strategic industries while selec -
tively deploying international competition at home.
Outlook
Companies will
have to further
localize while
acting as 'good
corporate citizens'
on CCP terms

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
72 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
China’s leaders aim at dominance in an expanding set of strategic industries by achieving
full control of relevant value chains. This can involve diverse actors and different modali-
ties of party-state influence, but the underpinning goals are clear: control, reducing depen-
dence, import substitution and, eventually, global market dominance.
Engaging with a digital power player and norm-setter aiming for self-reliance
Western actors – private companies, non-governmental organizations and individuals – sit -
uated in China are affected by the expansion of digital control mechanisms. Data is collect -
ed and often insufficiently protected. New regulations and initiatives strive to further allow
the government access to data and make monitoring more comprehensive.
Digital interconnectedness with the outside world remains critical to achieving the party’s
2035 goals for “socialist modernization,” core tech autonomy, full informatization and digi-
tal economy. The party has to juggle access to ‘open’ cyberspace with its own model of cyber
sovereignty. The long-term solution is to ensure foreign interactions increasingly take place
on China’s terms.
European businesses in China will need to further localize operations to comply with differ -
ent rules and political pressures. Where this proves impossible, they will face hard choices
about prioritizing or even choosing between key international markets.
China has made setting technical standards and norms in cyberspace a key goal. European
stakeholders will meet and compete with forceful Chinese initiatives in relevant UN forums,
governance and technical standards bodies. China’s digital infrastructure footprint in parts
of the developing world will grow rapidly, creating challenges on the ground for European
governments and businesses.
Facing-up to a comprehensive Chinese national security state with global reach
National security will become the dominant paradigm in China’s foreign relations. With
Xi’s ‘security first’ perspective permeating institutions in and interactions with China, in-
ternational counterparts are likely to be surprised by increasing intransigence in exchanges
and cooperation.
When security gains are a predominant goal, costs in the form of worsened bilateral rela-
tions become more tolerable. Xi’s China will not just be more assertive and proactive in its
foreign relations but potentially aggressive – where it perceives key interests under threat.
More diplomatic partnerships and cooperative arrangements are likely to be disrupted by
China’s ‘security first’ approach.
The biggest impact for Europeans will result from China’s steady shift towards ‘extra-terri-
toriality’, the intent to proactively control behavior and narratives beyond China. China will
claim and police formerly domestic red lines more forcefully abroad – leaving public and
private sector counterparts torn between competing value imperatives.
Outlook
The long-term
solution is to
ensure foreign
interactions
increasingly take
place on China’s
terms

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
| 73
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
4. EMBRACING CHINA RISKS AND RECALIBRATING EUROPE’S BALANCING AND
HEDGING STRATEGIES
While it was already apparent in 2016 that China is charting a different course, back then
one could still assume this would have a moderate impact for Europeans. This is different
now: in the 100th year of the CCP , China’s party state presents itself as a force to be reck -
oned with – despite the persisting domestic vulnerabilities caused by, i.e., demograph-
ic challenges or inherent instabilities in the financial system. It remains in Europe’s best
interest to deepen relations with China, but China’s organic party-state economy, digital
leadership and globalizing national security state require responses.
European public and private sector stakeholders, therefore, need to:
 Invest in pooled foresight and anticipatory capacity on China-related risks based on a
realist assessment of China’s anti-fragile trajectory. Play out “what if” scenarios.
Prepare for crises.
 Further invest in China competence and policy coordination at all levels of governance,
from local to regional, national and EU levels.
 Craft consistent China policy: actions on China should be guided by clearly defined
national security challenges, an identification of vital interests, specified assumptions
and desired end-states.
 Work towards a European consensus on an overarching China paradigm, combining
open strategic competition with principled precaution.
 In the meantime, continue to cooperate where necessary; maintain openness for
dialogue and exchanges.
 Prevent an over-securitization of relations. Invest in strategic confidence building,
Track-2/1.5 dialogues and capacities to understand mutual signaling better.
 Avoid symbolic posturing but coordinate proportionate responses to Chinese violations
of international law and agreements as well as threats to national security and vital
interests.
 Support economic diversification more offensively. A robust European anchor to
transatlantic engagement and cooperation with like-minded liberal market economies
around the globe matters more than ever.
 Europe must “win at home,” by playing offense and running faster. Focus on increasing
innovation and being better than, not undermining, competitors.
Endnotes:
 1 | MERICS Papers on China 1: https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2020-04/MPOC_ChinasCoreExecutive_
web.pdf.
Outlook

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
74 |
MERICS | PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Contributors
Contributors
Katja Drinhausen, Senior Analyst, focuses on the development of China’s legal and gover -
nance system, including digital governance and the social credit system, as well as human
rights in China and state policies towards minorities. Katja also coordinates research in
the Politics & Society team at MERICS. She studied Sinology at the universities of Leipzig
and Erlangen-Nuremburg and worked as a researcher and project manager in the Beijing
Office of the Hanns Seidel Foundation where she tracked the development of Chinese law,
governance and civil society in China. She received an LL.M. in international law from China
University of Political Science and Law in Beijing where she focused on Chinese and inter -
national public law.
Nis Grünberg, Senior Analyst, focuses on state-party governance, elite politics as well as
China’s sustainable development. He has published on the Chinese energy sector and
worked on state-owned enterprise reform. Nis also coordinates research in the Poli-
tics & Society team at MERICS. Before joining MERICS, Nis was a postdoctoral fellow at
Copenhagen Business School (CBS) and the Sino-Danish Center, Beijing. He holds a PhD
from CBS and BA and MA degrees in China Studies from Copenhagen University. He has
also studied at Shanghai International Studies University, National University of Singapore
and Freie Universität Berlin.
Mikko Huotari, Executive Director, focuses on China’s foreign policy, China-Europe rela-
tions and global (economic) governance and competition. He has published on China’s rise
as a financial power, trade and investment relations with Europe as well as on geopolitical
shifts related to China's emergence as a global security actor. Mikko studied in Freiburg,
Nanjing and Shanghai. He holds a PhD from Freiburg University and was a guest scholar at
the University of California in San Diego in 2017/2018. In 2019, Mikko was appointed as one
of 15 German representatives to the German-Chinese Dialogue Forum.
John Lee, Senior Analyst, coordinates work in the MERICS’ research cluster on China’s
use of digital technologies. His research covers emerging and foundational technologies
in China’s domestic development and international relations, China’s science and innova-
tion policies, and China’s approach to governance of the Internet and cyberspace. He holds
Masters degrees from the King’s College London Department of War Studies and the Aus -
tralian National University. He previously worked for the Australian Department of Defence
and Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade, and is an admitted Australian legal practitioner.

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
| 75
MERICS PAPERS ON CHINA No 10
Contributors
Helena Legarda, Senior Analyst, focuses on China’s defense and foreign policies, includ -
ing their domestic sources and drivers, and their geopolitical impact. Helena coordinates
research in the Foreign Relations team at MERICS. She is also a joint lead on the China
Security Project, in collaboration with the International Institute for Strategic Studies. Prior
to joining MERICS she gained professional experience at the Delegation of the European
Union to China and at research and advisory firm China Policy in Beijing. Helena holds a
Master in Public Policy degree with a focus on International and Global Affairs from the
Harvard Kennedy School of Government and a BA in Chinese Studies from the University of
Oxford. She also studied Chinese language at Peking University.
Claudia Wessling, Director Communications and Publications, leads publications and
product development at MERICS. A sinologist and journalist, she has written on digitali-
zation in China, Hong Kong and the Belt & Road. Claudia was editor at the foreign policy
desk of news agency Agence France-Presse in Berlin. From 2010 to 2015 she reported on
German politics as an AFP correspondent. She studied Chinese, Indonesian and economics
in Bonn, Wuhu and Yogyakarta, before training as a science journalist in Berlin.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
IMPRINT
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64, 10179 Berlin, Germany
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.de
EDITORIAL TEAM
Claudia Wessling, Director Communications and Publications, MERICS
Mary Hennock, Freelance Editor
Gerrit Wiesmann, Freelance Editor
DESIGN
STOCKMAR+WALTER Kommunikationsdesign
LAYOUT AND GRAPHICS
Alexandra Hinrichs, Graphic Designer, MERICS
Kathrin Hildebrandt, Hildebranding
STOCKMAR+WALTER Kommunikationsdesign
Titlegraphic: Anton Ohlow
Copyright © 2021
Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS)
Printed in Berlin, Germany
ISSN (Print): 2509-4319
ISSN (Online): 2509-5862

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
www.merics.org
