
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 1
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
Drastically intensified internet censorship.
New type of propaganda.
IT-backed authoritarianism.
Main findings and conclusions:
 Information control is an essential part of the CCP’s
conceptualization of the term national security. The
Chinese leadership views the strategic handling of cyber-
space as a matter of political life and death. The Cyber-
space Administration of China (CAC) was founded in 2013
with the clear mission of streamlining overlapping internet
control structures.
 Rather than warding off hackers, cyber criminals and
cyber terrorists, the CAC focuses on devising effective
digital information control mechanisms. Taming the in-
ternet without jeopardising the economic opportunities of
the digital age is a formidable challenge which the CAC is
still struggling with.
 The CAC has not succeeded yet in significantly widen-
ing its competences beyond internet censorship and
digital propaganda. Xi Jinping’s vision of a grand strategy
for the cyberspace has not materialised yet. Ministries, like
the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology or the
Ministry of Public Security, are still responsible for large ar-
eas of cyber policy.
 The CAC has radically stepped up China’s internet cen-
sorship regime. Mandatory real-name registration as well
as a new accreditation system for online journalists are but
two examples of the CAC’s regulatory work.
 The CAC is a major player in the Party-wide effort to
adapt the propaganda system to the digital age. By
using animated videos and cartoons the Party is trying
to reach out to China’s 700 million netizens. The CAC also
champions new digital magazines, like The Paper and its
English-language sister publication Sixth Tone. Such digi-
tal outlets have a lighter tone and content than traditional
Party-state media.
 The CAC is internationally advocating the concept of
cyber sovereignty. According to this notion, each country
should have the right to draft and enact its own internet
regulations however it sees fit. The notion of cyber sov-
ereignty has already attracted the attention of leaders in
authoritarian countries.
 The CAC’s first director, Lu Wei, laid down the foundation
for an agile and adaptive information control body. His suc-
cessor Xu Lin is continuing the hard-line policies of his
mentor.
InformatIon control 2.0:
The Cyberspace Administration of China tames the internet
nabil alsabah
15 September 2016
MERICS
cHIna
monItor

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 2
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
© MERICS

In the Name of National Security
China’s Cyberspace under Party Control
Cyberspace Administration of China
31 Provincial-Level Cyberspace Administrations
Central Leading Group for Cyber Security and Informatisation
9 Offices
3 Subordinate Centres
网络评论工作局
Office of
Internet
Commentary
网络社会工作局
Office of
Internet and
Society
移动网络管理局
Mobile Internet
Management
Office
网络安全协调局
Office of
Internet Security
Coordination
国际合作局
Office of
International
Cooperation
政策法规局
Office of
Politics
and Law
网络信息服务管理局
Office of
Digital Information
Management
网络新闻信息传播局
Office of
Online News
Dissemination
信息化发展局
Office of
Informatisation
Development
网络安全应急指挥中心
Cyber Security
Emergency Centre
违法和不良信息举报中心
Complaint Centre for Unlawful
and Inappropriate Content
互联网新闻研究中心
Research Centre
for Online News
3 Vice-Directors
Chairman: Xi Jinping
CAC Director: Xu Lin
Deputy Chairmen: Li Keqiang, Liu Yunshan
19 more members

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 3
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
1. the Cyber SpaCe adminiStration of China
iS devoted to C ontrolling information in
CyberSpaCe
China’s censors see the internet as a source of potential dan-
gers. Officials like Lu Wei and Xu Lin recognise the empowering
potential of modern information and communication technol-
ogies. They understand how these technologies enable ordi-
nary citizens to put out ideas that could transcend borders
and boundaries, infect hundreds of thousands, even millions
of people, and, potentially, spur them into action. For loyal
servants of a political system that equates the stability of its
hold on power with national security, the spectre of mass mo-
bilisation is horrifying. Thus, Party devotees like Lu and Xu
view information control not as an infringement on the
freedoms of the Chinese people, but as an indispensable
guarantor of national security. Without it the virtual world
would descend into chaos and this chaos would spill over into
the real world.
1
Since December 2013, the CAC – first led by Lu and cur-
rently by Xu – has strived to redefine China’s system of digi-
tal information control. By improving censorship regulations,
strengthening oversight over digital content providers, and
promoting new propaganda formats, the CAC has been using
information technology tools to underpin the Party’s author-
itarian rule.
1.1 China’S C ontrol of the internet to date:
a CaSe of too many C ookS Spoiling the broth
The internet represents a double-edged sword for China’s
leaders. On the one hand, they want to take advantage of the
digital economy, but on the other, an open internet with free-
dom of speech would threaten the Communist Party’s hold on
power.
2
The Chinese leadership particularly fears snowball ef-
fects, which in other countries have resulted in protests and
uprisings such as those that took place during the Arab Spring
and the Maidan revolt in Ukraine. Intense criticism of the Chi-
nese authorities voiced on social media in the wake of the
Wenzhou train accident in 2011 caused considerable uneasi-
ness among Party leaders.
Unlike his predecessors, President Xi Jinping takes in-
formation control in cyberspace very seriously.
3 Xi believes
that effective information control requires clear-cut regula-
tory responsibilities. However, regulatory responsibilities for
the cyberspace were in the past divided up among 15 Party
and state authorities.
4 Xi once compared the situation to a
sea dominated by nine dragons: if too many authorities are in-
volved, it becomes difficult for them to make effective political
decisions. The CAC’s mission is to put an end to regulatory
chaos in cyberspace.
5
1.2 the Ca C deriveS itS authority from the
Central Cyber SeCurity and informatiS ation
leading Small group
Formally, the CAC is the general office of the Central Cyberse-
curity and Informatisation Leading Small Group (中央网络安全
和信息化领导小组). A central leading small group of the CCP is
a taskforce staffed with high-ranking Party leaders and usually
led by a member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo. 6
The Central Cybersecurity and Informatisation Leading Small
Group is one of only four central leading small groups person-
ally chaired by Xi Jinping himself.
7 Its 22 members are the most
senior decision-makers whose portfolios touch in some way
on network security, fighting cybercrime, cyber warfare, cyber
diplomacy, propaganda, censorship, digital economy and IT
infrastructure. The group includes, for example, Central Bank
Governor Zhou Xiaochuan, Chief of the Joint Staff Fang Feng-
hui, and Head of the Propaganda Department Liu Qibao.
At the inaugural meeting of the Central Cybersecurity
and Informatisation Leading Small Group in February 2014, Xi
Jinping stated: “Cybersecurity and informatisation go hand
in hand. There is no national security without cybersecu-
rity and no modernisation without informatisation”. The
CAC was to take on the role of developing and enacting a
comprehensive strategy for China’s cyberspace.
8 The CAC was
also expected to take a leading role in promoting the digital
economy and combatting cybercrime. At present, the CAC is
a long way from accomplishing these goals, and works first
and foremost on the area of information control. It lacks the
institutional capacity and personnel to compete with already
established ministries such as the Ministry of Industry and In-
formation Technology (MIIT) or the National Development and
Reform Commission (NDRC) in the aforementioned areas.
2. the Ca C’S organiS ational StruCture iS tai-
lored toward CenSor Ship and propaganda
The CAC certainly knows how to catch the public’s attention:
Xu Lin and his leadership team comment on matters of inter-
net policy in the media; they appear at conferences and work-
shops and meet up with foreign politicians and businessmen.
And yet the CAC is very tight-lipped about its internal struc-
ture. However, a look at the CAC’s job advertisements sheds
ample light on the focus of its work: the cyberspace adminis-
tration searches primarily for candidates with at least two
years of solid experience in propaganda work. Successful
applicants get assigned to, for example, the Office of Internet
Commentary or the Complaint Centre for Unlawful and Inap-
propriate Content.
9
By analysing official Chinese Party-state media reports
on the CAC, we can discern at least nine CAC offices (see the
organigram on p. 2). Although the exact areas of responsibili-
ties cannot be deduced from media reports, the names of the
individual departments give us some clue about the nature of
their work. Take, for example, the Office of Online Commen-
tary, the Office of Internet and Society, or the Office of Online
News Dissemination. The Mobile Internet Management Office
is responsible for regulating text-messaging services such as

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 4
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
WeChat. These offices are clearly in charge of censorship
and propaganda tasks.
On the subnational level the CAC is supported by an
intricate network of cyberspace administrations. As in the
Beijing headquarters, experienced propaganda officials occu-
py leading positions in the CAC’s subsidiaries on city and pro-
vincial level. Their task is to enforce the rules and directives
issued by the central CAC in Beijing. The local press reports
regularly on their work. In 2015, for example, the cyberspace
administration of Shandong Province removed approximately
7,600 “illegal” online postings, deleted 110 blogs and closed
760 digital user accounts.
10 The cyberspace administration of
the city of Changsha, in turn, closed a “rumour portal” called
Voice of Changsha (
长沙说).11 The cyberspace administration
of Anhui Province organised a workshop in February 2016 to
pass down new restrictive propaganda guidelines.
12
3. taming Cyber SpaCe: a Clever blend of Cen-
SorShip and Self-CenSor Ship
In essence, the CAC is a revamped version of the former
State Internet Information Office (SIIO,
国家互联网信息办公
室). In April 2013, shortly after taking office as President of the
PRC, Xi Jinping appointed Lu Wei director of the SIIO. Known
for his zealous work style, Lu began his tenure by targeting
the regime’s most outspoken critics on Twitter-like microblog-
ging platforms, especially Sina Weibo. Lu initiated a large-scale
campaign with the specific aim of silencing critics with a large
following on Weibo. Some of those opinion-makers had hun-
dreds of millions of followers. Lu also met informally with the
most influential ones and urged them to toe the Party line.
In addition, Lu stepped up the surveillance and censorship of
Weibo posts. Hundreds of micro bloggers were arrested. The
500 million Weibo users got the message: crossing the red line
is no longer tolerated. A few months later President Xi estab-
lished the Central Cybersecurity and Informatization Leading
Small Group and promoted the SIIO to act as its General Of-
fice. Thus, Lu Wei’s boss was no longer the head of the State
Council Information Office, but Xi Jinping himself in his capacity
as Chairman of the Central Cybersecurity and Informatization
Leading Small Group.
The CAC is continuing the censorship work of the
State Internet Information Office. The CAC ensures the sup-
pression of digital “rumours”, i.e. online comments that touch
upon sensitive issues or engage in organised dissent. Cen-
sored material also extends beyond politically sensitive topics
to include a wide-range of issues that the Party regards as
“harmful”. This includes pornographic content, illegal drugs ad-
vertisement and content that glorifies violence. The CAC also
cooperates with communication firms such as China Mobile to
filter spam texts. It requires digital platforms to take steps to
limit online bullying. And it closes web portals that facilitate
extramarital affairs.
The CAC understands that no bureaucratic machine can
ever control the digital output of China’s 700 million netizens.
Thus, the bulk of the CAC’s work focuses on two aspects:
strengthening the existing system of outsourced censor-
ship and increasing self-censorship. The CAC is also respon-
sible for deleting “undesirable” Chinese websites and blocking
foreign websites.

3.1 the Ca C haS Strengthened the poliCy of
CenSorShip delegation
The number of websites blocked in China has risen by 14 per-
cent in the first two years of the CAC’s existence.
13 The CAC’s
endeavour to tame China’s cyberspace has been largely
successful. As Rogier Creemers, an expert on China’s cyber-
space, has observed, political satire still exists on the internet,
but social media are no longer as politically active as they
leadership team of the cyberspace administration of china (as of September 2016)
name Position Previous positions
Xu Lin CAC Director Propaganda Department of Shanghai
Wang Xiujun CAC Vice Director Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
Ren Xianlang CAC Vice Director Propaganda Department of Shaanxi
Zhuang Rongwen CAC Vice Director High-ranking government engineer
© MERICS
Source: http://www.cac.gov.cn

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 5
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
were before.14 The CAC’s outsourcing of censorship tasks to
digital platforms and placing restrictions on online journalists,
introducing real-name online registration and imposing harsh-
er punishment on offenders are all factors that contributed to
the taming of China’s internet.
Online platform and social media providers were under
obligation to monitor and delete “undesired” content long be-
fore the CAC came along, and they usually conduct the bulk
of censorship work. However, the CAC increased the scruti-
ny of the way online platform and social media apps, like
WeChat, conduct their censorship duties. In extreme cases,
the CAC can order any digital platform in China to delete the
user account of a troublemaker. In February 2016, the CAC
made headlines for ordering the deletion of the social media
accounts of real estate mogul Ren Zhiqiang. With 37 million
followers, Ren was one of the best-known voices in China’s
social media, and he used his voice to criticise Xi Jinping’s me-
dia policy.
With the aid of local cyberspace administrations, the CAC
can take firm action against online platforms whose providers
fail to meet their censorship obligations. The CAC has even in-
troduced rules and regulations for platforms that do not fully
co-operate. One of these regulations, the “Ten Admonition
Rules” (
约谈十条), obliges local cyberspace administra-
tions to summon representatives of online platforms who
neglect their censorship duties for a talk with local CAC
officials. During the talk, CAC officials present the respective
censorship team with its alleged “errors”. Punitive action di-
rected at the company is also possible.
15 The whole process is
modelled on Propaganda Department practices in dealing with
traditional media outlets that crossed the red line.
3.2 ending digital anonymity haS inCreaSed
Self-CenSor Ship tendenCieS
The CAC’s ultimate goal is to make censorship unnecessary by
enticing netizens to self-censor their digital output. To this
end, the CAC issued the real-name online registration reg-
ulation (
互联网用户账号名称管理规定). CAC officials reckon
that if netizens were forced to provide their real names online,
they would then become more cautious in what they write
and share. The task of ensuring that the real-name regulation
is enforced was then relegated to the online platform provid-
ers. The CAC has toughened this system by making websites
and app developers liable for the digital output of their users.
Netizens are still allowed to use a public pseudonym.
However, pseudonyms may not imply any connection with
government entities or famous individuals. Pseudonyms such
as “China Daily” or “Barack Obama” are not allowed for that
reason.
16
3.3 netizenS who over Step the red line are
liable for legal a Ction
The CAC lobbied hard for the criminalisation of online rumours.
Its efforts were fruitful. According to the Ninth Amendment
to the PRC Criminal Law, which became effective on 1 No-
vember 2015, the spreading of online “rumours” carries a
prison sentence of up to seven years.
17 The CAC can pros-
ecute anyone proven to have “knowingly” disturbed the public
peace by disseminating rumours. Whether or not the CAC will
make use of this provision remains unclear; the discussion in
the Party-state media indicates that this will only happen in
serious cases. Without doubt, the ninth amendment has a de-
terrent effect.
In addition to ordinary internet users, online journalists
are under particularly close scrutiny by the CAC. In accordance
with a new system launched in November 2015, only ac-
credited online journalists are allowed to publish online
news. The accreditation must be renewed annually. Anyone
who fails to meet his or her “journalistic duties” is blacklist-
ed. These duties include propagating and spreading the Party
narrative.
18 This system has extended even further as non-ac-
credited websites will not even be allowed to publish news
from accredited sources without a special licence.
19
4. CaC propaganda: the p arty’S voiCe “Should
be the loudeSt” in Cyber SpaCe
Censorship – however efficient – is only one aspect of informa-
tion control. The other aspect is propaganda. The aim of cen-
sorship is to weed out undesired information. The purpose of
propaganda is to define the narrative. In the long run effec-
tive propaganda is a more reliable tool of information con-
trol. Lu Wei and Xu Lin – who spent a good deal of their career
working for the Propaganda Department – understand that.
Prior to the Xi Jinping era, digital propaganda work was
limited to drawing from the printed content of the Party’s of-
fline media and posting it online. For a long time there was
hardly any difference between propaganda material earmarked
for online use and for print media. However, the Party realised
that members of the younger generation have no use for the
stilted language employed by the Party-state news agen-
cy Xinhua and the People’s Daily. That is why Xi Jinping set
himself the task of revamping the propaganda system, which
in his view was obsolete and ineffective.
20 “The struggle for
public opinion must be won online”, he stated in August 2013,
making the new Party line clear.
21
It is precisely this struggle that the CAC is carrying out
in the name of the Party. The CAC is one of the major play-
ers who are adapting China’s propaganda apparatus more
closely to the internet age. Others include the CCP’s Propa-
ganda Department as well as the Xinhua News Agency. The
ultimate aim is to reach out and win over China’s 700 million
netizens. The country’s digital propaganda landscape looks far
different today than it did just a few years ago. The personal-

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 6
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
ity cult surrounding Xi Jinping, for instance, is being promoted
using modern internet tools. Added to this is an effort towards
playing down the authoritarian power structure by using ani-
mated propaganda videos and cartoon figures. The end game
is to present the Party narrative in an entertaining fashion.
Three to five minute long cartoons about the PRC’s anti-cor-
ruption campaign, the current five-year plan or market reforms
have become a trademark of the new propaganda strategy.
This manner of presenting the Chinese leadership would have
been unthinkable before Xi Jinping came to power; it would
have been perceived as ridiculing the country’s top leaders.
22
Local Party media are also taking the initiative in the
development of new digital formats. From the Party’s view-
point, the Shanghai United Media Group sets a good example
for others to follow. In July 2013, it launched the online news-
paper The Paper (http://www.thepaper.cn/), which has become
very popular since then. The CAC supports such initiatives. In
fact, Lu Wei visited the editorial office of The Paper in July
2014 to demonstrate his support for its work. Today the inter-
net magazine stands for a growing number of online portals
that present the General Secretary as the friendly “Uncle Xi”
and his wife, the singer Peng Liyuan, as “Aunt Peng”.
In February 2016, Xi Jinping called on the Party-state me-
dia “to fan out into the world and tell the China story”. Heeding
this call, The Paper launched an English version called Sixth
Tone in April 2016 (www.sixthtone.com). The Paper and Sixth
Tone intentionally refrain from publishing the usual stiff po-
litical reports and focus on human-interest stories and light-
weight journalism instead.
Source: http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/indepth/2015-10/24/c_134745888.htm
Diplomatic success depicted in comic-strip style
Screen shot of Xinhua’s report on Xi’s visit to the UK in 2015
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 7
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
5. China Still doeS not have a grand
Strategy for Cyber SpaCe
The CAC can claim several successes relating to its core re-
sponsibilities of censorship and propaganda, and yet it failed
to deliver on one of its central missions. Xi Jinping established
the Central Cybersecurity and Informatisation Leading Small
Group to work towards a grand cyber strategy for the country.
He entrusted its general office, the CAC, with facilitating that
aim.
23 The CAC still has a long way to go to become the
most influential actor in shaping China’s cyber strategy.
This does not keep it from creating the impression – both in
discussions with foreign guests and on its website – that it
bears responsibility for China’s overall digital strategy. The
reality is quite different: industrial policy on information and
communication technology (ICT) lies in the MIIT’s hands. The
National Development and Reform Commission is primarily re-
sponsible for implementing the Internet Plus strategy. In sec-
tors such as big data, cloud computing, artificial intelligence
and robotics, CAC activities are primarily restricted to posting
reports on its website.
Moreover, the CAC cannot yet fulfil the task conceived for
it by Xi Jinping of ensuring network security and fighting cy-
bercrime – topics which Western governments regularly raise
with China. The Ministry of Public Security continues to bear
responsibility in these areas; in the cyber dialogue between
the United States and China, it was Guo Shengkun, Minister
for Public Security, who represented the Chinese side, not the
CAC.
The term cybersecurity has a different meaning in China
than it has in the West. While some Western countries place
particular emphasis on data protection, it is information control
that is the key issue for China. For Chinese decision-makers
more than anything else, ensuring cybersecurity means
averting hazards to political stability that originate in cy-
berspace.
24 It is cybersecurity in this narrow sense that is cur-
rently the focus of the CAC’s work.
Nonetheless, in the months and years ahead, the CAC
will continue its endeavours to expand its scope of influ-
ence. It will further strive to assume a leadership role when it
comes to regulating and promoting the information and com-
munication industry. For the time being, though, the CAC
only occupies niches: in January, the CAC founded a com-
mittee dedicated to developing Chinese technical standards
of network security.
25 The draft laws for cyber security and
e-commerce also include provisions for a secondary role for
the CAC in addition to other players such as MIIT and NDRC.
26
The State Council’s strategy paper on the Internet Plus initi-
ative grants the CAC a voice in matters including the digital
economy and digitisation of the healthcare sector.
27
Nevertheless, for the time being it would be an illu-
sion to believe that the Cyberspace Administration of Chi-
na will soon evolve into the central steering entity that Xi
Jinping envisaged. The CAC still does not have the personnel
or the competence to dislodge existing power structures and
curb the influence of the other actors.

6. the Ca C iS promoting the C onCept of Cyber
Sovereignty abroad
As the Chinese leadership sees it, control over cyberspace is a
matter of national security, and effective censorship and prop-
aganda are two very important ways of guaranteeing that.
Efforts by Western countries to undermine China’s censorship
system have been a thorn in the side of the Chinese leader-
ship. The US State Department, for example, invested approxi-
mately 100 million dollars (about 88 million euros) in the devel-
opment of software tools to circumvent internet censorship
between 2008 and 2010.
28 China criticises such actions as
constituting unlawful interference in its own affairs.
This is why the CAC wants to gain international accept-
ance for China’s information control regime. Propagating the
principle of “cyber sovereignty” ( 网络主权) is an important
aspect of its cyber diplomacy efforts. The notion of cyber
sovereignty conceives of cyberspace as being comprised of
the “internets” of different countries. Each country would have
a right to regulate its own internet at its own discretion.
29 To
enforce this claim, the CAC also involves successful domestic
IT companies such as Baidu and Tencent in its efforts.
30 Where
leading American companies such as Apple and Google ad-
vocate internet freedom, China’s national champions are ex-
pected to propagate the Party line of internet censorship and
information control.
Up to now, however, the CAC has had little success in its
struggle for international acceptance. Not only do Western
countries reject the concept of cyber sovereignty, but so do
emerging economies such as Brazil and India. At this point in
time, the idea of a free internet is in the lead internationally.
The situation is different in countries under authoritarian rule,
though. In matters of internet control, Lu Wei met with Rus-
sian and Iranian officials to advise them.
31
The CAC is an important pillar of China’s IT-backed
authoritarianism, i.e. the state’s use of newest information
technology to sustain China’s one-party rule.
32 In time, the
CAC could become a viable export model for other authoritar-
ian states.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 8
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
7. China’S ambitiouS internet Strategy:
outwardly iSolated, yet inwardly innovative
 With the CAC as the central steering body, internet censor-
ship in China is likely to be intensified. The Party leadership
under Xi Jinping is determined to tame the perceived threat
potential coming from online dissent.
 To be able to operate at all in China, foreign companies
and non-governmental organisations will have to adapt to
tighter censorship regulations.
 Stricter censorship does not hamper economic develop-
ment of the internet in China, since the Party is pursuing
dual objectives in matters of cyber policy: politically sen-
sitive content is blocked, whereas regulatory and financial
support of the ICT industries is being expanded.
 For the foreseeable future, the CAC’s competence will con-
tinue to be mainly limited to propaganda and internet cen-
sorship. In spite of support by leaders at the highest level, it
will be difficult for the CAC to become a dominant player in
areas such as regulating the internet economy. These areas
will remain the responsibility of MIIT, NDRC, and subnational
governments.
 China’s efforts to assert the notion of cyber sovereignty
on the international stage will remain unsuccessful for the
time being. On the other hand, in countries under authori-
tarian rule, Chinese concepts of internet control are viewed
quite positively.
your ContaCt for thiS
iSSue of China monitor:
Dr. Nabil Alsabah
nabil.alsabah@merics.de
editor:
Claudia Wessling
publiSher’S detail S
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64
10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
deSign
STOCKMAR+WAL TER Kommunikationsdesign

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
| 9
CHINA MONITOR | 15 September 2016
1 | Lu, Wei (2010). “经济全球化背景下的国家话语权与信息安全”.
http://www.chinanews.com/it/2015/12-10/7664099.shtml.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
2 | Xi, Jinping (2014). “把关键技术掌握在自己手里”.
http://www.cac.gov.cn/2014-06/10/c_1112674083.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
3 | See China Monitor 34 on this topic as well.
4 | Liu, Jun (2014). “网络“整治”背后的权力机构互联网管理20年变迁”.
http://www.infzm.com/content/99098 Accessed on 19.08.2016.
5 | Xi, Jinping (2013). “习近平谈关于加快完善互联网管理领导体制”.
http://politics.people.com.cn/n/2013/1115/c1001-23559689.html.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
6 | Heilmann, Sebastian and Shih, Lea (2015). “Die Kommunistische Partei
Chinas“, in: Das politische System der Volksrepublik China, p. 50.
7 | China Web (2015). “中央领导小组逾22个 习近平任4小组组长”.
http://news.china.com.cn/2015-07/31/content_36190622.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016. There is no official confirmation for him
chairing additional ones
8 | East Day (2014). “互联网管理,从破解‘九龙治水‘起步”.
http://pinglun.eastday.com/p/20141019/u1ai8398239.html.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
9 | CAC (2015). “中央网信办所属事业单位2015年面向社会公
开招聘工作人员职位信息表”. http://www.cac.gov.cn/2015-
10/13/m_1116806295.htm. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
10 | CAC (2016). “山东省网信办主任李建军：引导广大网民依法上网
文 明上网”. http://www.cac.gov.cn/2016-01/05/c_1117667641.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
11 | Red Net (2016). “‘长沙说‘微信公众号因传谣被依法关闭”.
http://hn.rednet.cn/c/2016/03/21/3939247.htm. Accessed on
19.08.2016.
12 | Anhui News (2016). “安徽网信办组织新闻网站学习贯彻习 近平总
书记重要讲话精神”.
http://ah.anhuinews.com/system/2016/02/25/007235287.shtml.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
13 | Carsten, Paul and Martina, Michael (2016). “U.S. says China internet
censorship a burden for businesses”.
http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-trade-internet-
idUSKCN0X50RD. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
14 | Creemers, Rogier (2015). “The Pivot in Chinese Cybergovernance”. In:
China Perspectives, 2015/4, p. 11.
15 | Southern Weekly (2015). “约谈十条” 发布：网站违规 总编或将被约
谈”. http://www.infzm.com/content/109205.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
16 | China Web (2015). “互联网用户账号名称管理规定”.
http://news.china.com.cn/2015-02/04/content_34731933.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
17 | BBC (2015). “中国实施刑法修正案 九种行为入罪”.
http://www.bbc.com/zhongwen/simp/china/2015/11/151101_china_
law_revised. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
18 | Xinhua (2015). “国家网信办就“ 首批新闻网站记者证发放”答记者
问”. http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2015-11/06/c_128402043.
htm. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
19 | China Economic Forum (2016). “中国将出新规：新媒体发布时政 新
闻须先获许可”.
http://www.ce.cn/xwzx/gnsz/gdxw/201601/13/
t20160113_8226607.shtml. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
20 | See China Monitor 26 on this topic as well.
21 | Xi, Jinping (2015). “习近平在全国宣传思想工作会议上的讲话”.
http://www.cac.gov.cn/2014-08/09/c_1115324460.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
22 | Batke, Jessica and Ohlberg, Mareike (2016). “Branding Xi: How the
CCP creates a professional PR leadership package for the modern
era”. http://www.merics.org/en/merics-analysis/dossierweb-special/
branding-xi.html. Accessed on 30.08.2016.
23 | East Day (2014): “互联网管理,从破解‘九龙治水‘起步”.
http://pinglun.eastday.com/p/20141019/u1ai8398239.html.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
24 | See China Monitor 19, 20 and 22.
25 | Standardisation Administration (2016). “全国信息安全标准化技术委
员会换届大会在京召开”. http://www.sac.gov.cn/xw/bzhxw/201601/
t20160115_200544.htm. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
26 | SCMP (2015). “网信办官员说明依法治网体系 抓紧未成年人网络
保护立法”. http://www.nanzao.com/sc/national/151a3faf994d5ac/
wang-xin-ban-guan-yuan-shuo-ming-yi-fa-zhi-wang-ti-xi-zhua-jin-
wei-cheng-nian-ren-wang-luo-bao-hu-li-fa. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
27 | State Council (2015). “国务院关于积极推进“互联网+”行动的
指 导意见”. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-07/04/
content_10002.htm. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
28 | Lindsay, Jon R (2015). The Impact of China on Cybersecurity: Fiction
and Friction. In: International Security, Winter 2014/15, vol. 39, no. 3,
p. 19.
29 | Lu, Wei (2015). “鲁炜在2015年新春招待会上的致词”.
http://www.cac.gov.cn/2015-02/09/c_1114311229.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
30 | Xinhua (2015). “互联网企业签署社会责任宣言 作出十大承诺”.
http://news.xinhuanet.com/info/2015-11/24/c_134850062.htm.
Accessed on 19.08.2016.
31 | Seddon, Max (2016). “Russia’s chief internet censor enlists China’s
know-how”. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/08564d74-0bbf-11e6-
9456-444ab5211a2f.html#axzz4HmLaMyKn. Cyber Threat News
(2015). “Russia, China bolster Iran’s cyber warfare capabilities
http://flashcritic.com/russia-china-bolster-irans-cyber-warfare-
capabilities/. Accessed on 19.08.2016.
32 | Meissner, Mirjam and Wübbeke, Jost (2016). “IT-backed
authoritarianism: Information technology enhances central authority
and control capacity under Xi Jinping“. In: Sebastian Heilmann and
Matthias Stepan (editors). “China’s core executive: Leadership styles,
structures and processes under Xi Jinping“, pp. 52-57.
