
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
| 1MERICS REPORT | June 2020
June 2020
MERICS
REPORT
CHINA’S DIGITAL PLATFORM ECONOMY:
ASSESSING DEVELOPMENTS TOWARDS
INDUSTRY 4.0
Challenges and opportunities for German actors
Rebecca Arcesati | Anna Holzmann | Yishu Mao | Manlai Nyamdorj |
Kristin Shi-Kupfer | Kai von Carnap | Claudia Wessling

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
CHINA’S DIGITAL PLATFORM ECONOMY:
ASSESSING DEVELOPMENTS TOWARDS
INDUSTRY 4.0
Challenges and opportunities for German actors
Rebecca Arcesati | Anna Holzmann | Yishu Mao | Manlai Nyamdorj |
Kristin Shi-Kupfer | Kai von Carnap | Claudia Wessling

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Acknowledgements ..................................................................................................... 7
Executive Summary ..................................................................................................... 8
1. Introduction: China’s push into the digital platform economy ............................... 13
2. The strategic context: Digital platforms play a critical role for Beijing’s
industrial modernization plans .............................................................................. 16
2.1 Beijing pursues ambitious targets for the development of digital
industrial platforms ............................................................................................... 16
2.2 Platform development in China’s manufacturing industry is still in its infancy ..... 18
2.3 China’s top-down approach to industrial digitalization reflects unique conditions ...19
3. The actors: China’s top-level design enables highly coordinated development
of the industrial internet ......................................................................................... 21
3.1 The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology orchestrates
development of China’s digital platforms ............................................................... 21
3.2 An industry association accelerates industrial internet development ................... 23
4. China’s industrial platforms landscape is evolving fast ......................................... 25
4.1 National champions lead the development of China’s industrial internet
platforms ................................................................................................................ 25
4.2 Private internet giants shift from consumer to industrial platforms ...................... 27
4.3 The government incentivizes SOEs to set up platforms to boost efficiency ............ 28
5. China lacks core capabilities to develop industrial digital platforms unaided ...... 30
5.1 The overall level of digitalization in China’s manufacturing remains low .............. 30
5.2 China lacks core components and human resources to develop digital platforms ...31
5.3 China’s industrial platforms are not used for high value-creation ......................... 32
6. China’s policy evolution targets domestic weaknesses .......................................... 33
6.1 Region-specific platform experiments and government-corporate
partnerships drive implementation ....................................................................... 33
6.2 Beijing seeks to shift financial support from subsidies to more
market-driven modes ............................................................................................ 35
6.3 China pushes for definition of technical standards for the industrial internet ....... 36
Content

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
7. The scope of foreign participation depends on China’s technological needs ........ 40
7.1 Foreign companies’ participation and their influence on regulation is limited ...... 40
7.2 Cybersecurity and data regulations threaten foreign participants ......................... 42
8. China’s advances in digital industrial platforms: implications for Germany ......... 44
Case Studies .............................................................................................................. 46
Endnoten ................................................................................................................... 57

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
| 6MERICS REPORT | June 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
| 7MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Acknowledgements
This study would have been impossible without the support of a great number of experts
and colleagues. It has profited greatly from the input and feedback of 25 leading experts on
China's digital platform economy.
We would especially like to thank participants at a MERICS workshop in September 2019,
where experts from government, industry, and research institutions provided valuable
feedback on our preliminary findings.
Special gratitude goes to the MERICS publications team, namely Alexandra Hinrichs
(graphics), Mary Hennock (copy editor) and Fiona Bewley (project manager) for their con-
siderable support in improving this study.
We are greatly indebted to Mikko Huotari, the Executive Director of MERICS, who has
helped to shape and refine the project.
We would like to acknowledge the valuable support of our intern, David Lenz, in finalizing
this report.
And, last but not least, we would like to thank the German Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy (BMWI) for supporting the project.
While everyone mentioned above has helped to improve our report, the authors bear sole
responsibility for any remaining errors.
Rebecca Arcesati, Anna Holzmann, Yishu Mao, Manlai Nyamdorj, Kristin Shi-Kupfer,
Kai von Carnap and Claudia Wessling
June 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
| 8MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Executive Summary
CHINA’S DIGITAL PLATFORM ECONOMY WILL DETERMINE ITS INDUSTRIAL FUTURE
China’s leadership has set an ambitious deadline to become a superpower in science and
technology innovation by the 100th birthday of the People’s Republic in 2049. The digitali-
zation of industrial production is central to their ambition. Digital platforms in the manu -
facturing sector are considered crucial to upgrade industry, improve productivity, optimize
resource allocation and increase employment.
Other countries can benefit, especially Germany, with its strong industrial base and rich
experience in the realm of “Industrie 4.0”. German companies like Siemens, SAP and Bosch
are already engaged in China’s emerging digital industrial platforms economy. However,
European actors must brace themselves for challenges. The competition is on: China will
be a major contestant in the “battle for industrial data”, as EU Commissioner Thierry Breton
recently coined the new phase of digitalization, in which Europe hopes to gain a stronger
foothold after being outperformed by US and Chinese tech companies.
CHINA’S PUSH INTO THE DIGITAL PLATFORM ECONOMY
China is investing heavily to become a leader of the Fourth Industrial Revolution; spending
on IT technologies reached CNY 2.6 trillion (EUR 337 billion) in 2018, research and advisory
firm Gartner has estimated. Software and data center systems accounted for CNY 250 billion
(EUR 32 billion) of this. Government policy pressure will see more companies invest in the
Internet of Things. Market observers estimate that China will account for one third – 4.1
billion – of global Industrial IoT connections (IIoT) by 2025.
Chinese digital industrial platforms are starting to compete on a global level. One of the
most important is INDICS, set up by China Aerospace Science & Industry Corporation Lim-
ited (CASIC), a state-owned missile manufacturer under direct central government control.
Two other corporate giants have set up increasingly influential platforms: Haier, the appli-
ances and electronics manufacturer, and Alibaba, the internet retail giant.
THE STRATEGIC CONTEXT: DIGITAL PLATFORMS ARE CONSIDERED CRUCIAL FOR
INDUSTRIAL MODERNIZATION
China’s promotion of the digital platform economy sits within an ecosystem of major pol -
icy initiatives, Internet+, Made in China 2025 and China Standards 2035, an effort to stan-
dardize cutting-edge technologies, e.g. AI, cloud computing, IoT and big data. The digital
platform drive combines corporate initiatives from China’s internet giants with the state-led
push to integrate traditional industries using advanced information and communication
technology (ICT).
The scarcity of advanced manufacturing in China is a key reason for the gulf between in-
dustrial digitalization and flourishing consumer oriented service platforms such as vid -
eo-sharing hub TikTok, the e-commerce portal Taobao and Tencent’s WeChat ecosystem:
the enterprise-on-cloud rate in China was only 30.8 percent in 2018, compared to 50 percent
in the US and 73 percent in Germany, all reported for 2018, according to a Chinese survey.
China is investing
heavily to become
a leader of the
Fourth Industrial
Revolution

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
| 9MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Government targets aim to remedy these deficiencies: policymakers want to see one million
companies “go cloud”, a crucial prerequisite for utilizing digital platforms. Bold targets to
foster platform development include the establishment of one leading global digital indus -
trial platform, 10 cross-sectoral platforms and 300,000 industrial apps by 2020. Policymak -
ers’ top-down approach combines ambitious, regularly adjusted targets with selected pilot
projects to pressure industrial and ICT actors to fulfill policy goals.
THE ACTORS: TOP-LEVEL DESIGN DRIVES A HIGHLY COORDINATED INDUSTRIAL
INTERNET DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
The main player orchestrating digital industrial platform development is the Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology (MIIT). In 2018, MIIT published its first ever list of 93
industrial internet projects in a comprehensive effort to build, scale up, regulate and stan-
dardize China’s platforms. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) funded the first batch of projects
with CNY 4.9 billion (EUR 679 million).
MIIT presides over the Alliance of the Industrial Internet (AII), the major forum for interac -
tion between policy makers and industry. The AII was created in 2016 and has more than
1,300 members. The AII’s few foreign members include SAP , Siemens, Schneider Electric
and GE. The body is active in setting technical standards for China’s industrial internet
platforms.
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) are tasked with generating sector-specific platforms. For
instance, a unit of oil giant Sinopec has set up a platform for the petrochemical industry.
The Chinese government sets targets on all levels
Key policy goals to develop industrial internet platforms
© MERICS
Source: State Council 2017; MIIT 2018
1 MILLION
new companies with
cloud-based platforms & 1 million
benchmark applications by 2025
10
cross-sectoral industrial platforms
by 2020, final list released in
August 2019
ALL LAYERS OF
THE IoT STACK
Industrial Apps
(300,000 by 2020)
Standards
(upgrade to IPv6,
push for NB-IoT, ≥ 10 security
standards at various levels)
ID resolution system
(≥ 10 public service nodes
and identification registration
amount of 2 billion by 2020)
3 – 5
internationally competitive platforms
by 2025, with 300,000 participating
companies by 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
| 10MERICS REPORT | June 2020
THE RESULT: A STATE-LED INDUSTRIAL PLATFORM LANDSCAPE IS EMERGING FAST
Three push factors are combining to shape the industrial digital platform landscape: gov -
ernment strategy is driving work by giant SOEs in key sectors; private sector firms have
joined in; and ICT giants are venturing into B2B to counteract stagnating user growth in
their B2C strongholds.
The Industrial Internet Convergence Platform for Centrally Administered State-owned En-
terprises was founded in June 2019 with 289 SOEs, including giants like China State Ship -
building Corporation, Baosteel (partnered with Siemens since 2015) and oil major Sinopec’s
unit Petrochemical Yingke. Several set up cloud platforms intended to optimize collabora-
tive R&D and manufacturing.
Among the most successful private sector players, Haier’s COSMOPlat combines 12 indus -
tries from textiles to electronics and ceramics and claims to serve 35,000 companies with
320 million end-users. ICT companies like Alibaba, Tencent, Huawei and Baidu seek to
leverage data from a massive pool of internet users: using consumer behavior data to opti-
mize industrial design and production is a core feature of Industry 4.0.
Some Chinese ICT players will benefit from their strength in cutting-edge applications.
Baidu’s Apollo, the world’s first open-source autonomous vehicle technology platform, has
over 130 corporate partners, including major German carmakers.
THE CAVEAT: CHINA LACKS CORE CAPABILITIES FOR PLATFORM DEVELOPMENT
Nonetheless, China’s own analysts openly debate weaknesses in this mass of activity. Their
views are consistent with MERICS own research. China’s structural dependence on key for -
eign components like industrial software is a fundamental deficiency that provides oppor -
tunities for foreign companies.
China lacks indigenous solutions in key layers of the industrial internet platform architec -
ture, e.g.:
 Sensors: the PRC has to import almost 80 percent of high-end sensors and up to 90 per -
cent of chips to meet domestic demand.
 Device connection: in 2019, 95 percent of high-end programmable logic controllers
(PLC) and common industrial protocols were imported. Lack of interoperability with de-
vices from different foreign companies is also an issue.
 Software as a service (SaaS): over 90 percent of high-end industrial software used in
China is of foreign origin. Companies like SAP , Microsoft and Salesforce dominate the
market.
CHINA’S SOLUTIONS: SETTING STANDARDS AND STRATEGIES TO RESOLVE DOMESTIC
WEAKNESSES
China’s government has begun to tackle shortcomings with centrally devised implementa-
tion blueprints. Key implementation mechanisms are:
 Devising region-specific, sub-national pilot projects involving local governments, state-
Some Chinese ICT
players will benefit
from their strength
in cutting-edge
applications

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
| 11MERICS REPORT | June 2020
owned companies and private firms (such as Alibaba’s SupET in Zhejiang, CASICloud in
Guizhou or XCMG’s XREA in selected BRI countries)
 Experimentating with more market-driven funding mechanisms, including private eq-
uity investment, to reduce the dominance of state subsidies
 Devising a comprehensive industrial internet standardization system by 2020.
Obstacles to Chinese companies engaging in the IIoT include the lack of interoperability
standards and insufficient rules on data ownership and security. China’s regulators there-
fore want more robust technical standards and a basic industrial internet standardization
system by 2020.
Most of China’s 324 industrial internet standards are still awaiting formulation. The AII has
judged platform standardization work in China as “early stage”. Standardization is an area
in which foreign actors could and should engage with China.
CONDITIONAL PARTNERS: FOREIGN PARTICIPATION DEPENDS ON CHINA’S TECHNO-
LOGICAL NEEDS
China’s official rhetoric proposes an open digital platform economy that is cross-border and
“win-win” in nature. It is not currently pushing for outright self-sufficiency, or a model de-
coupled from developments in other countries that would result in the exclusion of foreign
actors.
Many digital platforms analyzed in our study have benefited from strategic partnerships
with foreign companies like Siemens, Bosch, SAP or GE and foreign research. Even so, Chi-
na’s constant theme is the need for strong domestic capabilities that advantage its firms
vis-à-vis foreign competitors.
Our observations suggest that foreign players have limited ability to influence regulatory
developments. The environment favors indigenous solutions in the digital platform econ-
omy. Cybersecurity and data regulations are likely to be the main challenges for foreign
companies doing business with China in the digital platform economy.
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR GERMANY: EXPLORING OPPORTUNITIES AND MITIGATING
RISKS
Germany is a key partner for China in developing an Industry 4.0 of its own. German com-
panies and institutions play an important facilitating role in China’s work to create digital
industrial platforms, with joint research and development projects the main form of coop -
eration. E.g.:
 The R&D institute behind Haier’s COSMOPlat has cultivated strong links with several
German research institutes.
 Siemens gave support to the development of CASICloud’s INDICS cloud platform from
early on.
Opportunities for German platform providers to offer services to Chinese customers are far
more limited. However, they could arise in the areas of use and integration of sensors, de-
vice connection and “software as a service” solutions.
China’s constant
theme is the need
for strong domestic
capabilities that
advantage its firms
vis-à-vis foreign
competitors

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
| 12MERICS REPORT | June 2020
China’s rapid advance in the realm of digital industrial platforms demands attention from
German political and corporate actors on various levels. Germany should not delay mitigat -
ing potential risks.
This MERICS study is based on a deep search and analysis of primary Chinese language sources
with data as of December 2019. We made a systematic analysis of official policy documents
since 2015, Chinese experts’ research papers and interviews with and feedback from 25 experts
from politics, the corporate sector and research institutions.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GERMAN ACTORS REVOLVE AROUND THREE AREAS
1. Learning from China’s strengths. This requires, among other things, a solid un-
derstanding of China’s overall innovation capacity, going beyond showcase projects.
A realistic assessment of the overall impact of China’s digital platform economy needs
more research on regional specifications and development stages.
2. Conditional cooperation with China to leverage German strengths. China is
highly dependent on foreign IIoT stack components and services. German actors can
use this to demand greater transparency in the application of cybersecurity regula-
tions and equal access to the market for foreign companies. At the same time, main-
taining a high level of cooperation on Industry 4.0 is in Germany’s interest.
3. Mitigate risks arising from China’s idiosyncratic policy environment. China’s
drive to achieve self-reliance in every layer of the industrial internet creates challeng -
es for German partners. Joint research needs to be conditionalized and IP protection
needs to be a key priority in setting up cooperation frameworks.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
| 13MERICS REPORT | June 2020
For China, digital
platforms are a
crucial tool to
realize its goal
of becoming an
industrial super-
power by 2025
For the People’s Republic of China (PRC), digital platforms are a crucial tool to realize
its goal of becoming an industrial superpower by 2025. Beyond that lies the party-state’s
self-chosen 2049 deadline to achieve the status of a superpower in global manufacturing,
cyber- and science and technology innovation in time for the PRC’s 100 th birthday 1. From
2017 onwards, the government set out to transform the manufacturing realm into a digi-
tal platform economy, partly by leveraging China’s strength in business-to-customer (B2C)
digital platforms. China accounted for 28 percent of global spending on Internet of Things
(IoT) and 29 percent of total robotics investment in 2017, according to the US market intelli-
gence company International Data Corporation (IDC) 2. By 2025, China will account for one
third (4.1 billion) of the world’s Industry IoT (IIoT) connections 3.
China's ambitious goal of catching up with the leaders of the fourth industrial revolution
is demonstrated by the example of a digital industry platform operated by the state-owned
high-tech group China Aerospace Science & Industry Corporation Limited (CASIC). The gov -
ernment named CASIC a "national flagship company", a high-tech state-owned corporation
listed in the "Fortune 500" list of the world's largest companies, and prime contractor for
the Chinese space program, which produces missiles and aerospace equipment. The com-
pany is expected to lead China's push into the industrial digital platform economy. CASIC
has a business-to-business (B2B) digital platform called INDICS: it incorporates hardware
devices, Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS) and Platform as a
Service (PaaS) as well as a wide range of industrial applications.
Germany plays a key role in the development and internationalization of many Chinese dig -
ital industrial platforms, as can be seen from the example of INDICS 4. Since 2016, CASIC has
cooperated closely with German companies like Siemens (they signed a “strategic partner -
ship” in 2016) and SAP (for software procurement). The INDICS platform targets SMEs in tra-
ditional industries, providing them with matchmaking and resource sharing through cloud-
based manufacturing. It had 1.6 million registered users in 2018, with a total transaction
value exceeding CNY 400 billion, according to the company. In June 2019, INDICS launched
an international version called CASICloud INDICS (http://intl.indics.com) Its services and
functionalities are being investigated as part of a Sino-German joint research project that
seeks to improve understanding of the processes and capabilities of new technologies, such
as cloud technologies, and to provide use-oriented applications and assistance to compa-
nies. The German Ministry of Education and Research and China’s Ministry of Science and
Technology jointly support the research project5.
Such projects sit within wider Sino-German efforts to promote cooperation between re-
searchers and corporates while familiarizing themselves with each other’s approach to in-
dustrial policy 6. There is huge interest on both sides.
The basis for the cooperation was the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed in July
2015 by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi) and the Chinese Min-
istry for Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) to promote "German-Chinese cooper -
ation in the field of Industry 4.0" and the Memorandum of Understanding on "Intelligent
Manufacturing (Industry 4.0) and Smart Services" between the BMBF and the MoST on
19 January 20167:
1. Introduction: China’s push into the digital platform
economy

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
| 14MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 three annual conferences and symposia at State Secretary/Vice Minister Level on
intelligent manufacturing and interconnected production processes
 a regular Sino-German Company Working Group on “Industrie 4.0” and intelligent
manufacturing
 44 joint projects on industrial cooperation, standardization, talent cultivation and
industrial parks (as of 2018) 8
Germany has a lot to offer to China because of its strength in high-end manufacturing,
including a high level of digitalization in manufacturing and leading products/services for
the industrial internet. Likewise, the size of China’s market is appealing to German actors:
China spent CNY 2.6 trillion (EUR 337 billion) on IT technologies in 2018, of which CNY 250
billion (EUR 32 billion) was spent on software and data center systems. The PRC’s govern-
ment-led and subsidized push for companies to adopt cloud and IoT software means Chi-
nese companies are likely to invest more in these categories, stimulating the generation of
vast amounts of industrial data 9. Furthermore, the less restrictive regulatory environment
in terms of data protection facilitates experiments for joint projects on the ground in China.
China is tapping into the German economy’s traditional stronghold – its industrial base – to
ramp up its efforts to develop globally competitive digital industrial platforms. A deeper,
systematic understanding of China’s digital platform economy is therefore urgently need -
ed, including matters of access and sustainability. Only in this way can Germany better
protect its own interests in its relations with China (see box 1).
In the realm of digital industrial platforms China is progressing fast with flagship projects,
such as cross-sectoral industrial platforms. It is already setting international standards in
the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Chinese champions like INDICS, Haier’s COSMOPlat
platform or Alibaba’s SupET have started to compete globally with leading US and Europe-
an providers such as Microsoft’s Azure, PTC’s Thingworx platform, Siemens’ Mindsphere or
SAP’s HANA Cloud Platform 10.
Making sense of the industrial internet in the German and Chinese context
Working definitions for this study
© MERICS
Source: MERICS
A DIGITAL PLATFORM (互联网平台, hulianwang pingtai) is a digital space that facilitates value-creation via
online interactions of two or more groups of companies.
An ECOSYSTEM (互联网平台生态系统, hulianwang pingtai shengtaixitong) describes the industry-specific
platform environment that is composed of actors and their output in creating the infrastructure and setting
the regulatory framework necessary for platform interactions.
The DIGITAL PLATFORM ECONOMY (互联网平台经济, hulianwang pingtai jingji) refers to the sum of all
platform ecosystems (including their various platforms and actors) and their relations to one another.
A DIGITAL INDUSTRIAL PLATFORM (工业互联网平台 gongye huliangwang pingtai), often also referred to
as an Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) platform, is essential for linking machines and devices in a smart,
connected factory with applications (typically on a cloud). The platform collects, stores, processes and delivers
data and is the basis for monitoring manufacturing processes, for predictive and automated maintenance,
digital integration of value chains or customization of design and production.
Box 1

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
| 15MERICS REPORT | June 2020
China’s rapid development of its digital platform economy was enabled by low regulatory
requirements and innovative approaches to service integration. Chinese digital platform
companies in the B2C realm, like Alibaba, Tencent, or JD, often outsmart US competitors
because they can test and adapt their products in a home market protected from foreign
competition11. They also oftentimes benefit from state subsidies and support, e.g., in public
tendering or in target fulfilment (see chapter 6.1). The flipside is that their services fail to
meet international requirements for data privacy and cyber security.
This study sets out to assess the current state of the digital platform economy in China and
the key trends within it, putting a special focus on digital industrial platforms.
Chapter 2 introduces the strategic context. We examine what motivates China’s government
to support the development of a digital platform economy, and how it approaches this proj -
ect. In so doing, we will attempt to answer the question of how strategies for digitization of
Chinese industry differ from those of Germany with relation to Industry 4.0.
Chapter 3 addresses the overall institutional framework of the industrial internet and ex -
plores which political actors shape China's digital platform economy.
Chapter 4 looks into the corporate landscape of the industrial internet. It analyzes how the
development of digital industrial platforms is being shaped by different companies from
both the manufacturing and ICT sectors, and by a wide spectrum of funding mechanisms.
Chapter 5 scrutinizes core weaknesses affecting the evolution of China’s industrial plat -
forms by examining factors on the supply side and the demand side.
Chapter 6 assesses Beijing’s current policy measures to cope with these weaknesses. A wide
range of policy experiments on the national and sub-national level will be addressed, fol -
lowed by an analysis of existing funding mechanisms to support the development of digital
industrial platforms.
Chapter 7 covers the scope of foreign participation, sounding out opportunities beyond the
established Sino-German cooperation on “Industrie 4.0”. Challenges flowing from China’s
regulatory environment are also addressed.
The authors have undertaken an extensive stocktaking and analysis of primary Chinese-lan-
guage policy documents and research reports, and an in-depth analysis of 10 Chinese in-
dustrial platforms. The cases were picked from a self-compiled frequency ranking based on
Chinese documents. We have sought to cover the whole spectrum of platform providers, in-
cluding manufacturing companies and ICT firms, bigger state-owned players, smaller and
medium size private enterprises (SMEs), cross-sectoral and sector-specific platforms and
local pilots 12.
China’s rapid devel-
opment of its digital
platform economy
was enabled by low
regulatory require-
ments and innova-
tive approaches to
service integration

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
| 16MERICS REPORT | June 2020
China’s government sees the expansion of the “digital platform economy” as a critical new
driver of economic development and essential to transform the nation into an industrial -
ized, globally competitive superpower.
Beijing views the creation of digital platforms as a way to
 upgrade industry,
 optimize resource allocation,
 create better quality jobs.
China’s decision makers have identified industrial internet platforms as a vital means to
achieve the efficiency increases needed for innovation-driven “quality growth” and inno -
vation.
To foster the build-up of competitive digital industrial platforms, the government has given
them strategic weight as a key tool for China to become an industrial superpower. Beijing
wants to replicate the success of Chinese platforms in the B2C sector within the B2B in-
dustrial realm. The PRC leadership is thereby making “platformization” (the setting up of
digital platforms) a key solution to the challenges of the industrial internet.
2.1 BEIJING PURSUES AMBITIOUS TARGETS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF DIGITAL
INDUSTRIAL PLATFORMS
China’s ambitions for industrial internet platforms are embedded in a larger context. The
promotion of a “digital platform economy” is linked to major initiatives including Internet+
(互联网+) that promote broadly similar themes and seek to foster China’s cyberspace, sci-
ence and technology (S&T) and manufacturing capabilities (see exhibit 1).
Until now the development of digital platforms in many varied industries has been driven
by a mix of corporate initiatives from Chinese internet giants and the state-led push to inte-
grate “traditional” industries with advanced information and communication technology
(ICT). However, the expansion of platforms has not penetrated all sectors of China’s econ-
omy equally. The business-to-business (B2B) sector – especially in manufacturing – lags
behind the considerable progress evident in the business-to-consumer (B2C) domain.
To remedy these deficiencies, China’s government has begun to emphasize the need to in-
tegrate internet-based solutions into manufacturing industry. The State Council set ambi-
tious targets for the development of digital industrial platforms in November 2017.
2. The strategic context: Digital platforms play
a critical role for Beijing’s industrial modernization
plans
China’s government
emphasizes the
need to integrate
internet-based
solutions into the
manufacturing
industry

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
| 17MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Known as the “Guiding Opinions on Developing the industrial internet by Deepening
“Internet+ Advanced Manufacturing’” (关于深化“ 互联网+先进制造业”发展工业互联网的
指导意见), they set goals with a deadline of 2020 which include 13:
 one leading global digital industrial platform,
 10 cross-sectoral platforms,
 the first cohort of company-level platforms to promote corporate digitalization,
(数字化), connectedness (网络化) and “smartification” (智能化).
Work to fulfill these targets ranges from basic efforts in the field of cloud-based corporate
platforms to more technical (e.g. standards-related) and comprehensive goals that reflect
international ambitions (see exhibit 2). The goal of having 10 cross-sectoral industrial plat -
forms in place by 2020, for instance, had already been reached in August 2019 14.
Exhibit 1
Boosting a digital platform economy for China’s industrial superpower
Strategic context based on an analysis of keyword-coded policy documents from 2017 to 2019
© MERICS
Source: MERICS
Efficiency increase
Industrial trans-
formation &
 upgrade
Innovation
Quality growth
• China Standards 2035
• Social Credit System
• Smart+
• Internet+
• Informatization (Development)
Strategy
• Made in China 2025
• Supply-Side Structural Reform
• Mass Entrepreneurship and
Innovation
• Green and sustainable development
• Security, supervision and control
(multi-level governance system)
• Sharing economy, resource
allocation and economies of scale
(across entire value chains)
• Virtual and real-world integration
(digitalization)
• Service-orientation and new
employment opportunities
• Internet-based innovation
(incl. talent cultivation and new
business models)
Motivation Initiatives Themes
ManufacturingScience &
technology Cyberspace
Hierarchy of goals
SUPERPOWER

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
| 18MERICS REPORT | June 2020
2.2 PLATFORM DEVELOPMENT IN CHINA’S MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY IS STILL IN
ITS INFANCY
China’s consumer-oriented service platforms are thriving and expanding internationally.
Success stories include Bytedance’s TikTok (video-sharing), Alibaba’s Taobao (e-com-
merce), NetEase’s Youdao (e-education), Chunyu Doctor (e-health care), Didi Chuxing
(ride-hailing) and Tencent’s WeChat Pay (fintech). Their rise has been facilitated by a large
home market with ample demand, internet-savvy consumers and an initially laissez-faire
regulatory environment.
In contrast, China’s industrial sector is generally much less digitalized 15. Industry surveys
covering the PRC and the US yield the following aggregate findings:
 According to a report by the management consultants McKinsey, for example, in 2018
the proportion of companies in China that were active in the Cloud was just 40 percent,
in comparison to 85 percent in the United States and 70 percent within the EU 16.
 In 2016, only 46 percent of the surveyed Chinese manufacturing companies had dedi-
cated Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) strategies. Major obstacles cited were lack of
inter-operability and common standards, data ownership and security-related issues,
and under-qualified operators 17.
 In 2017, more than 50 percent of the surveyed Chinese manufacturing companies did
not have industrial clouds in operation 18.
The Chinese government sets targets on all levels
Key policy goals to develop industrial internet platforms
© MERICS
Source: State Council 2017; MIIT 2018
1 MILLION
new companies with
cloud-based platforms & 1 million
benchmark applications by 2025
10
cross-sectoral industrial platforms
by 2020, final list released in
August 2019
ALL LAYERS OF
THE IoT STACK
Industrial Apps
(300,000 by 2020)
Standards
(upgrade to IPv6,
push for NB-IoT, ≥ 10 security
standards at various levels)
ID resolution system
(≥ 10 public service nodes
and identification registration
amount of 2 billion by 2020)
3 – 5
internationally competitive platforms
by 2025, with 300,000 participating
companies by 2020
Exhibit 2

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
| 19MERICS REPORT | June 2020
The picture is beginning to change. As of March 2018, according to the iResearch institute,
the Chinese market counted 269 industrial internet platforms, up from only 50 in 2014. Of
these, 65 percent were run by manufacturing enterprises or industrial equipment suppliers,
whereas ICT firms provided 35 percent. Platform use cases were mainly found in highly
digitalized sectors, with 58 percent of the total concentrated in the machinery and energy
industries19.
Thus far, China has few industrial national champions that compete on a global scale.
According to the US company Forrester Research, leaders include Haier’s COSMOPlat and
the China Aerospace Science & Industry Corporation (INDICS platform from CASICloud).
Forrester groups three US and one German supplier (Siemens' Mindsphere) in the same
category20.
Haier’s COSMOPlat has acquired massive quantities of user information through its flag -
ship model “mass customization” (大规模定制). Users can engage in the whole production
process from idea and design all the way to final product and delivery. COSMOPlat has
therefore been able to attract many other resources: designers, and module, equipment
and logistics providers to build a strong user and resource base. As of 2019, it has 12 in-
dustry clusters including ceramics, agriculture, recreational vehicles, electronics, textiles,
equipment, construction, transportation and chemicals. COSMOPlat claims to serve 35,000
companies with 320 million end-users 21.
Another early success story of Chinese digital industrial platforms provides a glimpse into
the ecosystem in which Chinese industrial platforms thrive. The XREA platform, deployed
by Xuzhou Construction Machinery Group is reported by official Chinese media to be the
only profitable industrial Platform as a Service platform (PaaS); it reportedly had reve-
nue growth of 150 percent in the first 10 months of 2019 22. One reason for Shanghai-based
XREA ’s success is that it has a mature, strong manufacturing company behind it.
Like Haier, XREA was built on first mover advantage. It launched in 2016, when industrial
platforms where still in the early stage of development. XREA has strong partnerships: first,
with China’s leading cloud provider AliCloud and, second, a strategic cooperation – via its
manufacturing platform provider Xugong (XCMG) – with German multi-national SAP . Its
big data technology and applications like Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) have helped
XCMG to expand the basic IoT smart cloud computing service to intelligent manufacturing,
as well as managing XCMG's products, and providing intelligent logistics, risk prediction
and risk warnings 23.
2.3 CHINA’S TOP-DOWN APPROACH TO INDUSTRIAL DIGITALIZATION REFLECTS
UNIQUE CONDITIONS
Despite some successes, the current level of digital platform development in China’s indus -
trial landscape reflects the scarcity of advanced manufacturing there. Compared to more
industrialized nations like Germany, there is a gulf in the level of digital platform use. The
structural differences in the German and Chinese industrial base can be seen in their differ -
ent national strategies to master digital evolution in the industrial realm.
For China's government, digital platforms are an important innovation tool to catch up on
lost ground from the third industrial revolution (digitalization) and to be at the forefront of
the fourth industrial revolution (networking of the physical, digital and biological world).
Structural differences
in the German and
Chinese industrial
base can be seen
in their different
national strategies
to master digital
evolution

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
| 20MERICS REPORT | June 2020
As can be seen in the “Made in China 2025” initiative, China pursues a state-driven, top-
down approach, using fixed targets and selected pilots in various sectors. China’s govern-
ment wants to digitize existing production capacities to improve efficiency and to accel -
erate the integration of manufacturing and ICT industries, thereby creating new value for
participants in platform ecosystems.
Consequently, Beijing’s approach to industrial data (so far) has been rather laissez-faire
(see chapter 7.2), incentivizing manufacturing companies to set up and participate in dig -
ital industrial platforms without hinderance. However, following the introduction of the
Cyber Security Act in 2017 and the adoption of a number of implementing regulations, the
party state has tightened control over collecting and sharing industry data. Recently an-
nounced draft regulations underline the importance of industrial data security. This could
have far-reaching consequences for digital industrial platforms.
China’s official rhetoric endorses the view of an open digital platform economy that is
cross-border and “win-win” in nature 24. It does not push for outright self-sufficiency, or a
model that is decoupled from developments in other countries and would lead to the exclu -
sion of foreign actors. For foreign governments and companies, this can be used as point
of reference with Chinese officials to follow up on when it comes to addressing questions
of openness and interoperability, for instance. Nevertheless, the development of strong do -
mestic skills and capacities that allow Chinese companies to be independent of foreign
competitors remains an important aspect of China's strategic ambitions in the digital plat -
form economy (see also chapter 5).
Beijing has come to realize the importance of a state-driven approach to building up lead -
ing national platforms and of centralized data-flows. For example, the "Internet+regula-
tion" system ( 互联网+ 监管 " 系统) is to be linked to corporate platforms in order to use
the data obtained from them to optimize the Social Credit System and regulate the behav -
ior of platform economy players accordingly 25. In the reviewed policy documents, central
government’s main responsibility is portrayed as establishing an ecosystem that enables
companies to forge ahead with developing and expanding corporate IIoT platforms, while
retaining Beijing’s overall steering power.
One of the core documents of the State Council’s “Guiding Opinions on Deepening ‘Inter -
net + Advanced Manufacturing’ and the Development of the Industrial Internet,” pledges
central government to strengthen overall planning and guidance, further simplify admin-
istration and decentralization, combine decentralization and management, and optimize
service reforms. “We will intensively implement the innovation-driven development strat -
egy, build the three functional systems of network, platform, and security, and strengthen
the supply capacity of the industrial internet industry,” it says 26.
China’s official
rhetoric endorses
the view of an
open digital plat-
form economy
that is cross-border

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
| 21MERICS REPORT | June 2020
3. The actors: China’s top-level design enables highly
coordinated development of the industrial internet
China’s key political institutions – in the party and state – have taken on the leading role
in promoting the digital platform economy in the manufacturing sector. The Chinese Com-
munist Party’s (CCP) Central Committee and the State Council have been highly active in
publishing guidelines to promote industrial platforms.
The key player orchestrating digital industrial platform development is the Ministry of In-
dustry and Information Technology (MIIT), especially through its Informatization and Soft -
ware Services Department (信息化和软件服务业司). First, it administers working groups
and research institutes and issues specific regulations, target lists and pilot project calls.
Second, MIIT presides over the Alliance of the Industrial Internet (AII), the most important
platform for interaction between policy makers and industry.
3.1 THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ORCHESTRATES
DEVELOPMENT OF CHINA’S DIGITAL PLATFORMS
The MIIT clearly has the lead role in stimulating and steering China’s platform develop -
ment. It has set up industry associations at national and provincial level focused on the in-
dustrial internet and presides over several key actors. These include think tanks such as the
China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (CAICT; 中国信息通信研究
院), the China Academy for Industrial Internet (CAII 中国工业互联网研究院) and the China
Center for Electronic Information Industry Development (CCID; 中国电子信息产业发展研究
院), as well as standardization and network security agencies, such as China Electronic
Standardization Institute (CESI; 中国电子技术标准化研究院) and the National Industry In -
formation Security Development Research Center (CIC; 国家工业信息安全发展研究中心).
Even more relevant is the Industrial Internet Special Working Group (工业互联网专项工作
组), established by the State Council’s Leading Small Group for Constructing a Manufac -
turing Superpower and administered by MIIT. It oversees and coordinates implementation
work on industrial internet development. Its work plan specifies major tasks related to dig -
ital platforms (up to December 2019), including building and testing platforms, improving
their public service capacity, and promoting industry adoption and application – partly by
encouraging matchmaking between financial institutions and platform providers 27.
The work plan sets three vaguely defined targets: 1) accelerating platform rollout, 2) en-
hancing operational capacity, 3) expanding existing platforms. The most consistently em-
phasized item was the establishment of “open service platforms,” presumably to have the
capacity to incorporate participants from various sectors (see exhibit 3).
China’s key political
institutions have
taken on the leading
role in promoting
the digital platform
economy

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
| 22MERICS REPORT | June 2020
© MERICS
Industrial internet platforms are a new government priority
Political actors and industry associations shaping the development of China’s digital platform economy

Industrial Internet
Special Working Group
工业互联网专项工作组
National Industry Information Security
Development Research Centre
国家工业信息安全发展研究中心
Industrial network security agency
Alliance of
Industrial
Internet
工业互联网产
业联盟
Key industry
association
China Intelligent Manufacturing
System Integrators Consortium
中国智能制造系统解决方案供应
商联盟
Industry association
China Cloud Computing Technology
and Industry Alliance
 中国云计算技术与产业联盟
Industry association
China Center for Information
Industry Development
中国电子信息产业发展研究院 (赛迪)
Government think tank
Coordination
Industry associationIndustry associationIndustry association
China Industrial Software
Promotion Association
 中国工业软件产业发展联盟
Shenzhen
 Industrial Internet Union
深圳工业互联网联盟
Internet+ Development
Association of China
中国产业互联网发展联盟
Ministry of
Industry and
Information
Technology
工业和信息
化部
Source: MERICS
Cyberspace Administration of China
国家互联网信息办公室
Central internet regulator
Central Commission for
Cybersecurity and
Informatization
中央网络安全和信息化委员会
(CCP Commission)
Cyber
policy
Made in China
2025
Leading Small Group for
Constructing a
Manufacturing Superpower
国家制造强国建设领导小组
(State Council’s LSG)
Ministry of
Science and
Technology
科学技术部
National Development
and Reform Commission
国家发展和改革委
员会 Industrial
policy
Service Alliance for the Integration of
Informatization and Industrialization
中国两化融合服务联盟
Industry association
Instrumentation Technology Economy Institute
机械工业仪器仪表综合技术经济研究所 (仪综所)
Government research institute
National Internet Emergency Response Center
国家互联网应急中心
Network security agency
Ministry of
Finance
财政部
BudgetMacroeconomic
planning
Ministry of
Commerce
商务部
Trade and
investment
Ministry of
Education
教育部
Talent
training
R&D and
innovation
Government think tank
China Academy for Information and
Communications Technology
中国信息通信研究院
Vice Premier Ma Kai 马凯Xi Jinping 习近平
China Electronic
Standardization Institute
中国电子技术标准化研究院
Standardization
 Leadership
 Supra-ministerial
 Ministerial
 Inter-ministerial
 Technical/expert level
 Industry associations
Exhibit 3

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
| 23MERICS REPORT | June 2020
In addition to oversight and coordination, MIIT selects which platform projects and key
demonstration enterprises are to serve as national and international frontrunners. In 2018,
MIIT published its first ever list of 93 industrial internet projects – the Industrial Internet
Innovation Development Project featured industrial platforms (cross-sectoral, sector-spe-
cific, and regional) as a special sub-category 28.
The 2018 list revealed a comprehensive effort to build, scale up, regulate and standardize
China’s platforms, grouped into 11 tasks. The tasks covered everything from fundamental
research and identity (ID) resolution (the process of combining identifiers with industrial
equipment and devices) to platform testbeds, quality control and supervision. The docu -
ment put notable emphasis on the security aspects of both industrial networks and control
systems. It also emphasized the construction of platforms in priority process manufactur -
ing sectors (petrochemicals, steel and energy) and discreet industries (automotive, con-
struction machinery and electricity).
The MIIT tasked state-owned enterprises with much of the work to build up sector-specific
trial test (试验测试) platforms. Beneficiaries included, among others, China Petroleum &
Chemical Corporation/Sinopec (platform for the petrochemical industry); the State Grid
Corporation of China (platform for new energy industries); and Beijing Orient National
Communication Science & Technology (platform for the iron and steel industry). However,
this list also included private manufacturing sector players (i.e. Haier, XCMG and Chang -
hong Electric) and ICT companies such as Inspur, Yonyou and Alibaba. This approach re-
flects expressed Beijing’s goal of nurturing a mixed corporate ecosystem for platform devel -
opment. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) funded the first batch of industrial internet projects
with 4.9 billion CNY 29.
The MIIT issued a second project list in September 2019, which showed that platform devel -
opment had reached a crossroads. Along with roughly 100 listed projects, the MIIT set out
a fresh goal, namely improving technical conditions for connectivity, especially by making
progress on ID resolution. Another new goal was focused on addressing internet security
challenges, such as the need for comprehensive security and defense mechanisms, data
security and monitoring, and even the need for a security support platform for the Beidou
Satellite Navigation System.
3.2 AN INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION ACCELERATES INDUSTRIAL INTERNET DEVELOPMENT
The Alliance of Industrial Internet (工业互联网产业联盟, AII) was established in 2016 to
facilitate collaboration between government agencies, leading industrial platform compa-
nies and research institutes. It was patterned on the US Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC)
– while reserving a much larger role for the state30. It was established by the China Academy
for Information and Communications Technology (CAICT), a think tank with significant
regulatory power in China’s ICT sector, with support from its parent body, the MIIT, working
closely with industry leaders.
The AII has more than 1,300 members, including a few foreign companies, and is the most
important avenue for policy-industry interaction and coordination in the industrial inter -
net space.
The AII describes itself as an institution facilitating exchanges, cooperation, and knowl -
edge sharing to foster the development of China’s industrial internet ecosystem. Its research
State-owned
enterprises
should build up
sector-specific
trial test
platforms

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
| 24MERICS REPORT | June 2020
program covers platform architecture, information security and industrial development,
and supports technological innovation through testbeds, verification, evaluation and pilot
demonstration work.
As explained in Chapter 4, the AII is also active in setting the emerging technical standards
for China’s industrial internet platforms. Part of this effort entails defining an industrial
internet architecture for China. In August 2019, the AII issued the “Industrial Internet Sys -
tem Architecture 2.0” (工业互联网体系架构2.0), which replaced an earlier, simpler version.
According to state media, it is intended as the guiding framework for all actors involved in
China’s industrial internet 31.
The composition of AII’s working groups shows how a handful of companies wield the most
power: Huawei alone chairs or co-chairs six of the 20 thematic and ad-hoc working groups
(see exhibit 4). The Industrial Internet Platforms Group (工业互联网平台组) is chaired by a
representative from CAICT. Other members represent CASICloud, Huawei, Rootcloud, Chi-
na Telecom, Haier, Foxconn, Sysware, BONC, and XCMG. Other working groups deal with
the full spectrum of industrial internet-related technical, technological and regulatory mat -
ters; these range from the use of technologies such as Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Re-
ality (AR) and blockchain to questions of intellectual property rights, frequency allocation,
cybersecurity, talent cultivation and financing.
The AII’s Technology and Standards Working Group (技术与标准组) is also noteworthy. It
is led by defense and aerospace conglomerate CASIC with representatives from Haier, ZTE,
Huawei, China Telecom, China Mobile, China Unicom, Weichai, and the Shenyang Institute
of Automation of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). The group formulates proposals
within the state standardization system.
Foreign participants have their place within the AII. Four foreign multi-nationals hold seats
on its decision-making council: SAP is the most notable, sending one of 22 vice-presidents.
Siemens, Schneider Electric, and GE each have one Governing Unit Representative with-
in the AII. The four companies also have representatives within different working groups,
such as the groups for international cooperation, blockchain, and industrial development.
Exhibit 4
Few foreign companies can lobby in China’s Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII)
Distribution of the of decision making power within the A.I.I.
© MERICS
Source: Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII)
2. Working Groups, Members, and Subgroups (151 seats)
 CAICT Huawei CASICloud China Mobile China Telecom Other SAP, Siemens, GE, Schneider Electric
19 7817 13 10 410
1. Steering Committee, Council, Expert Council, and Secreteriat (118 seats)
 MIIT CAICT Haier Other SAP, Siemens, GE, Schneider Electric
29 784 43

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
| 25MERICS REPORT | June 2020
4. China’s industrial platforms landscape is evolving fast
Large manufacturers and ICT firms are emerging as the driving forces of China’s digital
platform economy, a scenario referred to locally as being “two-wheel driven” (双轮驱动).
Beijing combines state incentives with low regulatory requirements, for example regard -
ing market access for players in the platform economy (see also chapter 7.2), in order to
create a favorable environment for testing and expanding digital business models within
industry in China 32. Companies in various sectors are already operating industrial internet
platforms, experimenting with new ways to transform and modernize manufacturing.
These digital platforms are supposed to become part of a fast-maturing ecosystem where
different players – large manufacturers, equipment suppliers, industrial technology and
software firms, ICT equipment makers, and large internet companies – collaborate and
compete as platform orchestrators or providers of complementary services. Private and
state-owned national champions are spearheading platforms that combine advanced ma-
chines, internet-connected sensors, big data analytics and cloud computing to enable Chi-
na’s transition towards intelligent manufacturing.
4.1 NATIONAL CHAMPIONS LEAD THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHINA’S INDUSTRIAL
INTERNET PLATFORMS
The PRC still lacks large industry players that can integrate multiple control resources, ac -
cording to Chinese experts’ assessments. They cite control systems, along with communica-
tion protocols, production equipment, execution systems, management tools, professional
software, and platform construction. Chinese companies’ ability to build industrial PaaS,
expand the developer community and innovate business models is also limited 33. These
shortcomings are one reason for Chinese enterprises to cooperate with well-established
industrial companies like Siemens, Bosch, SAP or GE. Likewise, they favor open-source
collaboration as no individual platform can independently provide solutions that combine
cloud infrastructure, connection, data analytics and application services all in one 34.
The AII’s “Industrial Internet Platforms White Paper” ranks over 50 platforms as having
“regional and industry influence” 35. Our research, based on white papers, information from
industry alliances and company websites identified 201 industrial internet platforms (工业
互联网平台) of various sizes, maturity and industry focus.
Using platform providers’ headquarters as a proxy we concluded these platforms are con-
centrated in China’s economic powerhouses: the Pearl River Delta, the Yangtze River Delta
around Jiangsu and Shanghai, and the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei corridor (see exhibit 5).
In 2018, the MIIT, following the general guidelines announced by the State Council a year
earlier, announced plans to compile a list of 10 cross-sectoral platforms by 2020 36. Prelimi-
nary lists were released in 2017 and 2018, naming about 25 – 30 companies. In August 2019,
a list of 10 platforms followed 37. Little is known about the benefits, beyond the prestige of
being a national champion.
The PRC still lacks
large industry
players that can
integrate multiple
control resources,
according to Chinese
experts’ assessments

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
| 26MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Whatever support they receive from the government, digital platforms on the list are clear
first movers (see case studies). Consumer electronics and home appliances giant Haier is
seizing the commanding heights of the digital platform economy globally with its mass
customization platform COSMOPlat. Haier is already setting international standards in this
realm.
Construction machinery maker XCMG has developed the XREA platform, which focuses
on equipment management and optimization and already has links to 20 countries and 63
industries. These include construction machinery, renewable energy, military, fiber-optic
cables and components manufacturing.
In addition to these manufacturing giants, China’s ICT firms make up the other driving
force behind the creation of cross-sectoral platforms. Cloud computing, AI and the IoT of -
fer new opportunities for telecom equipment makers. For instance, Huawei has developed
FusionPlant to serve traditional industries in the domestic market, providing them with the
full spectrum of platform services. Huawei also operates the internationally-facing Ocean
Connect, a narrowband IoT platform that manages the interconnection of devices and sup -
ports developer APPs for smart home, cars, cities and factories.
Companies specializing in industrial software solutions and information technology ser -
vices are also well-positioned to set up digital platforms. Yonyou, Irootech, BONC and In-
spur have all made it to the MIIT’s hall of fame. Irootech’s Rootcloud IIoT platform (found -
ed in 2016 as a unit of construction machinery giant Sanyi) has already networked over
500,000 industrial devices and is eyeing the European market 38. In June, it closed a Series
B funding round of CNY 500 million (see case studies).
Number of platform providers:
 1-5
 5-10
 10-20
 20-30
 > 30
Yangtze River Delta
Jingjinji (Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei)
Metropolitan Region
Pearl River Delta
© MERICS
Source: MERICS
Landscape of industrial platforms
Geographical distribution of China’s industrial internet platform providers
Exhibit 5

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
| 27MERICS REPORT | June 2020
The ecosystem extends well beyond MIIT-designated companies. A host of startups provide
platform solution services to specific industrial sectors, e.g. You Ye, CyberInsight, Neu -
cloud and Beijing Kunlun. Automation-focused companies such as Hualong Xunda, Zhe-
jiang SUPCON, and MJ Intelligent System have amassed know-how in providing industry
4.0 solutions.
The involvement of small companies can also be seen in MIIT’s November 2019 list of new
use cases (工业互联网平台创新应用案例). The first category includes already-mentioned
cross-sectoral platforms. Two new categories analyze a) 14 large enterprise use cases and
b) 11 small enterprise use cases, encompassing multi-dimensional monitoring and manage-
ment of wind power equipment’s health, optimization of decision-making related to ener -
gy storage in new energy power stations, and AI-based predictive maintenance of rotating
equipment.
4.2 PRIVATE INTERNET GIANTS SHIFT FROM CONSUMER TO INDUSTRIAL PLATFORMS
Chinese internet giants venturing into the B2B space are a major push factor in the creation
of industrial internet platforms. In the consumer internet industry, companies like Baidu,
Alibaba and Tencent have established China’s comparative advantage in the B2C and C2C
domains of the digital platform economy. Faced with slowing growth in online users 39 and
the government’s call for a digitalization (数字化) and smartification (智能化) of manu -
facturing, these companies are harnessing new opportunities in the Industrial Internet of
Things (IIoT).
Industrial internet platforms enable internet companies to leverage the availability of data
from a massive pool of Internet users. A core feature of Industry 4.0 is the use of consum-
er behavior data to optimize design and production. At the World Artificial Intelligence
Conference in 2018, Tencent CEO Ma Huateng explained his company’s desire to parley its
strength in consumer internet (Tencent unit WeChat has over one billion monthly active
users) into the smart retail and smart manufacturing fields 40.
Tencent’s organizational restructuring has created a new cloud and smart industry busi-
ness group. Likewise, Alibaba’s B2C online marketplace Tmall has opened an innovation
center that helps sellers customize their products via access to Alibaba’s technologies and
a data pool of 600 million online users 41.
The strength of China’s internet giants in certain applications of cutting-edge technology,
e.g. in autonomous driving or industrial AI, may favor them in the new phase of the digital
platform economy:
 Baidu’s Apollo, the world’s first open source autonomous vehicle technology platform,
has over 390,000 lines of code,12,000 Github developers, and 130 corporate partners,
including major German carmakers 42.
 Open AI platform Baidu Brain puts its top-notch AI capabilities to use in several indus-
tries: In manufacturing, its image recognition technology is used to detect material defects.
On the demand side, the vast numbers of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in China’s
highly fragmented manufacturing sector are a major pull factor drawing internet firms to
the industrial internet. These SMEs often rely on third party-provided resource-matching or
general enabling platforms to go digital.
A host of startups
provide platform
solution services
to specific industrial
sectors

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
| 28MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 AliCloud, the cloud computing arm of Alibaba, developed ET Industrial Brain, an
industrial PaaS platform which uses AI algorithms, machine learning and data analyt -
ics to support intelligent manufacturing – from smart supply chain management and
R&D to smart production and marketing – across a range of industries, from renewable
energy to heavy industry.
 Based on ET Brain as a foundational technology and “1+N” as a concept, Alibaba devel -
oped the cross-sectoral SupET platform; it allows companies in virtually all industries
(“N”) to participate in its ecosystem and launch industrial APPs 43. SupET is a co-op -
eration between Alibaba, SUPCON (a leading provider of automation and information
technology) and the provincial R&D center Zhejiang Lab.
Investments and international partnerships are integral to the strategy of the BAT three (as
Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent are known) for conquering the industrial internet. Last year,
the three were among the strategic investors in Foxconn industrial internet’s record IPO on
Shanghai Stock Exchange: It raised CNY 27 billion, becoming the most valuable China-list -
ed tech company44. AliCloud secured a milestone deal with Siemens for bringing “Industrie
4.0” solutions to China and promoting the IIoT, thereby making Siemens’ Mindsphere avail-
able in the Mainland 45.
Internet companies can utilize their command of platform business models and the huge
amount of consumer data collected to create digital platforms that automate and transform up-
stream industrial processes. However, successful value-creation will depend on China’s overall
progress towards digital and intelligent manufacturing, particularly in traditional industries.
4.3 THE GOVERNMENT INCENTIVIZES SOES TO SET UP PLATFORMS TO BOOST
EFFICIENCY
China’s government recognizes the huge potential of industrial internet platforms to spur
innovation and productivity in the state sector, which fits the imperatives of high-quality
growth. SOEs play a critical role in China’s economy, though they remain significantly more
leveraged and less efficient than private firms 46. For industrial SOEs, industrial internet and
platform business models can act as catalysts of innovation and upgrading. A 2016 survey
revealed that only 44 percent of Chinese SOEs felt prepared for Industry 4.0, compared to
71 percent companies in the United States and 68 percent in Germany 47.
In June 2019, the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SA -
SAC) unveiled the Industrial Internet Convergence Platform for Centrally Administered
State-owned Enterprises (中央企业工业互联网融通平台) 48. The platform exists to promote
resource sharing and overall industrial upgrading. Its construction began in 2018; it was
carried out by 289 SOEs, with China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation (CASIC)
as the lead developer.
A small group of China’s largest conglomerates have already gained a foothold in the dig -
ital platform economy. A case in point is CASIC, a Fortune 500, hi-tech SOE which is the
main contractor to China’s space program and develops and manufactures missiles and
aerospace equipment. CASIC’s cloud computing subsidiary, CASICloud, started building
China’s first industrial internet platform as early as 2016. The platform focuses on match-
making and resource sharing through cloud manufacturing, and targets SMEs in traditional
industries. It had 1.6 million users registered as of 2018, with a total transaction value ex -
ceeding CNY 400 billion, according to the company (see case studies) 49.
Internet companies
can utilize their
command of platform
business models and
the huge amount
of consumer data
collected

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
| 29MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Other state-owned giants followed suit, setting up dedicated information technology sub -
sidiaries to build industrial internet platforms.
 China State Shipbuilding Corporation (CSSC) uses a cloud platform to optimize
collaborative R&D and manufacturing along its supply chain, which guarantees timelier
equipment delivery and higher production efficiency.
 Steel-making giant Baosteel (a partner since 2015 in the “Baosteel & Siemens Go to
Industry 4.0 project”) applies platform-based solutions such as remote-control systems
for on-demand production to monitor output through data visualization and apply data
modeling to improve decision-making.
 With the help of Huawei, Alibaba, the MIIT and several research institutes, Petro -
chemical Yingke (Sinopec Group) launched the ProMACE industrial cloud platform to
support digital transformation in China’s petrochemical industry.
 Other noteworthy platform experiments are underway in power generation
(Huaneng, State Grid) and automotive (FAW Group, BAIC Group).
The party-state actively supports these enterprise-led experiments by allocating finan-
cial resources and sponsoring pilot projects. For instance, in 2018, the MIIT selected some
demonstration enterprises – including two of those mentioned above – to spur digital in-
dustrial platform development in the process industry, as part of efforts to build up to five
national-level platforms 50. Beijing also sees the platform economy as a potential growth
engine for commodity markets 51.
There is still a long way to go before these efforts translate into a smartification of produc -
tion in the state sector at large. A few technologically advanced SOEs appear to be front -
runners in the industrial platform economy. However, leapfrogging from basic automation,
computer numerical control (CNC) and software-based production to the IIoT is not an easy
task. Many SOEs are burdened by overcapacity, debt and inefficiency and therefore less
likely to adopt cutting-edge technologies. Meanwhile, many of the existing platform exper -
iments would not be possible without technology and know-how from the private sector.
Competition in the global platform economy is slowly heating up. Until now, only a few
Chinese industrial platforms – such as Haier’s COSMOPlat – have become influential over -
seas. However, Beijing has stated its intention to promote the industrial internet as part of
the Belt and Road initiative (BRI). The focus seems to be digitalization and smart control
of transport, energy and logistics projects operated by Chinese companies in BRI markets
through digital platforms. There is also an emphasis on matchmaking and international
cooperation on regulations and standardization 52.
Until now, only a
few Chinese indus-
trial platforms have
become influential
overseas

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
| 30MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Despite the government’s grand top-level strategies and the rise of national champions,
China’s own analysts openly debate the weaknesses in the current level of development.
The shortcomings discussed in Chinese language reports 53 are consistent with the findings
of our own MERICS research.
Three key weaknesses are fundamentally interlinked:

1) Manufacturing industry has a low level of digitalization overall. This is the driver for
China’s “platformization” effort, as the CCP hopes to leapfrog beyond the manufacturing
industries of advanced industrial economies by levering digital technologies.
2) Platforms are highly dependent on key foreign components like industrial software –
a general structural problem for China and a key opportunity for foreign companies.
3) The low level of demand and usability for the more sophisticated solutions of digital
industrial platforms. When the quality of machinery and equipment is not high, it does
not create much added value to connect them with sensors and integrate data into an
overall fragmented semi-digital factory. Many companies will not rush to do this.
5.1 THE OVERALL LEVEL OF DIGITALIZATION IN CHINA’S MANUFACTURING
REMAINS LOW
The extent of digitalization and networking within manufacturing governs the level of in-
tegration and use of industrial internet platforms. The PRC has become a global leader in
sectors like e-commerce or fintech, yet it has the lowest overall level of digitalization in
manufacturing compared to any area of the economy.
The International Data Corporation (IDC), China’s leading global provider of market intel -
ligence for the ICT sector, has analyzed seven dimensions of digitalization. It found severe
shortcomings in the manufacturing sector, leading to “data islands” within companies, and
between upstream and downstream ends of the industrial chain. The IDC’s seven areas are:

1) application of digital technology,
2) integration of internal corporate decision-making,
3) integration of service procedures,
4) product services,
5) customer experience,
6) business models,
7) labor resource management.
China’s potential for economies of scale, digital industrial platforms that integrate multiple
factory sites and companies have strong growth potential. However, looking at the optimi-
zation of production processes along corporate supply chains, it can be seen that uneven
digital connectivity of production equipment across industries hinders deployment of larg -
er-scale platforms, especially cross-sectoral ones.
China has the
lowest overall level
of digitalization in
manufacturing
5. China lacks core capabilities to develop industrial
digital platforms unaided

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
| 31MERICS REPORT | June 2020
In the raw materials and ICT sectors, there is relatively high production device connectivity
(46.8 and 44.2 percent). Scores are low for the equipment in both the machinery (31.3 per -
cent) and traffic/mobility (39.1 percent) sector. The consumer product sector is also below
the average of 40.3 percent, with the lowest score in light industry (34.1 percent) 54.
Enabling conditions like centralized data management to set up and use such a platform
efficiently are also lacking, even when the scope of a platform is limited to a single factory
or company. For example, in 2018, only 14.6 percent of manufacturing companies assessed
by the National Development and Research Center for Industrial Information Security col -
lected and managed all information from their business units centrally. The figure was 13.7
percent for those centralizing information flow from external business units 55.
5.2 CHINA LACKS CORE COMPONENTS AND HUMAN RESOURCES TO DEVELOP
DIGITAL PLATFORMS
Looking more deeply at the specific components required to build industrial platforms,
China lacks indigenous providers at nearly every layer of the industrial internet platform
architecture – the edge, IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS layers. This lack of domestic supply is con-
stantly referred as a key problem by Chinese research reports 56.
 Data collection is the essential function of the edge layer – the bottom layer – of industrial
internet platforms. China still lacks capable domestic equipment and solution providers.
 China’s share of the global sensor market was around 10 percent in 2018. The PRC has
to import almost 80 percent of high-end sensors and up to 90 percent of chips to meet
domestic demand 57.
 Chinese companies also struggle to connect devices. In 2019, 95 percent of high-end
programmable logic controllers (PLC) and common industrial protocols were imported,
according to a CCID report assessing prospects for the industrial internet platform 58. De-
vices from different foreign companies are often not interoperable, posing problems for
collecting data and taking equipment to the cloud.
 In the Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) layer, over 90 percent of high-end industrial software
is foreign 59. Although some Chinese companies have overtaken foreign competitors in
developing information management software (Yongyou over SAP) and plug-in software
(Huawei over Siemens), yet foreign companies lead in the R&D and design production
software fields, according to the 2019 White Paper on China Industrial Software Devel -
opment60. The Chinese market for SaaS is still dominated by foreign companies such as
Germany’s SAP or US-based Microsoft and Salesforce 61.
China also lacks the talent pool to build enabling conditions for digital industrial plat -
forms, according to official media and research reports. The transformation to industry
from digital technologies will bring far-reaching changes to the labor landscape. The need
for new technical skills will grow, with data analytics being the most indispensable. China
is estimated to need 1.8 million data analysts in the next three to five years, but currently
has only about 300,000 62.
The China Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team, a research unit
of MIIT, has pointed out that the lack of multi-disciplinary skilled workers has become a
significant factor for the bottleneck of the further development of the industrial internet 63.
China lacks indige-
nous providers at
nearly every layer
of the industrial
internet platform
architecture

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
| 32MERICS REPORT | June 2020
5.3 CHINA’S INDUSTRIAL PLATFORMS ARE NOT USED FOR HIGH VALUE-CREATION
The majority of the use-cases of Chinese industrial digital platforms are still focused on
helping enterprises to realize digitalization, getting various devices connected and their
data into a cloud.
China’s companies, especially SMEs, still struggle to recognize a potential new source of
income in the added value from data-based additional solutions like customization of prod -
uct design or predictive maintenance, according to sector reports. Chinese media reports
have coined the phrase “not daring to use it, not being able to use it, can’t be bothered to
use it” (不敢用 不会用 用不起) to describe a common view among SMEs.
The AII has concluded that solutions offered by Chinese providers focus more on produc -
tion monitoring and optimization, whereas foreign platforms have a stronger emphasis on
predicative maintenance and after-sales services, using platforms to generate new sources
of income64.
Among solutions closer to existing production processes, the level of big data usage is be-
low 35 percent, according to the AII’s latest report to the National Committee of Technology
and Standardization Managing the Integration of Informatization and Industrialization.
The AII research showed that the lowest level of big data analysis is found in solutions
moving up from the existing business model of manufacturing companies, namely environ-
mental risk assessment (EIAs) and accident analysis and prevention 65.
Especially SMEs still
struggle to recog-
nize a potential new
source of income
in the added value
from data-based
additional solutions

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
| 33MERICS REPORT | June 2020
6. China’s policy evolution targets domestic weaknesses
China’s government recognizes current domestic weaknesses in developing industrial plat -
forms and has started to follow through with centrally devised blueprints that set forth
specific implementation mechanisms to push the digital platform economy deeper into the
manufacturing sector.
Key implementation mechanisms are:
 Region-specific, sub-national pilot projects, often emphasizing public-private partner -
ships between local governments, state-owned companies and private firms,
 Introduction and experimentation with more market-driven funding mechanisms, in-
cluding private equity investment, to reduce dominance of state subsidies,
 Setting up of a comprehensive industrial internet standardization system by 2020.
6.1 REGION-SPECIFIC PLATFORM EXPERIMENTS AND GOVERNMENT-CORPORATE
PARTNERSHIPS DRIVE IMPLEMENTATION
Provincial, municipal and city governments 66 started to issue their own industrial platform
implementation plans in 2019. One year before, the 2018 “Guidelines on the Construction
and Development of Industrial Internet Platforms” (工业互联网平台建设及推广指南) 67 had
mandated demonstration work and financial incentives. These are now being rolled out to
create an enabling environment for platform development. Local governments are gearing
up to advance Beijing’s platformization agenda, often through strategic partnerships with
state-owned and private companies.
Likewise, the “Guiding Opinions on promoting a standardized and healthy development of
the platform economy (国务院办公厅关于促进平台经济 规范健康发展的指导意见), released
by the State Council in August 2019, call for improved data sharing mechanisms between
platforms and the government. The "Internet+regulation" system and the "National System
for Disclosure of Corporate Credit Information" (国家企业信用信息公示系统), among oth-
ers, will be used for this purpose 68. This indicates that the digital platform economy is to be
linked with the state-controlled social credit rating system.
Sub-national governments have set specific targets for the number of companies “to go
cloud” (上云). The most ambitious provinces are not located in the comparatively well-de-
veloped coastal region of China, but notably further inland (e.g. Henan, Hubei, Chongq-
ing and Guizhou) 69. The regional push for cloud-connected companies seems to align with
current efforts to build large data centers in Guizhou province and parts of Sichuan 70. In
contrast, China’s 5G development, a key enabler of the digital industrial platforms, centers
on big cities in coastal areas (see exhibit 6).
In local implementation, a key trend is the establishment of region-specific platforms.
Henan, Guangdong and Chongqing, mirror the national approach by seeking to set up one
or two globally competitive platforms, two or three cross-sectoral platforms and up to 20
sector-specific platforms 71.
Provincial, municipal
and city govern-
ments started to
issue their own
industrial platform
implementation
plans in 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
| 34MERICS REPORT | June 2020
One of the key platform development tasks assigned by the government was to build re-
gion-specific platforms. Four projects of this kind were selected by the MIIT as national
focus projects to receive further funding and support:

 Guizhou Industrial Cloud (Guiyang, Guizhou Province, by CASIC),
 Unicloud Regional Industrial Internet Platform (Shanghai, by Unigroup Cloud Engine),
 Industrial Internet Platform of Beijing Automotive Industry Gathering Area
(Beijing, by BAIC Group),
 Industrial Internet Platform of Sichuan Electronic Information Industry Gathering Area
(Chengdu, by Sichuan Changhong Electric) 72.
Provincial and municipal governments are developing implementation plans to support
platform development, platform application demonstrations, and industrial enterprises’
“go-cloud” efforts.
In tandem, companies are responding to central and local government plans for digital
platform creation by tailoring their platformization strategies to specific regions and cities,
following the “regional platform + demonstration base” (区域平台+ 示范基地) model73.
3.3
5.2
7.2
10
6
4.6
 China Mobile
 China Unicom
 China Telecom
Infrastructure build-up to push digital industrial platform development
Provincial “going-cloud” ambitions and China’s biggest data centers
© MERICS
Source: MERICS
Number of companies to “go-cloud“:
 1,000 2,000 10,000 20,000 30,000 400,000
Haikou
Shenzen
Chongqing Hangzhou
Chengdu
Zhengzhou
Wuhan
Lanzhou Xiong‘an
Qingdao
Tianjin
Beijing
Shenyang
Suzhou
Ningbo
Shanghai
Guiyang
Guangzhou
Data center
(in 10,000 cabinets):
0.0
5G rollout between 2019 and 2020 by China‘s „Big Three“
Exhibit 6

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
| 35MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 Haier’s COSMOPlat pursues a nation-wide strategy and is already present in
20 countries,
 XCMG’s Xrea serves 330 cities and localities within China in addition to 10 markets
along the BRI,
 AliCloud chose to link its cross-sectoral SupET platform to regional industries by creat -
ing special sub-platforms (Feilong in Guangdong and Feixiang in Chongqing),
 SupET is also the core foundation of Zhejiang Province’s “1 + N” industrial internet
platform system strategy, which envisions the cultivation of one cross-domain industri-
al platform as well as various specific platforms,
 CASICloud is behind Guizhou’s Industrial Cloud, an integrated service platform
partly aimed at facilitating the local government’s industrial management and control
work.
Government-corporate partnerships drive many of these experiments. In the Yangtze River
Delta area (YRD), local authorities and CAICT work together with leading industrial internet
platform companies (XCMG, Isesol, AliCloud, Baosight, Helishi) to nurture regional plat -
form clusters. The end goal is to have four to five cross-industry and cross-domain platforms
by 2020, to boost the regional “networked and intelligent transformation of enterprises” 74.
China also leverages public-private collaboration in IIoT adoption, promoting innovation
test beds that are scaled up if successful. One example is the manufacturing quality man-
agement (MQM) test bed, a collaboration between Huawei, Haier, China Academy of Infor -
mation and Communications Technology (CAICT) and China Telecom. It seeks to improve
product quality standards and reduce defect rates based on the IIC’s Industrial Internet
Reference Architecture (IIRA) 75.
Another batch of pilot demonstration projects places special emphasis on integrated devel -
opment of manufacturing and the internet. Two sub-projects focus on sector-specific plat -
form pilots. They are spread remarkably widely, from Shandong on the east coast to Gansu
province in the west and Yunnan province in the south-west. With a few exceptions, like
Lenovo or Haier, the participating companies are not well-known platform providers. There
is no specific sectoral focus. The list of 36 platform pilots (out of 137 projects related to the
overall functioning of cyber-physical systems (CPS) or specific tasks like data collection)
runs the gamut of industries from food, to raw materials, textiles or steel 76.
6.2 BEIJING SEEKS TO SHIFT FINANCIAL SUPPORT FROM SUBSIDIES TO MORE
MARKET-DRIVEN MODES
The development of all China's industrial internet platforms has been mainly based on gov -
ernment subsidies, combined with corporate internal resources. Beijing is now aiming for
more market-driven financing, hoping to inspire mixed public-private projects as well as
equity financing.
On a continuum of outright state support to a stronger integration of market-driven mech-
anisms, the spectrum of funding mechanisms includes the following approaches (see ex -
hibit 7).
China leverages
public-private
collaboration in
IIoT adoption

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
| 36MERICS REPORT | June 2020
6.3 CHINA PUSHES FOR DEFINITION OF TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR THE
INDUSTRIAL INTERNET
Standards regulate everything, from the way machines communicate with each other and
data is safely shared among participants in a platform ecosystem, to the architecture of dig -
ital platforms and technical requirements for third-party developers who build industrial
apps on top.
A 2016 Deloitte survey of Chinese manufacturers identified three major challenges for do -
mestic companies in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Two of them stemmed from
insufficient regulatory frameworks, namely lack of interoperability standards and unclear
rules on data ownership and security 77.
China’s regulators are keenly aware that these challenges remain today. First, as more com-
panies start deploying platforms, China’s government seeks to push the definition of more
robust technical standards, from platform reference architecture down to interoperabili-
ty between platforms 78. However, according to an AII assessment, platform standardiza-
© MERICS
China’s wants to move towards market-driven funding mechanisms
Existing sources of funding for digital industrial platforms
Source: MERICS
Type of funding Example
Regional cash subsidies (兑现补贴券) About CNY 20,000 per company going cloud
National government procurement by the Minis-
try of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT)
More than CNY 3 billion for the strategic devel-
opment of industrial internet layers and com-
ponents such as identification resolution; cloud
and edge, platforms standardization, security
features
Subsidies for public tenders by provincial
governments
Up to 20 – 30 percent of the applied funding,
with a maximum sum of CNY 2 – 5 million
Partnerships between state-owned enterprises
(SOEs) and local government funds
China Electronics Corporation plus Changsha City
invested CNY 2 billion to set up China Electrics
Industrial Internet Co.
Corporate funding: big companies develop and
run platforms on their own expense, often by
setting-up their own designated platform com-
panies
China State Shipbuilding Corporation invested
CNY 50 million to set up the China Shibuilding
Industrial Internet Company
Attracting venture capital investment Rootcloud got CNY 500 million (B round)
Going public: initial public offerings (IPOs) of
Chinese platforms have not yet happened in the
industrial realm, but have proven very successful
with B2C platforms
Foxconn Industrial Internet Co Ltd IPO in
Shanghai in May 2018
StateMarket
Exhibit 7

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
| 37MERICS REPORT | June 2020
tion work in China is still at an early stage, especially as regards the interconnection of
platforms with equipment and intelligent products. Standards on data sharing and mutual
recognition are still lacking, as are regulations on platform operations, resources and ser -
vices79.
China aims to build a basic industrial internet standardization system by 2020 that includes
digital platforms. By 2025, more than 100 standards are due to be established, and a “uni-
fied, comprehensive and open industrial internet standardization system” is to be in place80.
In March 2019, MIIT and SAC jointly issued the “Guidelines for the Construction of an Inte-
grated Industrial Internet Standardization System” (工业互联网综合标准化体系建设指南).
Notably, it appears that regulators took up suggestions made by AII when the guidelines
were released for public comment 81. The document names three crucial parts of the indus -
trial internet:
 internet (network and connection, ID resolutions, edge computing),
 platforms (platforms and data, industrial APPs, edge),
 security.
Taken together, the three parts enable the construction of a new type of network infra-
structure with the full interconnection of people, objects and machines. At least on paper,
Beijing emphasizes mutually beneficial international collaboration on industrial internet
standardization. But despite China’s vision for its standardization framework being highly
ambitious, the process is still in its infancy and only a few standards have been published
so far.
The second challenge is to establish clear standards for data ownership and security. Chi-
na’s regulators are trying to eradicate “data islands” and the lack of basic infrastructure
© MERICS
Most of China’s 324 Industrial Internet Standards are still awaiting formulation
Progress of the Industrial Internet Standard System (工业互联网标准体系)
Source: Industrial Internet System Framework released by MIIT and SAC, January 2019
 Already published Under formulation Awaiting formulation
13.9 23.1 63.0
Total (in percentage)
5827157577
15 7
188
General system
(Online connectivity, ID resolution, edge computing, platforms & big data,
industrial apps, security)
239
Definitions and
requirements
45
Industry
specific
implementa-
tion 40
Exhibit 8

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
| 38MERICS REPORT | June 2020
supporting the acquisition, aggregation, classification and large-scale sharing of industrial
big data 82. The smooth flow of data between industrial enterprises and companies in the
ICT and data analytics sectors is a precondition for the scalability and adoption of digital
platforms, without which the convergence of information technology and manufacturing
cannot be realized. Chinese cloud and IIoT platform providers often cite the scarcity of
data, as many companies (especially SMEs) often have incomplete information systems or
simply stick to their old systems 83.
MIIT’s newly released draft Guidelines for the Development of Industrial Big Data (工业
大数据发展指导意见(征求意见稿) aim to address these problems. They call for the estab -
lishment by 2025 of “the industrial big data resource system, integration system, industrial
system and governance system”. Specific targets include setting up a National Industrial
Internet Big Data Center to serve as a nation-wide resource platform and cultivating three
to five internationally recognized industrial big data solution providers 84.
Openness and collaboration are extremely important for designing scalable platform busi-
ness models, since network effects are greater as more actors interact in a platform eco -
system. Removing bottlenecks to (big) data trading and sharing can considerably boost
China’s capabilities in the B2B platform economy.
At the same time, security is an increasingly pressing concern for China as it looks to pro -
mote digital platform adoption in the manufacturing sector. The interconnection of mil -
lions of machines and devices magnifies potential vulnerabilities, fueling demand for ro -
bust regulatory frameworks to protect information security. According to data from China
Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team, security loopholes exist in
over 90 percent of the more than 3,000 industrial control systems already connected to the
internet85. A strong security focus was already visible in the MIIT’s assigned pilot demon-
stration work for 2018, where 29 out of 93 sponsored projects focused on cyber and data
security, including platform security.
In August 2019, MIIT together with nine other government agencies issued the “Guiding
Opinions on Strengthening the Industrial Internet Security Work” (加强工业互联网安全工
作的指导意见). The document called for the establishment of a “complete and reliable in-
dustrial internet security system by 2025”, with an initial system ready by 2020 86. Among
the main tasks, the government will produce a classification system for grading enterprises,
formulate at least 20 cyber-security standards by 2020, promote pilot demonstration work
in priority sectors (automotive, electronic information, aerospace, energy) and nurture a
number of competitive industrial internet security companies.
In addition to dealing with internal structural challenges, China’s government seeks a
greater say for Chinese firms in international standard-setting bodies. China tries to actively
shape international standards for digital technologies underpinning industrial platforms,
such as the IoT. It uses a sophisticated, comprehensive and multi-pronged strategy com-
bining investment, well-trained human resources and targeted international partnerships,
first and foremost with Germany’s Industry 4.0. In the view of the German experts inter -
viewed for this study, China definitely considers Germany to be an important partner in the
standardization of the industrial Internet and intelligent manufacturing, including within
the IEC and ISO organizations.
Several IoT-specific plans, such as the “Special Project Action Plan for Standards Formu -
lation” (标准制定专项行动计划) emphasize China’s goal of gaining leadership positions in
Security is an in-
creasingly pressing
concern for China as
it looks to promote
digital platform
adoption in the
manufacturing
sector

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
| 39MERICS REPORT | June 2020
international bodies, such as ISO/IEC and ITU) 87. The strategy has already yielded results.
In July 2018 China’s IoT Reference Architecture proposal (known as ISO/IEC 30141) passed
the final draft international standard voting process of the joint ISO/IEC body 88. Intense
lobbying within standardization bodies is combined with the promotion of Chinese stan-
dards through R&D, testing and commercialization of digital infrastructure built by Chinese
companies at home and in foreign markets. Notable examples include 5G network solutions
and Narrowband (NB) IoT.
Chinese companies are scoring relatively well in terms of Industry 4.0 patents. According
to study by Fraunhofer, as early as in 2015 China had already overtaken the US and Germa-
ny in patents for basic Industry 4.0 technologies. China was mostly innovative in wireless
sensor networks, embedded systems, low-cost robots and big data. The picture was more
ambiguous in industrial information security, smart sensors, smart robotics, and Industry
4.0 applications 89.
Currently, only a handful of Chinese platforms stand out in international standardization.
Haier’s COSMOPlat is well-positioned to set mass customization standards globally, having
seen its proposal adopted by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).
The company has also taken a leading role within ISO’s first mass customization standard
project. Its presence in international bodies has active government backing: SAC (jointly
with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)) launched a training base
in Haier’s home city Qingdao to advance the enterprises’ role in standardizing intelligent
manufacturing 90. Haier also heads SAC’s manufacturing model standard working group
(SAC/TC573/WG10), established as part of the government’s “China Standards 2035” (中国
标准2035) research effort to standardize cutting-edge technologies like AI, cloud comput -
ing, IoT and big data and eventually export Chinese standards 91.
Chinese companies
are scoring relatively
well in terms of
Industry 4.0 patents

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
| 40MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Many of the digital platforms analyzed in this study benefited from strategic partnerships
with foreign companies and research institutes at various stages of their development. For
China, Germany is a key partner in developing an Industry 4.0 of its own.
The analysis of China’s digital platform economy and of existing mechanisms for foreign
participation shows that international collaboration is geared towards accessing the com-
petences and know-how China needs as it catches up in smart manufacturing. China’s rel -
ative weaknesses in mastering core components of the IoT technology, such as SaaS and
industrial applications, has created opportunities for German and other foreign companies.
Many collaborations have been established: For instance, Siemens obtained a license to
operate its MindSphere digital platform in China using the infrastructure of Alibaba Cloud.
Likewise, Bosch signed an agreement with Huawei to run its IoT suite on Huawei Cloud 92.
From our observation, however, it appears that foreign players’ ability to influence regula-
tory developments is highly limited. The regulatory environment largely favors indigenous
solutions in the digital platform economy. Cybersecurity and data regulations will likely
constitute the main challenge for foreign platform companies in doing business with China
in the coming years.
7 .1 FOREIGN COMPANIES’ PARTICIPATION AND THEIR INFLUENCE ON REGULATION
IS LIMITED
China’s approach to international cooperation in the digital platform economy puts domes -
tic industrial upgrading first. The government regards foreign collaboration primarily as
a means to acquire know-how in Industry 4.0, to share best practices and jointly work on
testbeds and standardization. This is reflected in AII’s partnership with the IIC, “Plattform
Industrie 4.0”, and international bodies such as the International Telecommunications
Union (ITU).
Cooperation with other countries is not mentioned once in the detailed work plan of China’s
Industrial Internet Special Working Group for 2019. However, foreign states do come up in
the context of two self-serving measures: they send Chinese experts abroad for training and
“on the premise of maintaining national information and data security, (…) actively serve
eligible industrial internet companies to directly raise funds in overseas capital markets” 93.
German companies and institutions play an important role in facilitating Chinese com-
panies’ platformization efforts. Joint research and development projects have become the
main form of cooperation between Germany and China.
The R&D institute behind Haier’s COSMOPlat cultivated strong links with several German
research institutes from the start. Germany’s Siemens supported the development of CASI-
Cloud’s INDICS cloud platform with a strong partnership from the early stages, following
an agreement signed during Chancellor Angela Merkel’s visit to China in 2017.
7. The scope of foreign participation depends on China’s
technological needs
The regulatory
environment largely
favors indigenous
solutions in the
digital platform
economy

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
| 41MERICS REPORT | June 2020
CASICloud is also working with TU Darmstadt and the company Festo Didactic SE within
the research project CaMPuS. The project investigates which competencies employees at
different hierarchical levels in Germany and China need in order to analyze and optimize
production processes with industry 4.0 technologies. The Instrumentation Technology and
Economy Institute (ITEI) also participates on the Chinese side 94.
Notably, CASIC’s advances in industrial internet and cloud manufacturing could bolster
China’s capabilities in developing advanced weapon systems, albeit indirectly 95. CASI-
Cloud is already used by the People's Liberation Army (PLA) for managing weapons and
equipment procurement information 96, as well as by CASIC itself for outsourcing defense
and commercial contracts and managing its supply chain. China’s defense industry clearly
sees platform business models as an important driver of industrial modernization.
Chinese counterparts generally describe their cooperation with German actors in utilitar -
ian ways: For instance, XCMG, a state-owned heavy machinery manufacturing company,
ranking 5th in the world's construction machinery industry, highly values its partnership
with SAP: “With the help of SAP’s successful experience in Industry 4.0 high-tech strategy
project, we wish to boost XCMG's globalization under the 'Made in China 2025' initiative and
continue to build up our sustainable competitiveness in the global market 97.”
The partnership agreement between SAP and XCMG was signed in 2015 to support the in-
telligent manufacturing and management of XCMG products in global markets, shortly af -
ter the Suzhou-based company had started working on its industrial IoT platform XREA.
The construction machinery company has since opened a wholly owned subsidiary, XCMG
Europe, in Krefeld, Germany, to tap into the industrial base, the essential foundation of
every digital industrial platform. XCMG’s research center wants to optimize and develop
new transmission systems for its machinery. To achieve this, Jiangsu-based XCMG recruits
systematically and in large numbers, judging from job advertisements on its website 98.
Chinese platform providers have also attracted German manufacturers as customers (sup -
ply-side end users), starting with carmakers, the industry that is most dependent on the
Chinese market. Digital platforms for autonomous driving, such as Baidu’s Apollo, Hua-
wei’s OceanConnect Connected Vehicle Solution, and QiMing’s Venus Cloud attract major
German carmakers, from Volkswagen to BMW and Daimler.
For German platform providers, opportunities to offer services to Chinese customers seem
much more limited. Siemens, Bosch and SAP all signed agreements with Chinese cloud
providers to be able to operate their services in the PRC. Those agreements seem to be
motivated by China’s own technological needs, specifically in the realm of SaaS and PaaS,
rather than by any growing openness in China’s digital platform ecosystems. German and
other foreign companies are more likely to participate as suppliers of components for the
IoT stack, or as providers of complementary services.
Furthermore, foreign companies have little say over regulatory developments that affect dig-
ital platform ecosystems within China. For instance, despite the 2016 admission of foreign
companies to the National Information Security Standardization Technical Committee (全国
信息安全标准化技术委员会, or TC260), the body that writes national information security
and data protection standards, their influence is limited. Foreign industry representatives
have shared that foreign members are only be allowed to join TC260 if they do not pose
real obstacles to the overall agenda. To mitigate conflict arising from comments by foreign
Chinese platform
providers have also
attracted German
manufacturers as
customers

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
| 42MERICS REPORT | June 2020
companies, TC260 has moved the issue of standards to one of the working groups without
foreign participation 99. Interaction with Chinese companies on association and enterprise
standards (which in China’s standardization system are distinct from government-issued
standards) is possible within AII, although only a few, highly influential foreign platform
owners sit in its working groups.
7 .2 CYBERSECURITY AND DATA REGULATIONS THREATEN FOREIGN PARTICIPANTS
The goal of creating a Chinese platform economy is not mentioned directly in official Chi-
nese statements. However, the regulatory environment clearly favors indigenous solutions.
Beijing conflates information security with national security and industrial policy objec -
tives – most notably those emphasized by “Made in China 2025” and related policy plans.
The industrial internet can help China realize its ambitions of global tech and manufactur -
ing leadership and reduced dependence on foreign inputs.
The formidable rise of Chinese digital platforms in B2C and C2C domains was as much due
to innovative entrepreneurs as the result of government digital protectionism. The CCP’s
desire to censor and control the internet conveniently shielded platform providers like Ali-
baba from foreign competition in their home market 100. The impact of these market access
restrictions goes well beyond e-commerce.
Cloud computing is a case in point. European businesses have long expressed concerns
about existing limitations on their access to China’s cloud computing market for the IaaS
and PaaS segments 101. While encouraging Chinese companies to go abroad, the PRC gov -
ernment has disadvantaged foreign cloud providers by imposing regulations that require
them to form joint operations and license their technology to a local partner to get into the
market. As a result, Chinese providers dominate the sector, with Alibaba Cloud taking 43
percent of China’s public cloud IaaS market in the first half of 2018 while Amazon’s AWS,
the top performer among foreign players, occupied a mere 6.9 percent 102.
The signs are that the emerging regulatory environment will be especially rigid for foreign
companies as the digital platform economy expands into industrial domains. Information
and network security, data privacy and cross-border data flow regulations are poised to
facilitate Chinese industrial internet platforms in their home market.
The Ministry of Public Security (MPS) released the draft “Cybersecurity Multi-Level Protec -
tion Regulation” (网络安全等级保护条例), in June 2018 for public comment. It was the first
layer of a framework sometimes referred to as Multi-Level Protection Scheme (MLPS 2.0) 103.
The new system emphasizes protection of critical information infrastructure (CII), as high-
lighted in the 2017 Cybersecurity Law, and expands the original scope of MLPS to cover
emerging technologies such as big data, cloud computing, and internet of things (IoT) (arti-
cle 34). Three further draft standards were released in May 2019, in addition to those issued
between 2018 and 2019, and were set to take effect on December 1 st, when the full MLPS 2.0
is due to enter into force 104. The framework also covers industrial control systems.
First introduced in 2007, the MLPS is a framework for protecting information security which
ranks ICT products and services based on the potential consequences of a damage in infor -
mation systems. Industrial platforms seem likely to fall under Level 3 or above, meaning
that national security could be compromised and so require companies to undergo complex
regulatory monitoring, testing and certification processes 105.
The signs are that
the emerging regula-
tory environment in
the digital platform
economy will be
especially rigid for
foreign companies

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
| 43MERICS REPORT | June 2020
China’s regulators appear to have dropped a previous requirement which demanded Chi-
nese intellectual property (IP) be used within Level-3 core IT systems and key hardware
components. However, considerable regulatory uncertainty and lack of transparency sur -
rounds implementation, and foreign companies may be required to disclose sensitive IP
and source codes as part of increasingly demanding cybersecurity review processes 106.
Beijing’s emphasis across several official documents on “secure and controllable” tech-
nology (interpreted as favoring indigenous ICT technology) 107, is set to have a significant
impact on foreign providers in the industrial internet market. It is a frequent theme in dis -
cussions within China’s expert community on the security and safety of industrial control
systems. Many experts argue that these problems can only be solved by developing core
technology that is “indigenous and controllable” (自主可控) 108.
China’s emerging data protection regime creates further potential hurdles for foreign par -
ticipation in the industrial sphere of the digital platform economy. The Cybersecurity Law
(article 37) limits the outbound transfer of vaguely defined “important data” by CII opera-
tors, making it possible only in exceptional circumstances and with regulatory approval 109.
Implementation was suspended after the United States submitted a complaint to the WTO,
but it is far from clear how the relationship between a draft called “Data Security Adminis -
tration Measures” (数据安全管理办法（征求意见稿）), released in May 2019, and an earli-
er, non-binding draft dated 2017 is going to play out.
The new measures do not classify network operators’ business and production data as
“important data”110. However, the 2017 “Guidelines for Data Cross-Border Transfer Security
Assessment” (数据出境安全评估指南) featured a very comprehensive appendix on indus -
try-related important data which, though not constituting “state secrets”, were neverthe-
less considered “closely related to national security, economic development and public
interests”111.
If the PRC government translated these guidelines into tangible regulations, the ability to
access industrial data on Chinese platform systems could be curtailed for foreign partici-
pants. Likewise, if China succeeds in becoming more self-reliant in core components of the
IoT, Beijing could conditionalize the already selective access of foreign companies in the
name of national security.
China’s emerging
data protection
regime creates
further potential
hurdles for foreign
participation

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
| 44MERICS REPORT | June 2020
China’s rapid advance in the realm of digital industrial platforms demands attention from
German political and corporate actors on various levels. Germany – as well as other Euro -
pean and foreign countries – should take a deeper look at the key characteristics of China’s
policy and corporate developments in this vital economic segment. Furthermore, Germany
should not delay mitigating potential threats if it is to also to be capable of exploring arising
opportunities in a fast changing global economic and technological environment:
8. China’s advances in digital industrial platforms:
implications for Germany
1. LEARN FROM CHINA’S STRENGTHS IN THE DIGITAL PLATFORM ECONOMY
A solid understanding of China’s overall innovation capacity requires going beyond
“lighthouse” projects. A realistic assessment of the overall impact of China’s
digital platform economy needs more research on regional specifications and
development stages.
German actors need to have a better understanding of the factors that shape China’s
unique approach to the digital platform economy. They need to get a better under-
standing of the unique evolution of cross-sectoral industrial, regional-focused
platforms and of network effects beyond smart factories.
German actors should realize that China’s investment in crucial infrastructure for In-
dustry 4.0 are decisive for the rapid progress in the sector. The Chinese experience
shows that the ubiquity of data center capacities and 5G connectivity are essen-
tial for the successful development of a digital platform economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
| 45MERICS REPORT | June 2020
2. CONDITION COOPERATION WITH CHINA TO PURSUE GERMAN INTERESTS
China continues to be highly dependent on foreign IIoT stack components and
services. This creates leverage for German actors to demand greater transparency
and access and to put a higher price tag on delivery of components China depends on.
Maintaining a high level of cooperation on Industry 4.0 is in Germany’s interest.
In negotiating a new framework of cooperation Germany needs to ensure that German
industry priorities are given greater consideration. To this end, the German govern-
ment should coordinate its own research activities more closely and create consistent
rules for cooperation with China.
Priority should be given to setting up more joint research projects on digital
industrial platforms on German, and not only on Chinese soil. China’s ambitions
to expand their platforms into other markets should be leveraged to reach this goal.
To maintain a favorable position in IT standard setting, Germany needs to dou -
ble down on standardization research and industry-driven standardization ef -
forts. This would also require investments into human resources to be able to better
shape decisions in international standardization bodies.
3. MITIGATE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH CHINA’S BUILD-UP OF DIGITAL INDUSTRIAL
PLATFORMS
Despite openness for cooperation, China’s drive to achieve self-reliance in every
layer of the industrial internet creates challenges for German partners. Joint re-
search needs to be conditionalized and IP protection needs to be a key priority of
cooperation frameworks.
Cyber security regulations create the biggest risk for foreign partners because of
ambiguity in the regulatory environment and new data-sharing requirements.
Risk assessment needs to take into account arbitrary or tighter application of regula-
tions by Chinese authorities.
The development of the Industrial Internet of Things in China takes place in a
highly politicized environment. Therefore, cooperation with Chinese partners re-
quires a thorough investigation of potential political risks and vulnerabilities.
IIoT platforms can have dual-use purposes. For German actors there can be high
reputational costs if they get entangled in surveillance and defense technology de-
velopment in China.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
| 46MERICS REPORT | June 2020
FOCUS ON MASS-CUSTOMIZATION
Main characteristics
COSMOPlat is a platform catering to a variety of industrial sectors, with a focus on home
appliance manufacturing. It provides seven regional sub-platforms within China, e.g., in
Shanghai, Tianjin, Xi’an and in Shandong and Jiangsu provinces. Its flagship product fo -
cuses on mass customization (pre-tailoring technology to become adaptable to the needs of
each individual user) and utilizes consumer data for improving production processes. The
platform is not open source but follows a collaborative model: third-party developers are
invited to support further development of services.
Users and modes of participation
As of 2019, the platform was provided to 12 industry clusters including ceramics, agricul -
ture, recreational vehicles, electronics, textiles, construction, transportation and chemi-
cals. Geared towards production-intensive sectors, it connects more than 35,000 companies
and 320 million end-users/consumers within an ecosystem providing for mass customiza-
tion112.
Services and modes of value creation
COSMOPlat offers efficiency-enhancing, tailor-made industrial apps and solutions for SaaS,
PaaS, IaaS and the edge layer, meaning pre-defined business-relevant KPIs, cloud services
and AI-supported Big Data analytics, as well as smart devices. The list of partners contrib -
uting knowhow to the platform includes foreign and domestic players like SAP , Bosch Ser -
vice, Ehlebracht AG as well as Alibaba, Huawei, China Telecom and Baosteel 113.
Case Study 1: Haier COSMOplat
FACT SHEET
 Owned by Haier Group
(world’s largest producer of consumer electronics and home appliances)
 Designed in cooperation of Tianjin Research Institute for Advanced Equipment
and German Fraunhofer Logistics Research Institute (BMBF project InFa-CTS)
 Operational since 2015
 Revenue of parent company: CNY 202 billion (2019)
 www.cosmoplat.com

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
| 47MERICS REPORT | June 2020
International outreach
COSMOPlat’s key products are still China-focused. However, it has built a reputation among
specialists worldwide, being named one of “the lighthouses of manufacturing” in a World
Economic Forum/McKinsey report in 2019. It has increased its global presence via its acqui-
sitions of Fisher & Pakel, GE's appliance division; Candy group; and facilities in Indonesia
and the Phillipines. The R&D institute that operates behind COSMOPlat is associated with
German research institutions like the Industry 4.0 Training Base at Aachen University. The
company is beginning to play a crucial role in shaping and defining standards for models
of mass customization and smart manufacturing 114. It participated in the formulation of 29
national and international standards and cooperates with international organizations like
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineering); IEC (International Electrotechni-
cal commission); and ISO (International Standardization Organization).

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
| 48MERICS REPORT | June 2020
FOCUS ON CLOUD EXPERIENCE AND OPEN SOURCE
Main characteristics
While Huawei’s general IoT services are already used by a large number of customers in
transportation, construction and utilities, FusionPlant is an industrial IoT platform cater -
ing to more manufacturing-oriented sectors in China. Huawei has also partnered with pub -
lic players to build regional industrial internet platforms, for instance in Guangdong.
Users and modes of participation
FusionPlant services vertical industries including manufacturing, petrochemicals, chemi-
cals and industrial products. In the electronics sector, FusionPlant supported the strategic
transformation of consumer electronics provider Changhong in IaaS, industrial PaaS, IoT
and other areas. It introduced an IoT architecture to the State Grid Corporation of China.
Huawei has built an open-source operating system, offering tools to help software engi-
neers develop applications that are compatible with servers powered by its Kunpeng chip
series. According to a recent study, FusionPlant’s pre-built applications and integration
with third-party apps remain limited when compared with its competitors 115.
Services and modes of value creation
FusionPlant provides cloud-based services like IaaS and SaaS and leverages the enterprise
intelligence capabilities of Huawei’s cloud, like big data management and an AI develop -
ment platform as PaaS. It provides configurable solutions by combining Huawei technolo -
gies and services with third party plug-ins and products offered on the Huawei cloud mar -
ketplace. Huawei has announced investment of USD 436 million over the next five years to
build a computing ecosystem around its ARM-based server chips 116 to establish its server
systems more firmly in domestic industries.
FACT SHEET
 Owned by telecom carrier Huawei
 Combines Huawei cloud and industrial connectivity platforms
 Established in 2015
 Revenue of parent company: CNY 715 billion
 www.huaweicloud.com/solution/fusionplant/
Case Study 2: Huawei Cloud’s FusionPlant

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
| 49MERICS REPORT | June 2020
International outreach
Partnerships with other global platforms are a key development strategy for Huawei.
FusionPlant partners with foreign firms like ABB, SAP and Bosch. For example, the soft -
ware platform Bosch IoT Suite collaborates with Huawei Cloud to offer functions needed
to connect devices, users, and businesses 117. Other partnerships involve French software
company Dassault Systèmes and US-based ANSYS. Huawei is very active in standardiza-
tion bodies like the Industrial Internet Consortium, the Edge Consortium, the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute, and the 5G Alliance for Connected Industries and
Automation (5G-ACIA).

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
| 50MERICS REPORT | June 2020
FOCUS ON PARTNERSHIPS TO BUILD AN ECOSYSTEM
Main characteristics
Rootcloud is one of the first vendors to offer an Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) plat -
form in China. It offers two types of platforms, one for machine relationship management
(MRM), connecting machines with cloud data storage and data analysis, and one Internet
of Machines platform (IOM) providing 360-degree lifecycle management for equipment.
Users and modes of participation
The company’s open platform 118 has around 200 partners and clients, connects 560,000
industrial devices over 61 verticals, including foundry, injection molding, machine tool
manufacturing, textile and diesel engine manufacturing. Rootcloud also contributed to the
buildup of 14 industry-specific vertical cloud platforms. It has branches in Suzhou, Xi’an,
Guangzhou, Beijing, Shanghai, and Changsha.
Services and modes of value creation
Rootcloud partners with hardware and software API vendors and systems integrators. Its
IaaS is based on the Tencent Cloud. Rootcloud wants to provide a broad range of PaaS
features to a broad variety of industrial sectors, such us equipment manufacturing, energy,
textiles, and construction equipment. The platform can integrate with a wide range of de-
vices and systems to map data in a visual approach.
International outreach
Rootcloud has established a global industrial IoT ecosystem and cooperates with interna-
tional partners. These include AWS, Telenor, ARM and Honeywell, among others 119. The
firm launched an overseas IIoT platform in 2018. Chinese-owned machine builder Putz -
meister is one of its key clients in Germany. According to its website, Rootcloud has provid -
ed services to foreign companies in India, Kenya, South Africa, Indonesia, Mexico 120.
FACT SHEET
 Incubated by Sany Heavy industry
 Focused on machine-relationship management and the internet of machines
 Operational since 2016
 http://en.rootcloud.com/
Case Study 3: Rootcloud

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
| 51MERICS REPORT | June 2020
FOCUS ON UPGRADING TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES
Main characteristics
CASICloud and its industrial platform INDICS benefit from defense giant CASIC’s equip -
ment and manufacturing experience. INDICS provides an industrial IoT platform but its
services extend far beyond this to include manufacturing operations and product data
management and resource planning.
Users and modes of participation
INDICS provides smart manufacturing and service solutions to government at all levels
and to industries like aerospace, ICT, industrial machinery, automotive, wind power, petro -
chemical, light engineering, and hydroelectric. It was designed to facilitate the upgrading
of China’s traditional industries and seeks to achieve this aim by integrating online and
offline operations 121. According to information on the INDICS website, more than 20,000
enterprises across 212 countries and regions have registered, with transaction values
amounting to USD 1.1 billion.
Services and modes of value creation
INDICS cloud manufacturing platform offers IaaS, PaaS and SaaS and edge devices, pre-
defined device models as well as VR-based production line optimization. It provides com-
prehensive software development kits and templates for development of industrial apps.
Its general PaaS is partly realized through CloudFoundry, a US provider. Some industrial
protocols like Profibus, HART, and Canbus are not yet supported.
FACT SHEET
 Established by state-owned China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation
(CASIC)
 Industrial IoT platform with manufacturing operations management capabilities
 Operational since 2015
 Revenue of parent company: CNY 250 billion
 http://www.indics.com/
Case Study 4: CASICloud INDICS

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
| 52MERICS REPORT | June 2020
International outreach
In 2019, CASICloud set up a multiple-language environment (English, German, Russian,
Spanish and French) to launch an international version of INDICS. The company has an
office in Germany 122. Parent company CASIC has established cooperation with major inter -
national enterprises and institutions, including Siemens, SAP , BOSCH, TU Darmstadt and
RWTH Aachen. Since summer 2019, CASICloud has installed part of its capacities on servers
provided by the TU Darmstadt to provide a protected test bed for German and European
SMEs.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
| 53MERICS REPORT | June 2020
FOCUS ON HIGH COMPATIBILITY AND STRONG INTERNATIONAL OUTREACH
Main characteristics
XREA was an early player in the China’s industrial internet and claims to be the first na-
tionwide industrial internet platform. It benefits from the experience of its parent company,
which is a major manufacturer of heavy machinery for the construction, mining and energy
sectors. XREA is specifically tasked with incorporating SMEs into IoT platform ecosystems.
Users and modes of participation
XREA provides services across more than 60 industries, including construction machinery,
renewable energy, military, wind power and core component manufacturing and serves
more than 1000 enterprises and 640,000 users in 20 countries, according to its website 123.
The platform has more than 680,000 connected devices and manages high-value equip -
ment assets of more than CNY 550 billion 124.
Services and modes of value creation
XREA provides a public and a private cloud, the latter targeting enterprises concerned with
data protection. The platform offers the full range of the IIoT stack. According to technical
analysts, the platform has strong capabilities in device connectivity, edge access, cloud-ser -
vice based data analysis and in delivering tailor-made solutions for specific industrial sec -
tors. XCMG IT has seven R&D centers in China including Xuzhou, Beijing, Nanjing, Shanghai,
Wuxi, Suzhou and Foshan. It partners with innovative internet firms like Alicloud. The com-
pany has accumulated several patents and copyrights and formulated 10 national standards
for the industrial internet with 27 patents submitted125.
FACT SHEET
 Platform provided by XCMG IT, affiliate of state-owned
Xuzhou Construction Machinery Group
 XREA claims to be compatible with 98 percent of industrial protocols
 XCMG IT was founded in 2014
 Revenue XCMG (2018): CNY 56 billion
 www.xreacloud.com
Case Study 5: XREA

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
| 54MERICS REPORT | June 2020
International outreach
XCMG is the 5 th biggest construction machinery group worldwide, with operations in more
than 180 countries. Its IT arm benefits from this huge network: according to reports, the
XREA platform is used in 20 markets 126 along China’s Belt & Road initiative. In Germany,
XREA cooperates closely with ERP provider SAP and has acquired Krefeld-based machin-
ery manufacturer Schwing. Other cooperation partners abroad include the industrial group
ABB and the Taiwanese IIot specialist Advantech.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
| 55MERICS REPORT | June 2020
FOCUS ON AUTOMOTIVE
Main characteristics
Venus Cloud provides industrial software to car manufacturers mostly from the state sector.
It also develops vehicle-to-vehicle communication and smart-city solutions. Qiming was
established under direct guidance of China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technol -
ogy (MIIT) to push the introduction of digital infrastructure solutions to the car industry 127.
The solutions for data collection and digital infrastructure development are largely based
on software from US provider Oracle.
Users and modes of participation
Venus Cloud has served more than 3,000 upstream parts and raw material suppliers, more
than 10,000 downstream dealers and service providers, 2 million network vehicles and
7 million owners 128. State-owned enterprises like the major car maker FAW group have im-
plemented platform solutions from Venus. Qiming also serves state-owned banks and ciga-
rette factories. Unlike other industrial platforms, Venus Cloud does not offer a marketplace
for third parties. Products offered on the website are designed and supplied by Qiming,
although many build upon existing international products.
Services and modes of value creation
Venus Cloud’s services are geared towards smart manufacturing, smart cars and smart city
implementations. There is a focus on R&D software for new product design. Other services
include consultancy, customer relationship management and analysis of industrial data 129.
Qiming CEO Wu Jianhui has said the company’s ambition is to expand Venus Cloud to other
manufacturing industries, and to create an open and shared integrated ecosystem130.
FACT SHEET
 Provided by – largely state-owned – Qiming Information Technology
 Claims to be first automotive industry internet platform
 Operates since 2018
 Revenue: CNY 1,5 billion (2018)
 http://www.qm.cn/
Case Study 6: Venus Cloud (Qiming Xingyun)

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
| 56MERICS REPORT | June 2020
International outreach
Qiming has long-standing relations with international companies, especially in Germany.
It has provided electric vehicle manufacturing-related services to Volkswagen and Bosch
(environmental adaptability, electrical performance and product platform testing as well as
performance failure analysis)131. Qiming has also tested autonomous driving algorithms with
FAW-Volkswagen. The company leadership has expressed the strategic goal of conquering the
global market of IT services for the automotive industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
| 57MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Endnotes:
 1 | Zenglein, Max and Holzmann, Anna (2019). “Evolving Made in China 2025.” MERICS Papers on China. July.
https://www.merics.org/en/papers-on-china/evolving-made-in-china-2025. Accessed: October 25, 2019.
 2 | Evans, Jon (2018). “China’s next great leap: Industry 4.0.” Orange Business. August 15. https://www.oran-
ge-business.com/en/blogs/chinas-next-great-leap-industry-40. Accessed: August 28, 2019.
 3 | Figures include Taiwan; GSMA (2018). “How Greater China is set to lead global industrial IoT market.” July.
https://www.gsma.com/iot/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/GSMA_Report-How_Greater_China_Is_Set_To_
Lead_Global_Industrial_IoT_Market-en-July2018.pdf. Accessed: September 12, 2019.
 4 | GIZ (2016). „Deutsch-Chinesische Zusammenarbeit bei Industrie 4.0 中德工业4.0合作 Deutsch-Chinesische
Kooperationsprojekte 2016. https://www.plattform-i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Publikation-ge-
samt/dt-chn-kooperationsprojekte.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1. Accessed: May 8, 2020.
 5 | See: Technische Universität Darmstadt (n.d.). “CaMPuS.” https://www.dik.tu-darmstadt.de/forschung_dik/
projekte/aktuelleprojekte_5/campus_2/campus.en.jsp. Accessed: January 31,2020.
 6 | For a detailed description of the range of activities see: https://www.plattform-i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/
DE/Standardartikel/internationales-kooperationen-china-2018.html und des BMBF, https://www.produkti-
on-dienstleistung-arbeit.de/de/projekte-2118.html.
 7 | Siehe „Deutschland und China: Ein gemeinsames Verständnis für Industrie 4.0“. https://www.plattform-i40.
de/PI40/Redaktion/DE/Standardartikel/internationales-kooperationen-china-2018.html. Accessed: May 12,
2020
 8 | See: GIZ (n.d.) “Sino-German Cooperation on Industrie 4.0.” https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/71332.html.
Accessed: January 31, 2020.
 9 | Gao, Kathy (2019). “Where Next For China’s Technology Policy? Creating the Industrial internet.” Bloomberg,
December 19. https://about.bnef.com/blog/where-next-for-chinas-technology-policy-creating-the-industri-
al-internet. Accessed: February 1, 2020.
 10 | Mu, Danny et. al. (2019). “The Forrester Wave™: Industrial IoT Software Platforms In China, Q4 2019.”
November 25. https://www.forrester.com/report/The+Forrester+Wave+Industrial+IoT+Software+Plat-
forms+In+China+Q4+2019/-/E-RES146895#. Accessed: November 27, 2019 [full report purchased].
 11 | European Centre for International Political Economy (ECIPE) (2019). “Patterns of Trade Restrictiveness in On-
line Platforms: A First Look”. January 2019. https://ecipe.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Patterns-of-Tra-
de-Restrictiveness-in-Online-Platforms-A-first-look-final.pdf . Accessed: May 8, 2020.
 12 | CCID 赛迪智库 (2018). “Outlook of China's Industrial internet Platform Development in 2019” [2019年中
国工业互联网平台发展形势展望]. p. 490. December. http://www.ccidwise.com/uploads/soft/181220/1-
1Q220155227.pdf. Accessed: September 12, 2019.
 13 | State Council of the PRC 中华人民共和国国务院 (2017). “Guiding Opinions of the State Council on
Deepening the 'Internet + Advanced Manufacturing' Development of the Industrial internet” [国务院关于
深化 ‘互联网+先进制造业’ 发展工业互联网的指导意见]. November 19. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/
content/2017-11/27/content_5242582.htm. Accessed: September 20, 2019; Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2018). “Notice On the Distribution of
the Action Plan for Development of Industrial internet (2018-2020) and 2018 Action Plan of the Industrial
internet Special Working Group” [关于印发‘工业互联网发展行动计划（2018-2020年）’ 和‘工业互联网
专项工作组2018年工作计划’的通知]. June 7. http://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146295/n1652858/n1652930/
n3757016/c6212005/content.html. Accessed: September 29, 2019.
 14 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2019). “The list of
cross-industry and cross-sector Industrial internet platforms in 2019” [2019年跨行业跨领域工业互联网平
台清单公示]. August 26. http://www.miit.gov.cn/newweb/n1146295/n7281310/c7291030/content.html.
Accessed: September 29, 2019.
 15 | Zhang, Longmei and Chen, Sally (2019). “China’s Digital Economy: Opportunities and Risks”. International Mo-
netary Fund (IMF). https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2019/01/17/Chinas-Digital-Economy-Op-
portunities-and-Risks-46459. Accessed: October 12, 2019.
 16 | For values on China and US and Germany, see: Dong, Peixin董培欣 (2018). “‘2018 Chinese Enterprise Cloud
Report’ Released” [“2018中国企业上云报告” 发布]. Zhiding Wang 至顶网. July 25. http://cloud.zhiding.
cn/2018/0725/3109365.shtml. Accessed: September 30, 2019.
 17 | Deloitte (2017). “From Interpretation to Prediction: Unleashing the Value of the Industrial internet of Things.”
April 25. https://www2.deloitte.com/cn/en/pages/consumer-industrial-products/articles/from-interpretati-
on-to-prediction.html. Accessed: October 21, 2019.
 18 | Deloitte (2019). “China’s smart manufacturing: a steady push for the long term – 2018 China smart manufactu-
ring report”. April 3, 2019. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/energy-resources/
deloitte-cn-eri-2018-china-smart-manufacturing-report-en-190403.pdf. Accessed: September 28, 2019.
 19 | iResearch 艾瑞网 (2019). “China Industrial internet Platform Research Report” [2019年中国工业互联网平
台研究报告]. July. http://report.iresearch.cn/report/201907/3416.shtml. Accessed: August 20, 2019.
 20 | Mu, Danny et. al. (2019). “The Forrester Wave™: Industrial IoT Software Platforms In China, Q4 2019.”
November 25. https://www.forrester.com/report/The+Forrester+Wave+Industrial+IoT+Software+Plat-
forms+In+China+Q4+2019/-/E-RES146895#. Accessed: November 27, 2019 [full report purchased].
For Level of maturity of global and Chinese; see: iResearch 艾瑞网 (2019). “China Industrial internet
Platform Research Report” [2019年中国工业互联网平台研究报告]. July. http://report.iresearch.cn/re-
port/201907/3416.shtml. Accessed: August 20, 2019.
 21 | Haier (2018). “Haier IoT ecosystem brands: COSMOPlat Mass Customization Platform.” July 25, 2018.
http://www.haier.net/en/about_haier/news/201807/t20180725_412004.shtml. Accessed: January 31, 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
| 58MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 22 | EastMoney 东方财富网 (2019). “Industrial internet platforms urgently need to break the industry shackles
of ‘don’t dare to use, not likely to use, too expensive to use’” [工业互联网平台亟待打破“ 不敢用 不会用 用
不起”的行业枷锁]. November 8. http://finance.eastmoney.com/a/201911081286648235.html.
Accessed: November 10, 2019.
 23 | PR Newswire (2015). “XCMG signs strategic cooperation agreement with SAP during Merkel state visit.”
October 20, 2015. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/xcmg-signs-strategic-cooperation-agree-
ment-with-sap-during-merkel-state-visit-300169554.html. Accessed: January 31, 2020; phone interview
with SAP representative on January 21, 2020.
 24 | NDRC 发展改革委 (2017). “Internet Economy Leads to the New Era of Economic Growth” [数字经济引领经
济增长新时代]. October 10. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2017-10/04/content_5229522.htm.
Accessed: February 4, 2020; Economic Daily 经济日报 (2019). “The Development of Internet Economy
Boosts Supply-side Structural Reform” [数字经济发展助推供给侧结构性改革]. April 3. http://jingji.cctv.
com/2019/04/03/ARTIZiUjUg6BYB8oAixmkQ9Q190403.shtml. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 25 | State Council of the PRC 中华人民共和国国务院 (2018). “Guiding Opinions of the General Office of the
State Council on Promoting the Well-regulated and Sound Development of the Platform Economy” [国务
院办公厅关于促进平台经济规范健康发展的指导意见]. August 8. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/cont-
ent/2019-08/08/content_5419761.htm?trs=1. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 26 | State Council of the PRC 中华人民共和国国务院. “Guiding Opinions of the State Council on Deepening the
‘Internet plus Advanced Manufacturing Industry’ and Developing the Industrial internet” [国务院关于深
化“互联网+先进制造业”发展工业互联网的指导意见]. November 27. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/cont-
ent/2017-11/27/content_5242582.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 27 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2019). “MIIT:
2019 Work Plan for Industrial internet Special Working Group” [工信部：工业互联网专项工作组 2019
年工作计划]. Chainnews, June, 25. https://www.chainnews.com/articles/607018618160.htm.
Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 28 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2018). “2018 List
of Industrial internet Innovation Development Projects to be supported” [2018 年工业互联网创新发展工程
拟支持项目名单]. June. http://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146285/n1146352/n3054355/n3057656/n3057661/
c6219154/part/6219158.pdf. Accessed: August 5, 2019.
 29 | CCID 赛迪智库 (2018). “Outlook of China's Industrial internet Platform Development in 2019” [2019年
中国工业互联网平台发展形势展望]. December. http://www.ccidwise.com/uploads/soft/181220/1-
1Q220155227.pdf. Accessed: September 12, 2019.
 30 | See: Alliance of Industrial Internet (n.d.). http://en.aii-alliance.org/. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 31 | Xinhua 新华网 (2019). “China's Industrial internet Architecture 2.0 Released” [我国工业互联网体系架构2.0
版发布]. August 8. http://www.xinhuanet.com/fortune/2019-08/27/c 1124928859.htm.
Accessed: September 3, 2019.
 32 | PRC State Council: 中华人民共和国国务院 (2019). “Guiding principles of the State Council’s Central Office
to foster a healthy development of a platform economy” [国务院办公厅关于促进平台经济规范健康发
展的指导意见]. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2019-08/08/content_5419761.htm?trs=1. August.
Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 33 | CCID 赛迪智库 (2019). “Outlook of China's Industrial internet Platform Development in 2019” [2019年中国工业
互联网平台发展形势展望]. March. https://www.ccidgroup.com/sdgc/12913.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 34 | China Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (CIC), Contemporary Service Alliance for
Integration of Informatization and Industrialization (CSA), and Internet + Development Association of China
(IDAC) (2019). “Industrial internet Platform Innovation and Development White Paper” [2018 工业互联网平
台创新发展白皮书]. http://cspiii.com/go/AttachmentDownload.aspx?id=%7B4eb16337-7ee9-4db8-aca3-
3a47d84cf44b%7D. Accessed: October 3, 2019.
 35 | Alliance of Industrial Internet (2019). “Industrial internet Platform White Paper (2019)” [工业互联网平
台白皮书 （2019）]. January. http://www.aii-alliance.org/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=show&ca-
tid=23&id=673. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 36 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2018). “Notice
On the Distribution of the Action Plan for Development of Industrial internet (2018-2020) and 2018 Work
Plan of the Special Working Group for Industrial internet“ [关于印发‘工业互联网发展行动计划
（2018-2020年）’和‘工业互联网专项工作组2018年工作计划’ 的通知]. June 7. http://www.miit.gov.
cn/n1146295/n1652858/n1652930/n3757016/c6212005/content.html. Accessed: September 29, 2019.
 37 | Shanghai Securities News 上海证券报 (2019). “List of cross-industry and cross-industry Industrial internet
platforms in 2019” [2019年跨行业跨领域工业互联网平台清单公示]. August 26. http://news.cnstock.com/
news,bwkx-201908-4421856.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 38 | Hegde, Zenobia (2018). “Chinese IIoT platform provider launches into European market.” IoT Now, April 18.
https://www.iot-now.com/2018/04/18/80856-chinese-iiot-platform-provider-launches-european-market/.
Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 39 | Boston Consulting Group (BCG), AliResearch, and Baidu (2019). “Decoding the Chinese Internet 2.0: Get Rea-
dy for the Next Chapter – Chinese Internet Economy White Paper 2.0.” BCG, Jan 11. https://www.slideshare.
net/TheBostonConsultingGroup/chinese-internet-economy-white-paper-20-decoding-the-chinese-internet-
20-get-ready-for-the-next-chapter-130016382. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 40 | Deng, Iris and Chen, Celia (2018). “Pony Ma sets out Tencent’s Industrial internet ambitions as it looks to
China’s future economy.” South China Morning Post, October 31. https://www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/artic-
le/2171079/pony-ma-sets-out-tencents-industrial-internet-ambitions-it-looks. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 41 | Barbaschow, Asha. “Alibaba's Tmall Innovation Center uses data to help sellers develop products.” ZDNet,
November 12. https://www.zdnet.com/article/alibabas-tmall-innovation-center-uses-data-to-help-sel-
lers-develop-new-products/. Accessed: February 4, 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
| 59MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 42 | See: Apollo (n.d.). http://apollo.auto/index.html. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 43 | GKong 新闻中心 (2019). “Expand ‘Industrial internet + new technologies’ to accelerate the ‘1+N’ platform
system extension” [向“1+N”平台体系扩展 “工业互联网+新技术”加速落地]. August 9. http://www.gkong.
com/item/news/2019/08/97789.html. Accessed: September 17, 2019; CCID 赛迪智库 (2019). “Expand
‘Industrial internet + new technologies’ to accelerate the ‘1+N’ platform system extension“ [向“1+N”平台体
系扩展 “工业互联网+新技术”加速落地]. August 9. https://www.ccidgroup.com/sdgc/14227.htm.
Accessed: September 17, 2019
 44 | Taipei Times (2018). “Foxconn Industrial internet shares soar on China IPO.” June 9. http://www.taipeitimes.
com/News/biz/archives/2018/06/09/2003694556. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 45 | Alibaba (2018). “Siemens and Alibaba Cloud jointly launch MindSphere in Chinese mainland.” September 21.
https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/siemens-and-alibaba-cloud-jointly-launch-mindsphere-in-chinese-main-
land_594016. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 46 | Rosen, Daniel (2019). “The China Dashboard: Fall 2019 Edition.” Rhodium Group, December 4.
https://rhg.com/research/china-dashboard-fall-2019/. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 47 | Wang, Kevin Wei et. al. (2017). “Digital China: Powering the economy to global competitiveness.” McKinsey
Global Institute Report, December. https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/china/digital-china-powe-
ring-the-economy-to-global-competitiveness. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 48 | State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council (SAC) 国务院国有资产
监督管理委员会 (2019). “The Industrial internet platform for central enterprises was officially launched”
[中央企业工业互联网融通平台正式启动]. June 17. http://www.sasac.gov.cn/n2588025/n2588124/
c11513727/content.html. Accessed: January 11,2020.
 49 | Zhao, Lei (2018). “Chinese Industrial internet site has almost 1.7m global users.” China Daily, June 17.
https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201806/17/WS5b25f04da310010f8f59d5b9.html.
Accessed: January 11,2020.
 50 | EastMoney 东方财富网 (2018). “A national Industrial internet platform is emerging” [国家级工业互联网
平台呼之欲出]. December 20. https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1620317687252664691&wfr=spider&-
for=pc. Accessed: September 12, 2019.
 51 | Ministry of Commerce of the PRC (MOFCOM) 中华人民共和国商务部 (2019). “Guidelines of the Ministry of
Commerce and other 12 departments on promoting the development of commodity trading market platform
economy” [商务部等12部门关于推进商品交易市场发展平台经济的指导意见]. February 27.
http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/article/b/d/201902/20190202838305.shtml. Accessed: December 1, 2019.
 52 | Vincent (2019). “Launch ‘Belt and Road’ Industrial internet international cooperation to create a high-quality
world economy seminar.” ZTOPlus, July 9. https://www.ztoplus.com/techfocus/launch-belt-and-road-industri-
al-internet-international-cooperation-to-create-a-high-quality-world-economy-seminar.html.
Accessed: November 3, 2019.
 53 | CCID 赛迪智库 (2019). “Outlook of China's Industrial internet Platform Development in 2019” [2019年中国
工业互联网平台发展形势展望]. March. https://www.ccidgroup.com/sdgc/12913.htm. Accessed: October
13, 2019; Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII) (2019). “White paper on Industrial internet platform (2019
discussion draft)” [工业互联网平台白皮书（2019讨论稿）]. http://www.aii-alliance.org/index.php?m=con-
tent&c=index&a=show&catid=23&id=514. Accessed: August 17, 2019; iResearch 艾瑞网 (2019). “China
Industrial internet Platform Research Report” [2019年中国工业互联网平台研究报告]. July. http://report.
iresearch.cn/report/201907/3416.shtml. Accessed: August 20, 2019; China Industrial Control Systems
Cyber Emergency Response Team (CIC), Contemporary Service Platform for Integration of Information and
Industralization (CSPIII), and Internet+ Development Association of China (IDAC) (2018). “White Paper on the
Innovation and Development of Industrial internet Platform” [工业互联网平台创新发展白皮书]. Industrial
internet Research Series, report No. 3 [工业互联网系列研究报告 No. 3]. https://www.innovation4.cn/library/
r34137. December 17. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 54 | Data based on an assessment of 130.000 manufacturing companies by the National Development and
Research Center for Industrial Information Security under the Ministry of Industry and Informatization; see:
Chainnews 链闻 (2019). “Zhou Jian: Perspectives on the digital transformation of China's manufacturing
industry (2009 ~ 2019)” [周剑：中国制造业数字化转型全景图（2009～ 2019）]. May 9. https://www.
chainnews.com/articles/482791628487.htm. Accessed: December 5, 2019.
 55 | Ibid.
 56 | Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII) (2019). “White paper on Industrial internet platform (2019 discussion
draft)” [工业互联网平台白皮书（2019讨论稿）]. http://www.aii-alliance.org/index.php?m=content&c=in-
dex&a=show&catid=23&id=514. Accessed: August 17, 2019.
 57 | Mantian, Xin 满天芯 (2019). “Overview of global sensor technology development” [全球转感器技术发展
概况一贤]. IC Zhiku IC智库. November 19. https://www.iczhiku.com/hotspotDetail/+6FGM896rsMF4h7u-
JDdL0Q==. Accessed: December 14, 2019.
 58 | CCID 赛迪智库 (2019). “Outlook of China's Industrial internet Platform Development in 2019” [2019年中国工业
互联网平台发展形势展望]. March. https://www.ccidgroup.com/sdgc/12913.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 59 | Ibid.
 60 | CCID 赛迪智库 (2019). “CCID Consulting: China's industrial software development white paper 2019” [赛迪
顾问：2019年中国工业软件发展白皮书]. July. http://www.199it.com/archives/913824.html.
Accessed; October 7, 2019.
 61 | International Data Cooperation China (IDC China) (2018). “IDC: in the first half of 2018, the IaaS market
of public cloud in China started to take off and the market integration was booming” [IDC: 2018上半年
中国公有云IaaS市场风起微澜，市场整合渐兴]. December. https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containe-
rId=prCHC44540318. Accessed: December 3, 2019.
 62 | Wan, Jiaxi 方家喜 (ed.) (2018). “The ‘Golden Age’ of big data Industry is facing four obstacles” [大数据产
业“黄金期”面临四道坎]. Xinhua/Economic Information Daily. February 7. http://www.xinhuanet.com/yu-
qing/2018-02/07/c_129807394.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
| 60MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 63 | Supra note 49.
 64 | Alliance of Industrial Internet (2019). “Industrial internet Platform White Paper (2019)” [工业互联网平
台白皮书 （2019）]. January. http://www.aii-alliance.org/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=show&ca-
tid=23&id=673. White Paper, p.3. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 65 | Chainnews 链闻 (2019). “Zhou Jian: Perspectives on the digital transformation of China's manufacturing
industry (2009 ~ 2019)” [周剑：中国制造业数字化转型全景图（2009～ 2019）]. May 9. https://www.
chainnews.com/articles/482791628487.htm. Accessed: December 5, 2019.
 66 | Shenzhen Industrial and Information Technology Bureau 深圳市工业和信息化局 (2019). “Shenzhen Indust-
rial and Information Technology Bureau Action Plan for Development of Industrial internet 2018-2020”
[ 深圳市工业互联网发展行动计划（2018—2020年）]. http://gxj.sz.gov.cn/xxgk/xxgkml/qt/gzdt/201907/
t20190712_18051790.htm. December 7. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 67 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2018). “MIIT on
Issuing Guidelines for the Construction and Promotion of Industrial internet” [工业和信息化部印发“ 工业互
联网网络建设及推广指南”]. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-01/19/content_5359232.htm. December 29.
Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 68 | State Council of the PRC 中华人民共和国国务院 (2019). “Guiding Opinions of the General Office of the
State Council on Promoting the Well-regulated and Sound Development of the Platform Economy” [国务院
办公厅关于促进平台经济规范健康发展的指导意见]. http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2019-08/08/
content_5419761.htm?trs=1. August. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 69 | For an overview see: Orient Securities 东方证券 (2018). “Industrial internet boosts the reforming of the ma-
nufacturing industry” [工业互联网引领制造业变革]. p. 8f. http://xqdoc.imedao.com/1637da0b4dc32f6b3f-
d8ceb3.pdf. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 70 | China IDC Quan 中国IDC圈. “Distribution of Data Centers in China” [全国数据中心分布图].
http://www.idcquan.com/Special/idcmap/. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 71 | Guangdong Provincial Government 广东省人民政府 (2018). “Guangdong province has deepened the
implementation plan of ‘Internet + advanced manufacturing’ to develop Industrial internet” [广东省深化 ‘
互联网＋先进制造业’ 发展工业互联网的实施方案]. March. http://www.gd.gov.cn/gkmlpt/content/0/146/
post 146713.html. Accessed: August 2, 2019; Henan Provincial Government河南省人民政府 (2018).
“Three-year Action Plan for Intelligent Manufacturing and Industrial internet Development in Henan Province
(2018-2020)” [河南省智能制造和工业互联网发展三年行动计划(2018—2020年 )]. April. https://www.
henan.gov.cn/2018/04-26/239902.html. Accessed; August 2, 2019; General Office of Chongqing Mu-
nicipal People's Government 重庆市人民政府办公厅 (2018). “Guiding Opinions of the General Office of
Chongqing Municipal People’s Government on Accelerating the Development of Industrial internet Platform
Enterprises to Enable the Transformation and Upgrading of Manufacturing Industry” [重庆市人民政府办
公厅关于加快发展工业互联网平台企业赋能制造业转型升级的指导意见]. July. https://www.ddk.gov.cn/
upfiles/201908/20190801140635628.pdf. Accessed: August 2, 2019.
 72 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2018). “Notice
on the Project to Support the 2018 Industrial internet Innovation and Development Project” [2018年工业
互联网创新发展工程拟支持项目公示]. June. http://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146285/n1146352/n3054355/
n3057656/n3057661/c6219154/content.html. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 73 | Anonymous (2019). “The mode of "regional platform + demonstration base" is adopted to speed up platform
landing” [通过“区域平台+示范基地”的模式加快平台落地]. Loumalaile 博客主题. May 6. http://www.lou-
malaile.com/hulianwang/1312.html; CCID 赛迪智库 (2018). “Outlook of China's Industrial internet Platform
Development in 2019” [2019年中国工业互联网平台发展形势展望]. December. http://www.ccidwise.com/
uploads/soft/181220/1-1Q220155227.pdf . Accessed: September 12, 2019.
 74 | CAICT 中国信通院 (n.d.). “CAICT Signed Strategic Cooperation Framework Agreement on Promoting
Industrial internet Platform Development in the Yangtze River Delta Area.” http://www.caict.ac.cn/english/
news/201806/t20180611_174025.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 75 | Industrial internet Consortium (IIC) (n.d.). “MANUFACTURING QUALITY MANAGEMENT TESTBED.” https://
www.iiconsortium.org/manufacturing-quality-management.htm. Accessed: November 28, 2019.
 76 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) (2019). “The 2019 list of pilot demonstration projects
for the integrated development of manufacturing and the Internet” [2019年制造业与互联网融合发展试
点示范项目名单公示]. http://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146295/n7281310/c7504462/content.html. November.
Accessed: December 10, 2019.
 77 | Deloitte (2017). “From Interpretation to Prediction: Unleashing the Value of the Industrial internet of Things.”
April 25, 2017. https://www2.deloitte.com/cn/en/pages/consumer-industrial-products/articles/from-inter-
pretation-to-prediction.html. Accessed: October 21, 2019.
 78 | Xu, Yiyan徐一嫣 (ed.) (2019). “Accelerate the Construction of Standards and set the Foundation for the De-
velopment of Industrial internet Platform” [加快标准体系建设 夯实工业互联网平台发展基础]. Xinhuanet
新华网. March 1. http://www.xinhuanet.com/info/2019-03/01/c_137859769.htm. Accessed: October 21,
2019.
 79 | Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII) (2018). “Industrial internet platform standard architecture framework
(Version 1.0)” [工业互联网平台标准体系框架 （版本1.0）]. February. http://www.aii-alliance.org/index.
php?m=content&c=index&a=show&catid=23&id=208. Accessed: August 23, 2019.
 80 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) and Standardization Administration of China (SAC)
(2019). “Guidelines for the construction of a comprehensive standardization system for Industrial internet”
[工业互联网综合标准化体系建设指南]. January. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-03/08/5371933/fi-
les/48de99f08f124d91bd7567641b4a89b0.pdf . Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 81 | Alliance of Industrial Internet (AII) (2019). “Industrial internet Standard System (Version 2.0)” [工业互联网
标准体系（版本2.0）]. February. http://www.aii-alliance.org/index.php?m=content&c=index&a=show&ca-
tid=25&id=482. Accessed: October 13, 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
| 61MERICS REPORT | June 2020
 82 | Gao, Chang 高畅 (ed.) (2019). “This will have a revolutionary impact! MIIT issued a document to promote the
development of Industrial Big Data” [将带来革命性影响！工信部发文力推工业大数据发展]. Xinhuanet.
September 5. http://www.xinhuanet.com/2019-09/05/c_1210267744.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 83 | Interview to CASICloud’s Deputy GM (found via Jeff Ding’s ChinAI Newsletter no. 70), see: Wang, Jinwang 王
金旺 (2019). “How many steps does it take to move the digital capabilities of national aerospace equipment
to manufacturing?” [将国家级航天装备数字化能力搬到制造业，需要几步？]. Weixin微信. October 8.
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/2GeOYIe4AM6djPuMeATELQ. Accessed: November 21, 2019.
 84 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2019). “Industrial
big data development guidelines” [工业大数据发展指导意见]. Law-lib 法律图书馆. September 9.
http://www.law-lib.com/fzdt/newshtml/20/20190909135458.htm. Accessed: December 4, 2019.
 85 | Ma, Si (2019). “Cybersecurity system on the way for Industrial internet.” Chinadaily. August 29. http://www.
chinadaily.com.cn/a/201908/29/WS5d672668a310cf3e355687ab.html. Accessed: December 2, 2019.
 86 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2019). “Notice on
Issuance of Guiding Opinions on Strengthening the Industrial internet Security Work” [十部门关于印发加强
工业互联网安全工作的指导意见的通知]. http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-08/28/content_5425389.htm.
July 26. Accessed: December 4, 2019.
 87 | National Development and Resource Commission (NDRC) (2013). “Special Action Plan for the Development
of Internet of Things 2013-2015” [物联网发展专项行动计划(2013-2015年 )]. https://wenku.baidu.com/
view/08da72e6d5bbfd0a79567347.html. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 88 | Zhou, Wenbo (2018). "ISO chooses China's IoT standards." Chinadaily. June 7. http://www.chinadaily.com.
cn/m/jiangsu/wuxinewdistrict/2018-07/11/content_36609586.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
 89 | Le, Truong and Fischer, Thomas (n.d.). “China’s high-impact patents of Industry 4.0 from January 2013 to April
2015.” CHINESE INDUSTRY 4.0 PATENTS. https://www.iao.fraunhofer.de/lang-de/images/iao-news/chine-
se-industry-1.pdf. Accessed: November 27, 2019.
 90 | Zhang, Dandan (2019). “Qingdao sets standards for interconnected future.” Chinadaily/Telegraph. Novem-
ber 20. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/china-watch/business/qingdao-manufacturing-standards/. Accessed:
February 4, 2020.
 91 | People’s Deaily 人民网 (2018). “Haier COSMOPlat led the establishment of the country's first manufacturing
model standards working group” [海尔COSMOPlat牵头成立国内首个制造模式类标准工作组]. December
20. http://homea.people.com.cn/n1/2018/1220/c41390-30479144.html. Accessed: November 2, 2019.
 92 | Freist, Roland (2018). “The two companies want to build an infrastructure for the Chinese Internet of
Things. Siemens MindSphere and Simatic MindApps will be running in the Alibaba cloud in the future as well.”
Hannovermesse. July 21. https://www.hannovermesse.de/en/news/news-articles/siemens-and-alibaba-are-
pooling-iot-resources-in-china; Gasgoo (n.d.). http://autonews.gasgoo.com/china news/70015245.html [not
available]. Accessed: September 12, 2019.
 93 | Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 中华人民共和国工业和信息化部 (MIIT) (2019). “Notice
on the issuance of the 2019 work plan of the special working group on Industrial internet” [关于印发《工
业互联网专项工作组2019年工作计划》的通知]. June. http://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146295/n1652858/
n1652930/n3757020/c7013751/content.html. Accessed: August 30, 2019.
 94 | See: Technische Universität Darmstadt (n.d.). “CaMPuS.” https://www.dik.tu-darmstadt.de/forschung_dik/
projekte/aktuelleprojekte_5/campus_2/campus.en.jsp. Accessed: January 31,2020.
 95 | Nurkin, Tate (2018). “Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT).” Jane’s by HIS Markit. May htt-
ps://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/Jane's%20by%20IHS%20Markit China's%20Advanced%20
Weapons%20Systems.pdf. Accessed: October 28. 2019.
 96 | Dong, Lei 董磊 (2018). “Foreign media pays close attention to China's civil-military integration achievements:
aerospace cloud network platform turnover exceeds 300 billion” [外媒关注中国军民融合成绩斐然：航
天云网平台成交额超3000亿]. http://www.cankaoxiaoxi.com/mil/20181220/2365959_2.shtml. Cankao
Military 参考军事. December 20. Accessed: January 31,2020.
 97 | XCMG (2015). “XCMG signs strategic cooperation agreement with SAP during Merkel state visit”. PRNews-
wire. December 3. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/xcmg-signs-strategic-cooperation-agree-
ment-with-sap-during-merkel-state-visit-300169554.html. Accessed: September 30, 2019.
 98 | XCMG Europe (n.d.). “XCMG – An International Employer.” https://xcmg-europe.de/en/career/. Accessed: Octo-
ber 23, 2019.
 99 | Sacks, Samms and Li, Manyi Kathy (2018). “How Chinese Cybersecurity Standards Impact Doing Business
In China”. CSIS Briefs. August. https://www.csis.org/analysis/how-chinese-cybersecurity-standards-im-
pact-doing-business-china. Accessed: November 4, 2019.
100 | Several research studies have emphasized China’s digital protectionism. For instance, the ECIPE’s Digital
Trade Restrictiveness Index found that China restricts digital trade more than any other country, including by
imposing information security and data restrictions. See: Ferracane, Martina Francesca et. al. (2018). “Digital
Trade Restrictiveness Index”. Europe Centre for International Political Economy. April. https://ecipe.org/dte/
dte-report/. Accessed: December 1, 2019.
101 | EU Chamber of Commerce in China (2017). “China Manufacturing 2025 – Putting Industrial Policy Ahead of
Market Forces.” http://docs.dpaq.de/12007-european_chamber_cm2025-en.pdf. Accessed: January 31,2020.
102 | International Data Cooperation China (IDC China) (2018). “IDC: in the first half of 2018, the IaaS market
of public cloud in China started to take off and the market integration was booming” [IDC: 2018上半年
中国公有云IaaS市场风起微澜，市场整合渐兴]. December. https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containe-
rId=prCHC44540318. Accessed: December 3, 2019
103 | Ministry of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China (2018). “The Ministry of Public Security issued
the ‘public consultation notice on the draft regulations on the multi-level protection of network security” [
公安部关于《网络安全等级保护条例（征求意见稿）》公开征求意见的公告]. June 27. http://www.mps.
gov.cn/n2254536/n4904355/c6159136/content.html. Accessed: October 3, 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
| 62MERICS REPORT | June 2020
104 | Seconded European Standardization Expert in China (SESEC) (n.d.). “SAC issued standards for Cybersecurity
Classified Protection V2.0”. p.2. May 16. https://www.sesec.eu/sac-issued-standards-for-cybersecurity-clas-
sified-protection-v2-0/. Accessed: November 16, 2019. For the Chinese version of the standards see: China
National Standards 中华人民共和国国家标准(n.d.). “China security GB Standards List.” http://www.gbstan-
dards.org/index/Standards_Search.asp?word=security. Accessed: November 16, 2019.
105 | State Administration for Market Regulation and Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic
of China (2018). “Information Security Technology - Information Security Classification Specifications of
Industrial Control Systems“ [信息安全技术 工业控制系统信息安全分级规范]. http://www.iscn.org.cn/
uploadfile/2019/0121/20190121051136153.pdf . Accessed: November 25, 2019.
106 | Sacks, Samms and Li, Manyi Kathy (2018). “How Chinese Cybersecurity Standards Impact Doing Business
In China”. CSIS Briefs. August. https://www.csis.org/analysis/how-chinese-cybersecurity-standards-im-
pact-doing-business-china. Accessed: November 4, 2019.
107 | Sacks, Samm (2018). “Addressing China’s Technology Policies: Beyond the Whiplash of a ZTE Deal”. Lawfare.
https://www.lawfareblog.com/addressing-chinas-technology-policies-beyond-whiplash-zte-deal. Accessed:
November 26, 2019.
108 | Wei, Wei魏巍 (ed.) (2018). “Experts call for strengthening the indigenous and controllable technology of Chi-
na´s Industrial internet” [专家呼吁中国加强工业互联网自主可控技术]. Chinanews. June 19. https://www.
chinanews.com/cj/2018/06-19/8541242.shtml. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
109 | Standing Committee of the National People´s Congress 全国人民代表大会常务委员会 (2016).
“Cybersecurity Law of the PRC” [中华人民共和国网络安全法]. http://www.xinhuanet.com/politic-
s/2016-11/07/c_1119867015.htm. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
110 | Cyberspace Administration of China 国家互联网信息办公室 (2019). “Measures for the Administration of
Data Security” [数据安全管理办法]. http://www.cac.gov.cn/2019-05/28/c_1124546022.htm. Accessed:
February 4, 2020.
111 | State Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine and Standardization Administration
of the People’s Republic of China (2017). “Guidelines for Data Cross-Border Transfer Security Assessment” [
数据出境安全评估指南]. https://www.tc260.org.cn/ueditor/jsp/upload/20170527/87491495878030102.
pdf. Accessed: November 27, 2019.
112 | See: CosmoPlat (n.d.). CosmoPlat website. https://www.cosmoplat.com/platform/plat. Accessed: November
27, 2019.
113 | Ibid.
114 | Haier (2018). “Haier IoT ecosystem brands: COSMOPlat Mass Customization Platform.” http://www.haier.net/
en/about_haier/news/201807/t20180725_412004.shtml. July 7. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
115 | Mu, Danny et. al. (2019). “The Forrester Wave™: Industrial IoT Software Platforms In China, Q4 2019.” p. 7
[The seven providers that matter most and why they stack up]. November 25. https://www.forrester.com/
report/The+Forrester+Wave+Industrial+IoT+Software+Platforms+In+China+Q4+2019/-/E-RES146895#.
Accessed: November 27, 2019.
116 | Smolaks, Max (2019). “Huawei is planning to inject $436m into Arm-based server silicon - With its eye
mostly on the domestic market.” TheRegister. July 25. https://www.theregister.co.uk/2019/07/25/huawei_
is_planning_to_sink_436m_into_armbased_server_silicon/. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
117 | Bosch (2018). “Bosch launches IoT software solutions on Huawei Cloud.” Press release. October 10. https://
www.bosch-presse.de/pressportal/de/en/bosch-launches-iot-software-solutions-on-huawei-cloud-172992.
html. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
118 | See: Rootcloud Company Website (n.d.). http://en.rootcloud.com/aboutus.html [not accessible].
119 | Ibid.
120 | Ibid.
121 | Sohu (2018). “’White Paper on Innovation and Development of Industrial internet Platform 2018’ formally
issued” [“工业互联网平台创新发展白皮书（2018） ” 正式发布]. Sohu. December 18 http://www.sohu.
com/a/282918779_680938. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
122 | See: Indics (n.d.). “Indics.” Company website. https://www.indics.de/imprint.ht. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
123 | See: Xrea (n.d.). “Company Introduction” [公司价绍] Company website. http://www.xreacloud.com/introducti-
on.jhtml. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
124 | MarketScreener (2019). “XCMG Construction Machinery: Xrea - The Digital Transformation for Manufacturing
Industry.” June 28. https://www.marketscreener.com/news/XCMG-Construction-Machinery-Xrea-The-Digi-
tal-Transformation-for-Manufacturing-Industry--28828042/. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
125 | Supra note 122.
126 | Supra note 123.
127 | See: “Qiming Cloud Provider.” Company website. http://www.qm.cn/znzz.jsp?cate=3&I=00 [not accessible].
128 | Ibid.
129 | Ibid.
130 | “Wu Jianhui” [吴建会]. https://baike.baidu.com/item/%E5%90%B4%E5%BB%BA%E4%BC%9A. Baidu Baike 百
度百科. Accessed: February 4, 2020.
131 | Bob (2017). “Beijing Pilot Zone for national smart car officially started” [国家智能网联汽车应用（北方）示
范区正式开工]. Cheyunnet 车云网. August 31. [not accessible].

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
| 63MERICS REPORT | June 2020
Contact
Kristin Shi-Kupfer
Director of the Research Area on
Public Policy and Society, MERICS Lab
kristin.shi-kupfer@merics.de
Editors
Claudia Wessling
Director Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
Mary Hennock
Freelance editor
Layout
Alexandra Hinrichs
Graphic Designer, MERICS
Publisher
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64, 10179 Berlin, Germany
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.de
Copyright © 2020
Mercator Institute for China Studies
