
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
A
rtificial intelligence (AI) is a new technological frontier that has wide-ranging economic, political, and
military implications that could lead to changes in the global balance of power. The People’s Republic
of China has embraced AI and enthusiastically attempted to advance it as part of the country’s drive to
become a self-strengthening scientific and technological power. As a result, China is in many areas at or near
the forefront of AI development and application. However, as global AI governance becomes a higher priority
in the international community, China, like others, is grappling with the question of how to govern AI and its
advancement, both domestically and internationally.
China’s Embrace of AI
In May 2015, China released the Made in China 2025 plan, which provided a blueprint for the next decade to
establish the country as an advanced manufacturing powerhouse. The plan identifies nine strategic tasks and
key areas, including enhancing manufacturing innovation, promoting integration of information technology
and industry, strengthening the country’s industrial base, and building quality and brand development. Almost
all of these priorities are directly related to or impacted by the development of AI. Thus, AI has become the core
technology indispensable for future intelligent manufacturing and China’s economic plans in this space. The Made
in China 2025 plan, together with the subsequent “Robotics Industry Development Plan (2016–2020),” released
Ren Xiao is a Professor at the Country and Area Studies Academy at Beijing Foreign Studies University.
CHINA’S APPROACH TO AI DEVELOPMENT AND GOVERNANCE
BRIEF BY REN XIA O, BEIJING FOREIGN STUDIES UNIVE RSITY

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
2
in April 2016, and the “‘Internet Plus’ Artificial
Intelligence Three-Year Action and Implementation
Plan,” released in May 2016, demonstrated that
China has elevated developing AI technology to a
level of national strategy.
Furthering the above-mentioned plans and
measures, China issued “The Development Plan
for the New Generation Artificial Intelligence”
in July 2017, and “The Ethical Norms for the New
Generation Artificial Intelligence” in September
2021. The former puts forward a three-step strategy
for China to reach an internationally advanced
level in AI by 2020, realize a major breakthrough in
foundational theory by 2025, and become one of the
major AI innovation centers in the world by 2030.
The latter aims to integrate ethics into the entire
lifecycle of AI and to provide ethical guidelines
for individual, enterprises, and other related
organizations engaged in AI-related activities. In
August 2023, China further stipulated “Interim
Measures for the Management of Generative
Artificial Intelligence Services.” The measures aim
to promote the healthy development and regulated
use of generative AI, preserve network security
and societal public interest, and protect the lawful
rights and interests of citizens, legal persons, and
other organizations.
China’s AI development efforts resulted in a major
technological breakthrough in 2025 with the debut
of the DeepSeek-R1 AI model, which challenged
previous assumptions about U.S. dominance in AI
development and innovation. DeepSeek-R1 uses an
open-source AI model, whereas the leading models
from U.S. companies are generally closed-source .
Open-source models make it more possible for
other countries, particularly those in the global
South, to have an opportunity to benefit from global
technology development. This helps break the
winner-take-all situation in the high-tech domain
and enables AI technologies to be developed and
utilized more widely.
Two American scholars, Amy Zegart and Emerson
Johnston, examined the academic and professional
pathways of over two hundred researchers affiliated
with DeepSeek. 1 They found that nearly all these
researchers were educated or trained in China, over
half never left China for schooling or work, and of
the nearly 25% who did gain some experience in the
United States, most returned to China. This finding
demonstrates the educational and technological
progress China has made and raises significant
questions for U.S. policymakers concerned about the
trajectory of U.S.-China technology competition.
The application of AI has become increasingly
wide-ranging in various Chinese industries and
across society as whole. In March 2024 the Chinese
premier’s annual government work report for
the first time proposed to implement “AI Plus”
action measures in order to take advantage of new
technology. The 2025 government work report again
vowed to advance the AI Plus initiative. To this
end, it pledged to support the extensive application
of large-scale AI models and vigorously develop
new-generation intelligent terminals and smart
manufacturing equipment, including intelligent
connected new-energy vehicles, AI-enabled phones
and computers, and intelligent robots. In July 2025,
the Chinese government released its “Opinions
on Deepening the Implementation of Artificial
Intelligence Plus Action.”
The government has decided to prioritize
three main aspects of AI development: the first is
industrial empowerment ( chanye fu nen ) to allow
AI to be utilized in industry, agriculture, and
services as much as possible; to actively support
the development and application of AI models in
vertical areas; and to let the upgrade of AI empower
new quality productive force ( xinzhi shengchanli ).
The second is AI applications ( zhongduan yingyong )
through digital technologies to reinforce intelligent
networking of cars, cell phones, computers, and
robots for a new round of rapid development. This

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
3
aims to better integrate AI with ordinary people’s
daily lives to let them enjoy an intelligent life. The
third is utilization scenarios ( changjing peiyu ),
which seeks to demonstrate AI implementation
in terms of new technologies, new scenarios, and
new business formats (for example, in low-altitude
economy, education, training, and medical areas) .
China and Global AI Governance
Globally, the rapid growth of AI has posed both
an opportunity and a challenge to the international
community. How should AI be utilized in favor of
people and society while avoiding harms? Just as
technological advancements were made in the past,
AI has emerged as a revolutionary technology and is
progressing at a breathtaking pace. The implications of
this new paradigm for humanity will be a key question
for the international community. From the very
beginning, China has been involved in international
rulemaking and coordination in AI regulation,
which can be broadly divided into three categories
of engagement.
The first category comprises initiatives coordinated
by international organizations or groupings such as the
United Nations, the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD), and BRICS. Such
engagement focuses on providing principled rules and
guidance for the technological risks related to the three
core pillars of AI (i.e., data, algorithms, and computing
power). The second category is global AI summits
and the G-20, which have focused on regulations and
security risks brought about by the development of
AI technology. Since 2023, global AI summits have
been held in Bletchley, Seoul, and Paris. The third
category is bilateral coordination involving China and
other nations, focusing on AI risk management, AI
governance and patterns, and AI technology export
controls across various applications and domains.2
At all three levels of engagement on global AI
governance, China has advocated for a people-centered
approach and the principle of “AI for good.” Chinese
priorities include enhancing the understanding of all
countries on AI ethics and ensuring that AI is safe,
reliable, controllable, and capable of better empowering
global sustainable development and enhancing the
common well-being of all mankind.3
China also advocates to increase the representation
and voice of developing countries in global AI
governance and ensure equal rights, opportunities, and
rules for all countries. More advanced countries should
make efforts to conduct international cooperation with
and provide assistance to less “literate” ones in order
to bridge the gap in AI and its governance capacity.
In addition, China supports continuing discussions
within the UN framework to establish an international
institution to govern AI and to coordinate efforts to
address major issues concerning international AI
development, security, and governance.
China unveiled the Global AI Governance Initiative
in October 2023. This initiative emphasized that all
countries, regardless of their size, strength, or social
system, should have an equal right to develop and use
AI. Efforts should be made to conduct international
cooperation with and provide assistance to developing
countries so as to bridge the gap in AI and its
governance capacity. Since then, China has advocated
that countries put equal emphasis on development
and security. In September 2024, it introduced the
“AI Capacity-Building Action Plan for Good and for
All.” This plan outlined key areas for collaboration
with international partners on AI governance,
including infrastructure development, industrial
empowerment, talent training, data management, and
security governance.
In July 2025, China hosted the World AI Conference
and High-Level Meeting on Global AI Governance,
which centered on the theme “global solidarity in
the AI era.” The three-day event drew over 1,200
industry leaders, government officials, researchers,
and investors from around 30 countries. During the
conference, the Chinese government proposed the
creation of a global AI cooperation organization
headquartered in Shanghai. This proposal would give

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
2
the national bureau of asian research
1819 l street nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 • 202-347-9767
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, w a 98101 • 206-632-7370
www.nbr.org @nbrnews
Endnotes
1 Amy Zegart and Emerson Johnson, “Policy Implications of DeepSeek AI’s Talent Base, ” Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI, Policy Brief, May 6, 2025, https://hai.stanford.edu/policy/
policy-implications-of-deepseek-ai-talent-base.
2 Cheng Haiye, “Global Artificial Intelligence Regulation: Rule Construction and Multiple Challenges, ” Journal of International Relations, no. 3 (2005): 115–18.
3 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, “Position Paper of the People’s Republic of China on Strengthening Ethical Governance of Artificial Intelligence (AI), ”
November 2022, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/zy/wjzc/202405/t20240531_11367525.html.
4 “‘Promoting Global Solidarity’ Provides a Chinese Solution for AI Governance, ” Global Times, July 27, 2025, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202507/1339411.shtml.
China a leading role in upholding multilateralism and
promoting global governance through consultation,
joint construction, and shared benefits. China also
issued an action plan for global AI governance, inviting
governments, international organizations, enterprises,
and research institutions to work together and
promote international exchanges, including through a
cross-border open-source community.
AI in U.S.-China Relations
Although the Chinese government’s position is that
AI should be a tool for global collaboration rather than
geopolitical competition, many observers view China’s
AI development through the prism of U.S.-China
competition. The “2025 Global AI Governance
Action Plan” was released just days after the Trump
administration announced the United States’ action
plan for AI. A Global Times editorial highlighted
some perceived differences between the two countries’
approaches, noting that the U.S. plan “includes further
tightening of export controls on AI chips to China” and
arguing that “the United States remains trapped in a
zero-sum mind-set, pursuing a fantasy of maintaining
AI hegemony through technological blockades.” 4 Such
“competition” could have complex and significant
implications for the rest of the world.
Overall, the world’s two preeminent powers
and largest economies must build a constructive
relationship on AI for the world and for themselves.
The Chinese government believes zero-sum thinking
is detrimental, and that it is harmful to politicize AI
and to frame everything, including AI, as part of a
competition between democracy and autocracy. One
fundamental task facing the global community today
is to narrow, if not completely eliminate, the digital
and AI divides. This is also the responsibility of the
world’s major powers. The best path forward to expand
access to advanced technology such as AI is through
cooperation rather than competition. •
