
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
CHINA’S ECONOMIC SLOWDOWN
AND ITS IMPACT ON
TRADING PARTNERS
Edited by Arthur R. Kroeber and Jonathon Marek

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
NBR Board of Advisors
William Abnett
NBR
Se Hyun Ahn
University of Seoul
Dennis C. Blair
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Ketty Chen
Taiwan Foundation for Democracy
Chun In-Bum
Lt. General, ROK Army (ret.)
Josh Corless
ConocoPhillips
Linda Distlerath
PhRMA (ret.)
Nelson Dong
Dorsey & Whitney LLP (ret.)
Nicholas Eberstadt
American Enterprise Institute
Karl Eikenberry
Former Ambassador (U.S.);
Lt. General, U.S. Army (ret.)
Bates Gill
NBR
Stephen Hanson
College of William and Mary
Harry Harding
University of Virginia (ret.)
Mikkal Herberg
University of California San Diego
Carla A. Hills
Hills & Company
Robert Holleyman
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (ret.)
Mark Jones
Kingswood Capital Solutions
Amit Kapoor
India Council on Competitiveness
Tariq Karim
Former Ambassador (Bangladesh);
Independent University
Heino Klinck
U.S. Army/Department of Defense (ret.)
David Lampton
Johns Hopkins University
Stephen Lanza
Lt. General, U.S. Army (ret.)
Nicholas Lardy
Peterson Institute for International
Economics
Richard Lawless
New Magellan Ventures
William McCahill
Department of State (ret.)
Dewardric L. McNeal
Longview Global
Meredith Miller
NBR
Tami Overby
Albright Stonebridge Group
John S. Park
Harvard Kennedy School
Pamela Passman
APCO Worldwide
Rajeswari Rajagopalan
Australian Strategic Policy Institute
Evans Revere
Department of State (ret.)
Clarine Nardi Riddle
Kasowitz Benson Torres LLP
Ryo Sahashi
University of Tokyo
Ulrike Schaede
University of California San Diego
Robert Scher
BP (ret.); Department of Defense (ret.)
David Shambaugh
George Washington University
Benjamin Shobert
Optum
Mike Studeman
Rear Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Travis Sullivan
Boeing Company
Alison Szalwinski
The Asia Group
Travis Tanner
Greenpoint Group
Arzan Tarapore
Stanford University
Jessica Teets
Middlebury College
Debra Waggoner
Corning (ret.)
Dana White
Juno Collective
NBR Chairs and Counselors
Richard J. Ellings
NBR (ret.)
Thomas B. Fargo
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Aaron L. Friedberg
Princeton University
Charlene Barshefsky
U.S. Trade Representative (ret.)
Charles W . Boustany Jr.
U.S. House of Representatives (ret.)
Norman D. Dicks
U.S. House of Representatives (ret.)
Roy Kamphausen
NBR (Special Advisor)
Ashley J. Tellis
Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
NBR Board of Directors
John V . Rindlaub
(Chair)
Regional President (ret.)
Wells Fargo Asia Pacific
Ahn Ho-young
Former Ambassador (South Korea)
Richard J. Ellings
President Emeritus and Counselor
NBR (ret.)
Jonathan W . Greenert
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Charles Hooper
Senior Counselor
The Cohen Group
Quentin W . Kuhrau
(Treasurer)
Chief Executive Officer
Unico Properties LLC
Melody Meyer
President
Melody Meyer Energy LLC
Huan Nguyen
Rear Admiral (ret.), U.S. Navy;
Senior Advisor to Naval Sea
Systems Command
Long Nguyen
Chairman, President, and CEO
Pragmatics, Inc.
Jonathan Roberts
Founder and Partner
Ignition Partners
Tom Robertson
Corporate Vice President and
Deputy General Counsel
Microsoft
Cynthia A. Watson
Professor and Dean Emerita
National War College
Michael Wills
President
NBR
Honorary Director
George F . Russell Jr.
Chairman Emeritus
Russell Investments

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report # 118 | june 2025
china’s economic slowdown
and Its Impact on Trading Partners
Edited by
Arthur R. Kroeber and Jonathon Marek

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
the national bureau of asian research
The NBR Special Report provides access to current research on special topics conducted by
the world’s leading experts in Asian affairs. The views expressed in these reports are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of other NBR research associates or
institutions that support NBR.
The National Bureau of Asian Research helps decision-makers better understand Asia and
craft concrete, actionable policy. NBR is an independent research institution based in Seattle
and Washington, D.C. We bring world-class scholarship to bear on the evolving strategic
environment in Asia through original, policy-relevant research, and we invest in our future
by training the next generation of Asia specialists.
Our research is conducted by a global network of specialists and tackles critical issues
identified by stakeholders in anticipation of future challenges. The findings are a result
of independent scholarship and do not reflect institutional perspectives. Our rigorous
standards facilitate informed decision-making based on knowledge rather than ideology.
Established in 1989, NBR is a legacy organization of Senator Henry M. Jackson, who foresaw
the national need for an institution to study and inform public policy on Asia in both the
public and private sectors. Building on Senator Jackson’s bipartisan approach, NBR engages
policymakers looking for reliable Asia expertise through sustained interaction in high-trust,
nonpartisan settings. Our experts and research have shaped congressional legislation and
administration policies, brought issues to the top of the U.S. foreign policy agenda, and
attracted worldwide media attention. We mobilize expertise on Asia for a more effective
foreign policy.
NBR receives support from foundations, corporations, government (including foreign
governments of allies and liberal democracies), and public agencies, and philanthropic
individuals. NBR reserves the right to publish findings. We do not undertake classified or
proprietary research work, and we observe policies to avoid conflicts of interest.
To download issues of the NBR Special Report, please visit the NBR website
http://www.nbr.org.
This report may be reproduced for personal use. Otherwise, the NBR Special Report may
not be reproduced in full without the written permission of NBR. When information from
NBR publications is cited or quoted, please cite the author and The National Bureau of
Asian Research.
This is the one-hundred-and-eighteenth NBR Special Report.
NBR is a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation under I.R.C. Sec. 501(c)(3), qualified to receive
tax-exempt contributions.
© 2025 by The National Bureau of Asian Research.
Cover design and illustration by Nate Christenson.
For further information about NBR, contact:
The National Bureau of Asian Research
One Union Square
600 University Street, Suite 1012
Seattle, Washington 98101
206-632-7370 Phone
nbr@nbr.org E-mail
http://www.nbr.org

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
china’s economic slowdown
and Its Impact on Trading Partners
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 v
 Foreword
Jonathon Marek
 1
 China’s Slowing Economic Growth: Causes and Impacts
Arthur R. Kroeber
 23
 China’s International Economic Narratives in an Age of Slowing Growth
David Gitter
 45
 The Trajectory and Implications of China’s Economic Slowdown
Arthur R. Kroeber, Ana Horigoshi, and Rodney Knight
 57
 What China’s Economic Slowdown Means for Key Countries: Case Studies
59 Brazil
 Ana Horigoshi and Jonathan Solis
70 Germany
 Ana Horigoshi and Rodney Knight
80 Indonesia
 Bryan Burgess and Ana Horigoshi
91 Nigeria
 Ana Horigoshi and Rodney Knight
100 Paraguay
 Ana Horigoshi and Jonathan Solis
nbr special report #118 | june 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
FOREWORD • MAREK
v
FOREWORD
O
ver the four decades from the beginning of reform and opening in 1978 to the last
year before the Covid-19 pandemic in 2019, the economy of the People’s Republic of
China (PRC) was defined by rapid expansion. GDP growth exceeded 10% in fifteen of
those years and only dropped below 5% twice. Neither global economic events, such
as the 1997 Asian financial crisis and the 2008 global recession, nor domestic political or policy
shifts seemed capable of knocking the PRC economy off its trajectory. This growth pattern, and
in particular an infrastructure- and investment-driven growth model designed to fuel a boom in
manufacturing exports, fundamentally reshaped the global economy and upended supply chains
as companies around the world relocated manufacturing operations to the PRC. This came to be
known as the “China shock.”
While the scale of the impact was massive globally, its particular manifestations varied based
on the nature of each country’s economic relationship with the PRC. For commodity exporters like
Brazil and Indonesia, rapid growth in Chinese demand led to higher prices and windfall profits.
For manufacturing sectors across the industrialized world, however, competition from Chinese
firms—which often gained an advantage through expansive state subsidies, questionable labor
practices, and intellectual property theft—made the China shock a uniquely disruptive experience.
For many developing countries, the rate of growth suggested that the so-called China model
might be an example worth following, with closer political and economic alignment with the PRC
providing not only access to investment or development finance but also a set of economic policies
to emulate.
Over the past several years, however, a new China shock is manifesting—an epochal
development that will similarly reshape how the PRC’s economic interlocutors engage with the
country. Like the first China shock, the fundamental cause of the shift can be found in the rate
and pattern of Chinese economic growth. Unlike the first shock, however, this one is the result
of meaningfully slower growth. A 5% growth rate, which had been the bare minimum one could
have expected for 40 years, now represents an ambitious target for the country’s leadership.
The imperative to understand the causes of this economic slowdown, analyze its trajectory, and
examine its implications for China’s trade and investment partners around the world is the
motivating factor behind this study.
The first chapter analyzes the numerous factors driving this slowdown. Some are immutable:
the natural tendency of growth to slow as a country develops and matures economically, the
decline of growth engines such as infrastructure and housing, and a deteriorating demographic
situation. Others, however, are driven by a pattern of government policy decisions over the past
decade—ranging from short-term macroeconomic management to longer-term strategic choices—
that have undermined or deprioritized economic growth.
Of course, China’s economy is not collapsing. However, given its scale, the rate of its slowdown,
and the changes in its growth model, previous approaches to economic engagement with the
PRC, many of which are characterized by disproportionate levels of reliance on the country as a
market or source of supply, are no longer viable. Despite PRC efforts to advance a misleading set
of narratives regarding the value of economic engagement, as discussed in the second chapter, the
data presented in this report tells a different story. Recognizing the immense implications of this

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
vi
NBR SPECIAL REPORT • JUNE 2025
reality for countries and companies that have aligned their economic strategies with a Chinese
economic trajectory that no longer exists, this report ultimately seeks to understand the impacts
of China’s slowdown on countries that engage with the PRC through trade, investment, and
other economic channels and to provide guidance for these actors on how to restructure their
engagement to align with the new reality.
Our analysis proceeds both quantitatively and qualitatively, seeking first to map out the likely
path of the PRC’s slowing economy—a topic covered in both chapters 1 and 3—and then to examine
the specific channels through which this slowdown will affect other countries. That examination
proceeds from both the top down, through identifying a series of high-level impacts that will be felt
by various types of economies, and from the bottom up, through conducting five country-specific
case studies that provide tangible evidence of cross-country trends and assess the implications for
countries seeking to re-evaluate their models of economic engagement with China. The countries
selected as case studies—Brazil, Germany, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Paraguay—are intended to be
diverse and representative of a variety of different approaches to trade and investment relations
with China. This ensures that the report’s analysis and policy implications are useful for not only
the five countries but also the dozens of others that are similarly situated.
This project would not have been possible without the diligent efforts of the project team
under the guidance of Principal Investigator Arthur Kroeber, whose knowledge of the PRC
economy knows no bounds. AidData, in particular through the contributions of Ana Horigoshi
and Rodney Knight, has been a perfect partner, providing a robust empirical foundation and
unparalleled analytical rigor to strengthen the project’s conclusions. The regional expertise of
Ana and Rod, as well as Bryan Burgess and Jonathan Solis, was similarly instrumental to the
project’s case studies. NBR Nonresident Fellow David Gitter eagerly and deftly undertook the
monumental task of condensing the entire apparatus of PRC propagandizing and narrative-
crafting around its economy and international economic engagement into a single, cohesive
chapter. And finally, I am immensely grateful to the rest of the NBR team—Doug Strub and
Alison Szalwinski for their leadership and vision, Fern Hinrix for her research support, and Josh
Ziemkowski for his editorial expertise.
Jonathon Marek
Senior Project Manager for Technology and Geoeconomic Affairs, NBR

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
1
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #118 | june 2025
ARTHUR R. KROEBER is Partner and Head of Research at Gavekal Dragonomics and
an Adjunct Professor of Economics at the NYU Stern School of Business. He can be
reached at <akroeber@gavekal.com>.
China’s Slowing Economic Growth:
Causes and Impacts
Arthur R. Kroeber

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This chapter analyzes China’s economic slowdown and considers the implications of the
country’s growth trajectory for its trade and investment partners.
MAIN ARGUMENT
Over the past decade, China has seen a steady decline in its real GDP growth rate. This rate
has declined from an average of 10% in 1980–2012 to around 7% in the seven years preceding
the Covid-19 pandemic (2013–19) and to less than 5% in the years since China exited the
pandemic. Many independent forecasts suggest that the Chinese economy will continue to
slow in the coming years. The International Monetary Fund, for instance, projects that the
country’s real growth rate could slow to around 3% by 2030. China’s economic slowdown
results from a mix of structural factors (such as demographics and the exhaustion of returns
from infrastructure spending) and policy choices related to both long-term development
strategy and short-term macroeconomic management. Under current policy conditions,
China will probably record 4%–5% real GDP growth in 2025–26, falling to 3%–4% thereafter.
There is little chance of macro policy becoming dramatically more stimulative. Deflationary
pressure will likely persist, resulting from both the impact of the property sector collapse
and the government’s policies of increasing the supply of manufactured goods while doing
little to support aggregate demand. As a result, nominal growth will not be much stronger
than real growth.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• Sluggish growth will not prevent China’s manufacturing sector from thriving, particularly
given the government’s industrial policies and the country’s rising share in global export
markets. Protectionist efforts to reduce the flow of Chinese exports in global markets will
struggle to reverse this trend.
• China could achieve much stronger growth results with a more stimulative policy
mix, including greater support for the property sector; interest rate cuts and currency
depreciation; more fiscal spending to boost aggregate demand; and service-sector
deregulation.
• China’s investment and trade partners will need to contend with an economy whose
demand for imports is sluggish and increasingly skewed away from manufactures toward
commodities and other inputs, while the country’s exports are increasingly competitive
on global markets. Successful responses will require tapping into China’s shifting patterns
of commodity demand and extracting maximum advantage from its outbound direct
investment flows.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
3
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
O
ver the past decade China has seen a steady decline in its real GDP growth rate. This
rate has declined from an average of 10% in 1980–2012 to around 7% in the seven years
preceding the Covid-19 pandemic (2013–19) and to less than 5% in the years since
China exited the pandemic. Many independent forecasts suggest that China’s economy
will continue to slow in the coming years. The International Monetary Fund, for instance, projects
that the real growth rate could slow to around 3% by 2030.1
This chapter examines the sources of China’s economic slowdown, presents policy choices that
could improve or degrade China’s growth prospects, comments on the trajectory of the country’s
economic policy, and analyzes changes in the composition of growth. It then concludes by
discussing the implications of China’s growth trajectory for the country’s trade and investment
partners, which will be examined in more detail in chapter 3 of this report.
Causes of China’s Slowing Growth: Structural Factors
In the first two decades of this century, China was considered a “miracle economy.” The Chinese
economy grew at an average rate of over 10% until 2012 and at a slower, but still very respectable,
rate of around 7% until the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. 2 In 2021, China had the
pandemic largely under control, while the rest of the world struggled with rolling lockdowns. As
a result, its two-year average growth rate in 2020–21 (slightly over 5%) was among the world’s
strongest. In 2022, however, the tables turned and China’s economy ground to a virtual standstill
under pressure from the fast-spreading Omicron variant of Covid-19 and the collapse of the
property market, while most other economies returned to normal. In the years since emerging
from the pandemic, China’s growth has been much weaker than expected, and the country has
struggled to hit its target of 5% real growth. Weak growth, combined with deflationary pressure
and high debt levels, has led to much speculation that China is headed for a repeat of Japan’s zero-
growth “lost decade” of the 1990s.
China’s economic slowdown is real and permanent, and even more striking when looking
at measures other than the real (constant-price) GDP growth rate (see Figure 1). The country’s
trend rate in real growth has indeed decelerated from a peak of around 12% in the early 2000s
to around 5% in 2024. The slowdown in nominal growth has been even more dramatic, from a
peak of around 18% in 2005–10 to just over 4% in 2024. When nominal growth is converted into
U.S. dollars—taking account of exchange-rate movements—the downshift is even more dramatic,
falling from a peak rate of over 20% to under 5%. This trend has been persistent over more than a
decade, suggesting that deep structural forces are at play, in addition to the shorter-term buffets of
the pandemic and property crashes.
We can divide the sources of China’s slowdown into two broad categories: (1) structural factors,
such as the country’s stage of development and demographics, and (2) policy reasons relating to
the government’s long-term development aims and short-term macroeconomic management.
 1 International Monetary Fund, “People’s Republic of China: 2024 Article IV Consultation, ” IMF Country Report, no. 24/258, August 2024,
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2024/08/01/Peoples-Republic-of-China-2024-Article-IV-Consultation-Press-Release-Staff-
Report-and-552803. Some private-sector estimates are even more pessimistic. See, for example, Roland Rajah and Alyssa Leng, “Revising
Down the Rise of China, ” Lowy Institute, March 14, 2022, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/revising-down-rise-china.
 2 Unless otherwise noted, macroeconomic figures for this report are drawn from World Bank, World Development Indicators, https://
databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators); IMF , World Economic Outlook, https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/
SPROLLs/world-economic-outlook-databases; and China’s National Bureau of Statistics, accessed via the CEIC database, available at
https://www.ceicdata.com/en.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
f i g u r e 1 China’s GDP slowdown in three measures
s o u r c e : National Bureau of Statistics, accessed via the CEIC database, https://www.ceicdata.com/en; and
World Bank, World Development Indicators, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-
indicators.
4
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
This breakdown is inevitably arbitrary—structural factors are also affected by policy decisions—
but still useful in helping understand both the nature of the slowdown and the potential impact of
different policy choices on China’s growth trajectory. The main structural factors are the natural
tendency of high-growth developing economies to slow down as they get richer; the exhaustion
of growth potential in housing and infrastructure, which powered much of China’s growth in the
first two decades of the twentieth century; and demographic decline.
A significant part of China’s growth slowdown is simply the natural and unavoidable
consequence of getting richer. When a country is relatively poor, it can generate huge productivity
gains, and hence rapid economic growth, by yoking its low-wage labor force to modern technology.3
As the country grows richer, the big gains achieved by moving workers from low-productivity
jobs (e.g., in traditional agriculture) to high-productivity ones (e.g., in export manufacturing) run
out, and growth slows as it needs to come more from hard-won improvements in efficiency and
technology.
China’s economic trajectory closely resembles that of its East Asian neighbors—Japan, South
Korea, and Taiwan—all of which enjoyed long periods of 8%–10% growth, followed by significant
decelerations. In the decade after they hit China’s current income level (about $20,000 per person
at purchasing power parity), Taiwan’s per-capita real GDP growth averaged 6.5%, South Korea’s
 3 Alexander Gerschenkron, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1962).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
f i g u r e 2 Comparison of China’s growth (1990–2023) with Japan (1955–93)
Japan 1981
s o u r c e : World Bank, World Development Indicators; and Penn World Table.
5
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
5.5%, and Japan’s slightly over 4%. 4 At a first approximation, China’s trajectory over the next
decade is likely to follow that of Japan in the 1980s (see Figure 2) rather than the higher-growth
paths of its smaller neighbors. The reason is simply that South Korea and Taiwan, as relatively
small countries, could rely very heavily on exports to power their growth. Although China is a
big exporter that runs a large trade surplus, as a large continental economy its ability to increase
the export share of GDP is constrained. South Korea’s export-to-GDP ratio was around 30% in
the 1980s and 1990s and rose to over 35% in the 2000s. China’s export ratio, conversely, peaked
at 35% in 2006–7 and then fell after the global financial crisis, as the country turned more to
domestic demand (see Figure 3 ). Its reliance on exports increased again in the early 2020s
with a government campaign to shift capital into technology-intensive manufacturing. Even
so, the export-to-GDP ratio rose only slightly. Export-led manufacturing will continue to be a
key part of China’s development strategy, and Chinese firms will expand their share of global
markets. But it is unlikely that exports alone can generate a major reacceleration of growth in a
$18 trillion economy.5
The second structural factor is the exhaustion of infrastructure and housing, which were major
drivers of growth in the first two decades of the 21st century. This factor is linked to a slowdown
in the rate of urbanization (see Figure 4). The urban population share rose from 19% in 1980 to
50% in 2010—in absolute terms, from 191 million to 670 million. By 2024, the urban population
 4 These figures are all based on purchasing power parity. The figures for Japan are from the Penn World Table, and those for China are from
the IMF’s World Economic Outlook.
 5 Data on export/GDP ratios is from the World Bank, World Development Indicators, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-
development-indicators. The IMF’s 2024 Article IV Consultation projects a decline in China’s export/GDP ratio.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
f i g u r e 3 China’s export/GDP ratio, 1995–2023
s o u r c e : National Bureau of Statistics, accessed via the CEIC database.
f i g u r e 4 Rate of urbanization, 2000–2030
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Annual increase in population (million)
Year
Actual
UN model projection
s o u r c e : National Bureau of Statistics, accessed via the CEIC database; and UN Population Division,
World Population Prospects 2024.
6
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
7
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
had risen to 944 million, or 67% of the national total. In other words, from the 1980s until the late
2010s, China’s urban population grew by around 20 million per year. Since 2020, however, the
country has added only around 10 million new urbanites per year, and urban population growth
is expected to decline further in the coming years. New urban residents are important drivers of
demand not just for housing but for all the goods and services that power a modern economy. As
urban population growth slows, so too will the economy.
In the late 1990s, the government deregulated the urban housing market, setting off a
construction frenzy that saw household fixed investment—in essence, housing purchases—soar
from about 6% of GDP in the late 1990s to a peak of 16% in 2013. 6 Economists generally estimate
that including indirect effects (among other effects, the stimulus of steel, cement, and other heavy
industries and purchases of household furnishings), the real estate sector accounted for 25%–30%
of GDP during the 2010s.7
State-led infrastructure spending was first boosted in the late 1990s with the issuance of special
bonds to finance expressway construction and other projects. It continued in the 2000s with the
rapid buildout of ports, telecom and power networks, and other infrastructure required to support
the manufacturing boom that followed China’s entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001.
Spending on infrastructure received another massive push in 2009–10, when in response to the
global financial crisis the government pumped a stimulus of roughly 15% of two-year GDP into
housing and infrastructure projects, financed largely by local governments raising loans against
their land holdings.8
Much of this investment was needed: in the early 2000s, China suffered from severe shortages
of housing and infrastructure. The economic return on investment for the early infrastructure
and housing projects was extremely high. Yet, over the next two decades China went from
shortage to glut. Housing starts went from severely lagging the growth in urban population to
overshooting it. After peaking in 2013, household investment in housing steadily declined
to about 12% of GDP in 2020. Since then, it has fallen to around half that as the result of tight
policy controls, which are discussed in the next section. 9 Meanwhile the buildout of massive—
and increasingly underutilized—road, railway, and power systems meant that by the late 2010s
the marginal economic benefit of new infrastructure projects approached zero. Despite these
diminishing returns, central and local governments continue to have strong incentives to invest in
infrastructure: such investments are the main tool for providing support to the economy during
cyclical downturns.
The third structural factor is the reversal of the “demographic dividend.” The simple account
of the economic impact of demographics is that economies tend to grow more quickly when the
working-age cohort (defined as ages 15–64) rises as a share of the total population and grow more
slowly when the working-age share shrinks: the demographic dividend, followed by demographic
drag.10 The reality is a bit more nuanced. India, for instance, has persistently grown more slowly
 6 Andrew Batson and Xiaoxi Zhang, “Timing the Property Downturn, ” Gavekal Dragonomics, September 5, 2024, https://research.gavekal.
com/article/timing-the-property-downturn.
 7 Kenneth Rogoff and Yuanchen Wang, “China’s Real Estate Challenge, ” Finance and Development Magazine, December 2024, https://www.
imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/2024/12/chinas-real-estate-challenge-kenneth-rogoff.
 8 Victor Shih, “Big Rock Candy Mountain, ” China Economic Quarterly 14, no. 2 (2010): 26–32.
 9 Batson and Zhang, “Timing the Property Downturn. ”
 10 David E. Bloom, David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla, The Demographic Dividend: New Perspectives on the Economic Consequences of
Population Change (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2003), https://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1274.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
f i g u r e 5 China’s aging population, 1980–2040
s o u r c e : UN Population Division, World Population Prospects 2024.
n o t e : Data represents the medium-fertility projection.
8
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
than China, despite enjoying a similar demographic dividend. Demographers—including the
inventor of the term “demographic dividend”—have tempered their claims about the malign
economic effects of aging populations, noting that much of the impact can be offset by delaying
retirement ages and other policy interventions.11
Nonetheless, there is little doubt that demography has shifted from a positive to a negative
factor for China (see Figure 5). Between 1980 and 2010, the working-age cohort’s share of the
population rose from 59% to 73% (in absolute terms, from 600 million people to nearly 1 billion).
China’s average growth during those three decades was about 10% a year. Since 2010, the working-
age share has fallen to 69%, and this has coincided with a fall in the average growth rate to 7% in
the 2010s and about 5% in the 2020s. In the late 2020s, this decline in the working-age share will
accelerate, and by 2045 (at the latest) it will be back to its 1980 figure of 59%. In absolute terms,
the working-age population will be about 800 million, roughly midway between its 1980 level and
the 2010 peak. Furthermore, the population share of retirement-age people is inexorably rising,
from about 5% in 1980 to 15% in 2025 and 30% by midcentury. By then, the ratio of working-age
people to retirees will be roughly the same as it is in Japan today. As the supply of productive
workers shrinks, and the proportion of retirees requiring pension and healthcare assistance grows,
economy-wide productivity growth, and hence GDP growth, can be expected to slow. Most of this
demographic decline would have happened anyway, as it has in every other industrial economy.
 11 Bloom et al., The Demographic Dividend.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
f i g u r e 6 China’s labor force participation compared with other countries, 2000–2024
s o u r c e : International Labour Organization; China data estimated from census data in National
Bureau of Statistics, accessed via the CEIC database; and Arthur Kroeber and Ernan Cui, “How to Fight The
Demographic Drag, ” Gavekal Dragonomics, Research Note, February 28, 2024.
9
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
But the decline was probably intensified by Beijing’s reluctance to loosen restrictions on childbirth,
which were fully abolished only in 2021.
Just how much economic slowing will be driven by demographic drag, however, is unclear.
Recent research by the originators of the demographic dividend idea has found that countries can
offset up to half of the loss in growth due to demographic drag as citizens extend their productive
years by living longer and healthier lives. 12 On top of this, China’s working-age population is very
inefficiently deployed. Labor-force participation for those 50 and up is far lower in China than
in most member economies of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) (see Figure 6 ). Restrictions on mobility through the hukou (residence permit) system
prevent workers from moving to cities, where there is most demand for their skills. Over-
regulation of services leads to an excess of low-productivity workers in state-controlled industries
and an artificial suppression of higher-productivity employment in the private sector. There is
thus plenty of potential policy space for China to offset demographic drag by eliminating barriers
to employment for those in their 50s and 60s, boosting labor efficiency through abolishing the
 12 Rainer Kotschy and David Bloom, “Economic Prospects in the Face of Population Ageing, ” Centre for Economic Policy Research, VoxEU,
October 22, 2023, https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/economic-growth-prospects-face-population-ageing.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
10
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
remaining barriers to labor mobility, and deregulating service sectors. 13 At the same time, there
is a significant risk that the demographic drag could have an outsized impact if compounded by
policy inflexibility.
Causes of China’s Slowing Growth: Policy Factors
The factors we have considered so far are all structural and basically unavoidable, although
policy can sometimes mitigate or exacerbate their impacts on growth (especially when it comes
to demographics and other structural factors that affect productivity). But policy choices by the
government not related to structural economic trends have also played a role in China’s economic
slowdown, especially since 2020. Some of these policies are “strategic,” in that they relate to a
deliberate, long-run development strategy. At the other end of the spectrum are more “tactical”
policies relating to short-term management of the economic cycle. In practice, it is not easy to
distinguish neatly between the two, since all policies harbor both short- and long-term effects. But
we can identify a linked set of policies that have tended to put downward pressure on growth over
the past decade or more. Moving roughly from the more strategic to the more tactical these are the
following:
• Reduced emphasis on market-oriented reforms and increased reliance on state guidance,
starting around 2008.
• Efforts to constrain the growth of credit and reduce financial risk, beginning in late 2016.
• Efforts to forcibly shift capital away from real estate, infrastructure, and consumer services and
toward technology-intensive manufacturing, accelerating after 2020.
• A crackdown on consumer-facing internet platforms in 2021–23.
• The maintenance of relatively tight monetary and fiscal policies in the post-pandemic period
of 2023–24, adjusted with a careful economic support package announced in October 2024.
Market Reforms vs. State Guidance
A story commonly told about China is that the last two decades have seen a shift from a broadly
pro-market orientation to a policy mix that puts more emphasis on state guidance. 14 An alleged
consequence of this shift is that productivity growth has fallen for three basic reasons. First,
pro-market policies give more space to private firms, which consistently earn a higher rate of return
on capital (i.e., are more productive) than state firms. 15 Policies that constrain the private sector
or favor the state sector therefore probably reduce productivity growth (see Figure 7 ). Second,
there is evidence that much of China’s rapid productivity growth in the past came from “creative
destruction” in the business sector: less efficient firms going out of business while more efficient
firms thrive. It appears that the rate of creative destruction has gone down (i.e., inefficient firms
 13 Arthur Kroeber and Ernan Cui, “How to Fight the Demographic Drag, ” Gavekal Dragonomics, February 28, 2024.
 14 Barry Naughton, “Grand Steerage as the New Paradigm for State-Economy Relations, ” in CPC Futures: The New Era of Socialism with
Chinese Characteristics, ed. Frank N. Pieke and Bert Hofman (Singapore: NUS Press, 2022), https://epress.nus.edu.sg/cpcfutures.
 15 David Dollar and Shang-jin Wei, “Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and Investment Efficiency in China, ” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper, no. 13103, May 2007, https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w13103/w13103.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
f i g u r e 7 Factor contributions to annual GDP growth
s o u r c e : Adapted from Roland Rajah and Alyssa Leng, “Revising Down the Rise of China, ” Lowy Institute,
March 14, 2022; and Richard Herd, “Estimating Capital Formation and Capital Stock by Economic Sector in
China: The Implications for Productivity Growth, ” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, no. 9317,
July 2020, 25.
11
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
are surviving longer thanks to various forms of state support). 16 Finally, the increase of the state’s
role in the economy has led to an increase in the share of capital spending going to infrastructure,
which has produced declining returns, and a decrease in the share going to business investment,
which is more likely to underpin future productivity gains.
There is almost certainly some truth in this narrative. In particular, it is clear that in the late
2010s housing and infrastructure increased their share of fixed investment at the expense of
business investment. Up to around 2010, roughly half of fixed investment was in the business
sector. But in 2015–19 that share fell to one-third, while the infrastructure and housing share rose
to two-thirds (see Figure 8).17
We need to be cautious, however, about how much of China’s slowing growth can be pinned
on a decline in productivity supposedly driven by more state-centric policies. For one thing,
productivity growth has slowed in virtually every economy in the world since around 2005, for
reasons that are not well understood. 18 It is likely that China’s productivity slowdown is both for
 16 Loren Brandt et al., “China’s Productivity Slowdown and Future Growth Potential, ” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, no. 9298,
June 2020, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33993.
 17 Richard Herd, “Estimating Capital Formation and Capital Stock by Economic Sector in China: The Implications for Productivity Growth, ”
World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, no. 9317, July 2020, 25, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/34126.
 18 See, for instance, Georg Erber, Ulrich Fritsche, and Patrick Christian Harms, “The Global Productivity Slowdown: Diagnosis, Causes and
Remedies, ” Intereconomics, January/February 2017, https://www.intereconomics.eu/contents/year/2017/number/1/article/the-global-
productivity-slowdown-diagnosis-causes-and-remedies.html; and Alistair Dieppe, ed., Global Productivity: Trends, Drivers, and Policies
(Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
f i g u r e 8 Investment in business and infrastructure as a share of GDP
2015/endash.cap19
s o u r c e : Adapted from Rajah and Leng, “Revising Down The Rise of China”; and Herd, “Estimating
Capital Formation and Capital Stock by Economic Sector in China. ”
12
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
reasons that are specific to China and for reasons that are more global in nature. For another thing,
while economists agree that productivity (more precisely, total factor productivity) is the most
important driver of long-term economic growth, they do not agree on what causes productivity
or even how to measure it consistently. 19 The basic problem is that there is no standard method
for deciding where additions to capital end and productivity begins. This is an especially large
problem for China, which has a very high rate of capital formation (consistently above 40% of
GDP) and a statistical system that is heavily biased toward the measurement of physical capital.
Controlling Financial Risk and Limiting Debt
The second key policy choice with a major impact on growth is the effort to control debt
and financial risk. Up until the 2008–9 financial crisis, China’s gross debt (borrowing by the
government, households, and nonfinancial corporations) was relatively stable, and not excessively
high, at less than 150% of GDP. In the following decade, though, debt rose dramatically. The main
reason was that, in response to the financial crisis, the government launched a debt-financed
fiscal stimulus program totaling around 15% of aggregate GDP from late 2008 through 2010. 20
One of the main mechanisms was local governments’ use of special-purpose companies to borrow
 19 For a good explanation of the problems with measuring productivity, see John G. Fernald, Robert Inklaar, and Dimitrije Ruzic, “The
Productivity Slowdown in Advanced Economies: Common Shocks or Common Trends?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February
1, 2023, https://www.frbsf.org/research-and-insights/publications/working-papers/2023/02/the-productivity-slowdown-in-advanced-
economies-common-shocks-or-common-trends.
 20 Shih, “Big Rock Candy Mountain. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
f i g u r e 9 Debt as a share of GDP , 2000–2024
s o u r c e : Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Center for National Balance Sheets of Institutions for
Finance and Development, accessed via the CEIC database.
13
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
against the land assets that they controlled (local-government financing vehicles, or LGFVs).
Local governments used these borrowed funds to build infrastructure (thereby exacerbating the
structural decline in the contribution of infrastructure to growth), help state enterprises buy
assets, and cover regular operating expenses.
Although local governments were the main culprits, there were other drivers of debt. Financial
deregulation between 2009 and 2017 made it much easier for companies and households to
borrow, using increasingly complicated structures involving a plethora of non-bank lenders
(so-called shadow banking). The long property boom resulted in a big rise in both mortgages and
loans to property developers. As a result, gross debt had risen to about 250% of GDP by 2017 (see
Figure 9). The risk that this debt buildup will trigger a dramatic financial crisis is low. Because
almost all the debt is issued by local banks in local currency, foreign creditors cannot prompt a
crisis by calling in their loans. Moreover, with the government controlling all of the lenders and
many of the borrowers, no group of domestic private actors is big enough to set off a crisis. And
the systemically important banks back their loans with a huge pool of low-risk deposits, made
possible because of the high national savings rate (around 44% of GDP) and tight capital controls
that make it very hard for Chinese citizens to move their money abroad.21
Nonetheless, there is significant risk that excessive debt, used largely to finance low-
productivity investments, will be a long-term drag on China’s growth potential. Hence, this factor
is closer to the strategic than the tactical end of the policy spectrum. The government is well
 21 “China Gross Saving Rate, ” CEIC database, https://www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/china/gross-savings-rate.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
14
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
aware of this risk, which is why efforts to control the buildup of debt have been a constant feature
of Xi Jinping’s time in office. In 2013–15, local governments were allowed to borrow directly for
the first time. The hope was that they would refinance their LGFV debt at lower rates and slow
down their debt accumulation; instead, they refinanced and kept borrowing through LGFVs.
In 2015–17, the government launched a campaign to reduce debt and excess capacity in heavy
industry (“supply-side structural reform”). This was largely successful, and Chinese companies
running real businesses in competitive sectors generally do not have unusually high debt levels. 22
In the official debt breakdown shown in Figure 8, over half of the nation’s gross debt is classified
as “corporate.” Yet, this includes a large amount of LGFV debt, which is technically corporate—
because the borrowers are companies not government entities—but in reality is disguised local
government debt.
Starting in 2017, the government launched a “financial de-risking” campaign in order to
eliminate risky shadow banking and make it harder for companies and households to pile up
debt. This campaign was also successful, although at some cost. Private companies, which are
largely shut out of the formal banking system, lost access to a key source of credit, and arguably
the recentralization of credit creation in the big state-owned banks made capital allocation more
risk-averse and less efficient. 23 The re-regulation of finance almost certainly improved financial
stability, but it might have had a negative impact on China’s economic growth.
Despite all these efforts, debt has continued to grow and now stands at around 300% of
China’s GDP according to official data. 24 The root cause is that many local governments do not
have enough revenue sources to fund their operating and capital expenditures—especially since
the collapse of the property market, which is discussed later—and transfers from the central
government do not fully cover the shortfall. As a result, local governments resort to borrowing
to make up their deficits. The solution is comprehensive fiscal reform that would enable localities
to match expenditures with revenues, but there is no imminent prospect of such reform taking
place. Instead, local governments are going through another round of refinancing, swapping out
old debts for new ones with lower interest rates and longer repayment terms.
The debt problem impedes growth in two ways. First, the large stock of debt financing low-
return investments means that less money is available to finance high-return projects. Second,
the desire to prevent debt levels from rising much more means that the government is reluctant
to engage in strong monetary or fiscal stimulus to boost the economy when it is weak—as was the
case in 2023–24.
Crushing the Property Sector and Shifting Capital to High-Tech Manufacturing
The third major set of policies affecting China’s growth trajectory is the government’s drive
to reallocate capital away from real estate and toward technology-intensive manufacturing.
High-tech manufacturing has long been a focus of Chinese industrial policy, but this focus has
intensified in the last decade, essentially for two reasons. First, the government recognized that
 22 Thomas Gatley, “The Promise and Peril of Industrial Policy, ” Gavekal Dragonomics, August 21, 2024, https://research.gavekal.com/content/
the-promise-and-peril-of-industrial-policy. The average debt-to-equity ratio of all listed nonfinancial firms in China fell from 65% in 2013
to 52% in 2023. Excluding real estate firms, the decline in this leverage ratio was steeper, from 62% to 47%. Both state and private firms saw
roughly comparable declines.
 23 Nicholas R. Lardy, The State Strikes Back: The End of Economic Reform in China? (Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International
Economics, 2019).
 24 China Academy of Social Sciences, Center for National Balance Sheets of Institutions for Finance and Development, accessed via CEIC database.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
15
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
the infrastructure and property boom was structurally running out of steam, that a new growth
engine was required, and that this new engine should rely mainly on innovation and higher
total factor productivity rather than on endless inputs of capital. 25 Second, the 2018–19 trade
war with the United States and the subsequent U.S. imposition of tight sanctions and technology
export controls cemented the leadership’s belief that China needed to become self-sufficient in
key technologies.
A decisive moment in this shift occurred in August 2020, when Beijing issued the “three red
lines” policy requiring that property developers drastically reduce their debt and instructing
banks to curtail credit to developers.26 This policy can be seen both as an extension of the financial
de-risking campaign (because it aimed to reduce property-related debt) and as a move in the
capital-reallocation strategy (because it freed up banks to lend more to high-tech manufacturing).
The three red lines precipitated a collapse in the national property market. Over the next three
years, housing sales fell by half, and the number of new houses under construction fell by over
60%. Most property market indicators began to stabilize in late 2024, but the majority of private
(and even some state-owned) developers were still in financial distress. The real estate sector will
probably not return to growth until 2026 or 2027—a trend that will inevitably constrain GDP
growth, given the sector’s significant share of GDP, as was discussed earlier.
The property crash has produced numerous spillover effects—notably, lower demand for heavy
industrial products and their commodity inputs and a hit to consumer confidence (discussed
later). The impact on heavy industry, though substantial, was actually not quite as dramatic as
might have been expected, given the large role of housing in the demand for materials. One reason
was continued government support for infrastructure investment, despite diminishing returns.
Another was rising reliance on export markets, reflecting the disparate channels through which
slowing growth can affect trade and investment partners (discussed later). Steel exports, for
instance, doubled from 54 million tons in 2020 to 110 million tons in 2024. China exported about
40% more steel than either Japan or the United States produced in that year.27
These efforts to force China into a hard tech–oriented growth track have had a dramatic impact
on the composition of the country’s economy. Their ultimate effect on growth is somewhat less
clear. The effort to reallocate capital away from property and into manufacturing has succeeded:
the volume of new loans to industry rose eightfold between 2019 and 2023, from 590 billion
renminbi to 4.8 trillion renminbi (or from $85 billion to $670 billion) (see Figure 10).28 The success
of Chinese high-tech manufacturing is now globally evident—and keenly felt by trading partners—
through China’s huge exports of electric cars and batteries and massive increases in semiconductor
production. Meanwhile, household investment in property has shriveled back to approximately
its pre-2000 level. 29 On the whole, the most likely outcome of the industrial policy–led growth
model is for sectoral success in many of the targeted high-tech industries, but also for significantly
 25 Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, “Outline of the National
Innovation-Driven Development Strategy, ” May 19, 2016, trans. Center for Security and Emerging Technology, https://cset.georgetown.edu/
publication/outline-of-the-national-innovation-driven-development-strategy.
 26 “What China’s Three Red Lines Mean for Property Firms, ” Bloomberg, October 8, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2020-10-08/what-china-s-three-red-lines-mean-for-property-firms-quicktake.
 27 Jing Zhang, “China’s Steel Exports Face Rising Trade Barriers as Antidumping Cases Surge, ” S&P Global, February 25, 2025, https://www.
spglobal.com/commodity-insights/en/news-research/latest-news/metals/022525-chinas-steel-exports-face-rising-trade-barriers-as-
antidumping-cases-surge.
 28 Data is from China’s National Bureau of Statistics, accessed via CEIC database.
 29 Batson and Zhang, “Timing The Property Downturn. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
f i g u r e 1 0 Bank lending shift from property to industry (net new medium-/long-term
bank loans by sector)
s o u r c e : National Bureau of Statistics, accessed via the CEIC database.
16
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
weaker growth than would be possible under a more demand-focused strategy. The basic reason
is that it is not obvious how successes in high-tech production will create spillovers driving higher
productivity and wages in services, which account for the majority of employment and all net new
job creation.30
Internet Crackdown and Declining Private-Sector Confidence
Another policy move executed at around the same time as the three red lines was a severe
crackdown on internet companies that began in November 2020 with the cancellation of the
initial public offering of Ant Group, a financial-technology spinoff of the e-commerce behemoth
Alibaba. After the cancellation, restrictive policies engulfed most of China’s top internet firms for
about two years. The end result of the campaign was that all internet firms were subjected to much
tighter regulation, effective prohibitions on certain business activities (such as fintech or online
healthcare), and strict controls on collecting, storing, and monetizing data as well as on these
firms’ ability to operate internationally.
The internet crackdown had several motivations: a desire to control the financial and social risks
posed by unregulated growth in the sector, a desire to prevent internet firms and their founders
from becoming alternative sources of political power, and the perceived privilege of investments
in hard technologies like semiconductors, industrial automation, and green technology over
consumer services. The latter perception was based on the theory that long-term growth in
 30 Arthur R. Kroeber, “The ‘Venture Capital State’: Implications for China’s Growth, ” in Not Just Another Cold War: The Global Implications of
the U.S.-China Rivalry, ed. Bård Nikolas Vik Steen (New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 2025), 75–100.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
17
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
productivity comes more from the these technologies than from consumer services, despite the
fact that the less state-influenced, consumer-focused service sector has generally outperformed in
terms of returns on capital.
While the tighter internet policy affected a minuscule proportion of Chinese private
companies, some of the largest and most internationally prominent companies were among those
affected.31 The signaling effect was clear: the kind of freewheeling entrepreneurship that had led
to the spectacular growth and innovation in China’s internet sector in the preceding two decades
would no longer be tolerated. Instead, future growth in high technology would focus on the
hardware sectors that were favored by government industrial policy and posed no risk of social
destabilization.
This signaling effect doubtless contributed to the sustained downturn in private-sector business
and consumer confidence that has plagued the economy since early 2022. Several other factors
depressed confidence. Covid-19 lockdowns swept the country in 2022, and unlike in the United
States and Europe, people who lost incomes or jobs received no support from the government. As
a result, precautionary saving rose and did not fall much after Covid-19 restrictions were lifted at
the end of the year. The property crash not only eroded the main store of wealth for households
but also hurt small business owners, who often relied on their homes or other property assets to
raise loans. Many small businesses had already been hurt by the crackdown on shadow banking.
The slowdown of consumer spending meant that consumer-facing businesses were reluctant to
invest and hire new employees. This led to a self-reinforcing growth-slowing cycle, as households
cut back on spending because they were pessimistic about their employment prospects.
Fiscal and Monetary Policy Stances
To summarize, over the past decade—and especially since 2020—China’s leadership has
undertaken a suite of strategic policies designed to increase the state’s control over the economy,
reduce debt and financial risk, and remake the Chinese economy as one driven mainly by
technology-intensive manufacturing rather than investment in infrastructure and real estate. The
stated intention of these measures was to put economic growth on a more sustainable footing and
to boost total factor productivity. (Whether the policies are likely to succeed in achieving these
goals is another matter, discussed in the next section.)
In the short run, however, the overall impact of this policy package has been to reduce economic
growth. The basic problem is that the real estate sector directly and indirectly accounted for more
than a quarter of China’s economy; hence, cutting it in half created a massive hole in aggregate
demand, which no amount of manufacturing investment could fill. 32 Normally, governments
respond to shortfalls in aggregate demand by launching stimulus through monetary policy (lower
interest rates) or fiscal policy (more government spending). Until the autumn of 2024, China’s
government was reluctant to do either. Why was this the case?
The basic reason seems to be that Xi Jinping and his top economic officials believed that a short-
term hit to growth is the price to pay for the strategic reorientation of the economy. Their apparent
conviction is that long-term growth is driven by investments in the right technology, and that
 31 Tianlei Huang and Nicholas R. Lardy, “Is the Sky Really Falling for Private Firms in China?” Peterson Institute for International Economics,
October 14, 2021, https://www.piie.com/blogs/china-economic-watch/sky-really-falling-private-firms-china.
 32 Gerard DiPippo, “Focus on the New Economy, Not the Old: Why China’s Economic Slowdown Understates Gains, ” RAND Corporation,
February 18, 2025, https://www.rand.org/pubs/commentary/2025/02/focus-on-the-new-economy-not-the-old-why-chinas-economic.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
18
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
aggregate demand will eventually pick up once enough of those investments pay off. Short-term
efforts to boost demand do not contribute to growth in the long run, and could even create more
problems by adding to China’s already high debt level.33
Nonetheless, by the late summer of 2024, it had become clear that the economy was slowing
sharply, and deflationary pressures were deepening. In response, the government in October
launched an economic stabilization package, including fiscal and monetary stimulus and measures
to support the property and stock markets. Rollout of the program was done in stages, with many
of the fiscal measures not being implemented until the release of the 2025 budget at the National
People’s Congress in March 2025.34 Yet, the measures already were having a modest positive effect
in the fourth quarter of 2024: retail spending and industrial production had risen significantly,
property sales stabilized (at very low levels), and economy-wide deflation fell slightly. At the
National People’s Congress the government set a real GDP growth target of “around 5%” for 2025
and stepped up its rhetoric in support of boosting consumer demand. China will probably achieve
4.5%–5% real growth in 2025. Policy statements since October 2024 have made it clear that the
government will add stimulus as needed to achieve the target, and various projections reflect that
likely outcome.35 Significant additional stimulus will be needed to offset the negative effect of the
additional tariffs imposed on Chinese goods by the Trump administration, which will suppress
export growth. 36
However, this stabilization masks substantial problems. Thanks to persistent deflation,
nominal growth in China will be weaker than real growth. The downdrafts in consumer and
business confidence are unlikely to be corrected soon. The strategic policy direction of focusing
on industrial policy as a driver of growth will probably stay in place, ensuring a deflationary bias.
The structural factors driving slower GDP growth are thus not going away. In fact, over the next
several years, China’s economy will continue to decelerate.
Note on U.S. Tariff Policy
The above analysis was completed before the Trump administration’s tariff announcements of
April 2025 that raised tariffs on Chinese imports to over 100%, which subsequently were reduced
to around 40% under a temporary agreement reached on May 12. 37 If these tariffs stay in place
or are increased again, China’s GDP growth in 2025 will probably be reduced by between 0.5
and 2 percentage points (depending on the actual tariff level), unless the government unleashes
 33 Lingling Wei, “China Isn’t Planning a ‘Bazooka’ Stimulus—at Least Not This Y ear, ” Wall Street Journal, November 4, 2024. https://www.wsj.
com/world/china/china-isnt-planning-a-bazooka-stimulusat-least-not-this-year-5250ad6e?page=2
 34 Key elements of the package included interest rate cuts, new or increased funding lines from the People’s Bank of China to support the
purchase of stocks and unsold property, a pledge to issue 10 trillion renminbi in new central government bonds to refinance local government
debt and recapitalize the major banks, a target of increasing the central government’s deficit spending starting in 2025, various programs to
support the property market, and subsidies to encourage both businesses and households to upgrade old appliances and equipment.
 35 See, for example, “China Sets Bullish Growth Goal of about 5%, Despite U.S. Tariffs, ” Bloomberg, March 5, 2025; and OECD, OECD
Economic Outlook, Interim Report March 2025: Steering through Uncertainty (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2025), https://www.oecd.org/en/
publications/oecd-economic-outlook-interim-report-march-2025_89af4857-en.html.
 36 As of the time of writing in May 2025, U.S. tariffs on most Chinese imports stood at approximately 40%, comprising a 10%–11% effective
tariff rate resulting from tariffs imposed in 2018–23, a new 10% baseline tariff applied to all U.S. imports, and an additional 20% tariff
ostensibly in retaliation for China’s failure to control the export of fentanyl precursor chemicals.
 37 Daisuke Wakabayashi, Amy Chang Chien, and Alan Rappeport, “U.S. and China Agree to Temporarily Slash Tariffs in Bid to Defuse Trade
Wa r,” New York Times, May 12, 2025, https://www.nytimes.com/2025/05/12/business/china-us-tariffs.html. Estimates of the effective tariff rate
on Chinese imports after the Geneva agreement range from 33% to 51%; the actual tariff regime is now so complex that a precise figure is hard
to calculate. See “State of U.S. Tariffs: May 12, 2025, ” Budget Lab at Y ale, https://budgetlab.yale.edu/research/state-us-tariffs-may-12-2025; Chad
P . Bown, “U.S.-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart, ” Peterson Institute of International Economics, May 14, 2025, https://www.piie.
com/research/piie-charts/2019/us-china-trade-war-tariffs-date-chart; and Arendse Huld, “Breaking Down the U.S.-China Trade Tariffs: What’s
in Effect Now?” China Briefing, May 23, 2025, https://www.china-briefing.com/news/us-china-tariff-rates-2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
19
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
additional fiscal and monetary stimulus. Because of concerns about debt sustainability, the
government will likely compromise by providing additional stimulus, while also accepting lower
growth. Assuming that the tariffs remain in place beyond the short term, China will probably
adjust its policy to enhance the focus on promoting domestic demand and cultivating new export
markets for its manufacturers. Given its large internal market and strong comparative advantage
in manufacturing, China should be able to weather the trade war storm—especially with all of its
competitors in Asia also being subject to high U.S. tariffs. If these tariffs persist in the long run,
Chinese growth rates will be somewhat lower than described in this chapter, but so will the growth
of most other countries in the world. China’s growth will still decelerate, but it is possible that
growth will be driven more by demand from domestic consumption than by industrial policy–led
investment. If so, this would be marginally positive for most of China’s trade partners.
Assessment and Conclusions
China’s economy is slowing for a wide range of structural and policy reasons, and continued
deceleration is likely to occur throughout the 2020s. Xi Jinping and his advisers now see the
government’s central economic management task as building up the nation’s technological
capacities, not maximizing growth. Because of this strong supply-side policy bias, disinflationary
pressure will be persistent. Although consumer price inflation hovered just above zero in 2023–24,
the broadest measure of economy-wide inflation, the GDP deflator, was negative for seven straight
quarters through the end of 2024.
Deceleration, however, is not synonymous with disaster. China’s economy is still by a wide
margin the world’s second-largest, with a GDP of roughly $18 trillion, and despite some misplaced
concerns, it is unlikely to replicate Japan’s experience of a zero-growth “lost decade.” 38 Even if its
average real growth slows to 3% over the next decade, as long as the exchange rate stays stable,
China will contribute more than twice as much to global GDP growth over the decade as India,
which is expected to grow at least twice as fast. 39
The comparison with 1990s Japan is worth a closer look. There are some superficial similarities:
both countries experienced a huge property market collapse, had high debt levels, and experienced
sustained deflation. But the differences are more salient. The Japanese asset price bubble of the
1980s was severe: the prices of both land and equities rose sixfold between 1980 and 1989. 40 This
necessitated a correspondingly large collapse in asset prices (around 80%) after 1990. China has
suffered no such asset bubble: domestic equity prices rose by just 15% in the 2010s, and the official
index of new urban housing prices rose by just 65%. 41 Its property sector had a problem of severe
overbuilding, but not of wildly inflated prices. The other critical difference is that in Japan banks
 38 This concern has been frequently aired in the media since 2023. See, for instance, “Does China Face a Lost Decade, ” Economist, September
10, 2023, https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2023/09/10/does-china-face-a-lost-decade.
 39 China’s 2024 GDP was $18.8 trillion at current exchange rates; India’s was $3.9 trillion. If China’s real GDP grows at an average of 3.5%
starting in 2025, and India’s grows at 7%, then (ignoring exchange rate movements) China will add $7.7 trillion to GDP over the next
decade, while India will add $3.77 trillion. Data is from World Bank, World Development Indicators.
 40 Shuichi Uemura and Takeshi Kimura, “Japanese Share Prices, ” Bank for International Settlements, BIS Conference Papers, no. 5, March
1998, http://bis.org/publ/confp05g.pdf.
 41 China’s data, which is an average of 70 cities, understates the rapid price appreciation of housing in the most desirable cities such as Beijing,
Shanghai, and Shenzhen. But BIS data on home prices, which tries to create a standardized measure across countries, reports that prices in
China rose 54% from the beginning of 2010 to the peak in mid-2021. By contrast, home prices rose by 128% in Japan in the decade before
the 1991 peak and by 149% in the United States in the decade before the 2006 peak. “Residential Property Prices, ” BIS, Data Portal, https://
data.bis.org/topics/RPP .

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
20
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
and industrial companies owned shares in each other, and the underlying value of these shares was
heavily determined by land values. 42 Thus, when inflated land values collapsed, both corporations
and banks were caught together in a classic debt-deflation spiral in which everyone tries to sell
assets at once to pay down debt, but the resulting fall in asset prices perversely causes the real
value of debt to rise rather than fall. 43 In China, cross-shareholdings of this type are prohibited
(precisely because of the lessons from Japan), and the exposure of the large systemically important
banks to property developers is relatively small.
The result is that in contrast with the unified balance-sheet collapse that Japan suffered, China’s
problem is fragmented. Property developers, many local governments, and some state enterprises
have big debt problems, whereas much of the productive corporate sector does not, and the
banking system as a whole is still able to expand the total supply of credit. China’s property and
debt problems are very serious and will take more time to resolve, but they do not fundamentally
constrain the nation’s ability to keep investing in productive new assets.
The base case, therefore, is that China’s economy continues to grow, but at a slower rate than
in the past. The most likely trajectory over the next decade is a continued deceleration from the
current real growth rate of 4%–5% to 3%–4%, followed by stabilization. Slower growth will be
accompanied by persistent deflationary pressure, which China could export to the rest of the world
through lower prices of manufactured goods. For the rest of the world, therefore, the key variable
for gauging China’s impact is not the speed of its growth but the changes in its composition. With
respect to this point, the most important findings are the following:
• Despite much talk over the past decade—most recently through discussions of “dual
circulation”—there is no sign that China’s economy is fundamentally “rebalancing” from
investment-led to consumption-led growth. Its policy clearly supports a continued high
investment ratio of around 40% of GDP .
• However, the focus of investment is shifting away from property and infrastructure to
technology-intensive manufacturing.
• This policy focus will keep the manufacturing share of GDP relatively high (probably above
20%) for some years to come. However, China is not immune to the natural tendency of
economies to become more service-oriented as they grow richer. The service sector has, since
the early 2010s, accounted for all net new job creation. As the service sector’s share of GDP
continues to grow, the trend rate of economic growth will fall, since as a general rule it is harder
to generate rapid productivity gains in services than in manufacturing.
• Reliance on external demand will remain at least as high as it is today and could grow. The
question is how much of this external demand will be tapped by exports, and how much
by Chinese companies internationalizing their operations and setting up production bases
overseas.
China could certainly achieve a higher growth rate through a different policy mix. More
growth-friendly policies would include a greater emphasis on domestic demand, deregulation of
the service sector to push up productivity across the widest swath of workers, and comprehensive
fiscal and financial reforms to boost capital efficiency. However, such a comprehensive change in
policy direction is improbable under the current leadership, although piecemeal reform efforts
 42 Uemura and Kimura, “Japanese Share Prices. ”
 43 Irving Fisher, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions, ” Econometrica 1, no. 4 (1933): 337–57, https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/
docs/meltzer/fisdeb33.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
f i g u r e 1 1 Comparison of China’s and Japan’s nominal GDP as percentage of U.S. nominal GDP
%
Japan 1995
China 2021
s o u r c e : International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Database, https://www.imf.org/en/
Publications/SPROLLs/world-economic-outlook-databases.
21
CAUSES AND IMPACTS u KROEBER
are possible. The industrial policy–led growth model that began to be articulated with the Made
in China 2025 plan in 2015 is now firmly entrenched throughout the Chinese system, and the
political urgency of prioritizing technological development and self-sufficiency over GDP growth
was cemented by the deterioration of relations with the United States over two successive U.S.
administrations of different parties in 2017–24.
On the other hand, the broad-based economic stabilization package launched in the autumn of
2024 shows the limits of the leadership’s tolerance for a weak economy. Although debt levels are
high, the central government still has significant spare capacity to mobilize resources to support
growth if it feels that the need is urgent enough. It would therefore be unwise to bet on China’s
growth falling much below the 3%–4% range in the coming decade. The cost of maintaining
this spare capacity, however, is a high wall of capital controls to ensure that savings stay inside
the country rather than leaking out through capital flight. This will constrain China’s ability to
internationalize its currency or underwrite large-scale non-dollar international payment systems.
China’s economic outlook over the next decade can be described in two pictures. The first
shows that on its new, slower growth trajectory China is unlikely to overtake the United States as
the world’s biggest economy, though it is equally unlikely to follow Japan’s relative decline after
1995 (see Figure 11). Hence, while China will continue to play a central role in the global economy,
it will fall short of playing a dominant one. As the second picture shows, however, China’s position
as the world’s biggest manufacturing power is secure and is unlikely to erode even as its growth
slows (see Figure 12). Chinese industry enjoys economies of scale, a competitive domestic market
that enables rapid innovation (as illustrated by the sudden emergence of Chinese companies as

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
f i g u r e 1 2 Comparison of China’s share of global manufacturing added with other
countries,1980–2022
s o u r c e : World Bank, World Development Indicators.
22
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
global leaders in electric vehicle and battery technology), a large pool of well-trained and relatively
low-cost labor, and ample government support. Efforts to stem the tide of Chinese-manufactured
exports through protectionism, or to force reshoring or nearshoring of supply chains away from
China, might succeed in a few targeted sectors but are unlikely to diminish the global market
share of Chinese industrial companies. What they could do is accelerate the pace of globalization
by Chinese firms, so that a greater proportion of those market-share gains come from localized
production in other countries rather than exports from China. The economic challenge for the
rest of the world, then, will be to maximize the benefits from a China that is growing more slowly
but playing a more active role in global supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
23
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #118 | june 2025
DAVID GITTER is a PhD student in the School of Public and International Affairs at
Princeton University and the founder and principal of Erelas LLC, where he leads
specialized research of Indo-Pacific affairs to inform public- and private-sector
stakeholders. He is also a Nonresident Fellow at the National Bureau of Asian
Research. He can be reached at <gitter@princeton.edu>.
NOTE: The author is deeply grateful to Zaki Atia and John Broach, whose countless
hours of Chinese-language research and insightful analytical contributions
significantly informed and elevated this assessment.
China’s International Economic Narratives
in an Age of Slowing Growth
David Gitter

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This chapter analyzes China’s international messaging strategy for economic engagement
amid domestic economic slowdown, low consumer spending, and eroding foreign investor
confidence.
MAIN ARGUMENT
As China faces an economic contraction and declining foreign investor confidence, Beijing
seeks to reinject positivity into its economic image through external narratives that project
strength, market liberalization, and support for globalization. China’s international
economic narratives are a facet of its broader set of economic challenges and subsequent
engagement strategies with foreign stakeholders. Five central narratives support China’s
economic objectives: (1) attracting foreign investment, (2) convincing foreign investors of
China’s greater reform and liberalization, (3) advancing China’s intellectual property and
market access rights, (4) countering foreign de-risking efforts, and (5) navigating foreign
trade barriers and technology restrictions. Beijing’s information operators use targeted
messaging techniques to encourage favorable trade positions from foreign stakeholders
while dissuading unwanted policies. Such increasingly asymmetrical trade practices,
however, will likely undermine Beijing’s messaging as it seeks to counter international calls
for the diversification of supply chains.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• Despite growing trade frictions and international economists’ recommendations for
China to transition to a consumer-driven economy, its policies signal that the country is
unlikely to meaningfully liberalize its market in the near term as it doubles down on its
export-led growth model. Nonetheless, Beijing’s official messaging to foreign investors
aims to disavow criticisms surrounding trade deficits, low consumer confidence, and
supply chain risks.
• China’s carefully curated narratives surrounding its asserted world-class business
environment, embrace of intellectual property rights, and promotion of the rule of law
work to conceal the unequal treatment of foreign firms competing in the Chinese market.
Foreign stakeholders who buy into these narratives in the pursuit of profitability may
ultimately provide one-sided contributions to China’s technological, talent, and supply
chain ecosystems.
• Due to Beijing’s apparent unwillingness to abandon its export-led growth model, trade
frictions will continue for the foreseeable future and likely induce protectionist policies
globally to rebalance trade and reduce reliance on China. Beijing will find it increasingly
challenging to convince foreign trade partners of the win-win nature of economic
engagement as trade deficits widen.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
25
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
C
hina’s international narratives about its economy play a key (albeit difficult to measure)
role in ensuring that foreign countries and companies remain open to providing the
capital, resources, talent, and market access on which the country’s continued economic
health depends. These narratives are grounded in authoritative Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) documents that are then tailored to the interests and sensibilities of their targeted
foreign audiences. This chapter seeks to examine the strategies employed by Beijing to advance
China’s economic engagement interests with foreign stakeholders.
While the messaging techniques utilized by Beijing share commonalities with generalized
norms of diplomacy and communication, their effectiveness stems from deliberate, audience-
specific deployment to achieve their desired policy outcomes through consistent messaging across
authoritative publications, diplomatic channels, and official statements. Beijing’s overarching
public diplomacy objective is to guide global opinion and monopolize discourse on China abroad.
In the realm of economic engagement, this involves a two-pronged approach of amplifying
positive stories that highlight the success of China’s economic model while suppressing competing
economic narratives that Beijing sees as hostile to its agenda.1
Beijing’s communication techniques have grown increasingly sophisticated. Once central
leadership establishes key talking points or slogans, they are enshrined in party orthodoxy upon
dissemination in National Party Congress documents, five-year plans, Central Economic Work
Conferences, and the CCP’s official mouthpieces, such as the People’s Daily.2 In addition to tasking
official messengers from channels such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) and the Ministry
of Commerce (MOFCOM) with the repeated dissemination of these slogans, Beijing has become
increasingly adept at expanding China’s messaging in local media outlets abroad—a strategy
it refers to as “borrowing mouths.” 3 As of 2022, it had established over four hundred content-
sharing partnerships with local media organizations. 4 This approach effectively masks the Chinese
government’s role while leveraging local media credibility, often leaving citizens unaware that they
are consuming curated content.
Beijing’s economic messaging coherence proves most convincing when grounded in the partial
truths and genuine concerns that resonate with foreign actors economically invested in the
Chinese market, either by addressing their anxieties or by appealing to profit-driven aspirations.
China’s external-facing rhetorical strategy is specifically designed to exploit historical engagement
strategies toward Beijing, which presupposed that supporting Chinese economic development
would translate into democratic reforms and peaceful integration into the international system—
an expectation that ultimately proved unfounded. 5 Nonetheless, Beijing’s messengers still seek to
exploit this diminishing expectation by curating an image of sustained market liberalization that
fosters a welcoming environment to foreign investment.
Beijing’s task is more difficult than it was a decade ago due to factors such as the challenges
in recovering from the Covid-19 pandemic, heightened criticisms surrounding intellectual
 1 Katja Drinhausen et al., “Image Control: How China Struggles for Discourse Power, ” Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS),
September 2023, https://www.stiftung-mercator.de/content/uploads/2024/07/MERICS-Report_Image-Control.pdf.
 2 Wu Guoguang, “Command Communication: The Politics of Editorial Formulation in the People’s Daily, ” China Quarterly 137 (1994): 194–211.
 3 Drinhausen et al., “Image Control. ”
 4 Samantha Custer, “Minutes and Transcript: Quarterly Public Meeting on Understanding the PRC’s Approach to Public Diplomacy, ” U.S.
Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy, January 16, 2025, 5, https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/02/ACPD-January-2025-
QM-Transcript-Final.pdf.
 5 Aaron L. Friedberg, Getting China Wrong (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
26
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
property (IP) theft, pressure from advanced democracies to reduce dependency on the Chinese
supply chain, and rising tariffs and technology export controls. Perhaps most obviously, the CCP
regime’s many external-oriented messengers can only demur on China’s failure to appreciably boost
domestic demand, which has been hampered by the government’s unwillingness to implement
meaningful policies to spur this shift, as detailed in chapter 1 of this report. 6 Messengers regularly
understate the weakness in domestic demand and continue to play into foreign firms’ hopes for
China’s grand domestic market.
In its internal and external promulgations, the Xi Jinping regime has consistently emphasized the
importance of developing “new productive forces” that rely less on labor-intensive manufacturing
and leverage new technologies to improve efficiency under a “new growth model.” 7 To achieve
the advanced industrialization and innovation levels sought by the regime as part of this model,
foreign inputs remain critical in everything from semiconductors and artificial intelligence (AI)
to operating systems and advanced manufacturing equipment. Moreover, another closely related
goal is facilitating new sources of foreign technical know-how to reduce China’s reliance on foreign
“chokepoint” technologies as soon as possible—a concern exacerbated by U.S. president Donald
Trump’s second term.8
As alluded to above, foreign observers have noted Beijing’s 14th Five-Year Plan prioritized a
strategic shift toward technological self-sufficiency and resiliency-building measures that bolster
China against disruptions in global supply chains. Its rhetoric reflects these goals. Although Beijing
today continues to benefit from comparative advantages in technology-intensive manufacturing,
technical talent, and economies of scale, it must work harder to make sure that foreign stakeholders
believe they can tap into these advantages. Foreign concerns regarding IP protection, new risks
stemming from geopolitical competition, and China’s drive for self-reliance must be addressed
satisfactorily, if not directly. Beijing’s narratives, therefore, have also promoted the enhanced rule
of law and protection of economic stakeholder rights, as well as the removal of structural barriers
to international trade and investment.9
The imperative of China’s “dual circulation” strategy presents unique challenges. By advancing
an economic model where the Chinese economy features two growth engines—one focused
domestically and the other externally—Beijing makes clear that domestic self-reliance is to
be complemented by increased Chinese export dominance (an objective that is reinforced by
the aforementioned weaknesses in domestic consumer demand). The result is a nonreciprocal
approach by design, felt by China’s trade partners at home (via trade imbalances, dumping, and
other unfair trade practices) and within China (via a lack of market access and an unequal playing
field). In this light, the issue of how external narratives navigate these nonreciprocal engagements
is worthy of study.
 6 Michael Pettis, “Why Is It So Hard for China to Boost Domestic Demand?” Carnegie China, July 31, 2024, https://carnegieendowment.org/
posts/2024/07/why-is-it-so-hard-for-china-to-boost-domestic-demand?lang=en.
 7 Xi Jinping, “中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会报告” [Report of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China],
October 16, 2022; Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang, “2020年中央经济工作会议公报” [Communiqué of the Central Economic Work Conference
2020], December 18, 2020; Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang, “2021年中央经济工作会议公报” [Communiqué of the Central Economic Work
Conference 2021], December 10, 2021; Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang, “2022年中央经济工作会议公报” [Communiqué of the Central
Economic Work Conference 2022], December 16, 2022; Xi Jinping and Li Qiang, “2023年中央经济工作会议公报” [Communiqué
of the Central Economic Work Conference 2023], October 31, 2023; and Xi Jinping and Li Qiang, “2024年中央经济工作会议公报”
[Communiqué of the Central Economic Work Conference 2024], December 12, 2024.
 8 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和2035年远景目标
纲要” [Outline of the 14th Five-Y ear Plan for National Economic and Social Development of the People’s Republic of China and the Long-
Term Objectives for 2035], March 12, 2021.
 9 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “第十四个五年规划”; and Xi, “中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会报告.”

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
27
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
China’s increasingly domestically oriented direction also drives the CCP regime’s defensive
rhetorical emphasis on principled, win-win engagement with the world economy. Beijing’s
international narratives thus declare China’s outward embrace of globalization and economic
integration with every region and contrast it with Washington’s agenda, which is portrayed as self-
centered and short-sighted. These narratives advertise China’s pursuit of integration through the
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), despite recent rhetoric signaling that investment is scaling down
to “small but beautiful” BRI projects, and showcase Beijing as a champion of free trade in global
bodies and groupings.10
What follows is an analysis of five broad external narratives that serve to facilitate five core
imperatives of the Chinese economy: (1) narratives aimed at attracting foreign investment and
trade, (2) domestic and international narratives for reform and liberalization, (3) narratives
about intellectual property rights (IPR), fair market access, and rule of law, (4) trade dependency
strategies and narratives against de-risking/decoupling, and (5) narratives regarding navigating
global trade barriers and tech restrictions. These narrative-centered sections explain how the
propaganda and information operators of the People’s Republic of China (PRC)—here defined
as all CCP regime messengers tasked with communicating politically driven statements to
advance regime goals—utilize specific techniques and even specific phrases in order to adaptively
incentivize desired foreign actions while dissuading unwanted policies.
Beijing employs three primary rhetorical tactics in its economic messaging abroad. First,
“strategic redirection” pivots or deflects conversations away from criticism toward topics that
present China more favorably. Second, “cherry-picking” involves citing carefully selected
statistics—often through “borrowed” foreign expertise to bolster credibility—while ignoring
broader economic context. Third, “selective omissions” rhetorically misrepresent China’s
economic statecraft by highlighting only minor sectors that portray the country’s industrial policy
in a positive light, while concealing less flattering aspects. International observers may be struck
by the simplicity of the tactics outlined in this chapter and the transparent attempts to distort and
co-opt international economic norms, but there need not be anything mysterious or complex in
Beijing’s economic narratives to effectively sell its circumstantial needs. This chapter concludes
with an overview of these techniques and a brief assessment of their efficacy.
Narratives Aimed at Attracting Foreign Investment and Trade
As China’s economic slowdown continues, the government faces a critical imperative to project
confidence in the country’s economic trajectory as part of broader efforts to incentivize foreign
investment and trade—which it views as necessary components of an effective solution to address
China’s growth challenges. Following the Covid-19 pandemic, these challenges come at a pivotal
time as the country adapts to what it acknowledges as a “new normal”—a period described as
 10 “实打实、沉甸甸的成就——习近平总书记出席第三次”一带一路”建设座谈会侧记” [Real and Significant Achievements: A Side
Note of General Secretary Xi Jinping’s Attendance at the Third Symposium on the Construction of the Belt and Road Initiative], Xinhua,
November 21, 2021, http://www.news.cn/politics/leaders/2021-11/21/c_1128084028.htm; Xi Jinping, “Building an Open, Inclusive and
Interconnected World for Common Development, ” Third Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, October 18, 2023, http://
www.beltandroadforum.org/english/n101/2023/1018/c124-1175.html; and Wang Hao and Chang Qin, “开创共建’一带一路’更加光明的
未来——习近平总书记在第四次‘一带一路’建设工作座谈会上的重要讲话引发与会人员热烈反响” [Creating a Brighter Future for
the Joint Construction of the Belt and Road Initiative——General Secretary Xi Jinping’s Important Speech at the Fourth Symposium on
the Construction of the Belt and Road Initiative Aroused Enthusiastic Responses from the Participants], People’s Daily, December 3, 2024,
http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/pc/content/202412/03/content_30032576.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
28
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
slower, but more sustainable, “high-quality” growth amid a complex global environment. 11
Despite its recognition of these challenges, the PRC’s economic narratives continue to promote
the country’s growing domestic market as a primary incentive to attract foreign capital. Beijing
presents a prima facie plausible case for this narrative. Its commitment to economic revitalization
is repeatedly demonstrated in policy priorities and economic messaging present in the CCP’s
Central Economic Work Conference, where boosting domestic consumption consistently emerges
as a fundamental objective. 12 This focus was further reinforced on February 21, 2025, when
Premier Li Qiang convened a State Council study session specifically aimed at identifying and
implementing measures to enhance consumer spending.13
However, official messaging on domestic consumption belies a broader strategic challenge facing
the Chinese economy. Over the past decade, China has maintained a notably low consumption
rate as a percentage of its GDP—a persistent concern highlighted by international economists
and discussed in detail in chapter 1. In response to international media ringing the alarm bell—
often eroding foreign investors’ confidence in the Chinese market—Beijing has developed a two-
pronged messaging strategy disseminated for foreign audiences. First, it emphasizes concrete steps
to transition toward a more consumer-driven economy. Second, it works to counter what Xinhua’s
English media has characterized as the “consumption crisis” myth shared overseas. 14 The ultimate
goal of this message is to portray China as a dynamic economy with a “prosperous and thriving”
Chinese consumer market ( 中国消费市场的红火兴旺) that remains an attractive destination for
global investment and imports.
First, to assuage foreign investors’ concerns, Beijing communicates that its consumer spending
issue is already under control through effective central government management. One key way it
conveys this message is by highlighting a few selective economic policies that qualify as stimulus
measures while deliberately omitting reference to its lack of stimulus in more consequential
sectors.15 For example, China Daily, one of Beijing’s English-language party mouthpieces, identifies
the lack of domestic demand perceived by economists and foreign investors as stemming from a
“problem of income distribution,” emphasizing the need to direct more income from corporations
to consumers.16 In this spirit, Beijing has touted to foreign audiences through State Council press
conferences that it is cutting mortgage rates by 0.5% and issuing 300 billion yuan in government
 11 Hu Jintao, “中国共产党第十八次全国代表大会报告” [Report of the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China],
November 8, 2012.
 12 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “第十四个五年规划”; Xi and Li, “2020年中央经济工作会议”; Xi and Li, “2021
年中央经济工作会议”; Xi and Li, “2022年中央经济工作会议”; Xi and Li, “2023年中央经济工作会议”; and Xi and Li, “2024年中央经济
工作会议.”
 13 “李强主持国务院第十二次专题学习” [Li Qiang Presided over the 12th Special Study of the State Council], Xinhua, February 20, 2025,
http://www.news.cn/politics/leaders/20250220/bcb5466cdd0e4373a1df26b5fcb91340/c.html.
 14 “Why China’s Pro-Consumption Policies Are Not Meant to Be Effervescent Tablets, ” Xinhua, November 13, 2024, https://english.news.cn
/20241113/9a9c23569815411b9f37ced4aeec9036/c.html; and Daniel Zipser, “Robust Growth Dispels Myths about China’s Consumption, ”
China Daily, November 25, 2024, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202411/25/WS6743da82a310f1265a1cf604.html.
 15 Zhu Chao and Lu Junyu, “外交部：中国消费市场红火兴旺反映各界对中国经济发展信心提升” [Ministry of Foreign Affairs: The
Booming Chinese Consumer Market Reflects the Growing Confidence of all Sectors in China’s Economic Development], Xinhua, February
13, 2025, http://www.news.cn/world/20250213/3eb9b3c899c443d89dbed95c8e5f76f2/c.html.
 16 Xu Gao, “Better Income Distribution Can Create Demand, ” China Daily, September 11, 2023, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202309/11/
WS64fe645aa310d2dce4bb5012.html; Wang Ke and Ou Y angjie, “上半年最终消费支出对经济增长的贡献率达到77.2%消费对经济拉
动作用逐步增强（年中经济观察）” [Final Consumption Expenditure Contributed 77.2% to Economic Growth in the First Half of the
Y ear the Role of Consumption in Driving the Economy has Gradually Increased (Midyear Economic Observation)], People’s Daily, July 27,
2023, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2023-07/27/nw.D110000renmrb_20230727_3-01.htm; and Lin Zhaomu, “增强消费对经济发
展的基础性作用（人民要论）” [Enhance the Fundamental Role of Consumption in Economic Development (People’s Opinion)], People’s
Daily, October 18, 2023, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2023-10/18/nw.D110000renmrb_20231018_1-13.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
29
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
bonds to facilitate the adoption of advanced industrial and consumer technology. 17 While these
stimulus measures are designed to incentivize trade-ins to promote greater consumption, in
practice they offer a negligible economic impact and fail to provide the direct income support
experts say is necessary to drive broader demand. Notably, both former U.S. Treasury secretary
Janet Yellen and International Monetary Fund chief economist Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
made the case in October 2024 that Beijing’s current stimulus measures are not enough to
boost domestic demand and absorb excess production—an argument supported by the analysis
provided in chapters 1 and 3 of this report. 18 Policy responses from the central government still
fall short of the meaningful structural reforms that international observers have suggested are
necessary to reinvigorate household consumption. For example, essays published by both the
Financial Times and Rhodium Group have urged measures that include addressing China’s rural-
urban divide, allocating significant fiscal reserves into social welfare and financial stabilization,
and implementing a comprehensive fiscal overhaul.19
To attract foreign investment, official messaging also portrays China as encouraging a
consumer-driven economy that is making strides to expand its imports, selectively highlighting a
few industries where this holds true.20 For example, Chinese vice-premier Ding Xuexiang at Davos
2025 told the world, “We don’t seek trade surplus; we want to import more competitive quality
products and services to promote balanced trade.” 21 Complementing this international narrative,
Chinese media emphasizes that China is the “world’s second-largest importer…accounting for
10.6 percent of global imports.” 22 Official messengers suggest that Beijing is pushing favorable
policies for foreign goods to China while cherry-picking annual statistics that show import
increases in select sectors such as wine, fruits, clothing, computer parts, electronic components,
and manufacturing equipment.23
Yet many of these imports, especially the ones with the highest increases, are often in areas
where China is specifically seeking foreign technical expertise or has no real domestic alternative.24
For example, Beijing deliberately increased its imports of computer and electronic components
before semiconductor export controls took effect and in anticipation of more stringent measures to
come. Beijing highlights temporary increases in electronics imports as evidence of its commitment
to addressing trade imbalances with other nations. However, these import surges are narrow
 17 “China Unveils Fresh Stimulus to Boost High-Quality Economic Development, ” Xinhua, September 24, 2024, https://english.news.cn/20
240924/7688723503874eb59f5fe4d5690940a3/c.html; State Council of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), “3000亿元国家支持！四部
门喊你领更新换新补贴” [300 Billion Yuan in National Support! Four Departments Are Calling on Y ou to Receive the Renewal Subsidy],
July 26, 2024, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/202407/content_6964480.htm; and Wang Keju, “Renewals, Trade-ins Unlock Investment,
Consumption, ” China Daily, October 28, 2024, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202410/28/WS671ee1c2a310f1265a1c9e5a_2.html.
 18 David Lawder, “China’s Stimulus Measures Not Enough, Y ellen and IMF Chief Economist Say, ” Reuters, October 22, 2024, https://www.
reuters.com/markets/asia/imf-chief-economist-says-lack-domestic-demand-fuels-chinas-export-growth-2024-10-22.
 19 Camille Boullenois et al., “How Can China Boost Consumption?” Rhodium Group, February 10, 2025, https://rhg.com/research/how-can-
china-boost-consumption; and Haohsiang Ko, “China Government Spending on Citizens Lags Behind Economic Peers, ” Financial Times,
February 22, 2025, https://www.ft.com/content/75f97747-53f4-4447-8c14-8a078bdc8750.
 20 Zhu Chao and Lu Junyu, “外交部:中国消费市场红火兴旺反映各界对中国经济发展信心提升” [Ministry of Foreign Affairs: The
Booming Chinese Consumer Market Reflects the Growing Confidence of All Sectors in China’s Economic Development], Xinhua, February
14, 2025, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/pc/content/202502/14/content_30056638.html.
 21 Ding Xuexiang, “Davos 2025: Special Address by Ding Xuexiang, Vice-Premier of the People’s Republic of China, ” World Economic Forum,
January 21, 2025, https://www.weforum.org/stories/2025/01/davos-2025-special-address-ding-xuexiang-vice-premier-china.
 22 Zhang Yiyi, “China’s Expanding Imports Boost Global Economic Growth Momentum: Report, ” Global Times, November 3, 2024, https://
www.globaltimes.cn/page/202411/1322370.shtml.
 23 “Update: China’s Foreign Trade Hits New High in 2024, ” Xinhua, January 13, 2025, https://english.news.cn/20250113/ae26ef8f105841fc847
245555f4b8ad7/c.html; and Fan Feifei, “Consumers Pull Out All Stops for High-Quality, Foreign Brands, ” China Daily, September 16, 2024,
https://epaper.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202409/16/WS66e77dada310b6be0c6572fe.html.
 24 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “第十四个五年规划.”

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
30
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
in scope, chiefly serving China’s national interests tied to obtaining “chokehold technologies”
rather than being emblematic of genuine trade diversification across multiple sectors. 25 Beijing’s
external narratives generalize from these anecdotes to foster positive foreign investor sentiment
in preferred strategic industries. Foreign investors who buy into these narratives in the pursuit of
profitability may ultimately provide one-sided contributions to China’s technological, talent, and
supply chain ecosystems.
Alongside arguments about sufficient stimulus measures and increased imports, official
messaging in some cases downright rejects the premise that there is any problem with consumer
spending by suggesting that domestic consumption of foreign brands is currently enjoying
an unprecedented high. Serving as a rebuttal to international economists, MFA spokespeople
consistently communicate that China’s consumer market is more “prosperous and thriving” than
ever before and provides “opportunities for countries around the world.”26 However, the anecdotal
data points used focus on China’s 2025 Spring Festival—a time similar to the end-of-year holiday
season in the United States—reflecting a seasonal uptick in consumer spending that does not
accurately represent year-round consumption trends.27
To push back against allegations of lagging consumption, CCP mouthpieces also cherry-pick
select industries, such as cosmetics and skincare products, to highlight consumption of imports,
but they fail to address broader concerns in the market like stagnant growth, low consumer
confidence, and declining imports.28 China has more explicit, albeit conflicting, external narratives
on such consumption. For example, two China Daily articles highlight increased demand for
foreign brands, whereas another article contradicts them, stating that “young consumers no longer
blindly pursue foreign brands and instead prefer local brands.” 29 These contradictory narratives
showcase the PRC’s balancing act between projecting national confidence in Chinese products and
enticing foreign brands to further invest in the Chinese market.
In summary, through selective omissions, misrepresentations, and anecdotal cherry-picking,
Beijing’s messaging on its lagging consumer market primarily communicates three narratives,
each marked by a significant gap between rhetoric and reality. First, the central government
argues that it is implementing sufficient stimulus measures to revitalize consumer confidence.
In practice, most international economists (including Arthur Kroeber in chapter 1) believe these
incremental measures fall short of the systemic reform needed to reverse China’s household
consumption slump. Second, Beijing implies it is broadly expanding imports in all sectors to
 25 “Commerce Strengthens Export Controls to Restrict China’s Capability to Produce Advanced Semiconductors for Military Applications, ”
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release, December 2, 2024, https://www.bis.gov/press-release/
commerce-strengthens-export-controls-restrict-chinas-capability-produce-advanced-semiconductors-military; Yuki Furukawa,
“Japan Tightens Export Controls on More Chip and Quantum Tech, ” Bloomberg, April 26, 2024, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2024-04-26/japan-tightens-export-controls-on-more-chip-and-quantum-tech; “Netherlands to Expand Export Controls on
Semiconductor Equipment, ” Reuters, January 15, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/technology/netherlands-expand-export-controls-
semiconductor-equipment-2025-01-15; Gregory C. Allen, Emily Benson, and Margot Putnam, “Japan and the Netherlands Announce Plans
for New Export Controls on Semiconductor Equipment, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), April 10, 2023, https://www.
csis.org/analysis/japan-and-netherlands-announce-plans-new-export-controls-semiconductor-equipment; and Ben Jiang, “China’s 2024
Chip Imports Surged 10.4% to US$385 Billion amid Tighter U.S. Tech Sanctions, ” South China Morning Post, January 13, 2025, https://www.
scmp.com/tech/tech-trends/article/3294570/chinas-2024-chip-imports-surged-104-us385-billion-amid-tighter-us-tech-sanctions.
 26 Guo Jiakun, “2025年2月13日外交部发言人郭嘉昆主持例行记者会” [Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Guo Jiakun’s Regular Press
Conference on February 13, 2025], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), February 13, 2025, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/fyrbt_673021/202502/
t20250213_11554463.shtml.
 27 Ibid.
 28 Fan, “Consumers Pull Out All Stops”; and Logan Wright et al., “No Quick Fixes: China’s Long-Term Consumption Growth, ” Rhodium
Group, July 18, 2024, https://rhg.com/research/no-quick-fixes-chinas-long-term-consumption-growth.
 29 Fan, “Consumers Pull Out All Stops”; Zipser, “Robust Growth Dispels Myths”; and Guan Lixin, “The Y oung Lead New Trends in
Consumption Market, ” China Daily, January 4, 2024, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202401/04/WS6595e97aa3105f21a507a6a4.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
31
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
encourage a new economic growth model that drives higher consumer confidence and provides
foreign firms more opportunities. However, the overall increase in imports is limited to specific
sectors such as “chokehold technologies,” and, more crucially, these import statistics remain
severely imbalanced relative to China’s surge in exports. 30 This reflects a strategy that is a
feature—not a bug—of China’s current export-led growth model. Finally, Beijing’s third talking
point attempts to dismiss household consumption concerns entirely, claiming that negative
reports are merely a product of foreign exaggeration. Under even minimal scrutiny, however, this
last argument loses credibility by contradicting the raison d’être of China’s first two narratives.
These narratives both accept the premise that consumer spending is low and aim to prove to
foreign investors that sufficient measures are being taken to address this issue and its impact on
foreign investors and imports into China.
Market Access: Narratives for Reform and Liberalization
The PRC’s messengers understand that many of the country’s economic hardships are partly
due to it “spooking” foreign investors from considering the Chinese market, and thus they actively
seek to counter this idea. 31 Concerns about future market access, unfair competition, and an
authoritarian legal system that operates on an ad hoc basis combine with the overall economic
slowdown to plague investor confidence. Beijing’s recently revised Anti-Espionage Law, along with
its expanded definition of “national security,” has been cited in crackdowns on foreign firms such
as the Mintz Group, increasing the perceived political risk for businesses operating in China. 32
These issues all contribute to the growing perception that the Chinese economy may no longer offer
the same promising opportunities as before and that, in fact, such opportunities are dwindling.
To combat these perceptions, the chief task of Beijing’s information operators is to reinject
positivity into the PRC’s economic image by communicating that the economy will continue to
open up in more sectors and undergo greater free-market reforms to smooth the path for foreign
investors.33 Indeed, the Chinese economy benefits tremendously from foreign investors and
firms holding out hope for a liberalized economy with fewer barriers to entry, as this perception
largely informs investment practices that can contribute to China’s long-term economic health
and achieve key strategic objectives. To this end, authoritative messaging repeatedly employs
the following slogan: “China’s door won’t close, but will only open wider and wider” ( 中国开放
的 大 门 不 会 关 闭 ，只 会 越 开 越 大). Similar to official pledges to “comprehensively deepen reform
and opening” or declarations that “China is open for business,” this rhetorical formulation aims
 30 Keith Bradsher, “China’s Trade Surplus Reaches a Record of Nearly $1 Trillion, ” New York Times, January 12, 2025, https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/01/12/business/china-trade-surplus.html.
 31 Alexander Chipman Koty, “How to Understand China’s Common Prosperity Policy, ” China Briefing, March 21, 2022, https://www.china-
briefing.com/news/china-common-prosperity-what-does-it-mean-for-foreign-investors.
 32 Joe McDonald, “Foreign Companies in China Face Growing Scrutiny, Pressure, ” Associated Press, April 28, 2023, https://apnews.com/
article/china-foreign-business-corruption-investigation-technology-113adfa55788aabb11896d8b059b32bc; Antoni Slodkowski and Liz
Lee, “China Frees Mintz Staff in Move to Soothe Foreign Sentiment, ” Reuters, March 24, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/china-
releases-mintz-employees-after-two-year-detention-company-says-2025-03-25; and “中华人民共和国反间谍法” [Anti-Espionage Law of
the People’s Republic of China], Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress (PRC), April 26, 2023, https://flk.npc.gov.cn/detail2.
html?ZmY4MDgxODE4N2FhMzJmOTAxODdiZDJlNDQwYjA1MmE%3D.
 33 Xi and Li, “2024年中央经济工作会议.”

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
32
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
to communicate continuity and stability to bolster the confidence of foreign investors. 34 Its
prominence and intentionality are evidenced by Xi Jinping’s direct use of the slogan during a 20th
Party Congress press conference and its recent appearance in Vice Premier Ding Xuexiang’s 2025
Davos speech.35 Not surprisingly, this narrative typically appears during periods of low investor
confidence, such as at the tail end of the Covid-19 lockdowns, with the PRC explicitly framing
it as a rebuttal to skeptics of the Chinese market. 36 Through this narrative, among other official
talking points, Beijing aims to present three key themes to demonstrate that China is adequately
addressing the concerns of foreign firms by hosting a welcoming business environment.
First, a prominent feature of Beijing’s messaging is to pair the slogan with examples of anecdotal
piecemeal openings in key sectors, serving as evidence that China is indeed becoming friendlier to
foreign enterprises. This carefully curated presentation aims to portray a consistent trajectory of
liberalization. For example, the PRC’s ambassador to the United States, Xie Feng, stated that, “on
one hand, [China’s] door is opening wider…. On the other hand, the barriers to foreign enterprises
are decreasing.”37 To support this claim, he highlighted Beijing’s new policy that has “lifted all
restrictions on foreign investment in manufacturing” while also reducing restrictions on China’s
“negative list”—a selection of economic sectors barred from foreign investment. However, relaxing
foreign investments on manufacturing serves the country’s interest to embed itself further
in global supply chains, acquire foreign technology and manufacturing processes, expand its
dominance in manufacturing output, and continue its focus on long-term competitive gains—all
of which raise concern abroad.38 Lifting these restrictions on manufacturing also selectively omits
other sectors in the Chinese economy that still face severe restrictions on market access. Thus,
this policy does not necessarily improve investors’ access to unrestricted domestic operation and
unimpeded profitability.
Second, official messaging selectively cherry-picks success stories to misrepresent market
access for foreign companies. For example, Beijing highlights the profitability of early movers
such as McDonald’s and Starbucks, implying that if they could penetrate the Chinese market,
other foreign firms can take advantage of the same opportunities. 39 In manufacturing, China
 34 20th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “Full Text: Resolution of CPC Central Committee on Further Deepening
Reform Comprehensively to Advance Chinese Modernization, ” July 18, 2024, https://english.www.gov.cn/policies/latestreleases/202407/21/
content_WS669d0255c6d0868f4e8e94f8.html; Xi Jinping, “Comprehensively Deepening Reform and Opening Up to Give Greater Impetus
to Chinese Modernization, ” Qiushi Journal, no. 10 (2024), http://en.qstheory.cn/2024-07/17/c_1005577.htm; 20th Central Committee of the
Chinese Communist Party, “中共中央关于进一步全面深化改革 推进中国式现代化的决定” [Decision of the CPC Central Committee
on Further Comprehensively Deepening Reform and Promoting Modernization with Chinese Characteristics], July 18, 2024, http://paper.
people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2024-07/22/nw.D110000renmrb_20240722_2-01.htm; Meaghan Tobin, “In China’s Words, It’s Open for Business.
In Actions, Not So Much, ” Washington Post, May 23, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/05/23/china-investment-us-
wang-wentao; and Antoni Slodkowski, “Chinese Premier Li Calls for Global Cooperation, Says China Open for Business, ” Reuters, January
16, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/chinas-premier-li-address-davos-its-economy-struggles-2024-01-16.
 35 “China to Open Wider to the World: Xi, ” Xinhua, October 23, 2023, https://english.news.cn/20221023/e9828e1505a14676a15383e3b30635f4
/c.html; Xi Jinping, “习近平:中国开放的大门只会越开越大” [Xi Jinping: China’s Door of Opening Up Will Only Open Wider and Wider],
Caixin, May 18, 2022, https://china.caixin.com/2022-05-18/101887034.htm; Du Haitao and Luo Shanshan, “开放的大门越开越大（奋进
新征程 建功新时代·伟大变革）” [The Open Door Is Opening Wider and Wider (Strive for a New Journey and Make Contributions to the
New Era and Great Reform)], People’s Daily, April 6, 2022, https://www.moj.gov.cn/pub/sfbgw/zwgkztzl/2022zt/20220311fjxzc/20220311fjx
zc_wdbg/202204/t20220406_452179.html; and Ding, “Davos 2025. ”
 36 Gao Xingwei, “Reform and Opening-Up to Economic Miracle, ” China Daily, October 19, 2022, https://www.chinadaily.com.
cn/a/202210/19/WS634f37e3a310fd2b29e7d394.html.
 37 Xie Feng, “中国驻美大使谢锋:中国将以更高水平开放提供市场新机遇” [Chinese Ambassador to the United States Xie Feng: China Will
Provide New Market Opportunities with a Higher Level of Openness], Embassy of the PRC in the United States of America, August 28,
2024, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/dshd/202408/t20240828_11480302.htm.
 38 Bradsher, “China’s Trade Surplus. ”
 39 Gao, “Reform and Opening-Up to Economic Miracle. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
33
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
similarly touts General Electric, BP, Siemens, and Tesla as success stories. 40 In the case of Tesla,
however, Beijing granted the company selective market access to induce a “catfish effect”—the
introduction of a large competitor to foster domestic know-how, nurture talents, and invigorate
China’s domestic electric vehicle sector. 41 Crucially, Tesla’s selective access does not represent
structural openness in the Chinese market, and other foreign firms are unlikely to obtain the
same privileges. Nonetheless, Beijing’s international narrative showcases Tesla as evidence of an
increasingly welcoming business environment for foreign firms rather than more accurately as a
strategic exception to China’s broad market restrictions.
Third, PRC media and embassy statements deliberately redirect discourse on foreign market
access to focus on “equal” or “fair” competition. 42 In practice, Beijing’s interpretation of these
terms is used as a cover for its protectionist policies. For example, a People’s Daily commentary
explicitly outlines the PRC’s extensive negative lists as “a powerful safeguard” for domestic
markets.43 When communicating to foreign audiences, however, Beijing’s messaging avoids
addressing a fundamental imbalance: the PRC preserves significant barriers against foreign
investors, while its companies enjoy relatively open access to international markets. This narrative
shifts the focus away from the country’s structural market barriers, redirecting attention through
positive messaging about a “world-class business environment that is market-oriented, law-based,
and internationalized”—all defined on Beijing’s terms. 44
The result of this narrative of fair competition can be seen in examples such as Apple Pay, which
was barred from entering China until 2016, when market dominance by domestic alternatives like
WeChat Pay and Alipay had already been established. 45 Similarly, all digital card payments in
China were processed by the domestic payment network UnionPay until 2019. Some restrictions
were then eased, but UnionPay was already deeply entrenched in the Chinese market. 46 It was
only in mid-2023 that most restrictions on digital payments with foreign payment networks like
Visa and MasterCard were lifted for foreign card holders. 47 These cases highlight China’s “fair
competition” narrative as coded language for protectionist policies. They further show China’s
strategic opening-up as benefiting domestic firms and putting foreign firms at a systemic
disadvantage—contradicting China’s public messaging about competitive neutrality.
In summary, three primary arguments reflect Beijing’s efforts to persuade foreign investors
that China offers a stable, liberalized market with a modicum of policy continuity trending
 40 Xua Ping, “Tesla’s ‘Catfish Effect’ and China’s 10-Million-Unit Milestone in NEV Production, ” People’s Daily, December 4, 2024, http://
en.people.cn/n3/2024/1204/c90000-20249994.html; “Tesla’s Shanghai Energy Storage Megafactory Begins Trial Production, ” Xinhua,
January 1, 2025, https://english.news.cn/20250101/1b6dc0cdcc8f46768b4c1a5c4151c17e/c.html; and He Yin, “为世界能源转型贡献中国
力量” [Contributing China’s Strength to the World’s Energy Transformation], People’s Daily, August 21, 2024, http://paper.people.com.cn/
rmrb/html/2024-08/31/nw.D110000renmrb_20240831_2-03.htm.
 41 Xua, “Tesla’s ‘Catfish Effect. ’”
 42 Zhong Wenxing and Liang Jun, “China Eyes New Rules on Fair Competition Reviews to Ensure Level Playing Field, ” Xinhua, June 21, 2024,
https://english.news.cn/20240621/4cc5240a1ebd4f3eb70ab7a712da8ad8/c.html; and Liu Zhiqiang and Ding Yiting, “中央层面首次专门就
完善市场准入制度建设出台政策文件，放宽准入限制，激发市场潜力活力” [For the First Time, the Central Government has Issued
a Policy Document Specifically on Improving the Market Access System, Relax Access Restrictions and Stimulate Market Potential and
Vitality], People’s Daily, August 31, 2024, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2024-08/31/nw.D110000renmrb_20240831_2-02.htm.
 43 Li Xinping, “ ‘一单列尽’,让市场准入更公平（人民时评）” [“One List of All” Makes Market Access More Fair (People’s Commentary)],
People’s Daily, September 6, 2024, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2024-09/06/nw.D110000renmrb_20240906_2-11.htm.
 44 Xi, “中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会报告.”
 45 Shu Zhang and Paul Carsten, “ Apple Pay to Go Live in China on February 18, ” Reuters, February 16, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/
technology/apple-pay-to-go-live-in-china-on-february-18-idUSKCN0VP1AQ.
 46 Laura He, “Visa and Mastercard Can Now Be Used on China’s Biggest Payment Apps, ” CNN, July 21, 2023, https://www.cnn.
com/2023/07/21/tech/china-alipay-wechat-pay-international-credit-cards-intl-hnk/index.html.
 47 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
34
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
toward openness. First, Beijing selectively identifies limited piecemeal openings to demonstrate
that the Chinese economy is on a trajectory that is friendlier to foreign firms. Second, official
propaganda highlights the success stories of foreign firms to disprove allegations of limited market
access. Third, Beijing’s messaging masks the protectionist nature of its policies by framing them
as only ensuring fair competition with domestic competitors, which is openly interpreted and
determined by Chinese authorities.
Intellectual Property Rights and Rule of Law Narratives
Improving IPR and the rule of law in China is critical for Beijing to signal to foreign investors
that China’s market is a safe place to invest. Foreign investors have increasingly been concerned
about forced IP transfers and the general lack of transparency in China’s legal system. On the
surface Beijing’s domestic policy pushes for greater enforcement and improvement of IP laws
and better implementation of the rule of law in the marketplace. 48 However, when diving deeper
into external narratives surrounding China’s regulatory environment, contradictions appear that
further fuel foreign investors’ concerns.
To push back against foreign criticisms about China’s regulatory environment, Beijing makes
two central claims. First, Beijing proclaims it safeguards IPR but opposes what it defines as “IPR
hegemony.” Second, it argues that China’s business environment “ensure[s] national treatment” for
foreign firms, yet it still exercises the right to safeguard its own “rule of law” interests. 49 Both of
these narratives are briefly discussed below.
China “Opposes IPR Hegemony”
Beijing’s narratives abroad focus on promoting an image that “China is fully involved in global
IPR governance,” supports the World Intellectual Property Organization, and provides “equal
IPR protection” to both domestic and foreign enterprises. 50 At the same time, official messaging
identifies a clear caveat in the form of strategic redirection. Beijing claims that China “opposes IPR
hegemony” (抵制知识产权霸权), which it defines as developed countries leveraging their IP to
limit, slow, or otherwise harm other countries’ right to development.51 The shift from IP protection
to the goal of establishing new international IPR rules that “uphold all countries’ legitimate right
to development” is a diversion that intentionally distracts from the IP issue at hand. 52 Moreover,
by promoting the “right to development,” Beijing is potentially laying the groundwork for a shift
in international IPR governance from full IP protection to an engineered acquiescence where
 48 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “第十四个五年规划.”
 49 “Qin Gang Meets with Director General of the World Intellectual Property Organization Daren Tang, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC),
April 28, 2023, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng./wjbzhd/202304/t20230429_11069018.html; Zhang Ming, “ Ambassador Zhang Ming: A High-
Standard China-EU Investment Agreement to Help Recover through Certainty, Sustainability and Multilateralism, ” Mission of the PRC to
the European Union, January 1, 2021, http://eu.china-mission.gov.cn/eng/mh/202101/t20210113_8203783.htm; and Ministry of Foreign
Affairs Party Committee (PRC), “努力开创外交战线涉外法治工作新局面” [Strive to Create a New Situation in Foreign-Related Rule of
Law Work on the Diplomatic Front], August 12, 2024, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/wjbxw_new/202408/t20240812_11469485.shtml.
 50 Lin Jian, “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular Press Conference on July 30, 2024, ” Embassy of the PRC in the United States of
America, July 30, 2024, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/lcbt/wjbfyrbt/202407/t20240730_11463380.htm.
 51 “Qin Gang Meets with Director General of the World Intellectual Property Organization”; and Gao Xiaomei, “我国知识产权战略亟需前瞻
性布局” [My Country’s Intellectual Property Strategy Urgently Needs Forward-Looking Layout], People’s Tribune, no. Z2 (2020): 6–7,
http://paper.people.com.cn/rmlt/html/2020-04/28/content_1986811.htm.
 52 “Qin Gang Meets with Director General of the World Intellectual Property Organization. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
35
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
China and others have de facto cover to forcibly transfer IP to domestic businesses as it serves their
developmental interest.
This dichotomy in rhetoric highlights Beijing’s delicate balancing act in assuring foreign
inventors that China respects IP while also alluding to Beijing’s moral justification for continuing
its policy of forced technology transfers. China even attempts to address IP theft by holding State
Council press briefings on its “iron fist” campaign to root out bad actors, including IP infringers.53
However, its crackdowns selectively omit and fail to address forced technology transfers—a core
concern for foreign companies when conducting business with China.54 To showcase its willingness
to engage on IP issues, Beijing professes to adhere to the Scientific and Technology Agreement
between the United States and China. China highlights how the 2024 updated agreement has
new “strict regulatory clauses in place that address such concerns as trade secrets and intellectual
property.”55 However, this agreement selectively addresses U.S.-China government-funded and
-facilitated scientific and technological cooperation and omits commercial IP issues.
Despite the narrow scope and selective omissions of its crackdowns on IP infringement, Beijing
goes further in its international narratives on IP. CGTN and the Global Times , for example,
explicitly highlight China’s “products with independent intellectual property rights” in articles
about the 135th and 136th Canton Fairs in 2024. 56 The goal is to emphasize China’s innovation,
market competitiveness, and surge in IP filings to prove to the world that the country is an IP
power. However, while China is signaling greater acceptance of IPR, its enforcement primarily
focuses on protecting Chinese IP over equal treatment of all IP abroad.
Foreign-Related Rule of Law
Internationally, Beijing promotes its “national treatment” and “foreign-related rule of law”
(涉外法治) policies as key implementations of reform. 57 National treatment, as promoted by
China’s State Council and European Union mission, purports to ensure equal legal and regulatory
treatment for both domestic and foreign enterprises and investors. 58 While national treatment
is a widely used international legal concept and a foundational trade principle of the World
Trade Organization (WTO), the PRC only applies the concept to the few sectors where foreign
firms and investors already have market access. Beijing’s related rhetoric is therefore a form of
 53 Li Lei, “Senior Official Reiterates Pledge to Safeguard IP , ” China Daily, April 28, 2024, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202404/27/
WS662c4259a31082fc043c4563.html; “Official: China Addresses Foreign Enterprises’ IP Concerns, ” Xinhua, November 29, 2024, https://
english.news.cn/20241129/6203d2d7061d4eb2b877a62f31b41990/c.html; and “China Expands IP Protection Network to 75 Centers, ”
Xinhua, December 2, 2024, https://english.news.cn/20241202/9a2fc26dac66469989d8c38ea99818e6/c.html.
 54 Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, “Four-Y ear Review of Actions Taken in the Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies,
and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation, ” May 14, 2024, https://ustr.gov/sites/default/
files/05.13.2024%20Executive%20Summary%20of%20Four%20Y ear%20Review%20of%20China%20Tech%20Transfer%20Section%20
301%20(Final).pdf.
 55 “Renewal of China-U.S. STA Indicates Potential for Collaboration, ” Global Times, December 15, 2024, https://www.globaltimes.cn/
page/202412/1325112.shtml; and “Benefits of Science Cooperation Clear to All, ” China Daily, December 24, 2023, https://www.chinadaily.
com.cn/a/202312/24/WS65881102a31040ac301a939d.html.
 56 Liu Chunsheng, “135th Canton Fair to Boost China’s Foreign Trade, ” CGTN, April 17, 2024, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2024-04-
17/135th-Canton-Fair-to-boost-China-s-foreign-trade-1sRVfaNbkFa/p.html; and Chi Jingyi, “136th Canton Fair Concludes, Showing
Vitality of China’s Foreign Trade through Diversity, Inclusiveness, ” Global Times, November 4, 2024, https://www.globaltimes.cn/
page/202411/1322431.shtml.
 57 Zhang, “ Ambassador Zhang Ming”; and “Xi Stresses Development of Foreign-Related Legal System, ” Xinhua, November 28, 2023,
https://english.www.gov.cn/news/202311/28/content_WS65658e5dc6d0868f4e8e1b37.html.
 58 “China to Ensure National Treatment for Foreign-Funded Enterprises, ” Xinhua, March 5, 2024, https://english.www.gov.cn/news/202403/05/
content_WS65e67ff2c6d0868f4e8e4a8e.htmlhttps://english.www.gov.cn/news/202403/05/content_WS65e67ff2c6d0868f4e8e4a8e.html; and
Zhang, “ Ambassador Zhang Ming. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
36
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
selective omission. 59 For example, the 2024 Negative List heavily restricts and regulates foreign
investment and market access into agriculture, media, education, financial services, transportation
and logistics, information technology services, and other sectors of the Chinese economy. 60 These
restrictions result in China’s conditional use of true national treatment and thus violate this core
principle of the WTO.61 Furthermore, Beijing’s frequent use of national treatment in its messaging
simply does not equate to the broad market liberalization that it rhetorically implies.
The Ministry of Justice highlights foreign-related rule of law as the path forward to bring
Chinese law closer to foreign and international law, arguing that it will foster a better cross-
border legal environment for greater economic integration with the world. 62 The aim is to assure
foreign investors that China will continue to align with global economic norms. However, at its
core, foreign-related rule of law also reinforces state control over foreign actors and is domestically
viewed as a tool to combat foreign influence and promote Beijing’s legal interests abroad. 63
First, Beijing’s rhetoric strategically avoids international oversight and leaves room for China to
challenge international rules and norms by including language ensuring the protection of “national
sovereignty, security, and development interests”—as it does with IPR when claiming that “IPR
hegemony” undermines countries’ rights to development. 64 Second, the rhetoric surrounding the
term “foreign-related rule of law” focuses on training more globalized legal professionals to help
Beijing influence international law and better navigate foreign trade and technology restrictions
(as will be discussed further below). 65 Third, in tandem with the growing application of national
security concepts in China and other laws such as the Anti–Foreign Sanctions Law, foreign-related
rule of law is part of a larger mechanism to counter external legal pressures. 66
Related to this last point, prominent Chinese legal scholar Huo Zhengxin has described
foreign-related rule of law as including both offensive and defensive elements to safeguard China’s
interests.67 According to his explanation, the concept is offensive in that it seeks to assert “China’s
interests beyond its borders,” while it is defensive in its ability to “[block] other countries’ attempts
 59 “China to Ensure National Treatment for Foreign-Funded Enterprises”; Zhang, “ Ambassador Zhang Ming”; and “Understanding the WTO:
Basics, Principles of the Trading System, ” WTO, 2025, https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/fact2_e.htm.
 60 Development and Reform Commission (PRC), “外商投资准入特别管理措施(负面清单)(2024年版)” [Special Administrative
Measures for Foreign Investment Access (Negative List) (2024 Edition)], https://www.ndrc.gov.cn/xxgk/zcfb/fzggwl/202409/
P020240907514493057643.pdf.
 61 “Understanding the WTO. ”
 62 Zhu Jian, “人民日报整版探讨:加强涉外法治建设” [People’s Daily Discusses in Full Page: Strengthening the Construction of Foreign-
Related Rule of Law], People’s Daily, March 29, 2024, https://www.moj.gov.cn/pub/sfbgw/zwgkztzl/xxxcgcxjpfzsx/fzsxyw/202403/
t20240329_496767.html; and Cao Yin, “Experts: Strong Foreign-Related Rule of Law Vital, ” China Daily, December 6, 2023, https://www.
chinadaily.com.cn/a/202312/06/WS656fc93ea31090682a5f1a20.html.
 63 Huo Zhengxin, “霍政欣:我国法域外适用体系之构建——以统筹推进国内法治和涉外法治为视域” [Huo Zhengxin: The Construction
of My Country’s Extraterritorial Application System of Law—from the Perspective of Coordinating the Promotion of Domestic Rule of Law
and Foreign-Related Rule of Law], China Law Review, no. 1 (2022), https://fzzfyjy.cupl.edu.cn/info/1036/15178.htm.
 64 Zhu, “加强涉外法治建设”; and Cao, “Experts: Strong Foreign-Related Rule of Law Vital. ”
 65 Cao Yin and Li Shangyi, “Key Role of Law Societies Highlighted, ” China Daily, January 11, 2025, https://www.chinadaily.com.
cn/a/202501/11/WS6781a449a310f1265a1da358.html; Huo Zhengxin, “涉外法治的法理意涵与建设路径” [Legal Implications
and Construction Paths of Foreign-Related Rule of Law], Guangming Daily, January 5, 2024, https://news.gmw.cn/2024-01/05/
content_37072144.htm; “努力开创外交战线涉外法治工作新局面” [Strive to Create a New Situation in Foreign-Related Rule of Law
Work on the Diplomatic Front], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), August 12, 2024, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/wjbxw_new/202408/
t20240812_11469485.shtml; and Ding Xiamin, “以高质效检察履职推进高水平涉外法治” [Promoting High-Level Foreign-Related Rule
of Law through High-Quality and Efficient Procuratorial Performance], Procuratorial Daily, January 22, 2025, https://newspaper.jcrb.com/2
025/20250122/20250122_003/20250122_003_1.htm.
 66 29th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Thirteenth National People’s Congress, “中华人民共和国反外国制裁法” [Anti–
Foreign Sanctions Law of the People’s Republic of China], State Council (PRC), June 10, 2021, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-06/11/
content_5616935.htm.
 67 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2023 Annual Report to Congress, ” November 2023, chap. 2, section 1, 181–84,
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2023-11/Chapter_2_Section_1--Chinas_Increasingly_Global_Legal_Reach.pdf; and Ding, “推进高
水平涉外法治.”

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
37
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
to assert longarm jurisdiction against Chinese entities,” affirming that foreign-related rule of law is
focused on countering external legal pressures and projecting influence abroad. 68 In light of these
alternative goals, foreign-related rule of law does not promote an independent judiciary—which
the concept of rule of law inherently implies to international audiences. It is also less focused on
fostering greater economic and legal integration and more concerned with leveraging international
and foreign law to increase Beijing’s influence and to protect its firms abroad.
In sum, Beijing’s international narratives on IPR and the rule of law aim to present China as
offering a friendly environment for foreign businesses. However, official messaging frequently
obscures important policy discrepancies by selectively omitting details and employing rhetorical
shifts to concepts that sanction its actual practices. China promotes itself as providing equal IPR
protection, supporting global IPR governance, and cracking down on IP theft. 69 At the same time,
it staunchly opposes what it presents as IPR hegemony and justifies policies that force companies
to transfer IP and technology as needed to facilitate development.70 China’s rhetoric about the rule
of law focuses on advancing its international influence rather than genuinely protecting foreign
businesses, with no full implementation of true national treatment or shift toward accepting
international legal norms.71 By not addressing foreign investors’ questions about IPR, Beijing only
adds to their concerns about the Chinese market.
Trade Dependency Strategies and Narratives against
De-risking/Decoupling
In the 14th Five-Year Plan, China outlined its strategy for economic growth through the
dual-circulation policy, emphasizing domestic self-reliance while also bolstering its dominance
in global exports. 72 However, Beijing has encountered serious headwinds in convincing the rest
of the world that dependency on Chinese exports is in their best interests, especially following
the Covid-19 pandemic when countries re-evaluated the risks associated with relying on China’s
manufacturing supply chain for critical goods. In 2023, Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the
European Commission, introduced the term “de-risking.” Since then, a number of like-minded
countries have adopted the phrase to describe a strategy of reducing economic dependence on
China.73 Beijing has argued that de-risking is simply a cover for the West’s real intentions—
“decoupling” or “de-Sinicization”—to impede China’s rightful path to development. 74 To oppose
 68 U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2023 Annual Report to Congress, ” 181–84; and Ding, “推进高水平涉外法治.”
 69 Lin Jian, “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lin Jian’s Regular Press Conference on July 30, 2024, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), July 30,
2024, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/lcbt/wjbfyrbt/202407/t20240730_11463380.htm.
 70 “Qin Gang Meets with Director General of the World Intellectual Property Organization. ”
 71 Xi Jinping, “中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会报告” [Report of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China], October 18,
2017; Xi, “中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会报告”; Xi and Li, “2022年中央经济工作会议”; and Xi and Li, “2023年中央经济工作会议.”
 72 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “第十四个五年规划.”
 73 Ursula von der Leyen, “Speech by President von der Leyen on EU-China Relations to the Mercator Institute for China Studies and the European
Policy Centre, ” European Commission, March 29, 2023, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/%E2%80%8Cen/speech_23_2063.
 74 Xie Feng, “中国驻美大使谢锋: 不能用‘去风险’‘脱钩’打掩护” [Chinese Ambassador to the United States Xie Feng: “De-risking” Cannot
Be Used as a Cover for “Decoupling”], Embassy of the PRC in the United States of America, June 7, 2023, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/
dshd/202306/t20230608_11091414.htm; Zhang Jiadong, “美国‘去风险’的本质与动机” [The Nature and Motives of U.S. “De-risking”],
People’s Tribune, no. 4 (2024): 83–87, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmlt/html/2024-02/26/content_26055409.htm; Qiang Jianxin, “国际观察:
美国对华‘去风险化’本身是巨大风险” [International Observation: U.S. “De-risking” China Is a Huge Risk in Itself], People’s Daily, August
8, 2023, http://world.people.com.cn/n1/2023/0808/c1002-40052616.html; and Zhong Sheng, “相向而行，共同落实好‘旧金山愿景’ ”
[Working Together to Implement the “San Francisco Vision”], People’s Daily, March 2, 2024, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2024-
03/02/nw.D110000renmrb_20240302_1-03.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
38
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
this trend, its authoritative messaging has consistently pushed two counter-narratives, presented
as slogans broadcast across Chinese media, diplomacy, and high-ranking official statements. These
are designed to convince the PRC’s largest trade partners to rethink their approach of moving
away from the Chinese market.
“China Is an Opportunity, Not a Risk”
“China is an opportunity, not a risk” ( 中国是机遇， 不是风险) is Beijing’s main rhetorical
formulation for dissuading countries from diversifying their trade relations away from the
Chinese economy.75 The slogan positively reframes the de-risking debate by portraying China’s
vast and open market as a win-win proposition for the global economy without truly engaging
with allegations of Chinese market risks. In particular, Beijing frequently pairs this slogan with
other statements intended to signal that the Chinese market is more open than ever before and
convince advanced Western nations that maintaining trade relations with the PRC is the best
and only avenue available to sustained economic growth. 76 As Foreign Minister Wang Yi once
emphasized in an address intended to discourage the U.S. business community from economic
decoupling, “the advanced supply chain and labor force in China are just irreplaceable.”77
However, this narrative deliberately sidesteps two key policy rationales for de-risking. The
first is national security vulnerabilities arising from linking critical dual-use technologies (such
as semiconductors) to the Chinese market. The second pertains to economic coercion based on
Beijing’s demonstrated willingness to leverage economic linkages and export controls on rare
earth minerals to coerce external actors into favorable policy positions. 78 China has employed
economic coercion in several notable instances: orchestrating a state-directed boycott of Korean
companies such as Lotte when South Korea installed a Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
system, implementing a robust and targeted tariff campaign against Australia following Canberra’s
criticisms of China’s Covid-19 response, and imposing trade restrictions on Lithuanian goods after
Lithuania upgraded its commercial ties with Taiwan, just to name a few.
Instead of addressing economic security concerns raised by foreign trade partners, Beijing’s
narrative deliberately redirects the discussion away from risks associated with dependency on
the Chinese market and inverts the argument toward potential dangers created by the de-risking
policies themselves. 79 The first purported danger is the disruption of a globalized supply chain,
which would harm the international economy. For example, Foreign Ministry spokesperson
Wang Wenbin has stated that “China is an opportunity, not a risk,” and suggested that the real
 75 Li Qiang, “Davos 2024: Special Address by H.E. Li Qiang, Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic of China, ” World Economic
Forum, January 17, 2024, https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/01/li-qiang-china-special-address-davos-2024; and Huan Yuping, “不合
作是最大的风险 不发展是最大的不安全” [Lack of Cooperation Is the Biggest Risk and Lack of Development Is the Biggest Insecurity],
Peoples’ Daily, July 5, 2023, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2023-07/05/nw.D110000renmrb_20230705_1-15.htm.
 76 Wang Cong, “China ‘Irreplaceable’ in Global Supply Chain, ” Global Times, February 19, 2020, https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1180142.
shtml; and Qi Mei, “亓玫大使在‘新闻报’发表‘中国是机遇不是风险’署名文章” [Ambassador Qi Mei Published an Article Titled
“China Is an Opportunity, Not a Risk” in Die Presse], Embassy of the PRC in Austria, July 12, 2023, http://at.china-embassy.gov.cn/chn/
sgxw/202312/t20231201_11192603.htm.
 77 Wang Yi, “Vision and Conviction Will Take China-U.S. Relations Forward, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), September 24, 2019, https://
www.mfa.gov.cn/eng/xw/zyjh/202405/t20240530_11341329.html.
 78 Rules Committee Majority and Minority Staff, “Examining China’s Coercive Economic Tactics, ” U.S. House of Representatives Rules
Committee, May 10, 2023, https://www.congress.gov/118/meeting/house/115789/documents/HHRG-118-RU00-20230510-SD118.pdf; and
Gracelin Baskaran, “What China’s Ban on Rare Earths Processing Technology Exports Means, ” CSIS, January 8, 2024, https://www.csis.org/
analysis/what-chinas-ban-rare-earths-processing-technology-exports-means.
 79 Wang Wenbin, “2023年7月13日外交部发言人汪文斌主持例行记者会” [Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press
Conference on July 13, 2023], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), July 13, 2023, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/lcbt/wjbfyrbt/202307/
t20230713_11112793.htm

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
39
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
threat to global stability stems from reduced cooperation, economic stagnation, and “political bloc
confrontation”—a driver traceable to supply chain disruption and economic decoupling policies.
The PRC minister for economic and trade affairs, Peng Gang, employed a similar rhetorical tactic
in a statement to the EU, arguing that it is “lack of cooperation that poses the greatest risk, and
the lack of development that poses the greatest insecurity.” 80 These coordinated communications
reflect China’s broader strategy to maintain its position in global supply chains while minimizing
discussion of the security concerns that originally prompted calls for de-risking.
The second message that Chinese officials emphasize when arguing against de-risking
is the danger of countries blindly following the United States. To undermine the credibility of
the de-risking strategy, they suggest that U.S. actions are unilaterally driving global economic
de-risking efforts in order to contain China. But this narrative omits the fact that the EU initially
devised the de-risking policy framework. 81 For instance, at the 2024 Munich Security Conference,
Foreign Minister Wang Yi claimed that “Europe has a more rational understanding of China….
Facts have proved and will continue to prove that China is an opportunity rather than a risk
for Europe.”82 By implying that European policymakers take a more pragmatic view than their
American counterparts, this narrative attempts to drive a wedge between the United States and
the EU.83 With policy rifts emerging between American and European officials on issues such as
the Ukraine war and trade policy under the Trump administration, Chinese messengers likely
perceive a strategic window of opportunity to reinforce their narrative of U.S.-EU division.84
“Decoupling/De-risking Is an Exercise in Futility”
“Decoupling/de-risking is an exercise in futility” (“ 脱钩断链/去风险”没有出路) is another
narrative often repeated in state media such as the People’s Daily or transmitted from other
authoritative messengers. Similar to the previous messaging strategy, Beijing avoids directly
addressing supply chain and security vulnerabilities raised by countries advocating for de-risking
and instead strategically redirects the de-risking debate primarily to the issue of feasibility. This
narrative has two central features.
First, it emphasizes that Europe and the United States’ decoupling strategy is simply
impossible due to the entrenched structure of the global economy. 85 The narrative suggests
that global integration is the norm of 21st-century economics, and any country trying to move
away from the Chinese market is attempting to rewrite history or run “against the trend of our
times.” This exercise is ultimately a futile one that will isolate countries from the international
economy.86 Moreover, this narrative not only claims that interdependence is a permanent feature
of global trade, but warns that there is no alternative to China’s economy of scale, cheap goods,
 80 Peng, “The Essence of China-EU Trade and Economic Relations. ”
 81 Zhong Sheng, “美方滥用单边贸易措施是一错再错” [The U.S. Is Making One Mistake after Another by Abusing Unilateral Trade
Measures], People’s Daily, April 24, 2024, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2024-04/24/nw.D110000renmrb_20240424_2-03.htm.
 82 Wang Yi, “For Europe, China Is an Opportunity, Not a Risk, and a Partner, Not a Competitor, ” Embassy of the PRC in the United States of
America, April 1, 2024, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/zgyw/202404/t20240403_11276053.htm.
 83 Zhang, “美国‘去风险’的本质与动机.”
 84 Chris Giles, “Trump Amplifies the Transatlantic Economic Divergence, ” Financial Times, February 6, 2025, https://www.ft.com/content/
d8aaf83b-f307-4efe-b564-9309fe8ecf21.
 85 Zhang, “美国‘去风险’的本质与动机.”
 86 Ibid.; and Yu Dunhai, “ Ambassador Yu Dunhai Publishes a Signed Article Titled ‘No Country Can Prosper in Isolation’ on Times of Malta, ”
Embassy of the PRC in the Republic of Malta, July 20, 2023, http://mt.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/sgxw/202307/t20230720_11115951.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
40
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
and manufacturing expertise. 87 For example, in order to discredit the notion that India can be
substituted for China, an editorial in the China Daily argues that “Chinese supplies remain crucial
for India’s manufacturing sector.” 88 Consequently, despite U.S. companies’ attempts to move
manufacturing from China to India, the U.S. supply chain remains functionally still linked to the
Chinese market. While there may be a fair degree of truth to this argument, it avoids the nuanced
geostrategic rationales for such friend-shoring. The main considerations include securing a reliable
supply chain during crisis scenarios and maintaining an ample buffer against the economic
vulnerabilities associated with trade wars, sanctions, and geopolitical conflicts.
The second feature of this argument is that de-risking will often backfire by harming the
country attempting to exit the Chinese market. Wang Yi echoed this sentiment during his keynote
speech at the Munich Security Conference, asserting that “those who attempt to shut China out in
the name of de-risking will make a historical mistake.”89 Another example of this argument comes
from a China Daily article that examines the issue of the United States revoking its permanent
normal trade relations with the PRC. Cherry-picking data points from the Peterson Institute of
International Economics, the article explicitly claims that if the Trump administration were to
follow through with this move, “the U.S. could be the main victim” because of the subsequent
GDP loss and rise in inflation affecting the average American consumer. 90 A People’s Daily article
similarly argues that countries attempting to de-risk will ultimately be worse off due to the issue of
defectors. Moreover, it claims that within the Western camp, some independent-minded nations
that forgo the de-risking strategy will benefit from greater market share in China, while those that
blindly follow will experience an economic downturn as they isolate themselves from the global
supply chain.91 Again, there is truth to the assertion that de-risking from China will cause some
economic pain. By exclusively focusing on this effect and downplaying the original motivations
for de-risking, Beijing attempts to strike a chord with foreign audiences that most directly plays on
their fears.
In summary, through strategically redirecting the discussion away from security rationales,
cherry-picking statistics, and distorting de-risking arguments, Beijing’s messaging against
de-risking centers on four claims: (1) the Chinese market offers a win-win opportunity for growth
with no alternative due to its unique economy of scale, (2) the havoc brought about by economic
decoupling and supply chain disruption is the real risk to the global economy, (3) de-risking is a
plot to contain China that serves U.S. rather than global interests, and (4) any efforts to disengage
from the Chinese market are futile and self-defeating. These rhetorical strategies are aimed at
maintaining the PRC’s global dominance in supply chains and undermining the logic behind
de-risking.
 87 Wang Yi, “Western Politicians’ ‘De-Risking’ Approach toward China Is Increasingly Being Proven Detrimental, ” Global Times, January 12,
2024, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202401/1305285.shtml.
 88 “ ‘De-Risking’ Efforts and Exercise in Futility: China Daily Editorial, ” China Daily, September 4, 2024.
 89 Wang Yi, “ A Staunch Force for Stability in a Turbulent World—Keynote Speech by H.E. Wang Yi at the 60th Munich Security Conference
Conversation with China, ” General Consulate of the PRC in Munich, February 17, 2024, http://munich.china-consulate.gov.cn/ger/
xwdt/202402/t20240223_11248719.htm.
 90 He Weiwen, “World Economy Damaged: U.S. Could Be the Main Victim, ” China Daily, December 31, 2024, https://www.chinadaily.com.
cn/a/202412/31/WS6773a0b7a310f1265a1d8539.html.
 91 Zhang, “美国‘去风险’的本质与动机.”

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
41
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
Narratives about Navigating Global Trade Barriers and Tech
Restrictions
In the 14th Five-Year Plan, the PRC laid out a vision for advancing domestic technological
innovation and self-sufficiency, specifically through investing heavily in critical chokepoint
technologies such as semiconductors while absorbing foreign technology and expertise.
Furthermore, in the 14th Five-Year-Plan, as well as in the communiques from the 2020 and 2021
Central Economic Work Conferences, the PRC outlined the importance of “stabilizing foreign
trade [and] ensuring the stability of industrial and supply chains” for its continued economic
growth.92
However, Beijing’s economic statecraft objectives were significantly complicated by restrictions
implemented by the United States and several U.S. partners that targeted China’s technological
ambitions—most notably by barring the export of advanced chips to the country. 93 To navigate
its increasingly challenging external environment, China sees one of the primary tasks of its
information operations as disrupting the U.S.-led coalition of trade and technology restrictions
that hinder its rightful path to development. 94 To push this agenda, authoritative messaging
primarily promotes the following slogan: “Protectionism leads nowhere, a trade war has no
winners” ( 保护主义没有出路， 贸易战没有赢家). The slogan has appeared in Ding Xuexiang’s
2025 Davos speech and Wang Yi’s 2025 Munich Security Council speech, as well as in various
statements from the MFA and MOFCOM.95 Another widely cited variant comes from Xi Jinping,
who stated that “pursuing protectionism is like locking oneself in a dark room. While wind and
rain may be kept outside, that dark room will also block light and air.” 96 This slogan, along with
Beijing’s broader official messaging, aims to communicate two key themes.
First, it redirects and inverts accusations of Chinese protectionism toward the United States,
characterizing U.S. policies as protectionist and harmful to the global economy while positioning
China as a champion of globalization and economic integration. To this end, Beijing portrays U.S.
trade and technology restrictions as emblematic of an “America first” agenda that is hostile to
the free market, protectionist, and harmful to other countries’ right to development. One such
case of this rhetorical tactic includes Beijing’s response to a 2024 report from the U.S. Trade
Representative that highlighted China’s anti-market practices that harm the commercial interests
of foreign firms.97 In response, the MOFCOM deflected the discussion away from its anti-market
 92 19th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, “第十四个五年规划”; Xi and Li, “2020年中央经济工作会议”; and Xi and Li,
“2021年中央经济工作会议.”
 93 Ana Swanson, “Biden Targets China’s Chip Industry with Wider Trade Bans, ” New York Times, December 2, 2024, https://www.nytimes.
com/2024/12/02/business/economy/biden-china-chips-exports.html.
 94 Zhang, “美国‘去风险’的本质与动机.”
 95 Ding Xuexiang, “坚守多边主义正道促进开放包容发展” [Adhere to the Right Path of Multilateralism and Promote Open and Inclusive
Development], World Economic Forum, January 21, 2025, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/web/zyxw/202501/t20250121_11542159.shtml; Mao
Ning, “毛宁:保护主义没有出路,贸易战没有赢家” [Mao Ning: There Is No Way Out for Protectionism, and There Are No Winners in the
Trade War], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), video, January 22, 2025, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/sp_683685/wjbfyrlxjzh_683691/202501/
t20250122_11543042.shtml; Wang Yi, “王毅在第61届慕尼黑安全会议‘中国专场’上的主旨讲话（全文）” [Wang Yi’s Keynote Speech at
the 61st Munich Security Conference “China Session” (Full Text)], Munich Security Conference, February 14, 2025, https://www.fmprc.gov.
cn/wjbzhd/202502/t20250215_11555652.shtml; and Li Keqiang, “李克强在第八届中国—中东欧国家经贸论坛上的致辞（全文）” [Li
Keqiang’s Speech at the 8th China-CEEC Economic and Trade Forum (Full Text)], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), July 8, 2018, https://www.
mfa.gov.cn/web/gjhdq_676201/gjhdqzz_681964/sgwyh_682446/zyjh_682456/201807/t20180708_9385197.shtml.
 96 Xi Jinping, “Xi at Davos: Key Quotes That Win Over Global Elites, ” Xinhua, January 17, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-
01/17/c_135991128.htm.
 97 Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, “2024 National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers, ” March 19, 2024, https://ustr.gov/
sites/default/files/2024%20NTE%20Report.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
42
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
practices by issuing its own bilingual report accusing Washington of an America-first agenda that
abuses tariffs and export controls in violation of WTO rules. 98
Similarly, China’s MFA and MOFCOM messaging consistently presents U.S. technology
restrictions and trade policies—including the Inflation Reduction Act and the CHIPS and Science
Act—as proof of the United States’ unilateralism and protectionism. 99 They claim that “rising
protectionism [and] blocked trade routes” undermine “the international economic and trade
order,” constituting the primary threat to the world’s economic recovery. 100 In contrast, Beijing
portrays Chinese exports as the key driver of global trade following the Covid-19 pandemic. 101
This rosy description of PRC trade policy selectively omits concerns raised by other nations
regarding Chinese industrial overcapacity, supply chain dominance, and nonreciprocal trade
practices. For example, the EU implemented targeted tariffs toward Chinese electric vehicles due to
overcapacity concerns.102 Japan and the Netherlands implemented semiconductor export controls
similar to U.S. restrictions, aiming to protect national security and IP.103 Indonesia restricted nickel
mining by Chinese companies and enacted import duties over nylon-film dumping by China
and other countries. 104 Brazil imposed tariffs on iron, steel, fiber-optic cables, and other goods
in response to Chinese dumping. 105 These cases demonstrate widespread, multiparty concerns
over China’s trade practices and export-driven growth model. Yet Beijing’s official messaging
consistently aims to either downplay these concerns or frame them exclusively as U.S.-led efforts
to contain China’s development.106
Second, like Beijing’s broader argument against decoupling, its official messaging
communicates that trade and technology restrictions are self-defeating. Foreign Minister Wang
has argued that U.S. trade barriers and technology restrictions “will not stop China’s development
and rejuvenation, but will only spur the 1.4 billion Chinese people to forge ahead with greater
determination.”107 Serving as another recent example, official messaging contends that the success
 98 “2024 Report on WTO Compliance of the United States, ” Ministry of Commerce (PRC), September 2024, https://sms.mofcom.gov.cn/
cms_files/filemanager/676898164/attach/20249/7e465a3c4b3c4f11be09a3a4f6d09916.pdf; and Liu Y ang, “商务部回应美发布‘2024年外国
贸易壁垒评估报告’ ” [The Ministry of Commerce Responded to the U.S. Release of the “2024 Foreign Trade Barriers Assessment Report”],
Xinhua, April 3, 2024, http://www.news.cn/fortune/20240402/263822eeb542486da509c3ee79e864a0/c.html.
 99 “外交部发言人就美国总统拜登签署对华投资限制行政令答记者问” [Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Replies to Questions Regarding
U.S. President Biden’s Signing of an Executive Order Restricting Investment in China], People’s Daily, August 11, 2023, http://paper.people.
com.cn/rmrb/html/2023-08/11/nw.D110000renmrb_20230811_3-03.htm; and “商务部新闻发言人就近期美系列涉华贸易限制措施发
表谈话” [Ministry of Commerce Spokesperson Made a Statement on the Recent Series of U.S. Trade Restrictions on China], Ministry of
Commerce (PRC), January 15, 2025, https://www.mofcom.gov.cn/xwfb/xwfyrth/art/2025/art_946873b612c444cd97fbd97ade4a0d04.html;
and Zhang, “美国‘去风险’的本质与动机.”
 100 Y an Yu, “三季度全球货物贸易保持复苏态势” [Global Trade in Goods Maintained Recovery in the Third Quarter], People’s Daily,
September 26, 2024, http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrbhwb/html/2024-09/26/content_26082938.htm.
 101 Ibid.; and Bradsher, “China’s Trade Surplus. ”
 102 Ryan Featherston, “Slamming the Brakes: The EU Votes to Impose Tariffs on Chinese EVs, ” CSIS, December 16, 2024, https://www.csis.org/
blogs/trustee-china-hand/slamming-brakes-eu-votes-impose-tariffs-chinese-evs.
 103 Gregory C. Allen, Emily Benson, and Margot Putnam, “Japan and the Netherlands Announce Plans for New Export Controls on
Semiconductor Equipment, ” CSIS, April 10, 2023, https://www.csis.org/analysis/japan-and-netherlands-announce-plans-new-export-
controls-semiconductor-equipment.
 104 “Indonesia to Impose Anti-Dumping Import Duty for Nylon Film from China, Thailand, Taiwan, ” Reuters, March 12, 2025, https://www.
reuters.com/markets/commodities/indonesia-impose-anti-dumping-import-duty-nylon-film-china-thailand-taiwan-2025-03-12; and A.
Anantha Lakshmi, “Indonesia Moves to Reduce Chinese Ownership of Nickel Projects, ” Financial Times, July 26, 2024, https://www.ft.com/
content/0f8e2fe8-c7cb-4d6a-9436-1cb1806af4e0.
 105 Igor Patrick, “Brazil Imposes New Tariffs on Imports from China in Bid to Fight Dumping, ” South China Morning Post, October 19, 2024,
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3283014/brazil-imposes-new-tariffs-imports-china-bid-fight-dumping.
 106 Annabelle Liang, “U.S.-China Chip War: Netherlands Moves to Restrict Some Tech Exports, ” BBC, March 9, 2023, https://www.bbc.com/
news/business-64897794.
 107 “Wang Yi: Unilateralism and Protectionism Are Bound to Be Crushed by the Wheels of History, ” Embassy of the PRC in the United States of
America, May 15, 2024, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/zgyw/202405/t20240515_11305137.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
43
CHINA’S INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC NARRATIVES u GITTER
of DeepSeek, the Chinese AI startup, is proof that U.S. technology restrictions will only compel
Chinese engineers to train AI models “more effectively” and competitively.108
Furthermore, official mouthpieces such as the MFA and China’s embassy to the United States
highlight the adverse effects trade barriers will have on American consumers and companies. In
one example, they cherry-pick and leverage foreign commentary from 2021 that claims that “92.4%
of the cost of the tariffs has been borne by American companies and consumers,” alluding to an
annual increase of $1,300 in household expenditures, according to a Moody’s Investment Service
report.109 Beijing goes on to cite statistics from the U.S.-China Business Council to claim that
U.S. tariffs on China have caused an estimated loss of 250,000 American jobs. 110 By drawing on
the credibility of these foreign statistics, Beijing attempts to argue that any trade and technology
barriers placed on China are self-defeating even according to international experts.
In summary, this narrative against trade barriers and technology restrictions aims to portray
the transgressor—usually the United States—as the real protectionist country acting unilaterally
while positioning China as a rule-abiding leader in global trade. Furthermore, official messaging
suggests that any trade or technology restrictions imposed on China will backfire and ultimately
strengthen its position. These narratives serve the strategic purpose of preserving the PRC’s role in
global supply chains, facilitating technology acquisition through absorbing foreign expertise, and
redirecting scrutiny away from Beijing’s nonreciprocal trade practices and violations of the WTO’s
founding principles.
Conclusion
This chapter has sought to explore the narratives Beijing employs in order to protect China’s
interests in topics ranging from investment and market access to IP, trade dependency and
de-risking, reform, and liberalization, as well as trade and technology restrictions. While Beijing
frames widespread coverage of these issues as a byproduct of geopolitical competition with the
United States, the PRC’s economic practices affect all foreign stakeholders. Many actors—such as
some member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Japan, the Netherlands, the
EU, Brazil, and India—have raised similar concerns over Beijing’s export-driven growth model.111
To address these international trade frictions, Beijing tasks its information operators with a two-
pronged strategy of broadcasting the win-win nature of economic integration with the Chinese
market while suppressing critical coverage of the PRC’s policies. The techniques used to deliver
these messages are probably familiar to even casual observers of diplomacy. There is nothing special
 108 Hua Xia, “China’s AI Advances Thwart U.S. Suppression Policy, ” Xinhua, January 25, 2025, https://english.news.cn/20250125/9f892a203a704
3ec985858603b7cd200/c.html.
 109 “China Resilient Against External Shocks, Vice Commerce Minister Says amid U.S. 60% Potential Tariff Threat, ” Global Times, November
22, 2024, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202411/1323585.shtml; Guo Jiakun, “2025年1月16日外交部发言人郭嘉昆主持例行记者会”
[Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Guo Jiakun’s Regular Press Conference on January 16, 2025], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), January
16, 2025, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/fyrbt_673021/202501/t20250116_11536633.shtml; Wang Wenbin, “2024年4月23日外交部发言人汪文
斌主持例行记者会” [Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference on April 23, 2024], Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (PRC), April 23, 2024, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/wjdt_674879/fyrbt_674889/202404/t20240423_11287839.shtml; and “Tariffs on
China Shouldn’t Be Used as a Political ‘Sticky Note’ for Washington’s Convenience: Global Times Editorial, ” Global Times, August 22, 2024,
https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202408/1318767.shtml.
 110 Qin Gang, “Great Changes, Great Horizon, Great Vision—China and the U.S. Must Find the Right Way to Get Along in the New Era, ”
Embassy of the PRC in the United States of America, July 27, 2022, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/dshd/202208/t20220824_10750348.
htm; and “The U.S.-China Economic Relationship, ” U.S.-China Business Council, January 2021, https://www.uschina.org/articles/the-us-
china-economic-relationship.
 111 Brendan Kelly and Shay Wester, “ ASEAN Caught Between China’s Export Surge and Global De-risking, ” Asia Society, February 17, 2025,
https://asiasociety.org/policy-institute/asean-caught-between-chinas-export-surge-and-global-de-risking.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
44
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
about strategic redirection, selective omission, cherry-picking, or other tactics used by Beijing to
distort international economic norms. Instead, it is the careful employment of these tactics in
various situations and to select audiences that facilitates China’s desired economic outcomes and
reveals a sophisticated operation that keeps party newspaper editors, career diplomats, and top
leaders all on message. This consistency and unity of message is most persuasive when it relies
on truths and half-truths of significant concern to foreign entities deeply invested in the Chinese
economy because they either threaten foreign fears or play on foreign hopes. Indeed, the use of
external rhetoric to influence in this fashion aligns with scholarship showing that Beijing’s broader
external policies were crafted to take advantage of the West’s engagement strategy toward China.
This strategy had supported China’s economic development on the bet that it would lead to the
country’s adoption of democratic norms and peaceful integration into the U.S.-led international
order.112 This clearly did not happen.
More recently, Beijing’s narratives frequently highlight the PRC’s endorsement of globalization
and free-trade principles in contrast with the United States’ apparent shift toward protectionism.
Such messaging may prove to be especially salient given the United States’ “reciprocal tariff”
policy announced on April 2, 2025. While Beijing will likely continue to employ the rhetorical
tactics and slogans outlined in this chapter to position itself as the champion of global trade, its
fundamental dual-circulation strategy will remain a unique challenge for its overall economic
engagement narrative. As recent reports reflect that Beijing has little interest in abandoning its
export-heavy growth model, China’s economic partners will bear the brunt of the country’s
nonreciprocal trade practices.113 How Beijing’s information operators navigate these nonreciprocal
engagements—and subsequent international pushback—is worthy of further study.
 112 See, for example, Friedberg, Getting China Wrong.
 113 Bradsher, “China’s Trade Surplus. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
45
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #118 | june 2025
ARTHUR R. KROEBER is Partner and Head of Research at Gavekal Dragonomics and
an Adjunct Professor of Economics at the NYU Stern School of Business. He can be
reached at <akroeber@gavekal.com>.
ANA HORIGOSHI is a Research Scientist in the Policy Analysis Unit at AidData. She
can be reached at <ahorigoshi@aiddata.org>.
RODNEY KNIGHT is a Senior Research Scientist in the Policy Analysis Unit at AidData.
He can be reached at <rodneyknight@aiddata.org>.
The Trajectory and Implications
of China’s Economic Slowdown
Arthur R. Kroeber, Ana Horigoshi, and Rodney Knight

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This chapter explores the implications of China’s economic slowdown for the country’s trade
and investment partners, highlighting broad takeaways from the nature of the slowdown as
well as common trends from this report’s five case studies.
MAIN ARGUMENT
The impacts of China’s economic slowdown are complex and operate across a number of
trade and investment channels, posing policy challenges for a wide range of countries.
The shift in China’s growth model will have adverse impacts on both commodity and
manufacturing exporters.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• As China broadens its manufacturing base, it will be increasingly difficult for countries
to protect their manufacturing sectors, let alone to maintain or increase their exports
of manufactured goods into China. Protectionist policy measures might not be enough
to effectively reverse this trend, although the rearrangement of global supply chains is
likely to accelerate due to worsening trade relations between China and partners such
as the U.S.
• Chinese demand for traditional commodities (e.g., oil, coal, iron, and ore) will continue
to decline as infrastructure and housing are less central to China’s growth model. Demand
for new commodities (e.g., lithium, nickel, and cobalt) will not likely result in the same
price spikes and, therefore, will not necessarily benefit commodity exporters in the same
way as previous commodity booms driven by China.
• Because of the above factors, across a wide range of countries, diversifying trading
partners beyond China is a critical recommendation to mitigate economic exposure to
the impacts of the country’s economic slowdown.
• China’s strict capital controls, designed to stabilize its highly leveraged financial system
and control its exchange rate, will remain tight to mitigate the risk of a domestic financial
crisis. Because of these restrictions and the fact that China continues to run a trade
surplus, direct investment and outbound FDI will continue, in line with official strategic
objectives. Recipient countries should note this report’s finding of minimal evidence that
these flows meaningfully contribute to domestic growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
47
TRAJECTORY AND IMPLICATIONS u KROEBER ET AL.
T
 his report’s first chapter examined the long-term trends of Chinese economic growth. The
time frame considered began with the period of elevated growth (roughly 10% per year),
continuing up to 2012. This period was followed by lower growth in the mid to late 2010s
and even lower growth after the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. Our descriptive analysis
of structural and policy trends shaping China’s economic landscape suggests that the country’s
future growth could continue to slow to or below 4% in the near future. The analysis considered
a number of economic, social, political, and demographic factors to generate this expectation of
future growth. However, to complement this analysis with direct econometric modeling, we jointly
modeled interactions of key factors and past trends of economic growth with each other. Vector
autoregressive (V AR) models are a type of econometric model in which each variable is expressed
as a function of its own past values and the past values of other relevant variables, with all the
equations estimated jointly. This method allows us to forecast the future values of all variables
in the system. The outputs of such models can increase understanding of the possible economic
trajectories of China in the near term based on a set of assumptions and validate the analysis
derived from structural and policy trends.
In our V AR model for China, the forecast of GDP growth from the last quarter of 2024 forward
five years displays a modest increase followed by a gradual decline (see Figure 1).1 At its peak, the
forecast estimates that China’s GDP growth will reach 5.7%. The lowest rate of growth (4.1%)
occurs at the end of the forecast. The GDP growth levels in this forecast mirror the findings from
the descriptive analysis in chapter 1 that growth will decline over time. While the values of the
V AR model do not drop quite as low as the 3%–4% range expected from the descriptive analysis,
these results show the same general pattern of decline. Moreover, the extended time horizons
that can be considered through the descriptive analysis suggest that structural and policy factors
could compound to extend the decline in growth rates after 2029 (the end of the period examined
by the model).
Having analyzed the trajectory of this slowdown, this report now examines the implications
for countries with trade and financial linkages with China. While broad implications can be
drawn from the overall trajectory of the slowdown—for instance, that the shifting growth model
will generally hurt traditional commodity exporters, while the continued competitiveness of
Chinese manufacturing will affect countries that seek to protect or develop their own sectors—
to more fully understand the implications of the slowdown, we examined its effects through
case studies of five countries with varied characteristics and economic relations with China (see
Table 1). The characteristics of these countries vary sufficiently to provide examples of how the key
implications could be applied to the economies of other countries in similar situations. The case
studies cover four regions: Africa, Southeast Asia, Europe, and Latin America. Three of the five
countries (Indonesia, Nigeria, and Brazil) have over 200 million people, putting them in the top
ten countries in the world for population, according to 2025 data from the U.S. Census Bureau.
Germany is also a relatively large country, with over 80 million people. Paraguay is the smallest of
the countries, with only 6.8 million people. The countries also cover a range of income levels, with
one being high-income (Germany), one being lower–middle income (Nigeria), and the remaining
 1 The model is based on quarterly data from the first quarter of 1995 through the third quarter of 2024 and includes measures of inflation,
interbank interest rates, and trade with the United States along with GDP growth. Additionally, the model includes shocks for the outbreak
of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 and the imposition of U.S. tariffs on China in 2018. In the forecast period, we added an additional shock
in the second quarter of 2025 for new tariffs. Due to the limited number of time periods for analysis, V AR models can only have a limited
number of covariates, especially since the autoregressive characteristic of such models effectively increases the number of variables.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Country Region Population
(2023)
Income
group
Chinese
trade
balance
China’s largest
import from
country
Diplomatic
relations with
the PRC
Brazil Latin
America
211.1
million
Upper
middle
income
Net importer
from Brazil Raw materials
Recognized
the PRC in
1974
Germany Europe 83.3 million High
income
Net importer
from
Germany
Capital goods
Recognized
the PRC in
1972
Indonesia Southeast
Asia
281.2
million
Upper
middle
income
Net importer
from
Indonesia
Intermediate
goods
Recognized
the PRC in
1950
Nigeria Africa 227.8
million
Lower
middle
income
Net exporter
to Nigeria Raw materials
Recognized
the PRC in
1971
Paraguay Latin
America 6.8 million
Upper
middle
income
Net exporter
to Paraguay Raw materials
No
recognition of
the PRC
t a b l e 1 Characteristics of case study countries
s o u r c e : Data for population is from the World Bank databank; information on income group is from
World Bank; information on trade balance is from UN Comtrade database; information on largest import is
from World Integrated Trade Solution database; and information on diplomatic relations is from Wikipedia.
f i g u r e 1 Historical GDP growth and forecast of quarterly GDP growth for China
s o u r c e : Calculations based on authors’ V AR model.
48
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
49
TRAJECTORY AND IMPLICATIONS u KROEBER ET AL.
three falling within the upper–middle income range. The countries include both a country with
a net outflow of foreign direct investment to China (Germany) as well as recipients of Chinese
development finance. In terms of trade, China is a net importer from three of the countries (Brazil,
Germany, and Indonesia) and a net exporter to the other two countries (Nigeria and Paraguay).
The product group with the largest imports to China is raw materials for three of the countries
(Brazil, Nigeria, and Paraguay), intermediate goods for Indonesia, and capital goods for Germany.
Four of the five countries have long-established diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic
of China (PRC). The exception is Paraguay, providing an example of how the Chinese economy
interacts with a country that does not formally recognize the PRC and therefore maintains
minimal overall direct trade volumes.
We can define four major implications of China’s economic slowdown for the country’s trade
and investment partners. These implications derive in part from the overall changes in growth
rates; however, inasmuch as the Chinese economy is still growing, many of the effects on partners
depend more on changes in the composition of growth, which affect China’s demand for imports
and the volume and competitiveness of exports, as well as changing financial flows. The remainder
of this chapter assesses these impacts both generally and for various types of economies (e.g.,
developing commodity exporters and advanced industrial economies, among others). In the latter
case, our analysis draws heavily on the findings of the five country-specific case studies that follow
this chapter.
Implications of China’s Economic Slowdown
The first major impact is that as China broadens its manufacturing base, it will be ever more
difficult for countries to increase their exports of manufactured goods to China (see Figure 2
for an overview of China’s global share of these exports). This is already a significant problem
for Germany and other advanced industrial economies that in past years had relied heavily on
such exports. Furthermore, China’s comparative advantages in manufacturing (e.g., economies
of scale, abundant labor, and strong infrastructure), paired with persistent government subsidies
and support, mean that manufacturers in most countries will find it ever harder to compete
with the “China price” at home or in third markets. This creates a serious challenge for lower-
income countries hoping to develop through the traditional route of export manufacturing, as
is discussed in several of this report’s case studies. As is noted in the case study of Nigeria, for
instance, the kind of “China shock” that affected the country’s previously sizable textile industry
is likely to persist. In the case of Indonesia, efforts to move up the value chain from raw materials
to manufactured goods will face challenges, and even strong policy steps to promote this goal
might not be fully effective.
Second, protectionist efforts to curb Chinese imports—such as the aforementioned Indonesian
policy measures—will continue to grow in countries that wish to retain or establish a substantial
share of industry in their production structure. But it will be very hard for such protectionism
to be effective, given China’s massive comparative advantage, as well as the growing willingness
of Chinese companies to internationalize their operations to avoid the impacts of tariffs and

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
f i g u r e 2 China’s share of global exports
s o u r c e : International Monetary Fund; and World Trade Organization (WTO).
50
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
other restrictions. 2 Most countries will be forced into a strategy of using protectionist policies
not to block China’s entry into their markets but to compel Chinese companies to invest directly
and serve these markets through local production. Indeed, many of the Indonesian measures
mentioned above are intended to encourage local production and processing, but not necessarily
to preclude the involvement of Chinese companies.
A related factor is that the rearrangement of global supply chains is likely to accelerate due
to worsening trade relations between the United States and China. The precise outcome of the
trade war is impossible to predict, but U.S. tariffs on Chinese imports will likely settle at a rate
significantly higher than the 10% weighted average effective rate in 2024, as well as higher than
U.S. tariffs on other countries. 3 As a result, incentives will rise for Chinese manufacturers to ship
U.S.-bound goods through third countries to lower their exposure to tariffs. This could take the
form of simple transshipment, or it could involve relocation of production or final assembly, in
which case trade flows would be accompanied by investment flows.
This rearrangement of supply chains was visible in the aftermath of the U.S.-China trade war
during the first Trump administration. U.S. tariffs on many Chinese products rose dramatically,
 2 Much research shows that the U.S. trade war of 2018–19 rearranged patterns of global trade but had little impact on overall trade balances. It
thus was ineffective at sparking reindustrialization in the United States. See, for example, Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Tristan Reed, “Growing
Threats to Global Trade, ” Finance and Development Magazine, June 2023, https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/2023/06/growing-
threats-to-global-trade-goldberg-reed; and Jeongmin Song et al., “Geopolitics and the Geometry of Global Trade, ” McKinsey Global Institute,
Report, January 2024, https://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/geopolitics-and-the-geometry-of-global-trade.
 3 The weighted average effective tariff rate is simply tariff revenue on China divided by the value of imports from China. This was 10.3% in
2024. See “The Impact of U.S. Tariffs on China: Three Scenarios, ” Economist Intelligence Unit, December 17, 2024, https://www.eiu.com/n/
the-impact-of-us-tariffs-on-china-three-scenarios. This differs from the statutory rates on products, which were in many cases much higher.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
t a b l e 2 Estimated transshipment of Chinese exports to the United States via entrepot countries
s o u r c e : Thomas Gatley, “Reforging Supply Chains, Again, ” Gavekal Research, April 29, 2025.
n o t e : The entrepot countries are Belgium, Cambodia, Hungary, Mexico, Poland, Singapore, Thailand,
Turkey, and Vietnam.
Imports from China 2017 ($ bn) 2024 ($ bn) 2017–24 increase (%)
Entrepot countries 254 556 119%
Rest of world 2,011 3,023 50%
Entrepot countries’
share of total Chinese
exports
11% 16% –
Exports to the
United States 2017 ($ bn) 2024 ($ bn) 2017–24 increase (%)
Entrepot countries 448 831 86%
Rest of world 1,871 2,416 29%
Entrepot countries’
share of total U.S.
imports
19% 26% –
51
TRAJECTORY AND IMPLICATIONS u KROEBER ET AL.
while tariffs on other countries remained largely unchanged. A number of entrepot countries
saw outsized increases in both imports from China and exports to the United States in 2017–24:
Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, and Singapore in Asia; Belgium, Poland, Hungary, and Turkey
in Europe; and Mexico in North America. Collectively, between 2017 and 2024, these countries
saw imports from China rise 119% and exports to the United States rise 86%. The figures for the
rest of the world were 50% and 29%, respectively. During the same period the entrepot countries
raised their share of total Chinese exports from 11% to 16%, and their share of U.S. imports from
19% to 26% (see Table 2).4 These increases in trade flows reflect both tariff avoidance and the
natural tendency of Chinese companies to internationalize their production (and hence flows of
intermediate goods) as they mature.
The key question is thus which countries are best placed to capture spillover benefits from the
gradual relocation of Chinese manufacturing capacity around the world. The crucial issue here
is not the quantity of new investment but the quality. Countries will need to focus relentlessly on
ensuring that these investments create local employment, supply chains, and technology transfer,
rather than simply creating Chinese enclaves. Vietnam and Indonesia are examples of countries
that have put Chinese investment to good use in upgrading their economies: Indonesia by moving
up the value chain in commodity-processing, and Vietnam by becoming an important hub of
electronics production (see Figure 3). As is discussed in the case studies, many countries that
have received Chinese investments in other contexts—such as infrastructure or commodities—
have struggled to translate these into sustainable, long-term growth. In particular the Nigerian
 4 Thomas Gatley, “Reforging Supply Chains, Again, ” Gavekal Research, April 29, 2025, https://research.gavekal.com/article/reforging-supply-
chains-again.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
f i g u r e 3 Share of global manufacturing exports for select countries
s o u r c e : WTO.
MalaysiaIndia
2.0
1.0
3.5
2.5
1.5
0.5
3.0
52
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
and Indonesian case studies—which look primarily at commodity investments—provide salutary
lessons for these kinds of countries: develop a strategic plan for the relevant sector before
investments begin, learn from the experience of countries such as Vietnam that have already
experienced a similar influx, and be wary of the risks that overcapacity could drive down prices
and limit the economic benefits derived from production.
Third, the structure of China’s demand for global commodities is changing. Most significantly,
the de-emphasis on domestic infrastructure and housing construction in favor of technology-
intensive industries, especially in renewable energy, means that resource demand will shift from
commodities crucial to the old economy (oil, coal, and iron ore) to those important for the new
economy, notably copper and minerals related to battery production (particularly lithium, nickel,
and cobalt). Yet, crucially, in these new mineral markets China will not replicate the impact it
had on the iron-ore market, where its burgeoning steel demand led to a tenfold increase in global
prices between 2000 and 2010 and sustained high prices thereafter. Production of traditional metal
ores such as iron and copper is dominated by European, North American, and Australian mining
companies, which in the face of rising Chinese demand stayed relatively disciplined in bringing
on new supply to keep prices high. The case study of Indonesia provides additional detail on how
the global trends affected that country and its exports to China—creating growth during the
2010s that is not likely to be replicated. In new specialty minerals, Chinese companies dominate
global production: between 2018 and 2021, they accounted for about two-thirds of global lithium
production acquisitions (largely in Latin America); over a longer period, they bought up 60% of

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
53
TRAJECTORY AND IMPLICATIONS u KROEBER ET AL.
global cobalt supply (mainly in Africa). Chinese miners rapidly expanded production of both
minerals, causing prices to crash by over 50% after a short-lived boom.5
Indonesia pioneered a strategy to address this problem: as is discussed in detail in the case
study, in 2019 it banned exports of raw nickel ore, requiring buyers (mainly from China) to set
up processing facilities in Indonesia. The result was a huge influx of Chinese nickel-processing
capacity to process Indonesian ore into battery-grade nickel. 6 After yet another a short boom,
the battery-grade nickel price fell by two-thirds in 2022. The low-cost, high-efficiency Chinese
producers in Indonesia survived and the net impact for the Indonesian economy was positive,
but nickel producers in many other countries were forced to scale back or go out of business.
The lesson is that mineral-rich countries cannot take the long-term consistency of the benefits of
Chinese demand for granted; instead, they need to carefully construct investment regimes to turn
potential benefits into sustainable realities.
This changing demand outlook for commodities is also affecting the sectoral targeting of
China’s overseas investments. While the broad picture is discussed in more detail below, countries
such as Brazil and Indonesia have seen declines in inbound Chinese development financial
investment into their energy sectors from peaks in the mid-2010s. This suggests that commodity
exporters not only may no longer see the price increases that they had become accustomed to but
also may not see the same level of Chinese investment.
The fourth and final implication relates to China’s evolving position in global financial flows.
China punches well below its economic weight in the world of finance. It accounts for around
18% of global GDP, 33% of world manufacturing production, and 40%–50% of global demand
for energy and many physical commodities. But while it is also a major provider of FDI, generally
ranking second behind the United States, it accounts for less than 2% of global portfolio capital
flows—a figure that has not significantly risen in the last decade.
The reason is that, in order to protect the stability of its highly leveraged financial system and
control its exchange rate, China maintains by far the tightest capital controls of any industrial
economy. These controls were tightened in 2015–16 in response to strong capital outflows, and
they have been tightened again in recent years as weak economic growth has boosted the incentive
for Chinese to move capital out of the country.
China will not materially relax controls on outbound portfolio investment in the next decade.
It needs to keep the large pool of domestic savings locked up at home to finance its industrial
policies and, as noted above, give itself additional breathing room to ensure that the country’s high
debt levels do not pose significant risks of a financial crisis. For the same reason, there is not much
chance that China will succeed in making the renminbi a widely used international currency or
the anchor of a non-dollar international payment system. To achieve those goals, it would need to
dismantle capital controls and create deep and reliable financial markets that international holders
of renminbi could easily access.
China will, however, continue to be an important source of FDI and official financing flows, and
its capacities in this regard will not be significantly constrained by its slowing economy. So long as
China continues to run large current account surpluses—the average in 2021–24 was $370 billion a
year, underpinned by even larger trade surpluses—it will have large flows of income that must be
 5 Tom Miller, “How China Killed the Battery Metals Market, ” Gavekal Research, April 1, 2024, https://research.gavekal.com/article/how-
china-killed-the-battery-metals-market.
 6 Isabelle Huber, “Indonesia’s Nickel Industrial Strategy, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies, December 8, 2021, https://www.csis.
org/analysis/indonesias-nickel-industrial-strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
54
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
invested abroad. Because its capital flows effectively prohibit private-sector portfolio investment,
these foreign investments must take the form of official reserve accumulation (purchases of U.S.
Treasuries or similar low-risk instruments), direct investment, or development finance and other
official financial flows.
China saw a boom of outward investment from 2013 to 2017, partly through private activity
and partly through infrastructure and resource extraction investments under the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI). Private outward FDI was severely curbed by tighter capital controls in 2016, and
BRI investments were reined in after 2017 because too many projects delivered poor returns, were
enmeshed in corruption, or generated political backlash. The pandemic years of 2020–22 saw a
further decline in international project loans and investments. During that period, most of China’s
outward financing was emergency lending that refinanced unprofitable BRI projects.7
Since 2023, however, China’s outbound project investments have recovered. Its total
international direct project and construction investments averaged $112 billion a year in 2023–24,
up from an average of $90 billion during the pandemic. This is well below the hectic pace of 2013–
17, when Chinese spending on such projects was around $200 billion a year, but it is noteworthy
that these flows increased even as China’s domestic economy was slowing. 8 The likely future
trajectory is that these investments will continue to grow at a moderate pace and will reflect both
official strategic objectives and the desire of Chinese companies to globalize their operations.
Cross-Country Themes
These implications and the country-specific impacts identified in the individual case studies
could greatly alter the growth trajectories of the five countries examined, as well as other similarly
situated countries. Moreover, the micro-level impacts—whether affecting export-dependent or
import-competing sectors, localities dependent on Chinese investment or development finance,
or other economic actors—could be even more pronounced. In response to these implications,
countries would be prudent to take actions to reduce or mitigate the impacts of the slowdown on
their economies. Each of the case studies considers policy options for how the specific countries can
respond to the slowdown. Two cross-country themes emerge from the recommendations, which
could apply across countries with different characteristics defining their economic relationship
with China beyond the five countries examined in detail.
The first theme is the importance of countries diversifying their trading partners. Diversification
enables a country to shift exports to other markets if a slowdown reduces Chinese demand for
the country’s exports, thereby reducing the impact. Diversification can also reduce the impact
of China switching to more local production to replace imports from abroad as part of its effort
to promote self-sufficiency. The recommendations for diversification of trade do not imply that
the case study countries have undiversified trade flows; indeed, all of them have a diverse set of
trading partners, but tend to rely on China for specific parts of their trade or even most of their
trade, making them vulnerable to fluctuations in the Chinese economy.
The three countries with a bilateral trade surplus (Brazil, Germany, and Indonesia) have
large volumes of exports to China, making them particularly vulnerable to slowdowns in the
 7 Bradley C. Parks et al., “Belt and Road Reboot: Beijing’s Bid to De-risk Its Global Infrastructure Initiative, ” AidData, William & Mary,
November 2023, https://www.aiddata.org/publications/belt-and-road-reboot.
 8 American Enterprise Institute, China Global Investment Tracker, http://aei.org/china-global-investment-tracker.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
55
TRAJECTORY AND IMPLICATIONS u KROEBER ET AL.
Chinese economy. Since 1992, China has imported over $1.2 trillion in goods from Brazil. The
volume of trade has increased almost exponentially, resulting in Brazil becoming increasingly
dependent on this trade. In the case of Germany, China historically imported mostly capital
goods. Even as its economy decelerates, China will continue to require capital goods for its
manufacturing sector. But over time it has proved more capable of producing its own capital
goods, which reduces the need for German capital goods. The case of Indonesia presents an
example where a country has made inroads to self-sufficiency but still maintains a level of
export dependence on China. At the start of the trading relationship, China mainly imported
raw materials from Indonesia, but over time trade between the countries shifted toward China
importing more intermediate goods. This shift was partly due to Indonesia banning the export of
raw nickel, which forced China to invest in nickel processing in Indonesia, thereby transferring
the capacity to Indonesia. However, the overproduction of Chinese processing plants led to a
drop in the price of nickel, resulting in lower returns. As the Indonesian case suggests, reducing
reliance on exports to the PRC is difficult and will require targeted policies to not only strengthen
domestic industries but also reshape trade flows.
Nigeria, by contrast, is far more reliant on imports than exports. Even with a slowdown,
China’s strong manufacturing sector will produce most of the consumer goods Nigerians buy. The
problem for Nigeria is generating enough capital through exports—either to China or to other
countries—to pay for these consumer goods. Expansion of exports to China specifically would
make Nigeria more vulnerable to fluctuations in the Chinese economy, which makes expanding
exports to other countries more attractive. Already exports to Europe far exceed those to China.
Nigeria will fare better by increasing the number of countries to which it exports petroleum and
other products rather than relying on exports to China.
Unlike the other case study countries, Paraguay recognizes Taiwan and does not have
diplomatic relations with the PRC. Therefore, it has much lower levels of trade with the PRC,
making its economy relatively less vulnerable to slowdowns in the Chinese economy. Paraguay,
however, could be indirectly vulnerable to China’s economic fluctuations through Brazil. Due to
its export dependence on China, Brazil’s economy could be greatly affected by a slowdown in the
Chinese economy. A slowdown in the Brazilian economy in turn would hurt Paraguay because
Brazil is the largest recipient of Paraguayan exports—reflecting the fact that the impacts of China’s
slowdown percolate through a variety of channels. To reduce this vulnerability, Paraguay should
pursue a strategy of diversification of trade beyond Brazil.
The second theme is for countries to align financial investments related to China with their
own national interests rather than Chinese interests. In the case of Germany, more FDI goes to
China than from China to Germany. This leaves German businesses and investments exposed to
potential downside risks such as weak Chinese demand and a stiffening competitive environment.
In response, countries like Germany should ensure that their entities that invest in China are
aware of the state of the Chinese economy and attempt to structure incentives for businesses to
ensure that investments benefit Germany’s interests at large. For instance, simply producing more
cars in China does not necessarily benefit the German economy if those cars are sold for declining
prices in a market increasingly dominated by Chinese manufacturers. Close examination of the
benefits of FDI will help Germany guide businesses to productively invest in the PRC in order to
benefit Germany.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
56
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
In the other four case studies, the primary direction of investment is from China to the country.
These countries should focus China’s current and future investments toward their national
interests. For current investments, countries can review the terms and, where feasible, renegotiate
agreements to be more favorable, taking into consideration the changing economic landscape.
This is particularly important for investments that are linked to infrastructure or other projects
that ultimately facilitate exports back to China. The countries can also learn about what works and
what does not work from existing agreements and then apply these lessons in negotiating future
agreements. Indonesia is a special case where its agreement with China led to building Indonesian
capacity in nickel processing. Other countries should follow this example by seeking agreements
with China that build domestic capacity and allow them to move up the value chain.
Conclusion
Overall, the impacts of China’s economic slowdown on its trade and investment partners will be
highly heterogeneous, varying based on the magnitude of the overall relationship, the composition
of the country’s imports from and exports to China, the existence of significant commodity flows
or export-dependent sectors, financial linkages, and other factors. As seen in the Paraguayan
case, while a smaller set of economic linkages with China shields countries from the direct
effects, the slowdown will continue to reverberate throughout the global economy over the years
to come. This chapter has attempted to present a quantitative description of the likely trajectory
of China’s economic slowdown, drawing on the factors outlined in this report’s first chapter and
supplementing that analysis. This analysis serves as the basis for the five case studies that follow
as well as a broader analysis of the slowdown’s implications for China’s trading partners. The case
study countries’ economies and economic relationships with China provide salutary lessons for
other similarly situated countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
57
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #118 | june 2025
ANA HORIGOSHI is a Research Scientist in the Policy Analysis Unit at AidData. She
can be reached at <ahorigoshi@aiddata.org>.
JONATHAN SOLIS is a Research Scientist in the Policy Analysis Unit at AidData. He
can be reached at <jsolis@aiddata.org>.
RODNEY KNIGHT is a Senior Research Scientist in the Policy Analysis Unit at AidData.
He can be reached at <rodneyknight@aiddata.org>.
BRYAN BURGESS is a Senior Policy Specialist in the Policy Analysis Unit at AidData.
He can be reached at < bvburgess@aiddata.org>.
What China’s Economic Slowdown Means
for Key Countries: Case Studies
Ana Horigoshi, Jonathan Solis, Rodney Knight,
and Bryan Burgess

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
59
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
T
 his chapter presents five case studies analyzing the implications of a slowdown in the
domestic economy of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) for a diverse set of countries:
Brazil, Germany, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Paraguay. These countries were selected to cover
a range of geographic regions, levels of economic development, and engagement with the
PRC. By investigating these representative cases, this chapter highlights the different channels
through which the effects of a Chinese economic slowdown would unfold globally.
Each case evaluates the patterns of economic interdependence with the PRC, assesses the
vulnerabilities resulting from reduced Chinese demand and investments, and considers policy
options for governments to navigate the slowdown. Collectively, the case studies provide a
framework for understanding the global ramifications of a Chinese economic slowdown and offer
policymakers guidance to mitigate risks and leverage new opportunities.
Brazil
Ana Horigoshi and Jonathan Solis
Brazil occupies a complex position in the global landscape. As Latin America’s largest
country by population and GDP, it wields significant regional influence. Yet, it also faces external
dependencies. Through its membership in the BRICS grouping, Brazil has strengthened ties
with the PRC, envisioning a future aligned with countries outside the G-7 and challenging the
dominance of the U.S. dollar. 1 Recent additions to the coalition, such as Iran, further signal an
alignment among countries seeking to counter Western dominance. This reinforces Brazil’s pivot
toward multipolarity. The Brazilian economy supports a population of 211 million, with a GDP
per capita of $9,258 in 2023 (in constant 2015 U.S. dollars).2 Its population has grown steadily since
2000, with projections indicating continued expansion in population and economic output. 3 In
2023, Brazil’s overall Human Development Index was 0.76 (on a 0 to 1 scale), which qualifies as
“high human development.”4 As it stands, Brazil’s economic potential remains largely unrealized.
Brazil recognized the PRC in 1974 after decades of diplomatic relations with the Republic of
China (or Taiwan), aligning with a wave of similar decisions by other nations. 5 In 1993, it became
the first Latin American country that the PRC recognized as a “strategic partner.” 6 Relations with
Beijing have remained strong, with trade becoming the foundation of the partnership, leading
 1 In 2023, at a BRICS conference in Johannesburg, Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva called for the BRICS nations to consider a
common currency to shield them from fluctuations in the U.S. dollar. See Rachel Savage, “Explainer: What Is a BRICS Currency and Is
the U.S. Dollar in Trouble?” Reuters, August 24, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/what-is-brics-currency-is-us-dollar-
trouble-2024-12-17. While no serious plans are in place, this proposal reflects the group’s growing unease with their economies’ dependence
on the U.S. dollar. The BRICS originally comprised Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, but the grouping has expanded to include
Egypt, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran, and the United Arab Emirates.
 2 World Bank, World Development Indicators, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators.
 3 Ibid. The Brazilian government predicts a 2.5% increase in GDP for 2025. “Brazil’s Government Forecasts 2.6% GDP Growth in 2025,
Inflation to Hit 3.3%, ” Reuters, August 30, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/brazils-government-forecasts-26-gdp-growth-
2025-inflation-hit-33-2024-08-31. The population should continue to rise until at least 2040. See Luiz Bello, “Brazil’s Population Will Stop
Growing in 2041, ” Agência de Notícias IBGE, August 22, 2024, https://agenciadenoticias.ibge.gov.br/en/agencia-news/2184-news-agency/
news/41065-populacao-do-pais-vai-parar-de-crescer-em-2041.
 4 The Human Development Index measures a country’s overall development by examining life expectancy at birth, mean years of schooling,
expected years of schooling, and gross national income per capita. UN Development Programme, Human Development Report 2023–24:
Breaking the Gridlock—Reimagining Cooperation in a Polarized World (New Y ork: UNDP , 2024), https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/
documents/global-report-document/hdr2023-24reporten.pdf.
 5 Thomas J. Shattuck, “The Race to Zero?: China’s Poaching of Taiwan’s Diplomatic Allies, ” Orbis 64, no. 2 (2020): 337.
 6 Rhys Jenkins, “China and Brazil: Economic Impacts of a Growing Relationship, ” Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 41, no. 1 (2012): 22.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
f i g u r e 1 Brazil’s quarterly GDP growth over time (1997–2023) and five-year projection
(2024–29)
s o u r c e : Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (IPEA).
n o t e : The GDP forecast was produced with a vector autoregressive model. Data in the figure is Brazil’s
quarterly data.
60
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
to Brazil’s invitation to join the BRICS in the 2000s. 7 However, as of October 2024, Brazil has
declined to join the PRC’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)—a global infrastructure and investment
strategy designed to enhance connectivity and trade routes across Asia, Africa, and Latin
America.8 While it is possible that the holdout is a signal of Brazil’s unwillingness to explicitly
align itself with the PRC, the decision most likely relates to the limited benefits of joining, coupled
with the country’s long-standing policy of nonalignment. Brazil already receives nearly half of
the investment directed to the region, suggesting that signaling alignment by joining BRI is not
necessary to enhance access to Chinese capital. 9
Since 1992, Brazil’s economy has experienced significant fluctuations. Periods of robust growth
in the early 2000s were followed by contractions during the global financial crisis and the political
and economic crises of the mid-2010s, which included a recession, the impeachment of President
Dilma Rousseff, and U.S. tariffs on steel and aluminum (see Figure 1). A sharp decline of GDP
 7 Harold Trinkunas argues that the BRICS essentially formalized the already existing cooperation between Brazil and China. See Harold
Trinkunas, “Testing the Limits of China and Brazil’s Partnership, ” Brookings Institution, July 20, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
testing-the-limits-of-china-and-brazils-partnership.
 8 Celso Amorim, President Lula’s special presidential adviser on international affairs, told media that Brazil wishes to strengthen its economic
relationship with China but is more interested in “synergies” than signing a sweeping agreement. Cobus van Staden, “Brazil’s BRI Rejection
a Setback for China, ” China-Global South Project, October 30, 2024, https://chinaglobalsouth.com/2024/10/30/brazils-bri-rejection-a-
setback-for-china.
 9 Jorge Heine, “Brazil’s Non-Signing on to China’s BRI: Much Ado About Nothing?” China-Global South Project, November 11, 2024, https://
chinaglobalsouth.com/analysis/brazils-non-signing-on-to-chinas-bri-much-ado-about-nothing.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
61
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
growth in 2020 reflects the negative impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. Overall, recent history
suggests that Brazil’s economy is indeed exposed to external shocks—similar to what it would face
from a slowdown of the PRC economy. Post-pandemic recovery has been uneven, with growth
strongly rebounding briefly before stabilizing at lower, though positive, levels. The “forecast GDP”
line in Figure 1 represents the GDP growth forecast generated by AidData’s model, which includes
variables for tariff and pandemic shocks that directly affect Brazil’s growth potential. The forecasts
suggest that Brazil will experience an initial shock and dip in growth but sustain positive economic
growth, albeit without significant improvement. 10 This projection underscores the challenges
facing the country in maintaining long-term economic momentum amid global uncertainties and
domestic structural issues.
Our analysis focuses on two major economic inputs that link the PRC to Brazil: trade and
development financing. While foreign direct investment is another significant channel—
amounting to approximately $73.3 billion across 264 confirmed projects in Brazil between 2007
and 2023—FDI is not included in our analysis due to issues with data quality and availability. 11
The remainder of this case study examines the potential impact of the PRC’s economic slowdown
on Brazil by first exploring how shifts in the PRC’s domestic demand could influence Brazil’s
economic performance, including its trade dynamics and investment flows, and then identifying
vulnerable sectors and potential mitigating responses. We find that Brazil is substantially
vulnerable to changes in the Chinese economy due to its dependence on commodity exports. The
case study concludes with policy options for Brazil to navigate these challenges effectively.
The PRC’s Trade with Brazil
Brazil’s bilateral trade with the PRC has undergone remarkable growth since the 1990s (see
Figure 2). Cumulatively, between 1992 and 2023 the PRC exported $648.3 billion worth of goods
to Brazil, while importing $1.215 trillion worth of goods from Brazil, resulting in a total trade
value of $1.864 trillion over this period.12 During this time, Brazil consistently maintained a trade
surplus with the PRC each year, underscoring its role as a critical supplier of raw materials and
commodities that fueled the economic growth of the PRC in its infrastructure- and investment-
driven era. Brazil’s large trade surplus with the PRC also highlights the latter’s reliance on high-
value exports such as soybeans, iron ore, and crude petroleum. 13 This dynamic has consistently
driven bilateral trade and allows Brazil to maintain a more balanced economic relationship than
other countries that are heavily dependent on what the PRC imports from them. While this trade
deficit, from Beijing’s perspective, is not inherently harmful—offering access to affordable inputs
that boost domestic productivity—it could create vulnerabilities for the PRC. The PRC might
view a persistent deficit as making the country overly reliant on foreign goods, weakening its
domestic industries, and threatening the goal of self-sufficiency, which was discussed in chapter 1.
In response, Beijing might seek to boost exports or curb reliance on key imports, particularly
 10 Our calculations use a post-estimation impulse response function to project, based on AidData’s model, that a two-period shock would
occur following a PRC economic slowdown, with stabilization beginning in the third year.
 11 Tulio Cariello, “Chinese Investments in Brazil 2023: New Trends in Green Energy and Sustainable Partnerships, ” China-Brazil Business
Council, 2024, https://www.cebc.org.br/download/14517/?tmstv=1733322992.
 12 UN Comtrade database, https://comtradeplus.un.org; and World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database, https://wits.worldbank.org.
 13 Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC), “Brazil, ” https://oec.world/en/profile/country/bra.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
f i g u r e 2 Brazil-PRC trade over time, 1992–2023 (with significant years)
s o u r c e : UN Comtrade database.
2010 2011 2018 2021
62
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
commodities. Beyond these policy factors, Brazil is also highly vulnerable to changes in Chinese
demand, given that the PRC is responsible for over a quarter of Brazilian exports.14
The total value of trade between Brazil and the PRC has experienced exponential growth,
especially since the early 2000s, as seen in Figure 2. Years with significant spikes in trade activity
include 2010, which was the year following Brazil’s entry into the BRICS, as well as 2011, 2018,
and 2021. Notably, total trade peaked at $163.2 billion in 2021, driven by Brazil’s robust export
performance. Overall, increasing trade with the PRC has coincided for Brazil with some periods of
economic expansion, such as in the 2000s, but also periods of low to negative growth in which its
trade with the PRC still increased.
While Figures 1 and 2 show the general trend of Brazil-PRC trade, they do not tell the story of
the sectors driving these numbers. Table 1 further breaks down trade flows by stage of production
and product sector for the entire period from 1992 to 2022, for 2010, and for 2021. 15 The table
highlights the PRC’s reliance on Brazil for energy and other commodities. The raw materials
category consistently tops both overall imports and total trade flows. When broken down by
sector, minerals are the top sector in total trade and in what the PRC imports from Brazil, while
fuels consistently come in third. Capital goods—equipment and machinery used to produce other
goods—are consistently the top export from the PRC to Brazil.
 14 WITS database.
 15 We selected the years 2010 and 2021 for two reasons: first, they are two of the four banner years in Figure 2 and bookend this set of years;
second, they illustrate how the top sectors evolved over a decade of rapid expansion in trade relations.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
t a b l e 1 Top Brazil-PRC trade sectors by exports, imports, and total trade
Trade flows (cumulative, 1992–2022)
Total Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Minerals, (2) vegetable, (3) fuels
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) chemicals, (3) miscellaneous
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Minerals, (2) vegetable, (3) fuels
Trade flows (2010)
Total Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Minerals, (2) machinery and electronics, (3) vegetable
Exports
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) miscellaneous, (3) textiles and
clothing
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Minerals, (2) vegetable, (3) fuels
Trade flows (2021)
Total Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Minerals, (2) vegetable, (3) machinery and electronics
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) chemicals, (3) miscellaneous
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Minerals, (2) vegetable, (3) fuels
s o u r c e : World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database.
n o t e : Imports refer to PRC imports from Brazil, and exports refer to PRC exports to Brazil. Stage refers to
stages of production (capital goods, consumer goods, intermediate goods, or raw materials), and sector refers
to the specific sector of the product.
63
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
A slowdown in the PRC’s economy could disrupt this dynamic. Declining industrial and
consumer demand may reduce its imports of raw materials for energy, which are Brazil’s primary
exports to the PRC. This shift could pose challenges for Brazil, as the PRC’s evolving growth model
dampens demand for other major Brazilian exports like iron ore. Around 60% of Brazil’s iron
ore exports go to the PRC, making it the top destination and Brazil’s second-largest export to the
PRC, behind only soybeans. 16 With the PRC moving away from an infrastructure-heavy growth
economy (see chapter 1), Brazil will need to navigate a shifting trade landscape where its traditional
commodity exports may play a diminished role. This could in turn narrow the country’s trade
surplus or even result in a trade deficit, diminishing the benefits Brazil currently enjoys from its
 16 In 2023, Brazil was the world’s second-largest exporter of iron ore, shipping approximately $34 billion worth of the material. China alone
imported $20.6 billion from Brazil that same year. OEC, “Brazil. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
f i g u r e 3 PRC development finance to Brazil over time, 2000–2021
s o u r c e : AidData.
64
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
balanced economic position. This could further expose the Brazilian economy to future external
shocks, such as supply chain disruptions or geopolitical tensions with key trade partners.
That being said, it is important to avoid overstating the direct impact of a slowdown in the
PRC economy on Brazil’s GDP growth. The increase of trade between the two countries has not
consistently translated into higher economic growth in Brazil. Instead, Brazil has experienced
substantial fluctuations in growth, particularly in the 2010s, despite consistent growth in trade
with the PRC. Furthermore, given the size of the PRC’s economy, even a depressed growth rate
would still result in a substantial increase in global demand.
The PRC’s Development Finance in Brazil
Overall and sectoral perspectives. Since 2000, the PRC has committed approximately $54 billion
in development financing to Brazil (see Figures 3 and 4).17 Chinese investments have been heavily
concentrated in a few key sectors (Figure 5), and nearly 98% of this financing is in the form of debt
(i.e., loans with interest rates approaching market rates) as opposed to aid (i.e., grants or loans at
no interest or low interest rates). 18 The sector of industry, mining, and construction accounts for
the largest share, totaling $28.1 billion, or 51.6% of the PRC’s development finance commitments
 17 Samantha Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance: An Application of AidData’s TUFF 3.0 Methodology, ” AidData, William &
Mary, 2023, https://www.aiddata.org/data/aiddatas-global-chinese-development-finance-dataset-version-3-0; and Axel Dreher, Banking on
Beijing: The Aims and Impacts of China’s Overseas Development Program (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2022).
 18 We consider two types of PRC state-directed development finance: official development assistance (ODA), which are grants and no- or low-
interest loans; and other official flows (OOF), which are loans and other debt instruments approaching market rates. A vague category exists
when the data generators cannot clearly differentiate between ODA and OOF .

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
f i g u r e 4 Brazil’s quarterly GDP change
s o u r c e : IPEA.
f i g u r e 5 Top 5 sectors for PRC development finance to Brazil
s o u r c e : AidData.
65
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
in Brazil. Within this sector, Rio de Janeiro leads other states with $16.1 billion in investments—
nearly 60% of all mining projects—while Goiás ranks second at $2.7 billion. Notably, the PRC owns
two niobium (columbium) mines in Goiás. Niobium is a resource critical for strengthening steel,
producing jet engine superalloys, developing superconducting magnets for advanced technologies,

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
66
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
and enhancing the stability of electronic capacitors—applications that certainly fit with the PRC’s
strategy of pursuing a high-tech growth strategy centered on hard technology.
Energy is the second-largest recipient of the PRC’s development financing in Brazil, accounting
for approximately 35% of total commitments, or $19 billion. 19 The state of Rio Grande do Norte,
located in Brazil’s northeast, is the top destination for these investments, attracting $11.7 billion.
This includes one major deal between Petrobras and the China Development Bank (CDB) in 2016,
where an over $10 billion line of credit was provided in two $5.75 billion tranches to help Petrobras
manage its debt obligations.20
Investments in communications and transport and storage, the third- and fourth-
largest recipient sectors, respectively, further underscore the PRC’s strategic emphasis on
telecommunications, resource extraction, and infrastructure critical to its global supply chain
and energy security goals. For example, in 2009 the CDB provided loans of $450 million and
$750 million to Telemar Norte Leste SA to purchase telecommunications equipment and services
from Huawei.21 Similarly, in 2015 the CDB issued a $673 million loan for the same purpose. In
2018, it extended yet another loan of $4.2 million to Telemar Norte Leste SA, although the terms
and purpose remain unclear.
The top two sectors—industry, mining, and construction, followed by energy—are particularly
vulnerable as Beijing seeks to target its investments more precisely. The compositional changes
in the PRC’s economy that were discussed in chapter 1 suggest a decrease in the need for those
inputs. Furthermore, despite Brazil’s substantial known reserves of critical minerals, the country
might not be able to rely on the PRC’s investment to mine them, as it has done with iron ore.
Temporal trends in investment and economic growth . Over time, PRC investments in financial
development trends reveal a marked increase in activity after the global financial crisis in 2008
(see Figure 6 ). Overall PRC development finance surged sharply in 2009 and coincides with
Brazil’s entrance to the BRICS grouping, aligning with the country’s efforts to attract foreign
capital for large-scale projects. Sectorally, the biggest project driving the spike comes from the
industry, mining, and construction sector—namely a $10.5 billion line of credit provided by
the CDB to Petrobras for oil exploration in the Santos Basin. 22 The years 2016 and 2017 marked
significant milestones in Brazil’s energy sector, featuring major projects such as a $1.2 billion
overseas investment loan from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to facilitate CTG
Brazil’s acquisition of the Ilha Solteira and Jupiá hydropower dams. 23 In 2017 the Bank of China
participated in a $145.8 million syndicated buyer’s credit loan as part of a larger project to
construct a 292-megawatt solar power plant in Ribeira do Piauí, located in Brazil’s northeastern
state of Piauí.24 Construction began in July 2016, and the plant became operational in September
2017. After the dramatic increase from 2015 to 2017, growth in the energy sector continued, albeit
at a slower pace, as seen in Figure 6. Meanwhile, investments in communications and transport
have remained relatively modest by comparison, with incremental growth over time.
 19 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”
 20 Ibid. Values for specific projects are in 2021 constant U.S. dollars.
 21 Ibid.
 22 Ibid.
 23 Ibid. CTG Brazil is a subsidiary of China Three Gorges Corporation.
 24 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
f i g u r e 6 PRC development finance to Brazil by sector (cumulative), 2000–2021
Transport and storage
s o u r c e : AidData.
67
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
Interestingly, the relationship between PRC development finance and Brazil’s GDP growth
reveals a more complex dynamic (see Figure 7 ). While some periods of high investment
coincide with economic growth, the overall trend suggests a negative association, whereby
higher PRC financing aligns with slower GDP growth. This pattern underscores the influence
of broader macroeconomic factors, which appear to play a more decisive role in shaping Brazil’s
economic performance.
Implications of the PRC’s Economic Slowdown for Brazil
The PRC’s domestic economic slowdown could disrupt Brazil’s access to development financing
for at least three reasons. First, since most PRC development assistance comes in the form of loans,
a reduction in new financing or refinancing could strain ongoing projects, as well as hinder the
initiation or expansion of others, in key sectors like energy and mining. As of 2021, Brazil was the
seventh-largest recipient of PRC development finance among low- and middle-income countries.25
That makes it particularly vulnerable to future slowdowns. Additionally, repayment obligations
could become more challenging if Brazil’s economic growth slows in parallel, increasing the risk
of financial distress to the borrower. Reduced Chinese demand for Brazilian exports like soybeans
and iron ore could further exacerbate debt-servicing pressures and strain Brazil’s economy.
Second, the PRC’s efforts to reduce indebtedness across its economy could have an impact on
Brazil as a top receiver of PRC FDI by constraining debt-laden Chinese firms, limiting their ability
 25 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
f i g u r e 7 PRC development finance to Brazil over time and Brazil’s annual GDP change
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
0246 81 01 2
Average annual GDP growth (%)
PRC development finance ($ billion)
2004
2010
2007
2001
2009
2020 2015
s o u r c e : Data on PRC development financing is from AidData; and data on GDP growth is from IPEA.
n o t e : Band represents 90% confidence interval.
68
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
to sustain or expand overseas investments. 26 For example, HNA Group invested aggressively
in Brazil’s aviation sector in the mid-2010s, acquiring a 23.7% stake of the airline Azul in 2015
and 30% of the Rio de Janeiro–Galeão International Airport in 2017. 27 However, HNA Group
accumulated over $96.25 billion in debt by 2018.28 Subsequently, it shifted quickly from aggressive
global expansion to asset sales once Beijing emphasized domestic debt reduction.29
A third, related reason is the PRC’s policy of capital controls aimed at curbing private FDI
along with curbing BRI projects that underperformed—those seen as being marred by corruption,
provoking political backlash, or yielding disappointing financial results (discussed in more detail
in chapter 1). As with Beijing’s push to reduce indebtedness, capital controls could affect Brazil
due to the substantial FDI it receives from the PRC. BYD, a Chinese battery and electric vehicle
manufacturer, began constructing a factory in the northeastern state of Bahia in 2024, where
 26 Chapter 1 of this report details the factors contributing to the PRC’s debt-to-GDP buildup and Beijing’s subsequent efforts to stem it.
 27 “China’s HNA Group to Buy 23.7% in Azul Brazilian Airlines for $450 Million, ” Reuters, November 24, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/
article/business/environment/chinas-hna-group-to-buy-237-pct-in-azul-brazilian-airlines-for-450-mln-idUSB9N13E007; and “China’s
HNA Buys Odebrecht Stake in Rio Airport for $19 Million, ” Reuters, July 13, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/world/americas/chinas-
hna-buys-odebrecht-stake-in-rio-airport-for-19-million-idUSKBN19Y2LH.
 28 “HNA Group Trims Debt Nearly 11 Pct, or $11.6 Bln, in First Half, ” Reuters, September 1, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-
hna-debt/hna-group-trims-debt-nearly-11-percent-or-11-6-billion-in-first-half-idUSKCN1LH36A.
 29 “Hainan Airlines Sells Remaining Stake in Brazil’s Azul for $306 million, ” Reuters, August 10, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
hainan-airlines-azul-stake/hainan-airlines-sells-remaining-stake-in-brazils-azul-for-306-million-idUSKBN1KV0UX.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
69
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
163 Chinese nationals were found to be working in conditions compared to “slavery.”30 A Chinese
company, Jinjiang Group, was contracted to build the factory for BYD. As a result, Brazilian
officials halted the $484.2 million project to build the electric vehicle factory in early 2025. 31
Policy Options
Brazil’s economic engagements with the PRC, especially through trade and development
financing, increase its vulnerability to the PRC’s own economic performance. Declining energy
demand or reduced flows of development finance from the PRC could affect the course of Brazil’s
growth plan and pose significant risks to the country’s economic stability. This vulnerability
underscores the importance of diversifying Brazil’s export markets and reducing over-reliance on
a single trading partner. By addressing these challenges, Brazil can improve its economic diversity
and build resilience against future global and domestic uncertainties. To mitigate domestic
consequences of a Chinese economic slowdown, Brazil could consider the following policy options:
• Diversify export markets and reduce over-reliance on a single trading partner . When possible,
Brazil should pursue trade agreements with other major markets, including India, Southeast
Asia, and Africa. Expanding export opportunities can help the country stabilize its economy
against shocks stemming from the PRC’s economic fluctuations. Brazil’s export market is
currently heavily concentrated in the PRC, making it particularly vulnerable to fluctuations in
the Chinese economy.
• Strengthen domestic financial, regulatory, and governance frameworks . Brazil should foster a
stable, attractive investment environment by reforming regulations, offering tax incentives, and
improving infrastructure to attract a broader range of investors and reduce reliance on Chinese
development finance. With PRC financing playing a central role in Brazil’s development and
emerging signs that the Chinese economy is slowing down, Brazil must ensure that future
investment supports high-quality, sustainable growth. Strengthening democratic institutions
and curbing corruption would also facilitate access to loans and investments from Western
institutions that emphasize governance and transparency, diversifying Brazil’s financial
partnerships and reducing exposure to external risks.
• Leverage existing ties to renegotiate more favorable loan terms with the PRC . Nearly 98% of
Brazil’s development finance comes in the form of debt, with interest rates approaching market
rates. Lower rates on financial development projects would reduce Brazil’s debt-servicing costs,
freeing up fiscal space to counterbalance the negative effects of the PRC’s economic slowdown
with fiscal policy measures. This helps ensure that critical infrastructure, energy, and mining
development projects continue without placing additional financial strain on the Brazilian
economy during a period of global uncertainty. By lowering the burden of repayment, Brazil
can better maintain stability even if new funding flows from the PRC diminish.
 30 “China’s BYD Starts Construction on Manufacturing Complex in Brazil, ” Reuters, March 6, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/business/autos-
transportation/chinas-byd-starts-construction-manufacturing-complex-brazil-2024-03-06; and Annabelle Liang, “Brazil Shuts BYD Factory
Site over ‘Slavery’ Conditions, ” BBC News, December 15, 2024, https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c8xj9jp57r2o.
 31 Naiara Galarraga Gortázar, “BYD in Brazil: From the Company’s Triumphant Arrival to a Scandal Involving ‘Slavery-Like’ Working
Conditions, ” El País (English edition), January 11, 2025, https://english.elpais.com/international/2025-01-11/byd-in-brazil-from-the-
companys-triumphant-arrival-to-a-scandal-involving-slavery-like-working-conditions.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
70
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Germany
Ana Horigoshi and Rodney Knight
Germany holds a central position in the world economy. It is the third-largest economy after
the United States and the PRC and the largest economy in the European Union.32 In current dollar
terms, Germany’s 2023 GDP of $4.5 trillion and GDP per capita of $54,000 give the country
substantial economic power at both the national and individual levels. While the PRC has a much
larger GDP ($17.8 trillion), it has a lower GDP per capita ($12,000). The differential in GDP per
capita could play into how the PRC’s economic slowdown affects Germany. The lower labor costs
in the PRC could continue to make its manufacturing sector highly competitive (see chapter 1),
potentially continuing to attract German foreign direct investment. In 2021, German FDI stocks
in the PRC reached $118 billion.33 Combined with lower labor costs, the PRC has almost 17 times
the population of Germany, which gives it an enormous pool of labor to expand manufacturing
even amid slowing economic growth. 34 It will, however, be difficult for German firms to exit their
investments due to the PRC’s tight capital controls.
Nonetheless, Germany faces a possible weakness in an environment of slowing Chinese
economic growth. As a net exporter to the PRC, Germany could see its economy take a hit from
lower exports, particularly in the automobile sector. While most vehicles from German automakers
sold in the PRC are made locally there, many models are still imported from Germany. As noted
in chapter 1 of this report, the PRC’s efforts to expand its high-tech manufacturing and promote
self-sufficiency in strategic technologies and industries make the components of German exports
particularly vulnerable.
Outside of economic factors, global politics could determine the impact of the PRC’s economic
slowdown on the German economy. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the PRC’s support to Russia
prompted a turning point in Germany-Russia relations that affected Germany’s relations with
the PRC.35 Since the invasion, businesses in Germany have reduced reliance on Chinese parts for
products through diversification to manufacturers in other countries. 36 Such diversification can
make these companies more resilient to supply-chain issues relating to Chinese inputs. But it also
increases the risk that German companies that have invested in the PRC’s manufacturing sector
may see shrinking export markets back to Germany.
Even with its size and strength, the German economy has experienced several downturns
stemming from slowdowns in key trading partners, reflecting its exposure to external shocks.
The global financial crisis in 2008 and the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 were the two most notable
shocks, as seen in a graph of quarterly GDP growth from the end of 1999 through 2024 (see
Figure 8). The euro area crisis that started for other EU countries in 2009 had a delayed effect on
Germany, which first recovered from the 2008 global financial crisis and then did not succumb
to the euro area crisis until after 2010. Researchers have highlighted a number of weaknesses in
 32 World Bank, World Development Indicators, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP .POP .TOTL.
 33 The 2021 FDI statistic from Deutsche Bundesbank (2024) of 99.4 billion euros was converted to U.S. dollars with the average 2021 exchange
rate from the European Central Bank.
 34 In 2023 the population of China was 1.4 billion, whereas the population of Germany was only 83.8 million.
 35 Sebastian Biba, “Germany’s Triangular Relations with the United States and China in the Era of the Zeitenwende, ” German Politics 33, no. 3
(2024): 435–62.
 36 Andreas Baur and Lisandra Flach, “Zeitenwende in German-Chinese Trade Relations? Evidence from German Firms, ” ifo Institute, EconPol
Policy Brief, no. 57, April 2024, https://www.ifo.de/en/econpol/publications/2024/working-paper/zeitenwende-german-chinese-trade-
relations-evidence-german-firm.

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
f i g u r e 8 Germany’s quarterly GDP growth over time (1999–2024) and five-year projection
(2024–29)
s o u r c e : Federal Statistical Office of Germany.
n o t e : The GDP forecast was produced with a vector autoregressive model.
71
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
existing policies that have persisted after the euro area crisis, suggesting continued vulnerability to
external shocks.37
Germany is already experiencing a decline in GDP, which may be seen as starting with
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, following a large rebound in the economy after the Covid-19
pandemic. Yet, higher energy prices resulting from the war in Ukraine might not be the only factor
slowing the German economy. Analysts and economists suggest that high interest rates; external
competition; an aging population, which reduces the size of the labor force; overdependence on
exports, including those to the PRC; and weak growth in productivity also play a role. 38
The economic downturns of the past and the current economic crisis suggest that the
PRC’s economic slowdown would either be neutral or contribute to a further slowdown in
Germany’s economy. Our forecast for GDP growth from 2024 to 2029 shows an immediate
decline in GDP growth, followed by a temporary rebound and a flattening of growth, as seen in
 37 See, for example, Kirsty Huges, “European Politics and the Euro Crisis: Ten Failures, ” Friends of Europe, Policy Paper, November 2011,
https://www.friendsofeurope.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/European-Politics-and-the-Euro-Crisis-Ten-Failures.pdf.
 38 See, for example, Maria Martinez, “Germany in Deep Economic Crisis, BDI Industrial Lobby Group Says, ” Reuters, January 28, 2025,
https://www.reuters.com/markets/europe/germany-is-deep-economic-crisis-says-bdi-industrial-lobby-2025-01-28; and Jumana Saleheen,
“Germany’s Economic Woes Beyond the Energy Crisis, ” Vanguard, December 24, 2024, https://corporate.vanguard.com/content/
corporatesite/us/en/corp/vemo/germany-economic-woes-go-beyond-energy-crisis.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
f i g u r e 9 Germany-PRC trade over time, 1992–2023 (with significant years)
s o u r c e : UN Comtrade database.
2010 2021
72
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Figure 8. 39 While the model does not simply show a continued downward trend, it does suggest
that an economic shock from a slowdown in the PRC economy will produce lower growth than
otherwise would be expected.
The PRC’s Trade with Germany
As expected for the size and diversity of its economy, Germany has very active trade with the
PRC (see Figure 9). Over time the country has maintained a trade surplus—or at worst a limited
trade deficit—making it an outlier among the PRC’s largest trading partners. During the period
from 1992 to 2008, Germany fluctuated between having a slightly positive or slightly negative trade
balance with the PRC. Starting in 2009, it consistently maintained a positive trade balance for over
a decade. After 2021, however, both exports from and imports to the PRC began to plummet. This
decline in trade could be in part a consequence of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The PRC’s support
for Russia, combined with Germany’s opposition to the invasion, led to a cooling of relations
between Germany and the PRC, which might have slowed down trade. Declining bilateral trade
could have a negative effect on Germany’s GDP growth, even before accounting for the effect of the
slowdown in the PRC’s economy. It may, therefore, be difficult to know if the current deceleration
of the German economy is primarily due to a slowing Chinese economy or other factors—whether
related to the bilateral relationship or outside it.
 39 In addition to Germany’s GDP growth, our vector autoregressive model incorporates data on the PRC’s GDP growth, interest rates,
inflation, and shocks due to tariffs and the Covid-19 pandemic. Achim Truger, “ Austerity in the Euro Area: The Sad State of Economic
Policy in Germany and the EU, ” European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies: Intervention 10, no. 2 (2013): 158–74.

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
t a b l e 2 Top Germany-PRC trade sectors by exports, imports, and total trade
Trade flows (cumulative, 1992–2022)
Total Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) transportation, (3) miscellaneous
Exports
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) miscellaneous, (3) textiles and
clothing
Imports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) transportation, (3) chemicals
Trade flows (2010)
Total Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) transportation, (3) miscellaneous
Exports
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) textiles and clothing,
(3) miscellaneous
Imports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) transportation, (3) miscellaneous
Trade flows (2021)
Total Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) transportation (3) miscellaneous
Exports
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) miscellaneous, (3) textiles and
clothing
Imports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) transportation, (3) chemicals
s o u r c e : WITS database.
n o t e : Imports refer to PRC imports from Germany, and exports refer to PRC exports to Germany. Stage
refers to stages of production (capital goods, consumer goods, intermediate goods, or raw materials), and
sector refers to the specific sector of the product.
73
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
PRC imports from Germany do not focus on raw materials, as is often the case for countries
less developed than Germany, nor do they focus mainly on consumer goods. They instead focus
on capital goods (see Table 2). The share of capital goods, however, has been decreasing. In 1992,
consumer goods accounted for 14% of PRC imports from Germany, rising gradually to 31% by
2022, while throughout the period from 1992 to 2022 over half of the PRC’s imports from Germany
were capital goods.40 In particular, from 1992 to 2009, capital goods accounted for over 60% of the
PRC’s imports from Germany, but they gradually declined to around 50% by 2022.
 40 WITS database.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
74
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Why should a focus on capital goods over consumer goods matter? In terms of trade stability,
capital goods will be less prone to changing consumer preferences or the weak consumer demand
identified as a major factor driving the PRC’s slowdown. Trade in capital goods will have a level
of stability not found in consumer goods for this reason. Capital goods are, however, subject to
the level of demand for production, which could be reduced during an economic slowdown. The
continued strength of Chinese manufacturing exports, even in times of economic slowdown, could
thereby prop up the demand for the capital goods required to produce those consumer goods.
Yet, the stabilizing effect of a strong Chinese manufacturing sector on demand for imports of
German capital goods could be countered by other factors. As the Chinese industry matures, the
PRC will produce more of the capital goods it requires domestically, thereby reducing demand
for German capital goods. The growth of manufacturing in the PRC, as well as the level of
manufacturing, can affect the demand for capital goods. New or expanded production that is part
of growth will require higher levels of capital goods than existing manufacturing. If the level of
manufacturing remains stable, but growth is limited, there will be less demand for capital goods
than during a high-growth period.
Other factors that could change PRC demand for German capital good are the globalization
of Chinese manufacturing, shifts of trade to other countries due to tariff or non-tariff barriers
on Chinese imports, or even other countries becoming more competitive. If some Chinese
manufacturing moves to other countries, will the Chinese joint ventures or subsidiaries in those
countries be as motivated to import capital goods from Germany? The success of German firms
selling capital goods to these countries will depend in part on how established Germany’s trade
and business relationships are with them.
While the foregoing analysis has focused on capital goods, it is important to note that certain
sectors of the German economy that rely on exports of consumer goods to the PRC are substantially
vulnerable to fluctuations in the Chinese economy. For example, the PRC represents a large share
of global sales of luxury brands such as Porsche and Adidas. 41
Bilateral Investment Flows
Alongside their robust trade relationship, the PRC and Germany actively invest in the other’s
economy. Despite the PRC’s strict capital controls following major outflows around 2015, Germany
has contributed much more foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment (FPI)
to the PRC than the PRC has to Germany (see Figure 10).42 Examining the stocks of FDI since
2010, Germany started with around $48 billion in combined FDI and FPI. Germany expanded
its investment in the PRC to $119 billion by 2022. FDI from Germany ranged from $43 billion in
2010 to $95 billion in 2022, with a peak of $118 billion in 2021. The PRC’s FDI in Germany, on the
other hand, declined to less than $6 billion by 2022. The trend for PRC FDI in Germany did not
include portfolio investment because of the tight capital controls that restrict outbound portfolio
investment from the PRC, as noted in chapter 1.43
 41 “German Carmakers Most Exposed to Chinese Counter-Tariffs, ” Reuters, June 13, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/business/autos-
transportation/european-carmakers-exposed-any-chinese-retaliation-eu-tariffs-2024-06-13; and “Share of Adidas Retail Sales by Region
Worldwide in 2024, ” Statista, https://www.statista.com/statistics/531733/share-of-adidas-retail-sales-by-region.
 42 In foreign portfolio investment the investor invests in a portfolio of stocks, bonds, and other securities without having a role in the
management of the foreign businesses in the portfolio.
 43 Deutsche Bundesbank database, available at https://www.bundesbank.de/dynamic/action/en/statistics/time-series-databases/time-series-dat
abases/745582/745582?listId=www_sesbop_aw3_2_2c1__t_s1&tsId=BBFFDIPV .A.DI.DE.CN.S1.IMC.LE.NI.FA.D.F .ALL.EUR.I.V ._X._T._Z
&dateSelect=2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
f i g u r e 1 0 Germany-PRC FDI over time, 2010–22
s o u r c e : Deutsche Bundesbank.
75
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
How might this relatively high level of FDI from Germany to the PRC affect the former’s
broader economic fortunes?44 The degree to which the German economy is dependent on returns
from this FDI will influence the effect on German GDP. The level of FDI, while seemingly high,
represents less than 3% of Germany’s GDP, which is over $4 trillion annually. Profits that German
investors received from FDI in 2021 were estimated to be only $18 billion, which is less than 1% of
GDP.45 Given the low levels of FDI and related profits relative to GDP, as well as the challenges in
increasing FDI due to fears that investments are difficult to exit because of the PRC’s tight capital
controls, it seems unlikely that a reduction in FDI from Germany will have much effect on the
GDP of Germany.
The first step in assessing whether FDI from or to the PRC can influence German GDP is to
view the change in FDI along with the change in GDP (see Figures 11, 12, and 13). The annual
change in FDI reflects new inputs to FDI minus divestments. This net change accounts for the
total investment/divestment in the year and is what would be expected to influence the GDP. 46 In
the case of FDI from the PRC to Germany and FDI from Germany to the PRC, the pattern of the
change in FDI does not clearly mirror the pattern of the quarterly change in GDP. To test whether
either type of FDI is correlated with changes in GDP, regression models were run to evaluate the
 44 To simplify the discussion here and below, the term FDI refers to FDI and FPI combined.
 45 Cora Jungbluth, “Profits of German Investors in China—a First Empirical Stocktaking, ” Bertelsmann Stiftung, 2023, https://www.
bertelsmann-stiftung.de/en/publications/publication/did/profits-of-german-investors-in-china-a-first-empirical-stocktaking.
 46 The stock of FDI could also be seen as a measure of the potential effect on GDP , but this assumes that those holding on to the investment
will participate in corporate decision-making in a manner to influence the profitability of the investment. Instead, the change in the stock
reflects the change (increase or decrease) in the working capital for the company receiving the investment, which can directly contribute to
the success of the business.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
f i g u r e 1 1 PRC FDI to Germany change over time, 2010–22
s o u r c e : Deutsche Bundesbank.
f i g u r e 1 2 PRC FDI and FPI to Germany change over time, 2010–22
s o u r c e : Deutsche Bundesbank.
76
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
f i g u r e 1 3 Change in Germany’s quarterly GDP
s o u r c e : Federal Statistical Office of Germany.
f i g u r e 1 4 PRC FDI to Germany over time and change in Germany’s annual GDP
2020
s o u r c e : Deutsche Bundesbank; and Federal Statistical Office of Germany.
n o t e : Band represents 90% confidence interval.
77
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
f i g u r e 1 5 PRC FDI from Germany over time and Germany’s annual GDP change
2020
s o u r c e : Deutsche Bundesbank; and Federal Statistical Office of Germany.
n o t e : Band represents 90% confidence interval.
78
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
effect of the change in FDI to and from Germany on GDP change. Both models (see Figures 14
and 15) did not find a significant effect. In short, neither German investment into the PRC nor
PRC investment into Germany particularly matters for German GDP growth. These results are
not surprising, given the limited size of FDI relative to the size of Germany’s GDP—a phenomenon
partly driven by the PRC’s capital controls and the limited sample size.
Policy Options
As the third-largest economy in the world, with a highly competitive manufacturing sector and
a central role in European and global supply chains, Germany occupies a special position in the
global economy. When Germany falters, the rest of Europe is affected and to some extent the rest
of the world; similarly, Germany has shown that it is vulnerable to economic downturns stemming
from external shocks. The intertwining of the German and PRC economies in terms of trade and
investment makes both countries vulnerable to the economic slowdown of the other.
Germany and the PRC depend on each other for capital goods to support their export-oriented
economies. In the 1990s, trade was characterized by the PRC exporting consumer goods to and
importing capital goods from Germany. Through the 2000s, the PRC gradually caught up to
Germany to the point where its exports of capital goods to Germany met or exceeded imports of
German capital goods. Germany has become as dependent on capital goods from the PRC as the
PRC is dependent on Germany. The story for consumer goods is different. While Germany had been
catching up to the PRC on trade of consumer goods, in the last few years the trend has shifted back
to the PRC dominating the consumer goods trade. As the PRC’s manufacturing base broadens, it

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
79
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
will have an advantage to increase exports to Germany, particularly of consumer goods. Exports
of consumer goods could be what gives the PRC a long-term trade surplus with Germany. To avoid
sustained dependence on the PRC, Germany needs to look for other trade options.
Geopolitical events also are pushing Germany to consider alternatives. After Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine, Germany re-evaluated its interactions with the PRC as well as with Russia. Some
de-risking has occurred, 47 and trade has slowed as German companies have begun to diversify
the acquisition of critical resources and the production of products away from the PRC to other
countries. Moreover, Germany is currently experiencing its own economic slowdown, irrespective
of the PRC. The slowing of the Chinese economy exacerbates these economic woes.
For all these reasons, the resilience of the German economy will, in general, depend on
diversification. While Germany will continue the large volume of trade with the PRC and
investment in and from the PRC, its current level of dependence on the PRC need not remain
fixed. Germany already has very active trading and investment relations with the United States and
many other countries in Europe and Asia to draw on for diversification. To reduce its dependence
on the PRC, Germany could consider the following policy options:
• Diversify export and import markets and reduce over-reliance on the PRC. Germany already has
very active trading partnerships with other European countries, the United States, and many
other countries globally. Germany should evaluate its trade ecosystem and consider expanding
or refocusing efforts to increase its market access and reduce vulnerability to the economic
well-being of any one country. Expanded or refocused trading relationships can reduce risks
to the supply chain for German industrial production, particularly in the automotive industry,
and provide more stable sources for consumer goods.
• Evaluate and guide FDI with the PRC. As a larger provider of FDI to the PRC than a recipient,
Germany should evaluate the experience of its companies and institutions investing in the PRC.
How well have these investments returned value, and what alternatives exist for investment in
other markets? What impacts do the PRC’s tight capital controls have on German investments,
both presently and in the future? Understanding the answers to these questions can help the
German government create guidance and policies to protect German investment interests in
the PRC.
• Leverage existing ties within the EU and Europe more broadly to promote economic stability .
Looking more closely at its neighboring countries could improve Germany’s relations with
them, diversify markets for investment, and improve trading relations. Creating joint strategies
and working to curb the economic and political influence of the PRC on Germany and Europe
could strengthen cooperation between European countries, thereby increasing political stability
and fostering economic growth within the region.
 47 Baur and Flach, “Zeitenwende in German-Chinese Trade Relations?”

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
f i g u r e 1 6 Indonesia’s annual GDP growth over time (1985–2023) and five-year projection
(2024–28)
s o u r c e : Federal Reserve Economic Data.
n o t e : The GDP forecast was produced with a vector autoregressive model.
80
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Indonesia
Bryan Burgess and Ana Horigoshi
While the PRC is by far the largest economy in Asia, Indonesia is an important regional power
in Southeast Asia. With a population and an economy twice the size of its neighbors, Indonesia is
a leader in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and a bellwether for the economy
of the region as a whole. On January 7, 2025, the BRICS members formally admitted it to the trade
bloc as a full member, reflecting their desire to deepen economic linkages between Indonesia,
the PRC, and other members of the bloc. Since the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA) was
created, trade flows between Indonesia and the PRC have seen dramatic growth. 48 Meanwhile,
Indonesia has sustained an upward trajectory in economic and human development for most of
that period, raising important questions about just how much of the country’s rise is contingent on
the economic links to and growth of its mainland neighbor (see Figure 16).
Despite having first established diplomatic relations in 1950, Jakarta and Beijing have had a
contentious relationship. The Suharto regime suspended diplomatic recognition of the PRC shortly
 48 “Indonesia and China: How Trade Became a Path to Poverty Reduction, ” Center for Indonesian Policy Studies, February 10, 2025, https://
www.cips-indonesia.org/post/indonesia-and-china-how-trade-became-a-path-to-poverty-reduction.

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
81
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
after wresting power from President Sukarno in 1967, and only resumed diplomatic relations
in 1990. 49 Since then, Indonesia has joined a number of multinational initiatives with the PRC,
including the Belt and Road Initiative in 2015.
This case study focuses on two major economic channels that link the PRC to Indonesia:
trade and development finance. While the PRC’s foreign direct investment is another significant
channel—amounting to approximately $7.4 billion in realized investment projects in 2023, nearly
15% of total FDI and on par with the total investments from the United States, Canada, and Europe
combined50—our analysis does not include FDI due to the lack of transparent valuation methods
and long-term disaggregated data.
The remainder of this case study analyzes how trade dynamics and investment flows between
Indonesia and the PRC could influence the Indonesian economy. We find that Indonesia’s raw
commodities exports are particularly vulnerable to fluctuations in the PRC’s economy, but
there are opportunities for Indonesia to protect itself from these fluctuations by seeking new
partnerships—either through strengthening trade agreements and reducing trade barriers or by
moving up the value chain to produce semi-processed goods that can be exported to advanced
economies. Although Indonesia has already shifted its trade with the PRC upward in the value
chain, the conclusion suggests additional steps Jakarta could take to reduce its vulnerability to a
slowdown in the Chinese economy.
The PRC’s Trade with Indonesia
Following the signing of a formal trade agreement in August 1990, trade between the PRC and
Indonesia rapidly expanded under the framework of the ACFTA. Cumulatively, between 1992 and
2023 the PRC exported $754.4 billion worth of goods to Indonesia, while importing $703 billion
worth of goods, resulting in a total trade value of $1.457 trillion over this period. 51 During this
time, Indonesia alternated between a trade surplus and a trade deficit with the PRC several times
(see Figure 17). It transitioned from a consumer of Chinese capital goods and processed metals
during much of the 2010s to an exporter of intermediate goods in the current decade.
Metals, particularly iron, steel, nickel, and copper goods, are one of the key throughlines
undergirding this changing relationship. While iron and steel were a leading inbound category in
2022 (amounting to $6.7 billion, or 9% of Indonesia’s imports from the PRC), Indonesia exported
nearly three times as much back to the PRC ($19.0 billion, or 28% of Indonesia’s exports to the
PRC).52 The value of these exports represented an increase of over 27 times from 2010 levels. 53
Crucially, alongside a change in quantity of metal, the quality of metal has shifted as well. In
the early 2010s, Indonesia’s metal exports were dominated by raw or scrap metals, which are
very low-input commodities, with the PRC dominating flows of finished or processed metals.
Now, Indonesia is exporting far more semi-finished goods to the PRC, indicating an increasing
domestic capacity and decreasing reliance on Chinese processing firms. This is potentially a result
of a net-positive strategy on Indonesia’s side to move up the value chain by requiring buyers to
 49 Rizal Sukma, “Indonesia-China Relations: The Politics of Re-engagement, ” Asian Survey 49, no. 4 (2009): 591–608.
 50 This excludes Hong Kong. See BPS-Statistics Indonesia, “Investment Realization Foreign Investment by Country (Million US$), 2024, ”
https://www.bps.go.id/en/statistics-table/2/MTg0MyMy/realisasi-investasi-penanaman-modal-luar-negeri-menurut-negara.html.
 51 UN Comtrade database.
 52 OEC, “Indonesia, ” https://oec.world/en/profile/country/idn.
 53 WITS database.

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
f i g u r e 1 7 Indonesia-PRC trade over time, 1992–2023 (with significant years)
s o u r c e : UN Comtrade database.
2010 2011 2021
82
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
set up processing facilities in the country (see chapter 1 for further discussion). However, it is
important to note that the results of the bans on exports of raw minerals have been different for
other products. In the case of bauxite, the 2014 export ban led to the PRC replacing imports from
Indonesia with new supplies from Guinea and a drastic drop in Indonesian production of bauxite.
In the case of nickel, by contrast, the 2020 export ban was quite successful, leading to substantial
investment in mineral processing and manufacturing in Indonesia. 54 As the PRC’s manufacturing
sector is likely to remain highly competitive and self-sufficiency remains a major political goal for
the country in spite of its economic slowdown, Indonesia’s efforts to move up the value chain in
this space could face headwinds. Coupled with slowing growth in the rate of the PRC’s demand
for commodities due to the decline of infrastructure- and construction-driven growth, Indonesia’s
metals sector may be further squeezed.
Fuel exports from Indonesia to the PRC are not growing at the same pace and appear to be
detaching from the rapid rise seen across other goods. This trend is possibly a reflection of the
broader trend in the PRC’s economy (discussed in chapter 1) away from the kind of energy-
intensive infrastructure-driven growth that led to massive fuel imports. Throughout the past two
decades, petroleum and coal exports were a central pillar of the bilateral trading relationship.
Indeed, much of the recent reversal in the Indonesian trade deficit (as seen in Figure 17) can be
attributed to a $12.7 billion jump in Indonesian fuel exports to the PRC between 2020 and 2021.
However, prior to this jump, fuel goods had declined from 35% of Indonesia’s PRC-bound exports
 54 Gracelin Baskaran, “Diversifying Investment in Indonesia’s Mining Sector, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies, July 11, 2024,
https://www.csis.org/analysis/diversifying-investment-indonesias-mining-sector

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
83
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
to just over 25%. Petroleum exports from Indonesia to the PRC decreased by 6% between 2022 and
2023, and exports of lignite coal and briquettes were down as well. 55 These declines ended a five-
year run where coal exports from Indonesia to the PRC more than doubled in value (increasing by
146% and 174%, respectively). The PRC still retains a near monopoly on Indonesian lignite, buying
approximately 95% of Indonesia’s annual exports. As a result, if demand declines, Indonesia will
need to either diversify markets or face contractions. In contrast, semi-processed coal goods such
as briquettes have a variety of alternative markets, the largest of which is India. From 2018 to 2023,
Indonesia’s briquette exports to India grew from $6.75 billion to $9.4 billion.56 Japan, Taiwan, and
South Korea are all also leading consumers. As with metal commodities, should an economic
slowdown restrict the PRC’s appetite for raw lignite, Indonesian producers may have to look to
processed exports in related goods to reach other advanced markets across South and East Asia, or
face large declines in domestic production, as seen in the case of bauxite.
Key “banner” years in the bilateral trade relationship include 2010 and 2011, following
the ACFTA’s drawdown of tariffs. Bilateral trade again spiked in 2021, buoyed by fuel exports,
as economies reopened during the Covid-19 pandemic. One counterintuitive trend stands out.
Indonesia signed onto BRI in March 2015, with much discussion of bolstering trade relations.
However, this period aligned with a clear decline of $19.1 billion in trade volumes between 2014
and 2016 (see Figure 17).57 This appears to indicate that “trade sweeteners” were not an immediate
priority for Beijing as it sought to bring more members of ASEAN into its development initiative,
and that the purported economic benefits of BRI are not necessarily found in increased trade
volumes.
Table 3 further breaks down trade flows (exports, imports, and total trade) by stage of
production and sector of product for the entire period from 1992 to 2022, 2010, and 2021.58 Capital
goods, particularly machine and electric goods, dominate Chinese exports to Indonesia, while
fuels consistently lead the countervailing flows. However, as discussed above, increased value-
adding processes for metal exports have led to a shift in the total portfolio of Indonesia’s exports
to the PRC. Raw materials were the leading category of trade in 2010, whereas intermediate goods
made up the largest share in 2021.
A downturn in the PRC’s economy is likely to reduce demand for raw materials for energy
and for intermediate materials for construction and capital goods. In particular, as discussed in
chapter 1, this slowdown and the accompanying changes in the PRC’s growth model are likely to
be particularly hard on commodity imports—with the potential for even “new” commodities such
as critical minerals to not see the same sustained price increases that traditional commodities
such as oil or iron ore have encountered. In the short term, this could narrow Indonesia’s
trade surplus or even result in a trade deficit. Indonesia is unlikely to slow down its computer
and telecommunication imports, and there are few ready and able alternative sources for these
goods. In the medium to long term, however, the disruption to Indonesia’s trade balance could
accelerate pressure to transition domestic production sectors away from raw and intermediate
materials toward technologies and finished consumer goods, as Indonesia and ASEAN pursue
 55 OEC, “Indonesia. ”
 56 Ibid.
 57 UN Comtrade database.
 58 These years have been selected for two reasons: first, they are two of the banner years identified in Figure 17 and bookend this set of years;
second, they illustrate how the top sectors evolved over a decade of rapid expansion in Indonesia-PRC trade relations.

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
t a b l e 3 Top Indonesia-PRC trade sectors by exports, imports, and total trade
Trade flows (cumulative, 1992–2022)
Total Stage Intermediate goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) fuels, (3) metals
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) metals, (3) textiles and clothing
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Fuels, (2) vegetable, (3) metals
Trade flows (2010)
Total Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) fuels, (3) vegetable
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machine and electric goods, (2) textiles and clothing, (3) fuels
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Fuels, (2) vegetable, (3) minerals
Trade flows (2021)
Total Stage Intermediate goods
Sector (1) Fuels, (2) machinery and electronics, (3) metals
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) metals, (3) chemicals
Imports Stage Intermediate goods
Sector (1) Fuels, (2) metals, (3) vegetable
s o u r c e : WITS database.
n o t e : Imports refer to PRC imports from Indonesia, and exports refer to PRC exports to Indonesia. Stage
refers to stages of production (capital goods, consumer goods, intermediate goods, or raw materials), and
sector refers to the specific sector of the product.
84
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
higher-value production and resilience against external disruptions. Nonetheless, as noted in
chapter 1, the slowdown in the PRC’s economy will likely not affect the growing competitiveness
of its manufacturing sector—posing significant challenges to countries like Indonesia that seek
to move up the value chain. An additional challenge to Indonesia’s efforts to move up the value
chain is its reliance on non-tariff-measures, which adds up to an average tariff equivalent of 30%,
increasing the costs of inputs and potentially hindering Indonesia’s ability to transition further
away from commodity exports.59
 59 International Monetary Fund, “Indonesia: Selected Issues, ” IMF Staff Country Report, August 7, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
f i g u r e 1 8 PRC development finance to Indonesia over time, 2000–2021
s o u r c e : AidData.
85
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
The PRC’s Development Finance in Indonesia
Overall and sectoral perspectives . Since 2000, the PRC has committed approximately $55.2
billion in development financing to Indonesia, with investments heavily concentrated in
infrastructure sectors such as energy, industry, and mining (see Figure 18).60 Nearly 89% of this
financing is in the form of debt (i.e., loans with interest rates approaching market rates) as opposed
to aid (i.e., grants or loans at no interest or low interest rates). The energy sector accounts for the
largest share of PRC official development financing, totaling $17.9 billion, or 32% of the PRC’s
development finance commitments in the country (see Figure 19).61
Energy was closely followed by the industry, mining, and construction sector, which accounted
for 28% of the PRC’s official development financing. These sectors are both capital- and material-
intensive and benefited from Beijing’s desire to divest itself of its foreign currency reserves and
excess capacity in construction materials since 2013. 62 Furthermore, many of these projects are
focused on expanding Indonesia’s domestic production capacity and thereby increasing the PRC’s
access to high-value or strategic inputs. In 2021, PRC banks committed $686.7 million to two large
mineral projects: phase 1 of the Indonesia Lithium Project at Morowali Industrial Park and the
Huayou Nickel and Cobalt Project. 63 These projects indicate that Beijing anticipates high-value
metals continuing to be at the core of Indonesia’s exports, as the PRC seeks to expand its access to
 60 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”
 61 Ibid.
 62 Bradley C. Parks et al., “Belt and Road Reboot: Beijing’s Bid to De-risk Its Global Infrastructure Initiative, ” AidData, William & Mary,
November 2023, https://www.aiddata.org/publications/belt-and-road-reboot.
 63 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
f i g u r e 1 9 Top 5 sectors for PRC development finance to Indonesia
s o u r c e : AidData.
86
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
transition and rare earth metals. Since 2015, Indonesia has attracted six major loans investing in
transition minerals, collectively worth $3.5 billion. 64
Investments in transport and storage, the third-largest recipient sector, further underscore
the PRC’s strategic emphasis on infrastructure critical to its global supply chain goals, as well
as potentially expanding access to capital for transformative infrastructure projects. A banner
example of these investments is the Jakarta-Bandung high-speed-rail project. The project was
originally proposed by the Japan International Cooperation Agency, but the CDB bid on the
project and won by promising to implement it in three rather than five years. 65 The project was
financed in two loans collectively worth $4 billion with a forty-year maturity, ten-year grace
period, 2.00%–3.46% interest rate, and no sovereign guarantees.66
Temporal trends in investment and economic growth . Trends in the PRC’s development finance
reveal a marked increase in activity after 2006. The growth of investment was by no means steady,
however, with peaks in 2009, 2015, 2016, and 2017 (see Figure 20 ). Notably, PRC development
finance surged after Indonesia’s entrance into BRI, reflecting mutual efforts to mobilize Chinese
capital for large-scale projects. Financing increased over four times, from $1.6 billion to $8.7 billion
between 2014 and 2015. This is a common trend in the PRC’s engagement with some members,
where there is increased attention from state-backed investors during the years surrounding BRI
memoranda of understanding as an incentive to join the development initiative. Interestingly,
however, this spike in investment did not offset the overall declines in trade between Indonesia and
the PRC during these years (as seen in Figure 17). Moreover, official finance did not coincide with
 64 These are copper, cobalt, nickel, lithium, and rare earth element extraction and processing. Katherine Walsh et al. “Tracking China’s
Transition Mineral Financing: Methodology and Approach, Version 1.0, ” AidData, William & Mary, February 2025, https://www.aiddata.
org/publications/tracking-chinas-transition-mineral-financing-methodology-and-approach-version-1-0.
 65 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”
 66 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
f i g u r e 2 0 PRC development finance to Indonesia by sector, 2000–2021
Transport and storage
s o u r c e : AidData.
87
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
any noticeable changes in Indonesia’s quarterly GDP (see Figure 21), where the only significant
recent shifts have resulted from the global disruptions during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Implications of the PRC’s Economic Slowdown for Indonesia
The PRC’s domestic economic slowdown could disrupt Indonesia’s access to PRC development
financing. As of 2021, Indonesia was the sixth-largest recipient of PRC development finance
among low- and middle-income countries, giving it a large exposure to slowdowns in these flows,
particularly in the sectors of energy and mining. As noted in chapter 1, these flows will likely
continue to become more targeted. Between 2018 and 2021, there has already been a noticeable
slowdown of new projects in the energy sector. This may still reflect a residual impact of the
Covid-19 pandemic, but might also be foreshadowing a move of Chinese development financing
away from coal and toward critical minerals, particularly given that this negative trend is not
observed in the industry, mining, and construction sector. Given the expectation that as long
as the PRC runs a current account surplus there will be continuous flows of income to finance
investment abroad, it is reasonable to expect that there will be some reallocation of the sectors of
Chinese development financing rather than a drastic reduction in those investments, as discussed
in chapter 1.
Still, Indonesia’s sustained decades of economic growth have come from domestic developments
rather than any one international partner. Beijing’s growing investments in Indonesia, while they
could unlock the potential for specific infrastructure projects or industries, did not on their own
increase the country’s GDP, nor will a wind down of these projects alone swing it to the negative
(see Figure 22).

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
f i g u r e 2 1 Indonesia’s quarterly GDP change, 2001–24
s o u r c e : World Bank, World Development Indicators.
f i g u r e 2 2 PRC development finance to Indonesia over time and Indonesia’s annual GDP
change
2010 2007 2011
2008
2016
2009
2017
2015
2020
s o u r c e : Data on PRC development financing is from AidData; and Federal Reserve Economic Data.
n o t e : Band represents 90% confidence interval.
88
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
89
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
Policy Options
The Indonesian economy has close linkages to the PRC economy not only because of geographic
proximity, but also due to a series of strategic, economic, and geopolitical factors that make
Indonesia attractive to the PRC. Indonesia’s geostrategically important location as a crossroads for
major trade routes between the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean; its burgeoning middle class,
which potentially is a large market for Chinese consumer goods; and its riches of natural resources
are all compelling factors for strong engagement from the PRC.
From the Indonesian side, engagement with the PRC economy is double-edged. It provides
access to trade, investment, and financing but also exposes Indonesia to vulnerabilities. In
particular, the Indonesian economy is substantially reliant on the PRC, which is the destination
for nearly a quarter of its exports. While several factors mitigate Indonesia’s vulnerability to
fluctuations in the PRC economy—such as the country’s critical minerals reserves, including the
world’s largest reserves of nickel and copper as well as substantial reserves of bauxite and tin, and
its relatively diverse economy—the following policy measures could help soften the impacts of a
negative shock to the Chinese economy:
• Strengthen regional trade agreements. Seeking new agreements with regional partners such as
Japan and South Korea, as well as with the EU, would diversify Indonesia’s export markets
and reduce the risks from a Chinese economic downturn by offering alternative markets for
semi-processed goods in countries that do not have appropriate infrastructure to import raw
materials and do the initial processing locally.
• Diversify the targets for “old economy” commodities away from the PRC . Markets for coal and
crude palm oil are highly concentrated in India and the PRC, which makes Indonesia highly
vulnerable to fluctuations in demand. Exploring new markets such as Africa could mitigate
that risk.
• Continue to seek agreements that favor domestic capacity building . Indonesia could push for
investment regimes that finance construction of the necessary infrastructure for the country to
move away from an over-reliance on exports of raw materials to the PRC and toward exports
of semi-finished goods to other advanced economies in Asia. This is particularly imperative in
the context of the energy transition, as global economies, including the PRC economy, slowly
reduce their demand for raw materials such as coal and petroleum in favor of critical minerals.
Y et, such a transition requires careful assessment of the quality of the mineral reserves to
ensure that the restrictions will lead to greater investment rather than market loss. Although
Indonesia’s critical minerals sector is already heavily influenced by the PRC, agreements
such as the memorandum of understanding signed with the United Kingdom could mitigate
Chinese influence.
• Prepare for rising demand for critical minerals. Although Indonesia is best known for its large
reserves of nickel, copper, bauxite, and tin, it also actively mines other critical minerals such
as gold, titanium, and cobalt. 67 Countries, including the PRC, will seek to import these and
other critical minerals from Indonesia to fulfill the demand from their growing technology-
intensive industries. Indonesia has already developed a partially successful strategy for nickel.
Y et, as discussed in chapter 1, even a ban on exports of raw materials does not fully protect
the country from some negative effects of Chinese engagement. While Indonesia initially had
a positive experience with the PRC’s processing of nickel, the price fell as the Chinese plants
 67 Jaewon Chung, “The Mineral Industry of Indonesia, ” in “Minerals Y earbook 2020–2021: Indonesia, ” U.S. Geological Survey, January 2025,
https://pubs.usgs.gov/myb/vol3/2020-21/myb3-2020-21-indonesia.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
90
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
within Indonesia overproduced. Based on this experience and the experience of other countries
with critical minerals, Indonesia should develop a comprehensive plan for critical minerals. In
particular, it should conduct an assessment of critical minerals reserves and value, ownership
of mineral rights and mining companies, extraction and processing, trade, and governance.
• Reduce trade barriers . A movement away from exports of raw materials toward exports of
manufacturing goods requires cheap inputs. Indonesia has substantially high non-tariff
barriers, and targeted reforms are necessary to stimulate growth in its manufacturing sector.

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
91
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
Nigeria
Ana Horigoshi and Rodney Knight
Nigeria has great opportunities but also great challenges for economic growth. Rich in oil,
natural gas, coal, and mineral resources, the country has yet to translate the wealth from these
resources into an overall high level of well-being for the Nigerian people. 68 Oil continues to be the
major source of revenue for government operations, but rather than lift Nigeria out of poverty,
oil wealth has created a chronic state of dependence. 69 Instead of providing a basis for growth
in other areas, the dominance of oil has discouraged development of other industries and led to
dependence on imports of consumer goods, many of which are imported from the PRC.
The oil industry has primarily extracted oil and then shipped crude oil to other countries for
processing. Until the Dangote refinery was brought online in January 2024, the limited and dated
refining capacity in Nigeria fell far short of producing the refined petroleum products required to
meet its own demand. Most refined petroleum products had to be imported from other countries.
The operation of the Dangote refinery promises to change this and meet all of Nigeria’s domestic
requirements while also providing a surplus for export.70
The high population growth in Nigeria poses one of its most pressing development issues. With
a total fertility rate of over 5, the country has grown by 80% from 126 million in 2000 to 228 million
in 2023.71 As Nigeria’s population continues to grow at a high rate, this growth will tax resources
to feed, house, educate, and create jobs for the growing population. Even the development of the
oil industry, with all of its wealth, will not solve these problems.
Amid these challenges, how does Nigeria interact with the PRC? What role does the PRC play
in a country like Nigeria? The two countries have long-standing diplomatic relations, having
recognized each other in 1971. 72 During this time, they have maintained active trade relations,
and development finance has been and continues to be one of the major ways Beijing engages
Nigeria. When it was conceived in 2013, the Belt and Road Initiative did not focus on countries
in Africa. This changed in September 2018 at the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC)
when 22 African countries, including Nigeria, joined the initiative. Since then, Nigeria has
received $5.7 billion in development finance from the PRC. Before joining BRI, however, it had
already received $9.4 billion in development finance from the PRC starting in 2001—suggesting
that joining BRI did not fundamentally change the scale of PRC development finance. A key area
of Chinese development finance to Nigeria has been the energy sector, where the PRC has invested
$4.8 billion since 2002—60% for natural gas projects. Another means of engagement has been
people-to-people interactions, such as Nigerian officials attending the FOCAC summit. Just prior
 68 Eugene N. Nweke and Emmanuel Obona Elem, “Oil Wealth Dependence and Poverty in Nigeria, ” South East Political Science Review 1, no. 1
(2017): 37–48; and Eric Kehinde Ogunleye, “Natural Resource Abundance in Nigeria: From Dependance to Development, ” Resources Policy
33, no. 3 (2008): 168–74.
 69 Nafi Chinery and Tengi George-Ikoli, “Ending Nigeria’s Oil Dependency: Not If, but When…and How, ” Natural Resource Governance
Institute, March 2022, https://resourcegovernance.org/articles/ending-nigerias-oil-dependency-not-if-whenand-how.
 70 Kelly Norways, “Refiners Brace for Margin Pain as Nigeria’s Dangote Refinery Scales Up, ” S&P Global, November 22, 2024, https://www.
spglobal.com/commodity-insights/en/news-research/latest-news/crude-oil/112224-feature-refiners-brace-for-margin-pain-as-nigerias-
dangote-refinery-scales-up.
 71 World Bank, World Development Indicators, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP .POP .TOTL.
 72 Steven F . Jackson, “Two Distant Giants: China and Nigeria Perceive Each Other, ” Journal of European, Middle Eastern, and African Affairs 1,
no. 32 (2019): 40–74, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/portals/10/jemeaa/journals/volume-01_issue-2/jemeaa_01_2_jackson.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
f i g u r e 2 3 Nigeria-PRC trade over time, 1992–2023 (with significant years)
s o u r c e : UN Comtrade database.
2014 2016 2021
92
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
to the 2024 summit, President Bola Tinubu met with President Xi Jinping to discuss investment
in Nigeria.73
The remainder of this case study focuses on trade and development financing as channels
through which a Chinese economic slowdown could have an impact. We find that Nigeria is
very dependent on Chinese imports and thus in a vulnerable position because of its continuous
trade deficit. Furthermore, Chinese development financing has been growing over time since the
early 2000s, while GDP growth has been declining, suggesting that at best there is not a positive
correlation between both and at worst there is a negative correlation. The case study concludes
with policy options for Nigeria to navigate a deceleration of the Chinese economy.
The PRC’s Trade with Nigeria
The story of trade between the PRC and Nigeria is one of dependence. While Chinese imports
from Nigeria have generally increased over time, PRC exports to the country in 2023 were over
eight times as large as PRC imports, putting Nigeria at a substantial trade deficit with the PRC
(see Figure 23 ). In 2022, PRC exports were close to fourteen times as large as PRC imports.
Exports from the PRC, however, have not continuously increased. Between 2014 and 2016,
exports experienced a 38% drop. This corresponds to a recession in Nigeria that was prompted by
 73 Felix Onuah and Liz Lee, “China Pledges to Encourage Investment in Nigeria, ” Reuters, September 3, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/
nigeria-china-sign-economic-nuclear-energy-pact-2024-09-03.

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
93
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
a drop in oil prices. 74 Surprisingly, exports only declined slightly during the Covid-19 pandemic,
followed by a large increase in 2021. That recovery was short-lived due to the recession of 2024. 75
This recession was reportedly caused by economic reforms, reducing subsidies for oil and
allowing the currency to float. The reforms have led to high rates of inflation and limited the
ability of Nigerians to buy goods from abroad, resulting in a marked decline of exports from the
PRC to Nigeria.
Inexpensive Chinese imports have replaced local production in Nigeria, especially in the textile
industry, which previously was a large employer of Nigerian labor. In 2021, textiles and clothing
was the sector with the largest amount of exports from the PRC to Nigeria (see Table 4). Overall,
from 1992 to 2022 consumer goods accounted for the largest share of total trade among the stages
of production (raw materials, intermediate goods, consumer goods, and capital goods). Consumer
goods, however, did not always dominate across this time period. In 2010, capital goods had the
largest share. The largest sectors for Chinese exports in 2010 were mechanical and electrical,
metals, and plastic or rubber. The dominance of capital goods in 2010 suggests that after 2010
exports of consumer goods accelerated to the point that they had the largest share across time.
This suggests an increasing dependence of the Nigerian people on imported consumer goods,
which crowds out potential local production.
What vulnerability does the current dominance of Chinese exports of consumer goods pose
to Nigeria’s economy? In terms of GDP, Nigeria will struggle to develop its manufacturing sector
to the degree that Chinese exports of consumer goods suppress local production. As noted in
chapter 1, the PRC’s economic slowdown is unlikely to slow exports from the country given its
large and growing capacity across the manufacturing sector, which more than suffices to cover
both domestic production and exports. What is slowing exports is the devaluation of the Nigerian
currency, which makes it harder for Nigerians to purchase Chinese goods—a dynamic that could
continue to evolve as the PRC manages its currency with an eye toward potential economic friction
with larger economies such as the United States and EU.
Across time, raw materials have held the largest share of PRC imports from Nigeria. Fuels and
minerals consistently have accounted for the largest sector share. Fuels here represent petroleum
products, the bulk of which has been crude oil—reflecting the fact that the PRC’s engagement
with Nigeria is closely linked to the latter’s long-standing over-reliance on oil exports. While the
PRC is a large importer of crude oil from Nigeria, European countries together import a much
larger share of Nigerian crude oil than the PRC.76 India and the United States also imported larger
shares than the PRC. However, given the globalized nature of oil markets, particularly for refined
products, which will be increasingly central to Nigeria’s exports going forward, developments in
the Chinese economy likely will affect the prices that Nigerian exporters can charge—even if their
primary customers are not in the PRC. China’s economic slowdown has reduced demand, which
has in turn reduced global oil prices.77 Given the importance of the Chinese economy globally and
 74 Chijioke Ohuocha and Ulf Laessing, “Nigeria’s Economy Shrinks in 2016 for First Time in 25 Y ears, ” Reuters, February 28, 2017, https://
www.reuters.com/article/business/finance/nigerias-economy-shrinks-in-2016-for-first-time-in-25-years-idUSKBN1670U6.
 75 Ruth Maclean and Ismail Auwal, “Nigeria Confronts Its Worst Economic Crisis in a Generation, ” New York Times, June 11, 2024, https://
www.nytimes.com/2024/06/11/world/africa/nigeria-economy-strike.html.
 76 OEC, “Nigeria, ” https://oec.world/en/profile/country/nga.
 77 Ole Hansen, “Chinese Economic Woes Drag Down Crude Oil and Copper, ” Saxo, September 3, 2024, https://www.home.saxo/content/
articles/commodities/chinese-economic-woes-drag-down-crude-oil-and-copper-03092024.

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
t a b l e 4 Top Nigeria-PRC trade sectors by exports, imports, and total trade
Trade flows (cumulative, 1992–2022)
Total Stage Consumer goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) textiles and clothing, (3) metals
Exports Stage Consumer goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) textiles and clothing, (3) metals
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Fuels, (2) minerals, (3) metals
Trade flows (2010)
Total Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) metals, (3) fuels
Exports
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machine and electric goods, (2) textiles and clothing, (3) plastic
or rubber
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1) Fuels, (2) minerals, (3) hides and skins
Trade flows (2021)
Total Stage Consumer goods
Sector (1) Textiles and clothing, (2) machinery and electronics, (3) metals
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Textiles and clothing, (2) machinery and electronics, (3) metals
Imports Stage Raw materials
Sector (1 ) Fuels, (2) minerals, (3) metals
s o u r c e : WITS database.
n o t e : Imports refer to PRC imports from Nigeria, and exports refer to PRC exports to Nigeria. Stage refers
to stages of production (capital goods, consumer goods, intermediate goods, or raw materials), and sector
refers to the specific sector of the product.
94
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Nigeria’s own over-reliance on oil exports, the fluctuation of oil prices is likely the main channel
through which the Nigerian economy is vulnerable to a domestic economic slowdown in the PRC.
The PRC’s Development Finance in Nigeria
Overall and sectoral perspectives . Development finance investments from the PRC to Nigeria
began long before Nigeria entered BRI in 2018. Before then, the PRC had invested $9.4 billion,
including close to $1 billion in 2002 alone. Since joining BRI in 2018, Nigeria has received an
additional $5.7 billion in Chinese investments. How do these investments relate to the country’s
GDP growth? Over time Chinese investment in Nigeria has generally increased, peaking at
$3 billion in 2020 (see Figure 24). GDP growth has trended in the opposite direction, with a peak

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
f i g u r e 2 4 PRC development finance to Nigeria over time, 2000–2021
s o u r c e : AidData.
95
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
of 14.6% in 2002 and dips below zero in 2016 and 2020 (see Figure 25). On the surface, then, it
does not seem that Chinese investment has contributed positively to GDP growth.
Ranking PRC development finance by sector reveals how investment can contribute to
economic growth in Nigeria (see Figure 26). Transport and storage ranks highest, with railway
and road projects contributing to economic growth through the movement of people and goods.
A deepwater port improvement project can facilitate international trade. Unsurprisingly, energy
ranks second. Investments in a natural gas pipeline and a liquified natural gas (LNG) project can
spur growth by increasing natural gas exports. Telecommunications projects, ranked third, can
enhance business communications, improving corporate functioning and increasing sales.
Temporal trends in investment and economic growth . An examination of trends in investments
relative to economic growth reveals to what degree Chinese investment contributed to economic
growth in Nigeria and could indicate how Chinese investment might stimulate future economic
growth (see Figure 27 ). The PRC started investing in energy and communications in 2002.
Investments in communications have continued at a relatively regular pace ever since, while
energy did not see another investment until 2013. Investments in transport and storage did
not begin until 2010, but rapidly exceeded energy and communications. Banking and financial
services investments started in 2018. It is not clear whether this is an effect of BRI or the PRC
responding to Nigeria’s 2016 financial crisis as a means to increase trade. The timing of the bulk of
PRC investment does not correspond to the period when Nigeria’s growth was the highest, prior to
2010, but rather occurred when the country’s growth was slower.
Using a simple regression model to assess the effect of Chinese development finance on
Nigeria’s GDP growth, we found that Chinese development finance was negatively correlated

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
f i g u r e 2 5 Nigeria’s annual GDP change
s o u r c e : World Bank, World Development Indicators.
f i g u r e 2 6 Top 5 sectors for PRC development finance to Nigeria
s o u r c e : AidData.
96
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
with GDP growth (see Figure 28 ). That is, as development finance investment increased, GDP
declined. However, this relationship was not statistically significant. What is evident, nonetheless,
is that there is no clear causal relationship through which PRC development finance investments
in Nigeria have promoted economic growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
f i g u r e 2 7 PRC development finance to Nigeria by sector, 2001–21
Transport and storage
s o u r c e : AidData.
f i g u r e 2 8 PRC development finance to Nigeria over time and Nigeria’s annual GDP
change
2004
2015
2010
2002
2016
s o u r c e : Data on PRC development financing is from AidData; and data on GDP growth is from World
Bank, World Development Indicators.
n o t e : Band represents 90% confidence interval.
97
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
98
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Policy Options
Nigeria finds itself in a precarious economic situation at present, and it is not clear that
interactions with the PRC are helping the country. The data suggests that Chinese development
financing either has no impact on GDP growth or could even have a negative impact, though the
longer-term implications are difficult to assess. Nigeria has faced a growing trade deficit with the
PRC, and the country’s population is also rapidly growing, which implies that GDP growth must
reach a higher level to keep up. The opening of the Dangote refinery is a hopeful sign in terms of
job creation and reduction in dependence on imports of refined oil. With this increased refining
capacity, Nigeria is shifting from being primarily a commodity exporter to becoming an exporter
of intermediate and final goods. Oil, however, will not create enough new jobs to meet the needs of
the country’s growing population. The PRC’s economic interactions with Nigeria remain focused
on this sector, while other industries, such as textiles, have difficulty competing domestically and
internationally with the PRC and other countries.
The four major implications of the PRC’s economic slowdown for trade and investment that
were presented in chapter 1 will affect Nigeria. First, the PRC’s strong manufacturing base will
make it difficult for Nigeria to increase exports to the PRC. The country will have to seek ways
to pay for Chinese goods other than balancing trade with the PRC. Second, protectionist efforts
by Nigeria to reduce Chinese imports will be somewhat ineffective due to the PRC’s comparative
advantage. Reducing the trade imbalance with the PRC will require other means. Third, the PRC’s
shift from promoting housing and infrastructure development to technology-intensive industries
will reduce demand for oil and increase demand for critical minerals. Nigeria’s trade with the PRC
will shift in response to these changes in demand. Fourth, despite the PRC’s economic slowdown,
Chinese outbound investment globally will remain relatively consistent due to its importance to
the country’s strategic objectives. Given the PRC’s emphasis on critical mineral resources, Chinese
development finance to Nigeria might even increase.
To move away from its current level of dependence on the PRC, Nigeria should consider the
following policy options:
• Learn from the experience of other countries that liberalized trade . A number of commodity
exporters have shifted their economies away from dependence on commodities and diversified
their trading markets. Learning from the experience of those countries can help Nigeria develop
its economy in ways that promote growth and make it more resilient to Chinese influence. The
cases of Malaysia in the 1960s and India and Indonesia in the 1980s resemble Nigeria today.
These countries were primarily commodity exporters with strict controls over trade. When they
reformed policies to liberalize trade, FDI from a range of partners dramatically increased.78
• Diversify Nigerian trading markets and reduce debt to the PRC due to trade . Chinese exports
to Nigeria far exceed Nigerian exports to the PRC. The implications from chapter 1 suggest
that increasing Nigerian exports to the PRC and implementing protectionist policies to reduce
Nigerian imports from the PRC will have a limited effect on this trade imbalance. Additional
exports of refined oil to the PRC from the Dangote refinery will also not close this gap. To
minimize its debt to the PRC, Nigeria should develop a strategy to diversify trading markets
to pay for Chinese imports. The strategy would incorporate policies to expand oil and natural
gas exports, increase regional trade, and allow the Nigerian currency (naira) to continue to
 78 Jiaxiong Y ao and Y ang Liu, “Nigeria: Selected Issues—Diversification of Nigerian Economy, ” IMF Country Reports, February 8, 2021, 16–37,
https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/002/2021/034/002.2021.issue-034-en.xml?rskey=d5YE7Q&result=8.

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
99
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
float while implementing policies to reduce inflation. Nigeria already has diversified trading
partners in petroleum. With greater refining capacity, it could further diversify those markets
and increase exports of refined petroleum. Current expansion of its capacity to produce LNG
will increase Nigerian exports of LNG to Europe and other markets, generating additional
revenue to cover trade with the PRC. Increased trade with its partner countries in the Economic
Community of West African States could become another means for Nigeria to promote an
overall positive trade balance. Industries such as textiles that might not be competitive in the
global market could be competitive in this regional market. The recent policy to let the naira
float has led to reduced Chinese exports to Nigeria, which has slowed the growth of debt to
the PRC.
• Prepare for rising demand for critical minerals. Due to the rise of technology-intensive industries,
a number of countries will seek to import critical minerals from Nigeria. Nigeria needs a
comprehensive plan for critical minerals, including an assessment of critical minerals reserves
and value, ownership of mineral rights and mining companies, extraction and processing,
trade, and governance. Nigeria should review its existing mining policies and regulations,
specifically with respect to critical minerals. In preparation for development of the plan, the
country should conduct an assessment of foreign engagement in Nigerian critical minerals,
including by the PRC. Nigeria could also learn from the experience of other countries with the
PRC’s efforts to control the critical minerals industry. The Indonesian strategy shows how even
with a ban on exports of raw materials the results of Chinese engagement are mixed. While the
PRC’s establishment of nickel processing in Indonesia was positive, the subsequent fall in the
price of nickel as a result of overproduction at the Chinese plants counteracted the benefits.
• Review new Chinese development finance and FDI agreements for alignment with Nigerian
interests. Based on the implications discussed in chapter 1 and the assessment of the situation
in Nigeria in this case study, Chinese development finance and FDI could increase in Nigeria,
particularly in critical minerals, even with the PRC’s economic slowdown. Making agreements
with the PRC or Chinese companies involves risk. Nigeria can reduce that risk through a review
of existing development finance and FDI agreements to develop guidance on what to avoid and
how to make these agreements more favorable to Nigerian interests.

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
100
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Paraguay
Ana Horigoshi and Jonathan Solis
One of only two landlocked countries in South America, Paraguay occupies a unique space
in the region. With a population of approximately 6.8 million and a projected 2025 GDP of
$44.2 billion, it is dwarfed by neighbors like Brazil and Argentina. 79 In the past two decades,
Paraguay has experienced consistent economic growth that helped significantly decrease the
poverty rate from nearly half the population in 2003 to 17.6% in 2023.80
In addition to being geographically landlocked in South America, Paraguay is also
diplomatically isolated, surrounded by countries that recognize the PRC over Taipei. As one of
only twelve countries worldwide that do not recognize Beijing, and the largest of these countries
by landmass, Paraguay faces a unique diplomatic situation. Nonetheless, President Santiago Peña
has vowed to maintain its relations with Taiwan. 81 During a diplomatic meeting with Taiwanese
president William Lai in November 2024, Foreign Minister Rubén Lezcano reaffirmed that
“the relation[ship] between Paraguay and Taiwan is based on principles and values; democracy,
freedom, [and] human rights.” 82 The December 2024 expulsion of a low-level PRC diplomat
attending a UNESCO meeting in Asunción for allegedly encouraging lawmakers to reconsider ties
to Taiwan reinforces this position.83
Paraguay’s lack of official recognition of the PRC, however, has not prevented economic
engagement between the two countries. In both trade and development finance, the PRC’s presence
in the country is evident to varying degrees. Paraguay has received nearly $76.2 million in PRC
development finance since 2000,84 and the PRC is the largest exporter to Paraguay.85
Paraguay’s economy has experienced significant fluctuations in recent decades, with periods
of steady growth punctuated by contractions during the global financial crisis and domestic
economic slowdowns (see Figure 29). The early 2010s saw a particularly sharp spike, followed by
volatility in subsequent years. A decline in GDP growth in 2020 in part reflects the negative impact
of the Covid-19 pandemic, though 2019 saw negative growth as well. The country’s post-pandemic
recovery has similarly been characterized by substantial volatility. After rebounding in 2021, GDP
growth subsided in 2022 and picked up again in 2023. The combination of substantial volatility
in annual GDP growth rates in the past few decades and the small sample size (approximately 30
years) led to an unstable forecast model. However, this in itself is still informative in the sense that
the volatile projection highlights the challenges Paraguay faces in achieving long-term economic
stability amid external pressures and structural constraints.
For the remainder of the case study, we examine two major economic channels linking the PRC
to Paraguay: trade and development finance. While FDI also plays a role in Paraguay’s economy,
 79 World Bank, World Development Indicators.
 80 Ibid.
 81 “New Paraguay President Stresses South American Country’s Ties with Taiwan at Swearing-In Ceremony, ” Associated Press, August 15,
2023, https://apnews.com/article/paraguay-taiwan-pena-lai-f9ee99e365bff96d6efe543bb4bd1db0.
 82 Firstpost, “Paraguay Deports Chinese Envoy over ‘Taiwan’ and ‘Interference, ’ ” Y ouTube, video, December 6, 2024, https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=B_guslO_G7U.
 83 Daniela Desantis, “Paraguay Expels Chinese Envoy over Taiwan ‘Interference, ’ ” Reuters, December 6, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/
americas/paraguay-expels-chinese-envoy-over-interference-domestic-affairs-2024-12-05.
 84 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”
 85 UN Comtrade database.

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
f i g u r e 2 9 Paraguay’s yearly GDP growth over time, 1990–2023
s o u r c e : World Bank, World Development Indicators.
101
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
it remains significantly lower than in other regional countries like Brazil. 86 As a result of that
reality, as well as data limitations, our analysis focuses on trade and development finance as key
mechanisms of economic engagement between Paraguay and the PRC.
The PRC’s Trade with Paraguay
Paraguay’s top trading partners are a hodgepodge of global and regional powers in the
Americas, Europe, and Asia. 87 Although regional neighbors Brazil, Argentina, and the United
States are top partners, Paraguay imports the most from the PRC, which accounts for around 30%
of its total share.88 Figure 30 illustrates the full trade relationship between Paraguay and the PRC.
While the level of imports from Paraguay remains low throughout the sample, Chinese exports to
Paraguay have grown significantly since the mid-2000s and continued to rise, with 2010 and 2021
being banner years in the overall trade relationship.
Paraguay relies heavily on imported machinery and electronics to sustain its agriculture-based
economy, with the PRC serving as a key supplier (see Table 5). As of 2024, Paraguay is the world’s
largest exporter of organic sugar, third-largest soy exporter, and eighth-largest beef exporter. 89
 86 In 2023, Paraguay recorded $240.7 million in FDI inflows, compared with Brazil’s $64.23 billion. World Bank, World Development Indicators.
 87 According to the WITS database, as of 2022, Paraguay’s top five export partners are Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Russia, and the United States,
while its top five import partners are the PRC, Brazil, the United States, Argentina, and Singapore.
 88 WITS database.
 89 U.S. International Trade Administration, “Paraguay: Agricultural Sectors, ” March 5, 2024, https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-
guides/paraguay-agricultural-sectors.

===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
f i g u r e 3 0 Paraguay-PRC trade over time, 1992–2023 (with significant years)
s o u r c e : UN Comtrade database.
20212010
102
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
Given this dependence on food exports, its top imports from the PRC are machinery and
electronics, which support agricultural production.
As the PRC is expected to remain highly competitive in manufacturing (see chapter 1), and
considering that the Paraguayan economy relies on mostly imports of agricultural machinery
from the PRC, Paraguay would be relatively unaffected by the direct shocks of lower demand from
a Chinese economic slowdown. Nevertheless, the potential indirect impact is significant, given
that its main trading partner—Brazil—is more vulnerable to a PRC slowdown, as discussed in the
Brazil case study.
The PRC’s Development Finance in Paraguay
Unlike nations that recognize the PRC and receive direct development financing, Paraguay’s
engagement has largely occurred through indirect channels through ports in Uruguay and
Argentina.90 Surprisingly, there are still several PRC development finance projects in Paraguay (see
Figure 31). These investments totaling $76.2 million occurred in 2015 and 2018 and have primarily
been in two sectors: (1) industry, mining, and construction, and (2) transport and storage. 91 All
four projects were committed during former president Horacio Cartes’s administration and are
co-financed through the Inter-American Development Bank with the China Co-financing Fund
for Latin America and the Caribbean as one of the implementing agencies.
 90 Gabriel Cohen, “The South American Election That Has Taiwan Scrambling, ” Diplomat, January 18, 2023, https://thediplomat.com/2023/01/
the-south-american-election-that-has-taiwan-scrambling.
 91 Custer et al., “Tracking Chinese Development Finance. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
t a b l e 5 Top Paraguay-PRC trade sectors by exports, imports, and total trade
Trade flows (cumulative, 1992–2022)
Total Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) chemicals, (3) plastic or rubber
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) chemicals, (3) plastic or rubber
Imports Stage (1) Raw materials
Sector (1) Hides and skins, (2) textiles and clothing, (3) metals
Trade flows (2010)
Total
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) plastic or rubber,
(3) transportation
Exports
Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) plastic or rubber,
(3) transportation
Imports Stage Intermediate goods
Sector (1) Hides and skins, (2) wood, (3) metals
Trade flows (2021)
Total Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) chemicals, (3) plastic or rubber
Exports Stage Capital goods
Sector (1) Machinery and electronics, (2) chemicals, (3) plastic or rubber
Imports Stage Raw materials
Long list (1) Metals, (2) hides and skins, (3) vegetable
s o u r c e : WITS database.
n o t e : Imports refer to PRC imports from Paraguay, and exports refer to PRC exports to Paraguay. Stage
refers to stages of production (capital goods, consumer goods, intermediate goods, or raw materials), and
sector refers to the specific sector of the product.
103
CASE STUDIES u HORIGOSHI ET AL.
Policy Options
Paraguay’s minimal economic ties to the PRC limit its exposure to the ripple effects of a Chinese
economic slowdown. The choice to maintain recognition of Taiwan, even while the vast majority
of Latin American and Caribbean countries recognize the PRC, largely insulates Paraguay from
a negative economic shock, which is a significant benefit of its diplomatic stance. Other countries
across both the global South and North have taken steps to reduce their reliance on the PRC. One
example is the Supply Chain Resilience Initiative, which is a partnership between India, Japan,
and Australia aimed at addressing vulnerabilities caused by overdependence on the PRC in global
supply chains. Paraguay has largely avoided the need to take these measures. While by percentage

===== PDF_PAGE 112 =====
f i g u r e 3 1 Paraguay’s GDP growth overlapped with PRC financing (1992–2023)
s o u r c e : World Bank, World Development Indicators; and AidData.
PRC development /f_inance ($ million) 72.9 3.3
104
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u JUNE 2025
its main source of imports is the PRC, the overall volume is relatively small, making these goods
more easily substitutable.
As noted above, the indirect impact of a slowdown in the Chinese economy is a more significant
concern. Given Brazil’s deep trade relationship with the PRC, any contraction in Chinese demand
could weaken the Brazilian economy. This not only would reduce its demand for Paraguayan
exports like soy and beef but could lower the prices of those commodities, since they are also the
main exports from Brazil. The vulnerabilities of its neighbor, therefore, pose a greater risk for
Paraguay, due to the close economic ties between the two countries. To mitigate the indirect threat
of a Chinese economic slowdown, Paraguay should consider the following policy options:
• Diversify trade beyond Brazil and Argentina. Paraguay should expand trade partnerships with
other regional and global markets, moving beyond its neighbors and main trade partners Brazil
and Argentina, which are still substantially vulnerable to the Chinese economy. Strengthening
export agreements and seeking new buyers for key agricultural products would help insulate
the country’s economy from downturns in trade between the PRC and Paraguay’s main trade
partners.
• Strengthen agro-industrial integration. Paraguay should promote vertical integration and value
creation for agricultural products that it already exports, such as soybeans and corn. Moving
exports away from raw products and toward higher-value-derived products can have multiple
benefits, including higher value addition and increased revenues from exports, job creation,
and reduced dependence on raw commodity prices.

===== PDF_PAGE 113 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 114 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 115 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 116 =====
Seattle and Washington, D.C.
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, washington 98101 usa
phone 206-632-7370, fax 206-632-7487
1819 l st nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 usa
phone 202-347-9767, fax 202-347-9766
nbr@nbr.org, www.nbr.org
Seattle and Washington, D.C.
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, washington 98101 usa
phone 206-632-7370, fax 206-632-7487
1819 l st nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 usa
phone 202-347-9767, fax 202-347-9766
nbr@nbr.org, www.nbr.org
