
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
1
IP COMMISSION 2019 REVIEW OF PROGRESS AND UPDATED RECOMMENDATIONS
The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property is an independent and bipartisan
initiative of leading Americans from the private sector, public service in national security and
foreign affairs, academia, and politics.
ip commission 2019 review
Progress and Updated Recommendations
February 2019
Introduction
At the G-20 Summit in Buenos Aires in December 2018, President Trump and President Xi agreed
to work toward a pathway for resolving trade disputes and announced a 90-day truce on raising
tariffs. The two leaders stated they would “immediately begin negotiations on structural changes
with respect to forced technology transfer, intellectual property (IP) protection, non-tariff barriers,
cyber intrusions and cyber theft, services, and agriculture.”
The IP Commission applauds the administration for seizing the unique opportunity afforded
by increased attention on U.S.-China trade relations to address China’s structural challenges that
promote the theft of IP. This is the work of a generation, and the Commission urges our leaders to
see it through.
While there have been many policy developments in the last 18 months related to
strengthening the United States’ ability to protect IP, there are still a number of ways we could
improve those efforts. Below the IP Commission (1) highlights recent developments, (2) reviews
new research that demonstrates the continued salience of IP protection to U.S. competitiveness,
and (3) offers updated policy recommendations on page 4.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
WWW.IPCOMMISSION.ORG
Recent Developments
IP raised to top-tier priority. The Trump Administration has elevated the elimination of China’s
theft of American IP, whether through cyber-theft, forced technology transfers, stolen trade secrets,
counterfeiting of products, or other means, to one of the leading foreign policy priorities and a top
goal of the U.S.-China economic negotiations.
Expanded Committee on Foreign Investment in the US (CFIUS) and export controls. The National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 included the Foreign Investment Risk and Review
Modernization Act (FIRRMA) to prevent acquisition of critical U.S. technologies through foreign
investment and the Export Controls Act of 2018, which seeks to close loopholes in the export controls
process by increasing restrictions on the transfer of emerging and foundational technologies to foreign
persons. These new laws will significantly increase protection of IP, but more needs to be done.
Bill introduced to better combat threats to U.S. technology. Senators Rubio and Warner introduced
a bipartisan bill in January of 2019 to establish an Office of Critical Technologies and Security to
streamline efforts and ensure a whole-of-government approach to protecting U.S. technology. The
IP Commission has argued that policy leadership for the protection of IP needs to be a responsibility
of the National Security Advisor; this is a step in the right direction.
Increased oversight of military supply chains. The Pentagon has found a “surprising level of
foreign dependence on competitor nations.” While recent studies of the defense supply chain
evaluate more than IP risks, they do include IP as a key factor in their assessments .
New Research
Over the last 18 months there has been a surge in research examining Chinese theft of U.S. IP
that supports the IP Commission’s findings:
The White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy report on “How China’s Economic
Aggression Threatens the Technologies and Intellectual Property of the United States and the
World” noted that Chinese economic espionage continues to increase and that China is the most
active and persistent perpetrator of economic espionage. The report investigates the two primary
forms of Chinese economic aggression: acquiring key technologies and IP from other countries,
and capturing the emerging high-technology industries that will drive future economic growth
and advancements in the defense industry. The report concludes that China engages in systematic
economic espionage through a variety of means including cyber-espionage, evasion of export control
laws, counterfeiting and piracy, reverse engineering, forced tech transfers, investment and licensing
restrictions, data localization requirements, discriminatory IP protections, collection of science and
technology information by Chinese nationals at universities, labs, and companies, and investments
in private companies and university R&D programs.
The United States Trade Representative (USTR)’s “Findings of the Investigation into
China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and
Innovation under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974” examined China’s industrial policies
that call for the “absorption, digestion, and re-innovation of foreign intellectual property” to meet
the Made in China 2025 goal of 40% self-sufficiency by 2020 and 70% by 2025. Many of China’s
means of acquiring IP are not officially written into law but are done in indirect and informal
ways that make it difficult to prosecute. Through means such as investments and cyber intrusion,
the Chinese government directs and unfairly facilitates the systematic acquisition of cutting-edge

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
IP COMMISSION 2019 REVIEW OF PROGRESS AND UPDATED RECOMMENDATIONS
U.S. technologies in industries deemed important by state industrial plans. The report concludes
that China’s acts, policies, and practices are unreasonable because they unfairly target critical U.S.
technology with the goal of achieving dominance in strategic sectors. These practices harm U.S.
innovation and economic competitiveness.
USTR’s “2018 Report to Congress on China’s WTO Compliance” found that despite repeated
commitments to refrain from forcing U.S. companies to transfer technology, China continues to
do so through market access restrictions, abuse of administrative processes, licensing regulations,
asset purchases, and cyber and physical theft. Overall IP enforcement is hampered by gaps in
rights protection, civil and administrative recourse mechanisms that fail to deter widespread
IP infringement, and insufficient enforcement commitment. The resources, training, initiative,
coordination, and transparency required to make real progress in IP enforcement remains lacking.
The Interagency Taskforce (led by Department of Defense) report on “Assessing and
Strengthening the Manufacturing and Defense Industrial Base and Supply Chain Resiliency of
the United States” found that protection of the U.S. industrial base faces an unprecedented set of
challenges, not least from the surprising level of dependence on suppliers in competitor nations. For
instance, the report notes, “China is the single or sole supplier for a number of specialty chemicals
used in munitions and missiles.”
The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission’s “2018 Annual Report to
Congress” noted the multiple challenges to protecting IP that U.S. firms face when operating in
China. The report quotes the IP Commission’s findings on the scale and scope of the problem and
then delineates the policy tools that the United States has to respond to the theft of American IP. Of
note, the Commission highlighted that Section 1637 of the 2015 National Defense Authorization Act
gives the president authority—which has never been used—to “prohibit all transaction in property”
of any person determined to have conducted “economic or industrial espionage in cyberspace.”
The Department of Defense Defense Innovation Unit Experimental’s report, “China’s
Technology Transfer Strategy: How Chinese Investments in Emerging Technology Enable a
Strategic Competitor to Access the Crown Jewels of U.S. Innovation” found that from 2015 to
2017, Chinese participation in venture-backed startups was at a record level of 10-16% of all venture
deals (currently exceeds $100 billion), up from 6% from 2010 to 2015. China is especially investing in
foundational technologies including artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles, augmented/virtual
reality, robotics, gene editing, and blockchain technology. Investments in these technologies represented
40% of their investments in 2016. Many of these are dual-use technologies that will be key to the
superiority of the U.S. military. As China seeks to meet its Made in China 2025 goals, it is ramping up
its R&D spending to 2.5% of GDP and investing in mega projects in core electronics, chips, software,
satellites, the next generation of broadband wireless communications, quantum communications, and
classified defense projects. The Chinese Communist Party is highly involved in coordinating public and
private investment and other vehicles of technology transfer to accomplish its economic and strategic
goals. The report recommends the United States implement defensive policies such as CFIUS and
export controls reforms (already in progress), introduce immigration and visa policy reforms for foreign
students so they can stay in the United States with the knowledge they have attained at U.S. graduate
schools, and increase the level of counterintelligence resources. Recommended proactive policies
include increased funding for research, incentives for U.S. students to study STEM fields, pro-growth
and productivity-enhancing economic policies, and finally, a whole-of-government approach with a
coordinated strategy across multiple agencies and departments.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
WWW.IPCOMMISSION.ORG
USTR’s 2018 Special 301 Report placed China on the Priority Watch List due to critical
IP concerns, including trade secret theft, online piracy and counterfeiting, a high volume of
manufacturing and exporting counterfeit goods, technology transfer requirements, mandatory
application of adverse terms to foreign IP licensors, localization requirements, and weak enforcement.
The report points out that China has continuously failed to implement its promises to strengthen
IP protection. However, there is positive momentum in China’s judicial reforms that include its
specialized IP courts and tribunals, which demonstrate competence, expertise, and transparency
to a greater degree than other Chinese courts. Notwithstanding these positive developments,
interventions by local government officials, powerful local interests, and the Chinese Communist
Party remain obstacles to the independence of the courts and rule of law.
MITRE’s “Deliver Uncompromised: A Strategy for Supply Chain Security and Resilience
in Response to the Changing Character of War” report made a sophisticated argument for the
importance of understanding supply chain security of the defense industrial base—of which the
protection of IP is a critical element—as a fundamental component of national security in an era
and environment of changing and increasingly asymmetric threat.
What Remains: IP Commission Updated Recommendations
There has been much progress in research and legislative and administrative action, but there
are a number of ways the United States could be more effective in addressing IP theft. Some of these
approaches include:
Build independent international database for scoring of entities from foreign
countries that pose IP risk
Given the vast number of foreign actors and products in the U.S. marketplace and supply chains
that present IP risks, no bureaucratic mechanism can cover the breadth of the problem and effectively
prevent the theft of IP. For this reason, the IP Commission proposes to develop a market-based
“scoring” system to rate foreign entities from countries known to pose IP risks that seek to do
business with U.S. companies or government agencies. Such an approach would incentivize all actors
to comply with international laws and values of liberal market economies, as the market would
reward entities that score highly with more business and investment opportunities.
The score would draw upon globally sourced, existing data and must be objective and not subject
to manipulation. A trusted score of this type, similar to a FICO credit score, will empower all
law-abiding companies, organizations, government agencies, and individuals to make more educated
decisions about the level of risk they are incurring before doing business with a foreign entity.
There is currently no mechanism that helps U.S. businesses understand the level of risk they face
when engaging with a foreign company or that helps the U.S. government identify which companies
should not be allowed to invest or do business in the United States. While the Bureau of Industry and
Security in the Department of Commerce maintains a denied persons and entity list, this is solely
for export controls. Export controls are not effective in preventing the loss of IP. For example, even
at the height of the Cold War in the context of a much simpler global economy, the Soviet Union
successfully evaded U.S. export controls. The updated CFIUS law, while an improvement, focuses
on investment and thus misses the variety of other ways that bad actors siphon off IP.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
IP COMMISSION 2019 REVIEW OF PROGRESS AND UPDATED RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommended database should begin with scoring Chinese actors (including companies and
their subsidiaries, state-owned enterprises, and individuals) and then could expand to other countries
that pose a national security challenge. The information in this database should be developed in
coordination with U.S. allies to enable swift and harmonized responses. Adoption of the scoring
system must cause the least possible disruption to the normal course of business.
Use the emergency economic powers already granted to the president to deny access to
the U.S. market and banking system to foreign entities found to be directly benefitting
from the theft of American IP
Under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act of 1977, the president is allowed to sanction
individuals and organizations and to “prohibit any transaction in foreign exchange.” Section 1637 of the
2015 National Defense Authorization Act expands this authority to cover “all transactions in property”
of any person the president determines “knowingly engages in economic or industrial espionage in
cyberspace.” We need to make sure the president is using all of these tools that are at his disposal.
Deny access to banking system to foreign entities that use or benefit from the theft of
American IP
No foreign entity that steals IP should be able to access the U.S. banking system. The secretary
of the treasury should have the authority to deny access to the U.S. banking system to malicious
actors. This builds on the existing statutory authority of the president as outlined above and
was proposed but not adopted during the prior administration. The IP Commission strongly
encourages the adoption of this recommendation to ensure that the United States is well placed
to address new and emerging threats on an ongoing basis.
Enforce strict supply-chain accountability for the U.S. government
The IP Commission applauds the Pentagon’s announcement that it will audit the U.S. military
supply chain to identify weaknesses in the nation’s military readiness, as well as former Secretary
Mattis’s announcement of the Protecting Critical Technology Task Force (PCTTF) to spot leaks in
the military supply chain. The Commission recommends increased oversight of supply chains be
expanded to the entire U.S. government.
Require the Securities and Exchange Commission to judge whether companies’ use
of stolen IP is a material condition that ought to be publicly reported
This recommendation is derived from strengthened accountability requirements on foreign
firms that seek to be listed on U.S. exchanges. It was included in the original IP Commission
report and merits further study.
Instruct the Federal Trade Commission to obtain meaningful sanctions against
foreign companies using stolen IP
This recommendation seeks to find meaningful ways to punish willful IP-thieving entities. The
modalities of how to do this in effective ways also merit deeper research and policy analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
WWW.IPCOMMISSION.ORG
Coordinate investment and export controls
The reforms passed on the CFIUS and the export controls processes in the recent National
Defense Authorization Act made enormous strides forward by restricting investment in and
potential exports of emerging technologies critical for national security. Now it is urgent that
both the Department of the Treasury (which manages CFIUS) and the Department of Commerce
(which manages export controls) work closely together to close loopholes and share information
on foreign actors that pose risks.
Quickly intercept counterfeit goods
More must be done to quickly identify and intercept counterfeit goods coming into our ports.
Development and deployment of new technologies to improve the ability to detect counterfeit goods
can support law enforcement in this process. The Commission also recommends strengthening the
International Trade Commission’s 337 process to sequester goods containing stolen IP.
Streamline the process for reporting and responding to IP theft
The process to stop the sale of products made with stolen IP, especially stolen trade secrets,
is costly and time-consuming, and by the time law enforcement and the courts take action the
innovator’s entire business might have been decimated. For example, by the time that the U.S.
Department of Commerce in September 2018 took action against the imports of unfairly subsidized
quartz countertops made with stolen technology, Chinese imports were supplanting $1.2 billion of
sales per year of U.S.-produced quartz countertops for the American market. There needs to be a
simpler way for businesses to report cases of IP theft, for law enforcement to take swift action to
bar the sale of the illicit product, and for investigations to quickly proceed and come to conclusion.
Authorities must act with haste—within hours or days, not weeks or months.
Establish multilateral policy dialogues
The Commission recommends the United States initiate multilateral policy dialogues with
like-minded partners to strengthen and coordinate national policies on Chinese foreign investment
and enforcement of IP laws, share information on foreign actors engaging in IP theft, and learn from
each other’s best practices. The Commission recommends starting with Japan, then including the
European Union (especially Germany and France), Australia, and perhaps the Republic of Korea,
Taiwan, and Singapore.
Utilize multilateral institutions to harmonize national and international legal and
regulatory frameworks
While multilateral institutions like the World Trade Organization (WTO) and World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO) are not always the most efficient and effective at providing protection
of IP from an infringer like China, they can provide an important forum for allies committed to
the rule of law and fair markets to chart a path forward, and to incentivize others to adopt the
requisite norms and practices. The Commission applauds the United States, Japan, and the EU for
their conversations on the sidelines of the WTO on forced technology transfers in China, Chinese
industrial subsidies, and reforms to the WTO to better deal with IP violations. The Commission
encourages these side dialogues to continue, and recommends bringing in other champions of free
trade and high standards for IP protection.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
IP COMMISSION 2019 REVIEW OF PROGRESS AND UPDATED RECOMMENDATIONS
ABOUT THE IP COMMISSION
The IP Commission is an independent and bipartisan initiative of American leaders from the
private sector, public service in national security and foreign affairs, academia, and politics. The
IP Commission published reports in 2013 and 2017 documenting and assessing the causes, scale,
and other major dimensions of international intellectual property theft as they affect the United
States. The reports also proposed appropriate U.S. policy responses that would mitigate ongoing
and future damage of intellectual property rights by China and other infringers.
ABOUT THE COMMISSIONERS
Co-chairs:
• Admiral Dennis C. Blair, Co-chair of the IP Commission; Chairman of the board and
Distinguished Senior Fellow at the Sasakawa Peace Foundation USA; former commander of
the U.S. Pacific Command; and former U.S. director of national intelligence
• Craig Barrett, former chairman and CEO of Intel Corporation
Other Commissioners:
• Charles W. Boustany Jr., former six-term U.S. representative from Louisiana
• Slade Gorton, former U.S. senator from Washington State; member of the 9/11 Commission
• William J. Lynn III, CEO of Leonardo North America and DRS Technologies
• Deborah Wince-Smith, President and CEO of the Council on Competitiveness
• Michael K. Young, President of Texas A&M University
