
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
REF: Section 301 Investigation: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology
Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation
Docket No.: USTR-2018-0005-0001

WRITTEN COMMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE COMMISSION ON THE THEFT OF AMERICAN
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY TO THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE

I. Introduction …………………………………..………………………………..……...p. 2

II. Current Tariff Levels in Relation to the Problem………...…………………………p. 3

III. Proposed Alternative Actions to Curtail IP Theft and Influence Chinese
Actions………………………………...…………………………………………..……p. 4

IV. Conclusion …………………………………………………………………………… p. 4

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2

May 11, 2018
Robert Lighthizer
United States Trade Representative
Office of the United States Trade Representative
600 17th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20508

Written Comments on behalf of the Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property
to the United States Trade Representative

I. Introduction
The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property (IP Commission) thanks the Office of
the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) for the opportunity to provide comments regarding appropriate
actions in response to Chinese predatory IP practices. The Commission appreciates the Office of the
USTR’s dedication to safeguarding American workers, entrepreneurs, consumers, and investors and the
nation’s security through strengthening rule of law.
The IP Commission is an independent and b ipartisan initiative of American leaders from the private
sector, public service in national security and foreign affairs, academe, and politics. The IP Commission
was formed in 2012 to document and assess the causes, scale, and other major dimensions of
international intellectual property theft and its effect on the United States, and to assess China’s role and
purposes in that theft.
The IP Commission is a program of the nonprofit, nonpartisan National B ureau of Asian Research
(NBR). It is co-chaired by former Director of National Intelligence , Admiral Dennis Blair, and former
Chairman and CEO of Intel, Craig Barrett. For the last five years, the Commission has been a leader
outside of government in examining the mass theft and forced transfer of America’s intellectual property
and in offering policy solutions.
In March 2018, the IP Commission published a set of updated recommendations, which build on the
Commission’s foundational report issued in May 2013 and the updated report released in February 2017.
We appreciate the extraordinary interest in this and our prior work shown by Congress, this
administration, concerned allies , and a quarter million people who have downloaded the reports. The
most recent recommendations are attached as an appendix to these comments.
These written comments raise three main points: the small scale of the proposed U.S. tariffs versus the
enormity of the problem; the inability of tariffs alone to succeed as a long -term solution; and
recommendations for other strategic actions that could have more reliable long-term effects.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3

II. Current Tariff Levels in Relation to the Problem
The Commission assesses that China is the worst IP infringer of American IP today and believes this is
due primarily to China’s predatory economic policies and lack of rule of law . In fact, the Commission
estimates that the scale of the annual theft of American IP likely surpasses the U.S. trade deficit wit h
China; in 2017 the goods trade deficit was $375 billion, while in comparison, the loss of American IP
likely reaches $600 billion annually.
Chinese tariffs on U.S. exports and restrictions on U.S. investment significantly exceed U.S. tariffs on
Chinese imports and restrictions on Chinese investments, even considering USTR’s proposed $50 billion
in new tariffs. For instance, China’s tariffs on motorcycles are 45 percent, while the U.S. charges no
tariffs on motorcycles. China’s tariffs on motor boats are 10 percent, and U.S. tariffs are 1.5 percent. See
the chart below for a sampling of tariff comparisons on more products. Investment restrictions tell a
similar story. While the United States is generally open to foreign investment, including by Chinese
companies, China restricts U.S. investment in a number of industries, often requires U.S. companies
invest as minority stakeholders in joint ventures, or requires that the U.S. investor transfer its technology
or manufacture within China.
When comparing American versus Chinese tariff levels and investment restrictions, it becomes clear that
the current list of tariffs pale in comparison to the problem. While the Commission thanks the
administration for acknowledging the urgent problem of Chinese predatory economic policies and
recognizes that the proposed tariffs are a step in confronting the problem, the Commission recommends
other, more strategic courses of action.
Sampling of tariff comparisons
Product Chinese Tariff Rate U.S. Tariff Rate
Aircraft 5% 0
Alarm clocks 19.3% 3.9%
Circuit breakers 10 to 14% 2 to 2.7%
Glassware (household) 24.5% 6.9%
Mattresses 20% 3%
Medical devices (ultrasonic
scanning, electrocardiograph,
MRI apparatus, etc)
4 to 8% 0
Mineral or chemical fertilizer 15.5% 0
Motorcycles 45% 0
Motor vehicles (cars) 25% 2.5%
Photographic cameras 14.6% 0
Radio broadcast receivers 11.2% 0
Sewing machines 21% 0
Spectacle lenses 20% 2%
Table knives 18% 10%
Tower cranes 10% 0

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4

Shortcomings of Tariffs
The current 1,300 products that USTR includes on its proposed tariff list includes a mix of high tech and
low-tech products. The Commission notes that tariff increases often hurt U.S. businesses and consumers
by raising prices of manufacturing inputs, raw materials, and consumer goods, and invite retaliatory
tariffs that harm U.S. exporters. If tariffs are used as a tool to change predatory Ch inese behavior, the
Commission recommends targeting only those products that have benefitted from stolen IP or are
receiving Chinese state assistance as part of China’s aggressive Made in China 2025 policy. The Chinese
response – to use tariffs in a superf icial way against politically sensitive targets in the U.S that are not
derived from national security interests or unfair trade practices – demonstrates that the PRC misjudges
the fundamental economic nature of the problem, and calls into question whether tariffs are the best tool.
Finally, the U.S. use of tariffs is not the kind of stealthy, strategic campaign needed to hurt Chinese IP
thieves over the long term. As opposed to tariffs, the Commission recommends that following actions.

III. Proposed Alternative Responses to Curtail IP Theft and Influence Chinese Actions
The following recommendations include both coercive policies (actions that can influence Chinese
actors and encourage better behavior, while testing Chinese intentions to implement real reforms) and
structural policies (actions that mitigate risk and protect U.S. economic interests). In addition to the
new recommendations below, the Commission released a list of recommendations in March that are
included in the appendix.

Identify bad actors
The United States must identify which Chinese companies, state-owned enterprises, and individuals
are conducting IP theft, and keep public records of these bad actors and all their subsidiaries. Publicly
naming and shaming these entities could prevent U.S. companies from unknowingly doing business
with them. The U.S. government should also ban Chinese individuals associated with these companies
from conducting business in the United States, accessing the banking system or stock exchange,
researching at U.S. universities, or buying property. Building a public registry of Chinese actors could
create a system to discourage IP theft and incentivize abiding by the law.

Work with partners
The United States must coordinate with partner countries that also believe in the rules-based trading
system and are concerned about Chinese IP theft, such as Japan, the European Union – particularly
Germany and France, and Australia. These partners should develop a multinational registry to
thoroughly share information on bad actors and deny them access to the market if they have a record of
stealing IP from any of the partner countries. If bad actors no longer have access to these important
markets, they would realize it is too costly to cheat and steal IP.

Address supply chain vulnerabilities
As the United States takes steps to address IP theft and threats to American innovation, it is imperative
to address supply chain vulnerabilities. American companies have significant exposure to risk of
supply chain disruption given the extent of integration into the Chinese economy. American policy
should take these vulnerabilities into account. Just as in warfare, supply lines matter, and in economic
competition or confrontation, supply chains matter. To maximize supply chain flexibility, the United

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5

States must execute a trade agenda that promotes key trade agreements as a necessary component of its
foreign economic policy. Integrity and flexibility of supply chains for American companies is vital for
national security.

Stop import of goods produced with stolen IP
Whenever a U.S. producer has alerted authorities to products entering the country that have been made
with stolen IP, the sale of those products must be immediately stopped. Ideally, these goods should be
identified and stopped at the port of origin rather than the port of entry, as prescribed in the Trade
Enforcement and Facilitation Act of 2015. No Chinese entity should be able to profit from the sale of
counterfeit goods or products produced with stolen IP.

Increase speed of action
Whenever a bad actor is identified, or an American company alerts authorities to the theft of IP or sale
of products made with stolen IP, authorities must act with haste – within hours or days, not weeks or
months.

IV. Conclusion
The administration has taken a step in the right direction by recognizing the enormous and critical
problem of Chinese intellectual property theft, but tariffs alone are not the best solution. The more
targeted actions recommended by the Commission might take longer, but would have long-term and
far-reaching impacts that can wipe out bad actors’ incentives to cheat and crush their success. For
additional recommendations, including recommendations for CFIUS expansion and new export
controls, see the Appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6

APPENDIX

Recommendations Regarding the Trump Administration’s Section 301
Investigation

March 2018

The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property (IP Commission), co-chaired by Admiral
(ret) Dennis Blair and Dr. Craig Barrett (former Chairman and CEO of Intel Corporation), provides the
following policy recommendations for consideration by the Trump administration in response to the
Section 301 investigation of Chinese theft of intellectual property (IP) and forced technology transfer.

Given the continued assault on American technology, products, science, copyrights, and trade secrets, the
IP Commission notes that changing the cost-benefit calculus of foreign entities determined to steal the IP of
American firms is essential to the nation’s full economic recovery and future economic success. Too many
brilliant start-ups have seen the value of their work stolen and never had the chance to prosper; too many
established manufacturers have had their products reverse-engineered and their markets inundated with
cheaply priced copies; too many multinational companies have been compelled to transfer technology as a
condition of market access. The administration must act, and act decisively with unilateral and multilateral
initiatives.

Taking strong positions can be accomplished without forsaking America’s values and fundamental
commitment to the rule of law. As with challenges faced in the past, the IP Commission urges transparent,
law-based approaches to ensure fairness, equal treatment, and justice as well as effectiveness.

The IP Commission acknowledges that the measures recommended below are part of a broader effort. The
commission encourages the administration to make plans and policies that seek to develop a comprehensive
U.S. economic strategy, one that revitalizes and protects the United States’ own national innovation system.
Doing so will help create a U.S. innovation ecosystem that unleashes the creative genius of America’s
entrepreneurs, providing for the lawful protection of their nascent ideas, research and development,
production, and marketing.
The IP Commission recommends the following specific measures to respond to predatory practices by
Chinese and other actors.

U.S. Policy Actions
1. Use the emergency economic powers already granted to the president to deny access to the U.S. market
and banking system to Chinese entities found to be directly benefiting from the theft of American IP.

 Under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act of 1977, the president is allowed to
sanction individuals and organizations and to “prohibit any transaction in foreign exchange.”
Section 1637 of the 2015 National Defense Authorization Act expands this authority to cover “all
transactions in property” of any person who the president determines “knowingly engages in
economic or industrial espionage in cyberspace.”

2. Designate the national security advisor as the principal policy coordinator on the protection of American
IP to reflect the president’s priority and to ensure interagency coordination.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7

 The administration should create an assistant to the president and deputy national security adviser
for economic security to coordinate the policy dimensions of IP protection, export controls, and
investment controls, including the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS).
This position would coordinate with the special assistant to the president for trade policy, or the two
positions might be merged.
 The national security adviser would review all new measures to protect IP, new export controls, and
new CFIUS legislation to ensure that measures to stop technology and trade-secret leakage are
coordinated and encourage American innovation and production.

3. Provide statutory responsibility and authority to the secretary of commerce to serve as the principal
official responsible for effectively administering the president’s policies on IP protection.
4. Expand authority to the secretary of the treasury (in consultation with the secretary of commerce and
national security adviser) to deny the use of the U.S. banking system to Chinese and other foreign
companies that use or benefit from the theft of American IP.

 This builds on the existing statutory authority of the president as outlined above and was proposed
but not adopted during the prior administration. The IP Commission strongly encourages the
adoption of this recommendation to ensure that the United States is well-placed to address new and
emerging threats on an ongoing basis.

5. Strengthen and modernize the CFIUS process managed by the Treasury Department to include an
evaluation of IP protection as a condition for investment in the United States.

 Congress should adopt the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (HR 4311), which
appropriately widens the categories of covered transactions, expands the specific factors that can be
considered by CFIUS to deal with new threats to U.S. military technology, and provides for
improved congressional notification.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8

 The CFIUS process should evaluate major new foreign investments on the basis of the
demonstrated level of protection afforded to U.S. companies’ IP, including assessments of a foreign
entity’s historical record of IP theft.
 It should assess whether acquiring companies have damaged or threatened U.S. national security or
the national security of U.S. treaty allies through the illegal acquisition of American IP, or other
activities against U.S. security polices and interests.
 CFIUS should review acquisitions that have been previously approved when new evidence comes
to light of damaging actions by the foreign companies.
 It should develop a monitoring mechanism for ongoing evaluation of approved investments in
sensitive industries.
 The administration should add financial resources and manpower to the CFIUS interagency team.

6. Establish a National Counter IP Theft Center, on the model of the National Counterterrorism Center in
the intelligence community, to develop a deep understanding of the corporate structure, funding, and
activities of foreign companies that pose the greatest threat to American IP.

 This action would establish close coordination with the National Intellectual Property Rights
Coordination Center (https://www.iprcenter.gov) to inform U.S. government decisions by the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Department of Commerce, and the Department of the
Treasury under their authorities.

7. Create a new Investment and Export Control Center, under the secretary of commerce, to develop and
implement integrated policy regarding the protection of U.S. technology.

 Such a center would integrate export control procedures with CFIUS efforts to deliver a coherent
and integrated set of outcomes to protect U.S. technology from the various methods sought to
acquire it for foreign entities—from dual-use violations to forced tech transfer as a condition of
market access.

8. In keeping with the IP Commission’s earlier recommendation to strengthen the International Trade
Commission (ITC) Section 337 process, establish a quick-response capability within the ITC for
sequestering goods that incorporate stolen, pirated, or otherwise illegally procured materials or forms of IP.

 Such a capability should draw on and reflect the United States’ global leadership as a champion of
the rule of law. It should be established using a probable-cause standard of proof for any initial
sequestering of goods; provide for a consistent, transparent process for rapid review and judgement;
and promote best practices in ensuring access to evidence while also protecting confidential
business information.

9. Require the Securities and Exchange Commission to judge whether companies’ use of stolen IP is a
material condition that ought to be publicly reported.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9

10. Establish in the private, nonprofit sector a dynamic and regularly maintained database of known foreign
entities that have illegally or illicitly obtained American IP to collate and publicize information about their
theft alongside key investment and trade data.

 The creation and regular maintenance of such a nonpartisan database would further empower a
broad base of American stakeholders—particularly state and local governments and small and
medium-sized enterprises—to make informed decisions about the risks of particular investments
and economic partnerships.

11. Enhance the work of the National Intellectual Property Rights Coordination Center, which currently
focuses on information-sharing and law enforcement, to make the center the real locus of policy on IP
rights protection.

 The administration should increase manpower and resources, especially in the Department of
Justice and FBI, to investigate and prosecute cases of trade-secret theft.

12. Continue to encourage and welcome investment and economic partnerships with Chinese entities that
have demonstrated a commitment to promoting high standards of IP protection and that do not engage in
unfair trade practices.

 As aptly noted in the administration’s recent National Security Strategy, the United States
“welcome[s] all economic relationships rooted in fairness, reciprocity, and faithful adherence to the
rules,” including the pursuit of ongoing closer U.S.-China trading ties. On this basis—and without
“turning a blind eye to violations”—the United States should continue to engage with China on
pursuing genuine opportunities to strengthen the bilateral relationship. This includes continued
efforts on the U.S.-China 100-Day Action Plan and the establishment of a high-standards bilateral
investment treaty in ways that “benefit all with equal levels of market access and opportunities for
economic growth.”

13. Make it a national goal to delegitimize Chinese indigenous innovation efforts dependent on the theft of
foreign IP and ensure that all U.S. agencies speak with one voice to move China to become a self-
innovating economy.

Multilateral Policy Actions
14. Initiate a multilateral policy dialogue among like-minded countries, starting with the European Union
and Japan, as well as Australia, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore, to strengthen national policies on
Chinese foreign investment (Multilateral CFIUS).

15. Establish a dialogue with Europeans, Japanese, and others who share interests in protecting IP and
reforming international trade rules and institutions to harmonize national legal and regulatory frameworks
and share information on bad actors.

 The IP Commission applauds the December 12, 2017, joint statement by the United States, the
European Union, and Japan expressing a commitment to work together to ensure a “global level
playing field.” Such partnerships should be encouraged and expanded, including to potentially
bring in other champions of free trade and high standards for IP protection.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10

 The World Trade Organization has proved largely ineffective in providing for the protection of IP
from an infringer like China. As a consequence, the United States must work with its allies and
friends to chart a path forward that serves the interests of nations committed to the rule of law and
fair markets and that incentivizes others to adopt the requisite norms and practices.

16. Encourage the development of evaluative tools that assess the levels of national IP protection and
formulate work plans in response (similar to the Trade Secret Protection Index (TSPI), which is an existing
tool that assesses national IP-protection performance).

17. Develop a program that encourages technological innovation on a multilateral basis to improve the
ability to detect counterfeit goods.

18. Establish IP “centers of excellence” with priority countries with strong rule of law to promote best
practices for protecting IP rights.

About the IP Commission
The IP Commission is an independent and bipartisan initiative of leading Americans from the private
sector, public service in national security and foreign affairs, academia, and politics. The IP Commission
published reports in 2013 and 2017 documenting and assessing the causes, scale, and other major
dimensions of international intellectual property theft as they affect the United States; the reports also
proposed appropriate U.S. policy responses that would mitigate ongoing and future damage of intellectual
property rights by China and other infringers.

About the Commissioners
Co-chairs:
 Admiral Dennis C. Blair, Co-chair of the IP Commission; Chairman of the board and Distinguished
Senior Fellow at the Sasakawa Peace Foundation USA; former commander of the U.S. Pacific
Command; and former U.S. director of national intelligence
 Craig Barrett, former Chairman and CEO of Intel Corporation

Other Commissioners:
 Dr. Charles W. Boustany Jr., Chair of the Center for Innovation, Trade, and Strategy at the National
Bureau of Asian Research; former six-term U.S. Representative from Louisiana
 Slade Gorton, former U.S. Senator from Washington State; member of the 9/11 Commission
 William J. Lynn III, CEO of Leonardo North America and DRS Technologies
 Deborah Wince-Smith, President and CEO of the Council on Competitiveness
 Michael K. Young, President of Texas A&M University
