
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • MARCH 2026
T
hrough public-private collaboration, Japan is pushing the technology frontier in next-generation
high-performance computing (HPC) and quantum computing, beyond current-generation artificial
intelligence (AI). Sizable investments are beginning to yield results, from building the infrastructure for
next-generation hardware to new start-ups. This new moonshot leverages Japan’s long-standing core competencies in
high-level precision manufacturing, hardware excellence, system-level engineering, computing design innovation,
and industrial policy. It is also a central piece in Japan’s response to the rise of geoeconomics. Rather than viewing
the world in only zero-sum terms, Japan’s positioning begins with a conviction that nobody can win alone in the
new world of HPC and quantum computing. To balance power relations in the U.S.-Japan security umbrella, Japan’s
national economic security strategy is centered on forging inextricable tie-ups with the United States.
Japan’s New Moonshot: Quantum and High-Performance Computing
AI is on everybody’s mind, in Japan just as much as everywhere else. While Japan may have been late in developing
its own AI, there is now substantial investment and activity around domestic AI design. These are often specialized
to certain areas; for example, the NEC cotomi focuses on helping companies accelerate their digital transformation.
In October 2025 a new government push was announced to build more domestic AI in order to reduce dependency
on U.S. and Chinese AI models.1
Ulrike Schaede is Professor of Japanese Business in the School of Global Policy and Strategy at University of California
San Diego.
JAPAN’S NEXT MOONSHOT: LEADERSHIP IN HIGH-PERFORMANCE
COMPUTING COUPLED WITH QUANTUM COMPUTING TECHNOLOGY
BRIEF BY ULRIKE SCHAEDE, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN DIEGO

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • MARCH 2026
2
In addition to these activities related to
current-generation AI, Japan has launched a separate
so-called moonshot goal for quantum computing, and
is making similar efforts to advance HPC capabilities.
Perhaps different from the United States, where the
concept of AI is sometimes used as an umbrella term
that encompasses a vast range of next-generation
computing technologies, stakeholders in the
Japanese private and public sectors consider HPC
separate from AI and look to tie HPC to quantum
computing The government’s ten-point Moonshot
R&D Program includes AI and robotics as the third
goal and quantum as a separate, sixth goal. In this
broader ecosystem, HPC is seen as a technology that
could utilize quantum hardware and middleware in
the event of a quantum computing breakthrough.2
Put in highly simplistic terms, the current AI is
a black box, a closed system that identifies patterns
in existing information to make predictions. This is
most useful for deep learning, model training, and
data inference. According to some experts, such as
Yann LeCun, AI is not an end state but an enabling
technology. It is most effective when used as a tool to
do other things, such as writing software or solving
scientific problems. LeCun has also predicted that
more advanced systems will replace AI based on large
language models in rapid succession.
In contrast, HPC can be thought of as a white box,
a kind of computing architecture designed to solve
complex scientific problems on its own. Rather than
processing massive amounts of data as fast as possible
for fast learning, as AI does, in HPC every node must
talk to its neighbor instantly in the pursuit of very
high precision and exact accuracy. Some might think
of HPC as the backbone to AI, while others view AI
as the accelerator for HPC. 3 In a pathbreaking event,
in 2025 the Japanese start-up Sakana AI managed
to have its “AI scientist” generate a peer-reviewed
journal publication. In other words, the company
produced a completely machine-generated research
paper that presented new scientific discovery and
passed the journal review process.4
Japan’s quantum moonshot is about leading the
development of advanced hardware, middleware,
and software systems that could support future HPC
applications. The push in this direction began under
the heading of AI, including in the passage of the AI
Promotion Act of 2025 and the establishment of the
AI Strategic Headquarters in the prime minister’s
office.5 Soon thereafter, Japan’s Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Industry (METI) broadened the goal and
labeled the year 2025 as the “first year of quantum
industrialization,” complete with a “high-stakes,
preemptive” government intervention exceeding $7
billion.6 Since then, public-private efforts in this next-
generation area have skyrocketed.
For the five years from 2025 to 2030, over 10 trillion
yen ($65 billion, which is more than the amount
authorized in the U.S. CHIPS and Science Act)
have been earmarked for government investment in
infrastructure upgrades (such as submarine cable
networks) and next-generation chip and quantum-
computing research (such as the Rapidus next-
generation semiconductor production facility in
Hokkaido) that Japanese stakeholders believe will
serve as a foundation for HPC. The government
initiative has also earmarked funds for start-up
companies, such as Sakura Internet, a Gen-AI
platform based on NEC’s cotomi-AI for advanced
cloud-based supercomputing applications.7
The efforts to spearhead quantum-computing
powers are led by RIKEN, Japan’s preeminent national
research laboratory. In collaboration with Fujitsu and
Nvidia, RIKEN has developed FugakuNEXT, which
is the quantum-computing hardware, as well as
OQTOPUS, a quantum-computing software system
developed by RIKEN and Fujitsu. RIKEN is also
supporting a SoftBank initiative to create a platform
for quantum-computing research that involves 21
companies and research teams. Meanwhile, the
ABCI-Q Supercomputer is developed jointly between
the National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (a METI-affiliated research
agency) and SoftBank. 8 METI has also created a

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • MARCH 2026
3
new facility called G-QuAT to serve as a hub for
business collaboration to foster talent and speed up
technology transfer.
These programs are reminiscent of the research
consortia of the 1980s, and indeed Japan’s long
experience in public-private R&D collaboration is
affording the country once again a great advantage.
With the goal of bringing together corporate
R&D leaders and bridging academic research and
commercial application, METI and RIKEN are
building an ecosystem that can turn scientific
progress into national competitiveness.9
The above developments represent the highlights
rather than the entire spectrum of Japan’s activities at
the intersection of AI, HPC, and quantum computing.
Moreover, Japan’s ambitions are not solely focused
on building high-powered hardware. Investments
are also directed at middleware—i.e., the software
that allows quantum devices to run applications. For
example, the telecom company KDDI and start-up Jiji
are building a first quantum operating system that, if
successful, could secure Japan a dominant position in
a potential future quantum ecosystem.
Japan’s Business Reinvention and HPC
Leadership
The government initiatives are complemented by
private investment that already exceeds $70 billion,
if it can even be fully assessed. The results of the IT
industry’s massive efforts are now beginning to show,
in ways that may be surprising for a casual observer
who has not looked at Japan’s IT industry since the
bubble economy burst in the early 1990s. The former
“NTT family” members—in particular, NEC, Fujitsu,
and Hitachi—have awakened from their slumber and
found their own new meaning and energy in the new
Moonshot Program. Each of them is undertaking
its own digital transformation and building AI
platforms as well as hardware, with investments well
over $30 billion so far. SoftBank, KDDI, and others
have joined the club, with SoftBank alone investing
$49 billion in the Stargate project with OpenAI. The
NTT Group itself has pledged $59 billion to build the
new Smart AI Agent Ecosystem. This frantic activity
has attracted foreign investments as well, including
by Microsoft, Amazon Web Services, and Alphabet,
which have pledged over $15 billion to upgrade their
cloud infrastructure in Japan.10
This wave of investment is happening as a critical
mass of Japan’s leading companies are making rapid
progress in a decade-long business reinvention. These
frontrunners have refocused their core competencies
away from consumer-end products and into the
technologically advanced upstream and downstream
portions of global value chains. Because this new
expertise is quietly building in the high-upstream
portions of global value chains, such as in advanced
materials or machinery, it is often overlooked.
Nevertheless, in many areas Japan’s leading
companies have become key players in various areas
of the technological frontier.11
As a result of this shift upstream and toward the
technology frontier, Japan overall has moved from a
“Made in Japan” business model to a “Japan Inside”
one.12 The new leadership is currently most evident
in advanced materials and components that feed
into the making of many products that do not carry
a Japanese brand name. Yet, this has made Japanese
companies integral to many supply chains, including
in next-generation computing, data centers, and
smart cities.
Japan’s Moonshot Program is leveraging these
new strengths. While U.S. firms are focusing their
investments on AI in consumer-facing products,
Japan is positioning upstream, in the development
of hardware and middleware (system-engineering)
applications. With these efforts, Japan is angling
to become an indispensable collaborator in the
next generation of HPC and quantum hardware,
middleware, and software.
Collaboration, Not Just Cooperation
The global shift toward geoeconomics—using
economic policy as a tool of foreign policy and

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • MARCH 2026
4
for strategic gain—plays into Japan’s hands given
long-standing strong government-business ties. As
the world enters a new order where countries no
longer pursue shared prosperity but rather national
economic gains in purportedly zero-sum games, it
is turning away from free-market competition and
toward corporate strategy guided and perhaps even
governed by national security interests.13
In this new world of geoeconomics and
economically driven national security strategies, one
might think that Japan is entering the ring from a
position of weakness. Japan greatly depends on the
United States for defense in Northeast Asia, and
everything in Japanese policymaking today must be
viewed in the context of its efforts at maintaining the
U.S.-Japan security umbrella.
However, to balance the dependency, Japan’s strategy
is to make itself an indispensable partner to as many
countries and companies as possible. The path Japan
has chosen toward this goal is collaboration, even as
the rest of the world is turning toward isolation. The
quantum moonshot is a great example of this strategy
of building crucial bargaining chips that make Japan
all but indispensable at the technology frontier.
Japan begins this technology pursuit with the
assumption that no one can win the race in HPC
or quantum computing alone. Domestically, this
justifies concerted government-industry efforts at
R&D, relying on time-tested playbooks of research
consortia and government-business collaboration.
Globally, Japan aims to be the reliable, go-to partner
for the United States and other collaborators by
proactively seeking commitments, joint investments,
and corporate and personal tie-ups. In some circles
in Japan, the term “cooperation” is considered too
weak for these partnerships, and in many official
statements Japan now explicitly insists on a deeper,
more inextricable form of “collaboration.” 14
This approach fundamentally differs from the
U.S. approach. The U.S. AI Action Plan sets as the
explicit goal “technological dominance,” including
pushing the United States’ AI vision and ecosystem
globally.15 In contrast, Japan’s official stance is to seek
“technological leadership,” which implies a more
collaborative approach and aims to make the country
one of the star players in a team effort. 16 In other
words, Japan’s moonshot programs are intended to
increase its indispensability.
In October 2025 the United States and Japan signed
a memorandum of cooperation that Japan would
make available $550 billion of funds for investment
in the United States. 17 While the details will most
likely be revised repeatedly, this memorandum could
become a centerpiece in U.S.-Japan collaboration in
HPC. As the exact investment areas are negotiated,
Japan’s goal remains constant, namely to create
synergies with the United States.
In sum, Japan is building world-class infrastructure
for HPC and quantum computing, with substantial
government commitment of resources and renewed
activity in the private sector to position the country
for collaboration in a world of geoeconomics. This
collaborative stance makes Japan an exception in an
era when many countries are engaged in zero-sum
competition. •
Endnotes
1 For an overview of recent AI developments in Japan, see “ A Japanese AI Boom?” posted January 29, 2026, by Asianometry, Y ouTube, https://youtu.be/Z_
ZXSUxQF-Y; “NEC Strengthens Its Generative AI, NEC Cotomi, for Specialized Business Use, Maintaining High Speed and Achieving World-Class Accuracy, ”
NEC, November 27, 2024, https://www.nec.com/en/press/202411/global_20241127_02.html; and Jeremy Werner, “Japan to Develop Domestic AI Model to Reduce
Reliance on U.S. and China, ” BABL AI, October 9, 2025, https://babl.ai/japan-to-develop-domestic-ai-model-to-reduce-reliance-on-u-s-and-china.
2 Cabinet Office (Japan), “Moonshot Goal 6: Realization of a Fault-Tolerant Universal Quantum Computer That Will Revolutionize Economy, Industry, and
Security by 2050, ” https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/moonshot/sub6_en.html; and Japan Science and Technology Program, “Here Begins Our New MIRAI:
The Moonshot R&D Program, ” https://www.jst.go.jp/moonshot/en/index.html. Some industry experts in the United States and Europe also separate AI from the
HPC/quantum area. See, for example, “Harnessing the Power of HPC and Quantum Computing, ” QuEra, October 10, 2023, https://www.quera.com/blog-posts/
harnessing-the-power-of-hpc-and-quantum-computing.
3 “HPC Intro: How AI and HPC Differ…and Converge, ” OnComputing, December 18, 2025, https://oncomputing.medium.com/hpc-intro-how-ai-and-hpc-differ-
and-converge-351e7760a1b7.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • MARCH 2026
2
the national bureau of asian research
1819 l street nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 • 202-347-9767
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, w a 98101 • 206-632-7370
www.nbr.org @nbrnews
4 “The AI Scientist Generates its First Peer-Reviewed Scientific Publication, ” Sakana AI, March 12, 2025, https://sakana.ai/ai-scientist-first-publication.
5 “Japan’s AI Governance: Major Government Steps since the AI Act, ” Bird & Bird, October 27, 2025, https://www.twobirds.com/en/insights/2025/japan/japan’s-ai-
governance-major-government-steps-since-the-ai-act.
6 Pablo Valerio, “Quantum Sun Rises, Japan Gambit for Leadership, ” EE Times, June 30, 2025, https://www.eetimes.com/quantum-sun-rises-japan-gambit-for-
leadership.
7 See Blake Crosley, “Japan’s $135B AI Revolution: Quantum + GPU Infrastructure, ” Introl, August 6, 2025, https://introl.com/blog/japan-ai-infrastructure-135-
billion-investment-2025; and Michael Feldman, “Japanese Startup Floats Bare Metal and Hybrid HPC Cloud, ” Next Platform, February 25, 2019, https://www.
nextplatform.com/2019/02/25/japanese-startup-floats-bare-metal-and-hybrid-hpc-cloud.
8 Feldman, “Japanese Startup Floats Bare Metal and Hybrid HPC Cloud. ” See also “RIKEN Center for Quantum Computing (RQC), ” RIKEN, https://www.riken.jp/
en/research/labs/rqc/#h2Anchor1; and “RIKEN Launches International Initiative with Fujitsu and NVIDIA for ‘FugakuNEXT’ Development, ” RIKEN, August 22,
2025, https://www.riken.jp/en/news_pubs/news/2025/20250822_1/index.html.
9 Matt Swayne, “Japan Backs Quantum Startups in 50 Billion Y en Push for Tech Leadership, ” Quantum Insider, July 31, 2025, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2025/07/31/japan-backs-quantum-startups-in-50-billion-push-for-tech-leadership.
10 See Crosley, “Japan’s $135B AI Revolution. ”
11 Ulrike Schaede, The Business Reinvention of Japan: How to Make Sense of the New Japan and Why It Matters (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2020).
12 Ulrike Schaede, Japan Re-Emerges (Kindle Publishing, 2024).
13 Gillian Tett (presentation at the G1 Global Conference 2025, Tokyo, October 13, 2025).
14 Author’s interview with Japanese government officials, Tokyo, October 2025.
15 Brad Glosserman, “De-Risking Is Not Enough: Tech Denial toward China Is Needed, ” Washington Quarterly 46, no. 4 (2023): 103–19.
16 Hiroki Habuka, “Japan’s Agile AI Governance in Action: Fostering a Global Nexus through Pluralistic Interoperability, ” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, October 9, 2025, https://www.csis.org/analysis/japans-agile-ai-governance-action-fostering-global-nexus-through-pluralistic.
17 “President Donald J. Trump Drives Forward Billions in Investments from Japan, ” White House, October 28, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/fact-
sheets/2025/10/28195; and Tamiyuki Kihara and Makiko Y amazaki, “Japan, U.S. Narrow First $550 Bln Investment Picks, Including SoftBank-Linked Plan,
Sources Say, ” January 19, 2026, https://www.reuters.com/business/media-telecom/japan-us-narrow-first-550-bln-investment-picks-including-softbank-linked-
plan-2026-01-19.
