
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JANUARY 2026
E
nsuring reliable and secure access to critical minerals is a top priority for the United States as it seeks
to safeguard its position in frontier technologies such as solar panels, electric vehicles, batteries, and
semiconductors. Disruptions to mineral supplies could undermine U.S. competitiveness in these strategic
industries, and global supply chains for many critical minerals currently run through China .
China’s investment in Indonesia followed Beijing’s “going out” strategy—a state-backed push for Chinese firms
to invest abroad. The strategy’s goal was to secure supply chains, expand global influence, and support domestic
economic growth by investing in natural resources, infrastructure, and strategic industries abroad.
The national security implications of this became evident in December 2024 when China banned exports
of gallium and germanium to the United States. 1 The ban of these critical minerals used in the production of
semiconductors and other electronics roiled markets and led to shortages, underscoring U.S. vulnerability to
supply chain shocks. Although the ban was lifted at the end of 2025 alongside a number of other subsequent export
controls, the consequences highlighted for the United States the urgency of securing access to critical minerals
through channels that bypass China.
The scale of the challenge is significant. China has spent years consolidating control over chokepoints in supply
chains for critical minerals, securing access to raw ores and investing heavily in refining capacity both domestically
and abroad. In 2024, China produced 99% of the world’s gallium and 44% of its refined copper. 2 What it does not
James Guild is an Assistant Professor at Universitas Islam Internasional Indonesia, where he teaches in the Master in Public Policy
Program with a focus on climate change. He has published widely on the political economy of Southeast Asia and writes the weekly
Pacific Money Blog for the Diplomat.
BY JAMES GUILD, UNIVERSITAS ISLAM INTERNASIONAL INDONESIA
ADVANCING RESILIENT CRITICAL MINERAL SUPPLY CHAINS IN INDONESIA
A TRIUMVIRATE APPROACH

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JANUARY 2026
2
produce domestically, it imports through state-owned
or state-directed mining companies, including cobalt
and copper from the Democratic Republic of Congo
and nickel from Indonesia.
The United States has seemingly been slow
to recognize the geopolitical value of critical
minerals, allowing procurement, investment, and
other supply chain decisions to be driven largely
by market incentives and the interests of private
firms. Addressing the national security implications
requires looking beyond commercial considerations
and forming partnerships with like-minded allies
based on shared geostrategic priorities rather than
exclusively market logic.
Current schemes, such as the Section 45X tax
credit for critical minerals, incentivize onshoring
and domestic production. But a resilient global
supply chain is not necessarily one where the United
States sits at the center, absorbing raw minerals from
other countries and processing them into high-value
finished goods. Resilient global supply chains take
the form of distributed cooperative networks, where
U.S. firms with know-how and technology invest
in overseas mining, smelting, and manufacturing
through subsidiaries set up in resource-rich countries.
This will allow U.S. firms to gain access to scarce
resources, while providing attractive benefits to the
countries that own and control the primary inputs.
China may hold a leading position, but the United
States can still build alternative, resilient supply chains
by partnering with resource-rich states in the Asia-
Pacific, including Indonesia and Australia. The recent
U.S.-Australia critical minerals framework marks
an important step in this direction. 3 Incorporating
Indonesia would strengthen it further.
The key question is how such frameworks can
be structured to benefit all parties at a time when
many countries—including the United States and
Indonesia—are considering how to shape global
supply chains to advance national interests and
expand domestic production. The following sections
will examine this question as it relates to prospects
for U.S.-Indonesian cooperation on critical minerals
for batteries (nickel and copper) and semiconductors
(germanium and gallium).
Critical Minerals for Batteries and
Semiconductors
Indonesia plays a central role in supply chains
of critical minerals necessary for the production of
batteries and semiconductors, two technologies with
widespread applications. Indonesia held 42% of global
nickel ore reserves in 2024, and its mines accounted
for 59% of global production.4 Nickel is used to make
lithium-ion batteries and is thus central to clean
energy supply chains. Historically, large foreign
mining firms extracted Indonesian nickel ore and
exported it for processing outside Indonesia. Seeking
to retain more value domestically amid heightened
global competition over control of critical mineral
resources, Indonesia in 2009 passed a law requiring
that ore be processed in domestic smelters and in 2020
banned nickel ore exports to enforce compliance.
This policy succeeded in driving massive investment
into Indonesia’s downstream nickel industry.5
Billions of dollars—primarily from Chinese
firms—flowed into smelters and industrial parks
in nickel-rich regions of Indonesia. In addition to
expanded mineral-processing facilities, factories to
produce batteries and electric vehicles are also now
in various stages of development, backed mainly by
Chinese and South Korean investors. The impact
of this downstreaming policy can also be seen in
Indonesia’s rapidly expanded output of refined
products such as ferronickel and nickel matte. In
2017, Indonesia exported just under $2 billion worth
of these products. By 2023, it was exporting nearly $21
billion, with the majority of exports going to China. 6
Indonesian nickel production increased so
rapidly the market is now oversupplied and prices
have fallen. The Gunbuster nickel smelter was forced
to ramp down recently after its parent company in
China declared bankruptcy, partly due to falling

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JANUARY 2026
3
nickel prices.7 This could be interpreted as evidence
the policy is not working as intended. But that
conclusion hinges on the assumption that Indonesia’s
nickel downstreaming is driven solely by commercial
logic, and that success or failure should be judged
using metrics like profit and loss, or prices determined
by markets. Viewed instead through a geopolitical
lens, this trend shows that Indonesia and China
are working toward mutually beneficial objectives.
Indonesia leveraged its dominant nickel resources to
expand its footprint in clean energy supply chains,
prioritizing its interest in downstreaming even when
conditions were not commercially optimal. China
sought long-term access to nickel for next-generation
technologies and was willing to invest, even with low
or negative margins, because securing supply has
value beyond short-term commercial returns.
The extent to which downstreaming is resulting
in the creation of long-term value for Indonesia, in the
form of technology transfers and upskilling, remains
to be seen. Substantial environmental and social
costs are also being incurred as part of this policy.
Whether the benefits outweigh the costs remains a
matter of intense debate. What is indisputable is that
downstreaming has helped Indonesia insert itself
into the global conversation on critical minerals in a
way that was not possible before.
Indonesia now seeks to replicate this experience
with copper smelters and downstream industries,
having enacted export bans on unprocessed copper
and bauxite in 2023. 8 Indonesian mines accounted
for 5% of global copper production in 2024, but
the country’s downstream industries remain
underdeveloped. The United States already has an
established private-sector presence here through
Freeport-McMoRan, which has operated the Grasberg
mine in Papua for decades. If securing reliable access
to non-Chinese copper is a strategic priority, the
United States is well placed to help Indonesia realize
its downstream ambitions in exchange for priority
access to refined copper products.
Gallium and germanium are also considered
critical minerals, though they are not mined like nickel
or copper. Gallium is a byproduct of bauxite and zinc
processing; germanium can be extracted from coal
ash. Their market size is small in dollar terms, but
they are important components in semiconductors
and other electronics. China currently dominates
global production of both minerals—mainly because
manufacturing them is uneconomical at scale, and
other producers cannot compete on a purely market
basis with subsidized Chinese firms. U.S. companies
have shown little interest in producing gallium and
germanium because they cannot do so profitably.
However, considering the role of these minerals in
semiconductor supply chains, they have strategic
value that goes beyond their market price.
Suitable candidates for producing gallium and
germanium outside China would be countries
rich in bauxite and coal that place a premium on
noncommercial objectives, such as improving their
position in global supply chains. Indonesia is such
a country. It contains 10% of global bauxite reserves
and is one of the largest exporters of coal in the
world.9 Given that China’s recent export bans
reminded the United States about the vulnerability
of its supply chains for critical minerals, expanding
partnerships with a friendly country like Indonesia
that possesses potentially favorable conditions for
producing these minerals with U.S. assistance is
worth consideration.
Building Critical Mineral Supply Chains
in Indonesia
The United States has been slow to incorporate
Indonesia into its critical mineral supply chains. This
is largely because companies are sometimes reluctant
to invest in Indonesia, especially in politically
sensitive sectors like mining. Indonesia’s regulatory
environment is complex, and the state plays an
assertive role in resource management, including

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JANUARY 2026
through partial or majority ownership of mining
companies. For example, the government recently
acquired a controlling interest in the Indonesian
operations of foreign-owned mining company Vale
in 2024 and secured majority ownership of Freeport
Indonesia in 2018. Meanwhile, Chinese firms like
Tsingshan and Huayue dominate the nickel sector.
These factors create barriers for American investors
entering the market despite the strategic value of
Indonesia’s mineral resources.
From a private-sector perspective, an
interventionist state coupled with China’s
hammerlock on nickel has dimmed Indonesia’s
attractiveness for foreign investors. However, this
evaluation of Indonesia’s promise as a partner leaves
out strategic considerations. If the goal of the United
States is to secure access to critical minerals while
reducing dependence on China, Indonesia remains
a critical partner to engage, and its downstreaming
policies offer clarity on the alignment of both
countries’ objectives. In recent years the Indonesian
state has begun consolidating control over natural
resources, including critical minerals, to ensure
they are exploited and developed in ways that are
more beneficial (or perceived as more beneficial) to
the national interest. 10 Rather than closing critical
minerals off from foreign investors and overseas
markets, this creates a direct channel for engagement
as long as strategic interests are aligned.
Two recent developments are important to
consider regarding engagement with Indonesia. First,
Indonesia has consolidated state-owned mining
assets under a single holding company, MIND ID.
This includes Aneka Tambang (gold, nickel, and
bauxite), Bukit Asam (coal), Inalum (aluminum), PT
Timah (tin), and Freeport (copper and gold). This
consolidated entity reported assets of $17.5 billion and
revenue of $8.7 billion in 2024, spanning Indonesia’s
entire critical mineral landscape from upstream to
downstream production.11 This consolidation enables
the state to coordinate resources more effectively and
direct them toward national development goals.
Second, in 2025 Indonesia launched Danantara,
a state-owned investment fund that functions as
a “super holding company,” controlling all state
enterprises, including MIND ID. One of Danantara’s
priority investment areas is energy security, including
maximizing value from Indonesia’s natural resources
such as nickel, copper, and coal. It is seeking foreign
partners willing not only to invest in these projects
but also, and perhaps more importantly, to provide
technology, skills, and knowledge.
Foreign firms may be wary of a mining sector
with such a highly centralized ownership structure
that is deeply entwined with the state. In terms of
geopolitics, however, this structure can simplify
engagement when broader strategic objectives are
aligned. Rather than dealing with a dispersed set of
actors and overlapping interests, there is one relatively
clear channel for foreign investors and governments
that want access to Indonesia’s critical minerals: it runs
through MIND ID and Danantara. Additionally, their
negotiating position is straightforward. Indonesia
has the raw materials but needs technology, capital,
and expertise to achieve its industrial ambitions and
move up global value chains.
A Critical Minerals Triumvirate in the
Asia-Pacific
Foreign partners willing to accommodate
Indonesia’s interests will find that the country is a
potentially attractive alternative for building critical
mineral supply chains that do not pass through
China. The United States is well positioned to take
advantage of this opportunity. The strategic value for
Indonesia of expanding participation in global clean
energy and semiconductor supply chains is aligned
with U.S. efforts to build more secure critical mineral
supply chains and de-risk from China. The United
States can help construct a production ecosystem
that runs through Indonesia by providing research
and development support, technology transfers,
investment, and upskilling. In so doing, it can
4

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JANUARY 2026
diversify and secure access to critical minerals that
are rare or uneconomical to produce domestically.
Other U.S. partners in the region, such as
Australia, can play a complementary role in supply
chains. Australia has large copper and lithium
deposits, which, along with nickel and cobalt, are
key components in making lithium-ion batteries.
It also has large bauxite, coal, and zinc deposits; is
a well-established mining industry; and is a natural
trade and investment partner of neighboring
Indonesia. Australia is already working to develop
germanium and gallium from its own bauxite
and zinc resources, an effort that could easily be
expanded to include Indonesia. 12 The Australian
government, like the United States, is reluctant to
intervene directly in economic affairs and influence
where private companies invest and how they build
their supply chains. But when it comes to critical
minerals, there is a strong argument to be made that
such decisions should not be left purely to market
forces and that geopolitics and strategic interests are
important factors.
A critical minerals triumvirate consisting of the
United States, Australia, and Indonesia would possess
sufficient raw material, technology, and know-how
to begin building alternative critical mineral supply
chains that steer clear of China. The trio also share
high-level strategic alignment, creating opportunities
for a critical mineral partnership that could benefit the
national interests of all parties. Establishing a high-
level strategic framework between the three countries
would set the tone for cooperation by defining basic
terms and articulating broadly shared objectives
and investment goals, similar to the existing U.S.-
Australia critical minerals framework. Within this
structure, the United States could provide subsidies,
tax credits, and offtake guarantees to de-risk private
investment from U.S. firms willing to integrate
Indonesia and Australia into their value chains.
The Indonesian government already offers a
range of incentives, including tax holidays and import
duty exemptions, to foreign companies that invest
in its downstream critical mineral sectors. 13 U.S.
public finance institutions such as the Export-Import
Bank of the United States and the Development
Finance Corporation are well positioned to provide
additional inducements by underwriting mining,
refining, and processing projects based in the region.
For the production of germanium and gallium, this
could require subsidizing losses, which the U.S.
government has historically been reluctant to do.
Given the geostrategic value of these products, it may
be time to rethink that calculus.
Rather than competing directly with Indonesian
mines, Australian mines might be more willing to
invest directly in Indonesian upstream extraction
and processing technologies if there is a reasonable
expectation that a large market like the United States
will absorb the output from these ventures. This is
where simple mechanisms like offtake guarantees can
play an outsized role.
To build more resilient critical mineral
supply networks and safeguard the production
of next-generation technologies, both the U.S.
and Australian governments should focus less on
onshoring production and instead explore policies
that change private investment incentives and
make decentralized supply chains running through
trusted partners an attractive option. In exchange for
access to its critical minerals, Indonesia will likely
seek equity participation, workforce upskilling, and
possibly technology transfers. If advanced partners
like the United States and Australia are willing to
accommodate these expectations, they will find
receptive negotiating partners in institutions such as
Danantara and MIND ID. Building resilient critical
mineral supply chains means that not every country
will get everything it wants, but collectively countries
will end up in an improved strategic position. A
critical minerals triumvirate in the Asia-Pacific based
on this understanding can begin creating such an
equilibrium. •
5

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JANUARY 2026
6
Endnotes
1 Amy Lv and Tony Munroe, “China Bans Export of Critical Minerals to U.S. as Trade Tensions Escalate, ” Reuters, December 3, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/
markets/commodities/china-bans-exports-gallium-germanium-antimony-us-2024-12-03.
2 U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries 2025 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2025), 64, 74.
3 “United States–Australia Framework for Securing of Supply in the Mining and Processing of Critical Minerals and Rare Earths, ” White House, October 20, 2025,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/2025/10/united-states-australia-framework-for-securing-of-supply-in-the-mining-and-processing-of-critical-
minerals-and-rare-earths.
4 U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries 2025, 124.
5 James Guild, “Indonesia Plays Hardball with Its Nickel, ” East Asia Forum, March 30, 2021, https://eastasiaforum.org/2021/03/30/indonesia-plays-hardball-with-its-
nickel.
6 Harvard Growth Lab, “The Atlas of Economic Complexity, ” https://atlas.hks.harvard.edu/explore/treemap?year=2023&exporter=country-360&importer=group-1.
7 Kholid Rafsanjani and Zetta Hannany, “Parent Company Bankrupt, GNI Nickel Smelter in Morowali Faces Closure, ” IDNFinancials, February 22, 2025, https://
www.idnfinancials.com/news/52649/parent-company-bankrupt-gni-nickel-smelter-in-morowali-faces-closure.
8 U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries 2025, 64; and Bernadette Christina and Fransiska Nangoy, “Indonesia to Allow Freeport, Amman Mineral
to Ship Copper Concentrate until 2024, ” Reuters, April 28, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/indonesia-allow-freeport-amman-mineral-ship-
copper-concentrate-2024-2023-04-28.
9 U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries 2025, 42; and International Energy Agency, “Coal Information Overview, ” https://www.iea.org/reports/coal-
information-overview/exports.
10 James Guild, “Why Indonesia’s Antam Wants to Acquire a Chinese Nickel Smelter, ” Diplomat, September 6, 2024, https://thediplomat.com/2024/09/why-indonesias-
antam-wants-to-acquire-a-chinese-nickel-smelter.
11 MIND ID’s financial statements are available at https://mind.id/en/pages/financial-statements.
12 Asaesja Y oung, “Critical Minerals: The Quiet Achievers Gallium and Germanium, ” CSIRO, June 20, 2024, https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2024/June/
Critical-mineral-gallium-germanium.
13 “Indonesia’s Special Economic Zones: A Structural Shift for Foreign Investors, ” ASEAN Briefing, https://www.aseanbriefing.com/doing-business-guide/indonesia/
where-to-invest/indonesia-s-special-economic-zones-a-structural-shift-for-foreign-investors.
