
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • OCTOBER 2025
U
.S. critical minerals policy is entering a new phase under President Donald Trump’s administration—
one defined by an unapologetically “America first” agenda. The administration is centering domestic
production and prioritizing American miners and processors whenever possible. While it is unclear what
this shift means for existing multilateral partnerships, security-driven conversations are creating opportunities
for new critical minerals agreements. Unlike the Biden administration’s approach, in which building resilient
supply chains for the clean energy transition laid the groundwork for international engagement, the Trump
administration appears to prefer bilateral deals or small, security-focused arrangements that make it easier to
safeguard U.S. interests .
For Indonesia, this shift introduces both new opportunities and sharper challenges. Indonesia will need a
way to position itself as an indispensable partner in a U.S. policy landscape that increasingly prioritizes national
security and domestic production. At the same time, U.S. companies looking to advance projects in Indonesia—
or source Indonesian materials—will need to navigate a U.S. policy environment that prizes domestic producers
and frames international partnerships as means to strengthen national prosperity and security.
Shifting Domestic Policies: From Energy Transition to U.S. Energy Dominance
The pivot in U.S. domestic and foreign policy is most clearly visible in the slew of executive orders that so far
define the current administration’s minerals posture. Executive orders such as “Unleashing American Energy” 1
Zoe Oysul is a Senior Policy Analyst with the Center for Critical Minerals Strategy at SAFE.
BY ZOE OYSUL, SAFE
CHANGING U.S. CRITICAL MINERALS POLICY
AND WHAT IT MEANS FOR INDONESIA

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • OCTOBER 2025
2
and “Immediate Measures to Increase American
Mineral Production” 2 mark a rhetorical break from
the previous administration’s emphasis on global
supply chain cooperation to build the mineral base
needed for the energy transition. They emphasize
extraction, processing, and above all, domestic
production. The “America First Foreign Policy
Directive to the Secretary of State” reinforces
that shift by championing a less collaborative
and more transactional mode of international
partnerships. At its core, the Trump administration’s
policy decisions—including critical mineral
policy—are measured by their immediate benefit
to the United States and U.S. interests, with less
flexibility for the mutual compromises required by
international cooperation.
Congress is reinforcing these changes by
redirecting available funding for critical minerals
away from clean energy–focused programs toward
national security–focused ones highlighted in the
executive orders. The One Big Beautiful Bill Act
retracts the unobligated funding of key programs
in the Department of Energy Loan Programs
Office—including those with the largest remaining
funds available for critical minerals—and in
section 50403 replaces them with a smaller energy
dominance financing program focused mainly on
brownfield opportunities. The reconciliation bill in
section 70501 also eliminates the section 30D clean
tax credit, which, with its sourcing provision, was
widely regarded as the only meaningful demand
driver for critical minerals used in lithium-ion
batteries. New and stricter prohibited foreign entity
(PFE) restrictions are introduced in sections 70512–
14 for the remaining tax credits, such as the 45X
advanced manufacturing production credit, aimed
squarely at restricting sourcing from and commercial
arrangements with foreign operations effectively
controlled by Chinese entities. At the same time,
the One Big Beautiful Bill Act creates new pots of
money for critical minerals under the Department of
Defense, appropriating $7.5 billion to bolster supply
chains—including $2 billion for stockpiling and
$5 billion for the Industrial Base Fund, earmarked
specifically for critical minerals (see section 20004).
Additionally, $500 million of the $1.5 billion
appropriated to the Office of Strategic Capital is
designated for critical minerals.
These shifts in U.S. policy are creating
uncertainties for foreign partners such as
Indonesia. The early sunset of Section 30D electric
vehicle sourcing rules, formerly a cornerstone of
Washington’s conversations about minerals with
Jakarta, eliminates the main motivation that drove
both sides to the table. Stricter PFE provisions for
remaining tax credits now hang over Indonesia. Given
the dominant role of Chinese FDI in Indonesia’s
critical minerals sector, producers have no choice
but to wait for U.S. Treasury guidance to see whether
their operations will be considered PFEs. The stakes
are especially high for nickel producers that want
to supply U.S. battery makers. Finally, it is unclear
how the energy dominance agenda and its impact
on growth of U.S. demand for electric vehicles will
impact U.S. demand for nickel, and in extension, the
attractiveness of the United States as a partner for
Indonesian producers.
Unanswered questions also remain on the
U.S. side, particularly regarding how the Trump
administration will view future investments in
the critical minerals sector in Indonesia and what
implications favoring domestic priorities may have for
existing and future U.S. producers. Just as important
is how growing attention to unconventional sources,
such as deep-sea nodules, will impact the importance
of Indonesia as a strategic partner. That said, the
larger market volumes and high projected demand
for commodities such as nickel and copper make
investment decisions in these metals less binary
compared to decisions for smaller-market minerals,
leaving room for projects to advance in both the
United States and Indonesia.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • OCTOBER 2025
3
Security Shapes Partnerships
The overarching logic guiding the Trump
administration’s choice of strategic partners for
critical minerals agreements and other partnerships
has not solidified. The only consistent through-line
so far is that emerging initiatives are anchored in
security dialogues rather than purely economic or
market-based logic, though these efforts have also
evolved under the administration.
This logic is evident in the critical minerals
agreements already announced or under development.
The U.S.-Ukraine Minerals Partnership doubles as
a vehicle to justify future financial support for Kyiv,
with access to minerals effectively traded for military
assistance.3 A U.S. minerals agreement under
development with the Democractic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda is tied to a peace deal brokered
by Washington. 4 Though successful outcomes for
the United States has yet to be demonstrated, these
deals nonetheless indicate a new strategic approach
to linking conflict situations with critical minerals
agreements. In both cases, it was the immediate
security needs of the counterparties that sparked the
discussions, not the United States.
For supply chain vulnerabilities that threaten
U.S. national security itself, domestic sources are
considered the most secure and reliable. Within
this context, international partnerships can take
two forms. First is coordination on supply chain
diversification efforts, such as aligning trade policy,
intervening to prevent price distortions, and pursuing
other forms of collective action to ensure fair
competition. The second is leveraging the production
capacity of partners to serve as a bridge. This entails
filling near-term gaps in U.S. supply or capabilities
with imports without undermining efforts to build
domestic capacity that can eventually address
national security needs in the long term.
A key example of the first approach is the Quad’s
new Critical Minerals Initiative, launched in July
2025.5 Although little is known about its scope
and substance, and momentum has stalled due to
tensions with India, the announcement nevertheless
demonstrated how critical minerals are being woven
into Indo-Pacific security dialogues. The attention
on the Indo-Pacific bodes well for Indonesia. As a
dominant producer of nickel worldwide, it is uniquely
positioned to promote market transparency, address
price distortions, and supply materials to the United
States. There are, however, two limitations that may
pose challenges. Indonesian nickel is well suited
for battery production but is less relevant for other
critical defense needs because of its grade and form.
Perhaps a bigger challenge is pricing: the low prices of
Indonesian nickel continue to weigh on the economics
of projects worldwide, making it important to find an
arrangement that does not threaten the long-term
economic viability of U.S. domestic production.
U.S.-Indonesia Trade Discussions:
Economically Driven Opportunities and
Tensions
Copper and nickel—the minerals at the core of
the U.S.-Indonesia relationship—stand apart from
many other critical minerals: their large production
volumes and exchange-based trading make it difficult
for any one producer or country (outside of China)
to shape market dynamics, though Indonesia is
beginning to develop notable market power in nickel.
For the United States, with only a single operating
nickel mine and just roughly 5% of global copper
extraction and 3% of copper refining, domestic
policies are insufficient to shift market dynamics.
Partnerships with other major producers and buyers
are therefore essential to addressing global challenges
such as market distortions and oversupply and to
make the field more competitive.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • OCTOBER 2025
Indonesia is too important and too large a
producer to exclude from U.S. critical mineral
policy, especially if Washington wants to level the
global playing field in copper and nickel. Already the
world’s top nickel producer and a rising cobalt player,
Indonesia is also a significant source of copper and
bauxite. U.S. companies, notably Freeport-McMoRan
in Papua Province, are embedded in the Indonesian
landscape, creating openings for alignment—if the
two states are willing.
The recent trade negotiations between the
United States and Indonesia, culminating in a
trade agreement framework announced at the end
of August, have both highlighted opportunities
for potential cooperation on critical minerals and
brought deeper tensions to the surface. 6 In a show of
classic reciprocity, the United States agreed to reduce
its reciprocal tariffs on imports from Indonesia to
around 19% (down from roughly 32%), in exchange
for Jakarta eliminating 99% of tariffs on a wide range
of U.S. industrial and agricultural goods. Indonesia
also committed to helping address global steel
overcapacity—a move that could be extended to nickel
and copper under a future critical minerals deal.
The joint statement left the impression that
Indonesia might relax its export bans on raw
minerals. Yet, Indonesian officials quickly clarified
that the bans would remain in place. 7 The United
States lacks the midstream capacity to process raw
minerals from Indonesia. However, downstreaming
is a core national policy that Indonesia does not want
to appear to be backing away from. The United States’
push for domestic production already sits uneasily
alongside any deal that expands Indonesian supply,
especially with an administration acutely sensitive to
foreign competition. Both countries want to signal
commitment to building domestic value chains. The
core issue is not the pursuit of domestic capacity
itself but ensuring fair competition between domestic
producers in both countries.
The framework agreement does not tackle the
broader question of fair competition, which includes
addressing market and price distortions. These
issues are at the center of the ongoing Section 232
investigation on critical minerals. Indonesia’s export
bans and other policies will also be considered under
this context, not to assess the United States’ potential
to source raw material but to evaluate their market-
distorting impacts.
Alignment and coordination on market and price
transparency, measures to counter price distortions,
and overcapacity are important to strengthen the
U.S.-Indonesia partnership for critical minerals. For
example, greater data sharing, not just on production
capacity but on prices and subsidies, combined
with commitments to work together to address
concerns related to market-distorting subsidies,
would be key. Such efforts, however, are also likely to
invite closer scrutiny of Indonesia’s critical mineral
operations, particularly those owned or operated
by Chinese companies. The outcome of the Section
232 investigation will shape how Washington
approaches these issues and which policy levers the
Trump administration deploys. Regardless of the
tools chosen, Indonesia’s willingness to embrace
transparency and promote fair competition—as
its already doing in the case of steel—could lay the
foundation for a more durable and mutually beneficial
partnership on critical minerals. •
4

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • OCTOBER 2025
Endnotes
1 “Unleashing American Energy, ” Executive Order 14154, Federal Register, January 29, 2025, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2025-01-29/pdf/2025-01956.pdf.
2 “Immediate Measures To Increase American Mineral Production, ” Executive Order 14241, Federal Register, March 20, 2025, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
FR-2025-03-25/pdf/2025-05212.pdf.
3 “Tinatin Akhvlediani, “Much More Than Minerals: The U.S.-Ukraine Minerals Agreement and Its Geopolitical Implications, ” CEPS, 2025, https://cdn.ceps.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2025/06/2025-06-FP-Mineral-deal-1.pdf.
4 “Peace Agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Rwanda, ” U.S. Department of State, June 27, 2025, https://www.state.gov/
peace-agreement-between-the-democratic-republic-of-the-congo-and-the-republic-of-rwanda.
5 “Joint Statement from the Quad Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Washington, ” U.S. Department of State, July 1, 2025, https://www.state.gov/releases/office-of-the-
spokesperson/2025/07/joint-statement-from-the-quad-foreign-ministers-meeting-in-washington.
6 “Joint Statement On Framework For United States–Indonesia Agreement On Reciprocal Trade, ” White House, July 22, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-
statements/2025/07/joint-statement-on-framework-for-united-states-indonesia-agreement-on-reciprocal-trade.
7 Jayanty Nada Shofa, “Indonesia to Ease Mineral Export Restriction for U.S., but Ore Sale Ban Remains, ” Jakarta Globe, July 23, 2025, https://jakartaglobe.id/
business/indonesia-to-ease-mineral-export-restriction-for-us-but-ore-sale-ban-remains.

5
