
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
U.S.-JAPAN TECHNOLOGY
AND ECONOMIC SECURITY
ACHIEVING RESILIENCE
IN AN ERA OF DISRUPTION
Edited by Jonathon Marek and Doug Strub

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
NBR Board of Advisors
William Abnett
NBR
Se Hyun Ahn
University of Seoul
Dennis C. Blair
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Ketty Chen
Taiwan Foundation for Democracy
Chun In-Bum
Lt. General, ROK Army (ret.)
Josh Corless
ConocoPhillips
Linda Distlerath
PhRMA (ret.)
Nelson Dong
Dorsey & Whitney LLP (ret.)
Nicholas Eberstadt
American Enterprise Institute
Karl Eikenberry
Former Ambassador (U.S.);
Lt. General, U.S. Army (ret.)
Bates Gill
NBR
Clara Gillispie
NBR
Stephen Hanson
College of William and Mary
Harry Harding
University of Virginia (ret.)
Mikkal Herberg
University of California San Diego
Carla A. Hills
Hills & Company
Robert Holleyman
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative
(ret.)
Mark Jones
Kingswood Capital Solutions
Amit Kapoor
India Council on Competitiveness
Tariq Karim
Former Ambassador (Bangladesh);
Independent University
Heino Klinck
U.S. Army/Department of Defense (ret.)
David Lampton
Johns Hopkins University
Stephen Lanza
Lt. General, U.S. Army (ret.)
Nicholas Lardy
Peterson Institute for International
Economics
Richard Lawless
New Magellan Ventures
William McCahill
Department of State (ret.)
Dewardric L. McNeal
Longview Global
Meredith Miller
NBR
Tami Overby
Albright Stonebridge Group
John S. Park
Harvard Kennedy School
Pamela Passman
APCO Worldwide
Rajeswari Rajagopalan
Australian Strategic Policy Institute
Evans Revere
Department of State (ret.)
Clarine Nardi Riddle
Kasowitz Benson Torres LLP
Ryo Sahashi
University of Tokyo
Ulrike Schaede
University of California San Diego
Robert Scher
BP
David Shambaugh
George Washington University
Benjamin Shobert
Optum
Mike Studeman
Rear Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Travis Sullivan
Boeing Company
Alison Szalwinski
The Asia Group
Travis Tanner
Greenpoint Group
Arzan Tarapore
Stanford University
Jessica Teets
Middlebury College
Debra Waggoner
Corning (ret.)
Dana White
Juno Collective
NBR Chairs and Counselors
Richard J. Ellings
NBR (ret.)
Thomas B. Fargo
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Aaron L. Friedberg
Princeton University
Charlene Barshefsky
U.S. Trade Representative (ret.)
Charles W . Boustany Jr.
U.S. House of Representatives (ret.)
Norman D. Dicks
U.S. House of Representatives (ret.)
Roy Kamphausen
NBR (Special Advisor)
Ashley J. Tellis
Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
NBR Board of Directors
John V . Rindlaub
(Chair)
Regional President (ret.)
Wells Fargo Asia Pacific
Ahn Ho-young
Former Ambassador (South Korea)
Richard J. Ellings
President Emeritus and Counselor
NBR (ret.)
Jonathan W . Greenert
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Charles Hooper
Senior Counselor
The Cohen Group
Quentin W . Kuhrau
(Treasurer)
Chief Executive Officer
Unico Properties LLC
Melody Meyer
President
Melody Meyer Energy LLC
Huan Nguyen
Rear Admiral (ret.), U.S. Navy;
Senior Advisor to Naval Sea
Systems Command
Long Nguyen
Chairman, President, and CEO
Pragmatics, Inc.
Kenneth B. Pyle
Professor, University of Washington
Founding President, NBR
Jonathan Roberts
Founder and Partner
Ignition Partners
Tom Robertson
Corporate Vice President and
Deputy General Counsel
Microsoft
Cynthia A. Watson
Professor and Dean Emerita
National War College
Michael Wills
President
NBR
Honorary Director
George F . Russell Jr.
Chairman Emeritus
Russell Investments

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report # 116 | february 2025
This report was produced by the National Bureau of Asian Research with support
from the United States–Japan Foundation.
u.s.-japan technology
and economic security
Achieving Resilience in an Era of Disruption
Edited by
Jonathon Marek and Doug Strub

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
the national bureau of asian research
The NBR Special Report provides access to current research on special topics conducted by
the world’s leading experts in Asian affairs. The views expressed in these reports are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of other NBR research associates or
institutions that support NBR.
The National Bureau of Asian Research helps decision-makers better understand Asia and
craft concrete, actionable policy. NBR is an independent research institution based in Seattle
and Washington, D.C. We bring world-class scholarship to bear on the evolving strategic
environment in Asia through original, policy-relevant research, and we invest in our future
by training the next generation of Asia specialists.
Our research is conducted by a global network of specialists and tackles critical issues
identified by stakeholders in anticipation of future challenges. The findings are a result
of independent scholarship and do not reflect institutional perspectives. Our rigorous
standards facilitate informed decision-making based on knowledge rather than ideology.
Established in 1989, NBR is a legacy organization of Senator Henry M. Jackson, who foresaw
the national need for an institution to study and inform public policy on Asia in both the
public and private sectors. Building on Senator Jackson’s bipartisan approach, NBR engages
policymakers looking for reliable Asia expertise through sustained interaction in high-trust,
nonpartisan settings. Our experts and research have shaped congressional legislation and
administration policies, brought issues to the top of the U.S. foreign policy agenda, and
attracted worldwide media attention. We mobilize expertise on Asia for a more effective
foreign policy.
NBR receives support from foundations, corporations, government (including foreign
governments of allies and liberal democracies), and public agencies, and philanthropic
individuals. NBR reserves the right to publish findings. We do not undertake classified or
proprietary research work, and we observe policies to avoid conflicts of interest.
To download issues of the NBR Special Report, please visit the NBR website
http://www.nbr.org.
This report may be reproduced for personal use. Otherwise, the NBR Special Report may
not be reproduced in full without the written permission of NBR. When information from
NBR publications is cited or quoted, please cite the author and The National Bureau of
Asian Research.
This is the one-hundred-and-sixteenth NBR Special Report.
NBR is a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation under I.R.C. Sec. 501(c)(3), qualified to receive
tax-exempt contributions.
© 2025 by The National Bureau of Asian Research.
For further information about NBR, contact:
The National Bureau of Asian Research
One Union Square
600 University Street, Suite 1012
Seattle, Washington 98101
206-632-7370 Phone
nbr@nbr.org E-mail
http://www.nbr.org

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
u.s.-japan technology
and economic security
Achieving Resilience in an Era of Disruption
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 1
 Achieving Resilience in an Era of Disruption
Saori N. Katada
 11
 Japan’s Approach to Resilience and Economic Security
Yuichi Hosoya
 21
 The United States’ New Search for Economic Resilience
Michael Beeman
 33
 The Strategic Role of Japan’s Development Finance under the New Dimension
of Digital Infrastructure
Hiroyuki Suzuki
 45
 Japan’s Cybersecurity Resilience Efforts in Collaboration with the United States
Mihoko Matsubara
 55
 Countering Economic Coercion
Mariko Togashi
nbr special report #116 | february 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
1
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #116 | february 2025
SAORI N. KATADA is Professor of International Relations at the University of Southern
California and the Director of the Center for International Studies. She is the author
of Japan’s New Regional Reality: Geoeconomic Strategy in the Asia-Pacific (2020). She
can be reached at <skatada@usc.edu>.
Achieving Resilience
in an Era of Disruption
Saori N. Katada

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
3
ACHIEVING RESILIENCE IN AN ERA OF DISRUPTION u KATADA
T
 he belief in the benefits of economic interdependence and the prospects of commercial
peace based on free trade have receded over the course of the last decade. Now,
policymakers’ attention is focused on weaponization of economic interdependence
and business disruption, and a future is coming into view where advanced and critical
technology become the sources of major national security threats and geopolitical conflicts. In
the 2020s, the concerns over “economic resilience” and “economic security” have become the
centerpieces of international economic relations, under which governments focus on protection
of their countries’ supply chains and critical infrastructure and work to secure leadership in
technological competition around the world.
States encounter challenges in multiple aspects of economic resilience. One prominent
manifestation comes in the form of supply chain disruptions and how to protect the economy from
associated costs. In this context, economic coercion by weaponizing other countries’ supply chain
dependence has become a brazen tactic. Advances of digital technology and artificial intelligence
(AI) in recent years have also led to an expanded set of dual-use technologies, increasingly blurring
economic and security issues and introducing new challenges to economic resilience. Establishing
and securing dominance in advanced technologies will be essential for maintaining leadership in
the global economy, while defending the national economy from abuses of these technologies such
as cyberattacks has also become a vital component of economic security.
These developments in the area of economic security have made U.S.-Japan technological
and economic cooperation ever more vital to the bilateral relationship and the region as a whole.
The two long-standing security allies both possess advanced technology ecosystems. They have
worked on these challenges independently and occasionally in collaboration for some time as they
both view China’s actions with alarm. Although some aspects of their strategies toward economic
resilience diverge, the common aim is focused on countering these threats without wrecking
global economic activities, which has allowed both economies to thrive for the last seven decades.
This introductory essay first examines the growing risk to economic resilience and the measures
being taken to tackle economic coercion. It then considers the role of digital technology and
cybersecurity as they become critical features of economic security. The third section covers U.S.-
Japan cooperation on collective resilience and the challenges the two countries face in achieving
this objective. This introduction concludes with short synopses of the five essays in this report.
The Growing Risk of Supply Chain Disruptions and
Economic Coercion
Economic interdependence stemming from cross-border trade and investment provides
countless benefits—from access to affordable goods to efficient international production
networks—but also exposes economies to dependency and makes them vulnerable to disruption.
While the sources of disruption could be natural disasters such as the Covid-19 pandemic, wars, or
major accidents, especially in key shipping routes (such as the Suez or Panama Canals), disruptions
can also be intentionally deployed by major powers to achieve certain political objectives. The
latter kind of disruption, called “weaponization” of interdependence, involves the use of coercive
economic tools ranging from sanctions to boycotts. After China rose to become a central node
of trade and investment, the Chinese government began to use these tactics to achieve its foreign
policy goals, as was demonstrated more than a decade ago with its 2010 rare earth elements

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
4
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
embargo against Japan. As the international trade regime based in the World Trade Organization
has suffered from paralysis, stakeholders must seek alternative ways to guard against economic
disruption and ensure the resilience of global economic activities.
In 2020 the world experienced an unimaginable disruption of supply chains for several months
during the Covid-19 pandemic. Soon thereafter, multiple political uncertainties followed, ranging
from wars to canal and port shutdowns, reminding every government and business alike how
vital it is to maintain supply chain “resilience.” 1 As the governments of advanced economies
develop their strategies, efforts to achieve economic resilience incorporate not only the short-term
defensive objective of cultivating alternative sources for production but also long-term goals such
as maintaining technological autonomy and denying potential adversaries’ future dominance to
reduce the number of possible threats.
One of the steps to beef up supply chain resilience is to diversify the location of production
and thereby increase the number of import sources. From reshoring to friendshoring or ally-
shoring, the U.S. and Japanese governments—along with other like-minded partners—began to
advocate relocating production facilities and import sources away from China-centric networks. 2
At the same time, with the increasing frequency and visibility of economic coercion (discussed in
detail in the essay by Mariko Togashi), multilateral forums among the industrialized economies,
including the G-7 and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), began
in recent years to share information between governments and develop collective policies to deter
and counter economic coercion with the aim to increase the perceived costs of such behavior.
High Fences in Support of Digital Technology and Fending Off
Cybersecurity Risks
Digital technology has brought tremendous benefits and considerable risks for the world. It has
provided the foundational infrastructure for a thriving digital economy, enhancing efficiency and
expanding commercial opportunities. However, these developments have exposed both economic
and national security vulnerabilities through challenges to cybersecurity and attacks on critical
infrastructure, both actual and potential (discussed in Mihoko Matsubara’s essay). Furthermore,
cutting-edge technology with dual-use civilian and military applications, such as generative AI
and quantum computing, has blurred the line between preparations for peacetime and war.
As it has become imperative for the United States to gain dominance in such sensitive and
critical technologies, the Biden administration’s national security advisor Jake Sullivan used the
phrase “small yard and high fence” to describe how the United States seeks to protect foundational
 1 The 2022 Economic Report of the President defines “resilience” as “the ability of supply chains to recover quickly from unexpected events. ”
The White House later outlined in a briefing note in November 2023 that “resilience can be achieved through better data on the structure
of supply chains, investments in redundancy, greater ability to substitute between inputs, and improved communication across the supply
chain. ” Further discussion of how the U.S. and Japanese governments define “resilience” occurs in the first two essays. See White House,
Economic Report of the President (Washington, D.C., April 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/ERP-2022.
pdf; and White House, “Issue Brief: Supply Chain Resilience, ” Issue Brief, November 30, 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-
materials/2023/11/30/issue-brief-supply-chain-resilience.
 2 Reshoring policy is defined as “the deliberate government policies to bring manufacturing from abroad to home country. ” Some use
“backshoring, ” “onshoring, ” or “inshoring” as equivalent to reshoring. See Saori N. Katada, Ji Hye Lim, and Ming Wan, “Reshoring
from China: Comparing the Economic Statecraft of Japan and South Korea, ” Pacific Review 36, no. 5 (2023). For further discussion of
friendshoring, see “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Y ellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy, ” U.S. Department of the
Treasury, Press Release, April 13, 2022, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0714.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
5
ACHIEVING RESILIENCE IN AN ERA OF DISRUPTION u KATADA
technologies such as semiconductors and usher in the waves of digital revolution.3 Meanwhile, both
the U.S. and Japanese governments are implementing measures to improve cybersecurity, protect
critical infrastructure, and strengthen economic resilience, while also developing regulations and
guidelines for the safe and ethical use of generative AI (see Hiroyuki Suzuki’s essay in this report).
U.S.-Japan Cooperation toward “Collective Resilience”
Whether intentionally deployed as a tool of weaponization or resulting from uncontrollable
factors like the Covid-19 pandemic, the world has recently experienced significant consequences
arising from economies’ overdependence on single points of origin for critical products and
inputs. Many such points are concentrated in China following its rapid growth as a manufacturing
and export hub. Furthermore, China’s technological advancement in recent decades has led to
potential and real threats encompassing military application of dual-use technology and other
disruptive capabilities in the form of economic coercion or cyber threats. Facing this challenge,
the United States began calling for decoupling from China during the first Trump administration,
especially with the imposition of tariffs on multiple sets of imported goods primarily from
China from 2018. These tariffs aimed to protect manufacturing jobs and industries in the United
States, pursue national security goals, push China toward adopting market reforms and stronger
intellectual property protections, and shrink the U.S. trade deficit with China. 4 During these
years, a primary tactic used by Japan, as one of the early targets of China’s economic coercion
in 2010, was to promote a China-plus-one strategy under which the government encouraged
businesses to diversify their sources of imports and destinations of investments. 5 The Covid-19
pandemic intensified the disruptions and coercive behavior by China. Beijing banned Australian
exports such as wine, barley, and beef to protest the Australian government’s request for further
investigation into the origins of the virus in China. All these developments further heightened
concerns of supply chain disruptions throughout 2020.
After being inaugurated in January 2021, President Joe Biden advocated an agenda of
“foreign policy for the middle class.” 6 The foreign economic policy of the Biden administration
has followed the path of the Trump era based on bipartisan support for an anti-China posture
(see Michael Beeman’s essay in this report), including by abandoning trade agreements and
maintaining tariffs against China. When it comes to the U.S. posture toward its allies and “like-
minded” countries in the efforts toward supply chain resilience, however, President Biden opened
 3 “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on Renewing American Economic Leadership at the Brookings Institution, ” White
House, April 27, 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/04/27/remarks-by-national-security-advisor-
jake-sullivan-on-renewing-american-economic-leadership-at-the-brookings-institution.
 4 A part of this came from an influential article estimating that more than two million American jobs were lost due to the sizable increase in
Chinese imports into the United States between 1999 and 2011. See David Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Shock:
Learning from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade, ” Annual Review of Economics 8, no. 1 (2016): 205–40.
 5 Keisuke Iida, “Political Risks and Japanese Foreign Direct Investment in East Asia: A Case Study of ‘China-Plus-One, ’ ” Korean Journal of
International Studies 13, no. 2 (2015): 383–410.
 6 “Remarks by President Biden on America’s Place in the World, ” White House, February 4, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
speeches-remarks/2021/02/04/remarks-by-president-biden-on-americas-place-in-the-world.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
6
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
a new page of “collective resilience.” 7 His economic team called for supply chain resilience from
the early phase of his presidency with the executive order on February 24, 2021, to evaluate U.S.
supply chains. 8 From that time, the Biden administration emphasized “collective” efforts toward
supply chain resilience.
The U.S. visit by Japan’s then prime minister Yoshihide Suga in April 2021 was an important
event that demonstrated how the Biden administration would work to build collective resilience
with its allies, as the two leaders agreed to launch the Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe)
Partnership. 9 The U.S. and Japanese governments committed to expand and renew their
countries’ partnership in critical technologies such as secure and open 5G+ networks, public
health, and green growth, among other areas. Following this major step, bilateral collaboration
has continued in a wide range of technological, infrastructural, and economic projects covered
across this report’s essays. First, on critical digital technology and infrastructure, the U.S. and
Japanese governments have agreed to support the development of Open RAN (radio access
network) to establish a new network ecosystem beyond 5G with a $4.5 billion co-investment. 10
Second, the U.S. and Japanese governments signed a critical minerals agreement in March
2023 with the aim to have the five minerals (cobalt, graphite, lithium, manganese, and nickel)
exported from Japan used to produce electric vehicles (EVs), which will be covered under EV
subsidies of the Biden administration’s Inflation Reduction Act, enacted in August 2022. 11 Third,
as a way to revitalize semiconductor production, the United States and Japan agreed on the Basic
Principles on Semiconductor Cooperation in May 2022. To coordinate these activities, the two
governments established a new bilateral policy coordination forum called the Economic Policy
Consultative Committee (consisting of economic ministers and foreign ministers, dubbed as the
Economic 2+2). At its first meeting in July 2022, the two parties agreed to participate in joint
research in key technologies such as advanced semiconductors and to work together to secure
sources of critical minerals.
Japan’s active engagement helped foster these bilateral initiatives. As a trade- and energy-
dependent economy, Japan has long been familiar with the notion of economic security (see
Yuichi Hosoya’s essay). Particularly since the 2010s, Japanese political leaders have been at the
forefront of tackling related issues. In the mid-2010s, the Abe government promoted the “free
and open Indo-Pacific” (FOIP) framework that emphasizes the rules-based order for the global
economy. The Diet Members Caucus for Rule Formation Strategy, chaired by former Trans-Pacific
Partnership negotiator Akira Amari, was established within the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)
in 2017 to tackle multiple economic security concerns, ranging from next-generation technology
to cybersecurity. A set of LDP recommendations was later published in December 2020 in support
 7 The term “collective resilience” was coined by Brad Glosserman and Eric Sayers in August 2020 and advanced widely by Victor Cha in
two articles published in 2023. See Brad Glosserman and Eric Sayers, “ ‘Collective Resilience’ Is the Way to Address China Challenge, ”
Japan Times, August 14, 2020, https://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion-2020/08/14/commentary/world-commentary/collective-resilience-
way-address-china-challenge; Victor D. Cha, “Collective Resilience: Deterring China’s Weaponization of Economic Interdependence, ”
International Security 48, no.1 (2023): 91–124; and Victor Cha, “How to Stop Chinese Coercion: The Case for Collective Resilience, ” Foreign
Affairs, January/February 2023.
 8 White House, “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains, ” Press Release, February 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
presidential-actions/2021/02/24/executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains.
 9 “U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), 2021, https://www.mofa.go.jp/
files/100177722.pdf.
 10 “U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership, ” White House, Fact Sheet, April 16, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/04/16/fact-sheet-u-s-japan-competitiveness-and-resilience-core-partnership.
 11 Kyla H. Kitamura, “U.S.-Japan Critical Minerals Agreement, ” Congressional Research Service, In Focus, May 20, 2024, https://crsreports.
congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12517.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
7
ACHIEVING RESILIENCE IN AN ERA OF DISRUPTION u KATADA
of setting up Japan’s economic security strategy. 12 Finally, the Kishida administration (October
2021–September 2024) took the last steps in formalizing the Japanese government’s policy
structure in support of its economic security priorities by drafting and passing the Economic
Security Promotion Act (ESPA). Under Prime Minister Kishida, the government also established
an economic security minister and upgraded the Economic Security Promotion Headquarters, as
well as installing these functions/bureaus within the Foreign and Economic Ministries.
The U.S.-Japan partnership has become the core of the fight to minimize supply chain
disruption and deter economic coercion. Capitalizing on the existing FOIP framework and the
Quad grouping, the two governments made the issue of supply chain resilience one of the pillars of
the first post-pandemic in-person Quad summit in September 2021. 13 The two governments have
also expanded their partnership to other countries from South Korea to Europe. Furthermore,
U.S.-Japan collaboration served as a key driver that led to the achievements of the G-7 Hiroshima
Summit in May 2023, when the leaders agreed on and announced the “G7 Leaders’ Statement
on Economic Resilience and Economic Security.” In its preamble, the leaders “affirm that our
cooperation to strengthen economic resilience and economic security will be rooted in maintaining
and improving a well-functioning international rules-based system,” and the statement identifies
seven priority areas to cover to achieve these goals.14 On the counter-economic coercion front, G-7
members at the Hiroshima Summit launched the Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion
to demonstrate solidarity against such actions (see Togashi’s essay for further discussion).15
The Future of U.S.-Japan Cooperation in Support of
Collective Resilience
U.S.-Japan cooperation on collective resilience has come a long way in a relatively short period
in the 2020s. The two countries have profound common interests in boosting economic and
technological resilience and supporting the rules-based order. Nonetheless, their ultimate goals
and associated concerns are not fully aligned. Especially with the beginning of the second Trump
administration, the following three areas will be likely points of discord.
First and most importantly, the U.S. government is unified in its belief that China is the largest
source of economic uncertainty and the primary risk to enhancing resilience. Since the first
Trump administration, U.S. export control policies have not shied away from explicitly calling
for reducing ties with China on national security grounds. 16 Meanwhile, the Japanese government
(and many other Asian and European leaders, for that matter) do not identify, at least not explicitly,
China as the ultimate or the only perpetrator of supply chain disruption. For Japan, decoupling
from China or explicitly targeting it for export controls not only is undesirable but also could be
 12 Liberal Democratic Party, “Teigen: Keizai anzen hosho senryaku sakutei ni mukete” [Proposal: Toward Establishing Economic Security
Policies], December 22, 202, https://www.jimin.jp/news/policy/201021.html.
 13 “Joint Statement from Quad Leaders, ” White House, September 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/24/joint-statement-from-quad-leaders.
 14 “G7 Hiroshima Summit: Session 5 Economic Resilience and Economic Security, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), Overview, May 20,
2023, https://www.mofa.go.jp/ecm/ec/page1e_000686.html.
 15 The G-7 statement further pledges to “use early warning and rapid information sharing, regularly consult each other, collaboratively assess
situations, explore coordinated responses, deter and, where appropriate, counter economic coercion, in accordance with our respective
legal systems. ” See “G7 Leaders’ Statement on Economic Resilience and Economic Security, ” White House, May 20, 2023, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/05/20/g7-leaders-statement-on-economic-resilience-and-economic-security.
 16 “China—Country Commercial Guide, ” International Trade Administration, updated April 28, 2023, https://www.trade.gov/country-
commercial-guides/china-us-export-controls.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
8
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
economically damaging. Japan’s industries are deeply integrated into those in China—a pattern
that is repeated across Asian economies. Since the hawkish U.S. stance toward China is unlikely
to change between the Biden and Trump administrations, this challenge is likely to continue and
even intensify between the United States and Japan.
Second, although collective resilience makes sense to the participating like-minded members to
achieve higher stability and economic resilience, a coordinated, policy-driven collective approach
is proving very difficult to achieve. The proposed Chip 4 Alliance is a case in point. The U.S.
government’s attempts to entice the major semiconductor-producing economies of Japan, Taiwan,
and South Korea to create an “alliance” with the United States against China in the “chip war”
did not fly well with these governments and their businesses. 17 Although the Kishida government
agreed in September 2023 to stop exporting advanced chipmaking machines to China, the U.S.
intention to cut China totally out of high-end semiconductor markets and not to allow others
to do business with it is a difficult sell in Asia, as is the United States’ hard security narrative of
containment. With the return of President Donald Trump, who is known to be a unilateralist, the
collective strategy and cooperation among allies will become even murkier (see Michael Breeman’s
essay for further discussion).
Third, domestic politics and the protectionist focus of the U.S. economic security strategy also
target Japan’s economic interest. Although the Biden administration called for stronger collaboration
with Japan along with other like-minded countries, it is clear that such calls face limitations. The
U.S. government’s heightened and tightened export control and investment screening provisions in
critical sectors in recent years have carried negative consequences for Japanese business investment
in the country. The blocking of Nippon Steel’s proposed acquisition of U.S. Steel has demonstrated
that domestic political priorities play a key role in this complex relationship, and there is a fine
line between economic security for the sake of global economic resilience and for domestic
protectionism. With promises of imposing high tariffs on all items coming into the U.S. market,
many expect President Trump to implement an “America first” economic policy and intensify
protectionism. Furthermore, if the first Trump administration provides any indication as to how
the second Trump administration will behave, national security considerations will cast a much
larger shadow on U.S. trade and investment policies across the board.
Achieving Resilience in an Era of Disruption:
The United States and Japan
The five essays that follow this introduction examine various aspects of economic resilience
and the challenges to economic and national security. As the world faces fundamental and rapidly
expanding challenges to economic resilience, the United States and Japan, along with other
connected economies, have taken measures in response. Although the priorities and strategies
vary, the United States and Japan are the principal actors in addressing economic resilience
and economic security for the region and the world. The authors highlight the importance of
cooperation and coordination in tackling threats and uncertainty by more fully involving both
domestic and international players—especially private-sector industrial partners.
 17 Arjun Gargeyas, “The Chip 4 Alliance Might Work on Paper, but Problems Will Persist, ” Diplomat, August 25, 2022, https://thediplomat.
com/2022/08/the-chip4-alliance-might-work-on-paper-but-problems-will-persist.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
9
ACHIEVING RESILIENCE IN AN ERA OF DISRUPTION u KATADA
In the first essay, Yuichi Hosoya focuses on Japan’s recent approach to economic resilience,
particularly in the face of economic security challenges. With its history of considering economic
security as a part of comprehensive national security, the Japanese government was an early initiator
of economic security strategy from the 2010s through now. As a national initiative, the Kishida
government prioritized economic security in its National Security Strategy along with the passage
and implementation of the ESPA. Meanwhile, the U.S. and Japanese governments have collaborated
closely on economic security policies and institutionalized their cooperation through the CoRe
Partnership and Economic 2+2. Finally, the Kishida government spearheaded cooperation among
like-minded countries toward economic resilience and economic security through the 2023 G-7
Hiroshima Summit. Despite these visible achievements, Hosoya argues that Japan’s economic
security strategy needs further clarification as the government implements policy measures that
tend to be more defensive. Fundamentally, economic security constitutes an integral component
of Japan’s national security, and the Japanese government will continue to work closely with its
partners to enhance the rules-based international order in support of economic resilience.
The second essay by Michael Beeman discusses the U.S. approach, which invokes both national
security and economic resilience. The United States, which had long been the guardian and the
leader of the postwar rules-based trading system in support of market opening and peaceful
interdependence, began to change course in the 2010s in the face of economic security challenges,
especially with the rise of Chinese technological and industrial power. As Beeman explains, the
United States’ pursuit of economic resilience centers on two objectives: protection of leading
and critical U.S. technologies, and the bolstering of domestic industrial production and supply
chain diversification goals. For the first objective, accelerating protection and development of
foundational technologies such as semiconductors and AI has become a critical feature of the U.S.
“small yard and high fence” economic security strategy. Meanwhile, new industrial policy and
reshoring/friendshoring constitute the core of the production resilience objective. The passage of
legislation, coupled with significant fiscal commitments through the CHIPS and Science Act and
the Inflation Reduction Act (both passed in 2022), incentivizes domestic production and reshoring
of critical items such as semiconductors, solar panels, and EVs with tax incentives and subsidies.
Beeman argues, nonetheless, that these policy choices are tied to the United States’ domestically
driven agendas, and the America-first Trump administration is likely to take even more assertive
strategies toward derisking and decoupling in its second term.
In the third essay, Hiroyuki Suzuki shifts the focus of the report to digital infrastructure, digital
competition among global companies, and challenges of digital transformation (DX), especially
regarding support for the development of digital infrastructure in the global South. Against the
backdrop of China’s Digital Silk Road under the Belt and Road Initiative, the race in the area
of digital technology and connectivity will continue to intensify. Supported by the country’s
traditional strength in development finance, the Japanese government has worked with its partners
to foster resilient digital infrastructure throughout the global South and beyond. One example
identified by Suzuki is Japan’s collaboration with the United States and Australia in support of stable
telecommunication infrastructure in the South Pacific. Moreover, the Japanese government took
the lead in launching the G-7 Digital and Technology Ministerial Meeting at the 2023 Hiroshima
Summit. The essay concludes by examining three challenging areas for Japan’s new digital
infrastructure strategy. The first is the geopolitical risks in the Indo-Pacific. As demonstrated by the
disruption of undersea cable networks in the South Pacific, the digital infrastructure that sustains

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
10
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
telecommunication, digital, and commercial activities is vulnerable. The second challenge is the
convergence of the digital transformation with the green transformation (GX). With the significant
electricity needs that data centers demand straining the economies of developing countries in the
global South, the fusion of GX and DX is vital. Third, with the rapid development of generative
AI, the world faces challenges in establishing digital governance and infrastructure standards.
Here, Suzuki argues that both multilateral efforts such as the establishment of Blue Dot Network
certification and the engagement of the private sector will be fundamentally important.
As the expansion of the digital economy becomes the global norm, cybersecurity is becoming
a major pillar of economic and national security for many countries. In the fourth essay, Mihoko
Matsubara discusses how cyberattacks and information operations have become a central part of
hybrid warfare, which has intensified since the 2022 outbreak of the war on Ukraine. In addition,
China-based Volt Typhoon has launched cyberattacks on U.S. critical infrastructure and attempted
to access sensitive data for the last few years. Against Japan, the 2023 ransomware attack on the
Port of Nagoya led to the stoppage of the port for two days, resulting in cascading effects and
supply chain disruptions. These cyber threats have driven both the U.S. and Japanese governments
to strengthen their respective cybersecurity measures. Such efforts are in the front and center
of Japan’s ESPA, which designates 210 companies across fifteen essential infrastructure service
sectors (ranging from electric power to financial institutions to ports) to be managed by multiple
layers of regulations against potential risks of disruption. Furthermore, the 2022 National Security
Strategy document includes a new mandate for active cyberdefense, including building capabilities
to neutralize potential cyberattacks against Japan. On the global level, Japan became a member of
the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence and cooperates closely with various
entities, including Europol, to tackle the cyber and ransomware challenges. Matsubara identifies
that the future steps to address cyber threats require close cooperation with industry partners in
the private sector. As such, public-private partnership through a collaborative framework will be
needed to enhance cybersecurity resilience.
In the report’s final essay, Mariko Togashi focuses on economic security measures to counter
economic coercion. The use of coercive measures has increased significantly since the mid-2010s,
when China began deploying them to achieve its foreign policy goals. Deterring such economic
coercion, whether through denial or punishment, would change the adversary’s cost calculation.
Japan has opted to resort to a denial-based strategy ever since its economy first encountered such
overt coercion by China in the form of a ban on the export of rare earth minerals during a 2010
incident around the Senkaku Islands. By reducing its dependency on China for rare earth minerals,
Japan has been able to reduce China’s coercive abilities since the incident. Working in cooperation
with others to build resilient supply chains for all essential products is a vital aspect of Japan’s
denial strategy. Along with domestic legislation in support of supply chain resilience (ESPA),
Japan has worked to establish multiple forums for countering economic coercion collectively
through U.S.-Japan bilateral cooperation (the Economic 2+2); trilateral agreements among the
United States, Japan, and South Korea; the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity; and
the G-7 coordination platform. Togashi concludes by emphasizing the importance of U.S.-Japan
leadership in working with like-minded countries to reduce supply chain vulnerabilities and to
collectively tackle economic coercion. Institutionalization of these efforts both domestically and
internationally will be essential so that multilateral arrangements persist in the face of changing
national leadership.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
11
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #116 | february 2025
YUICHI HOSOYA is a Professor of International Relations at Keio University. He can
be reached at <hosoya@keio.jp>.
Japan’s Approach to Resilience
and Economic Security
Yuichi Hosoya

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This essay argues that Japan’s recent approach to resilience and economic security is closely
linked to its diplomatic strategy for enhancing the free and open international order based
on the rule of law, which has led to renewed U.S.-Japan cooperation.
MAIN ARGUMENT
Amid increased U.S.-China rivalry and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the impacts of great-
power competition on economic interdependence have prompted Japan to pursue economic
security through enhancing its self-reliance and technological leadership. Under Prime
Minister Fumio Kishida, Japan placed economic security as a top policy priority, with key
measures including the appointment of the first minister of state for economic security and
the establishment of the Council for the Promotion of Economic Security, which produced
the Economic Security Promotion Act. Kishida’s advancement of economic security
policy built on the 2022 National Security Strategy, which tied the purpose of economic
security to ensuring Japan’s national security interests. The aforementioned changes in
the international environment have also led to renewed U.S.-Japan cooperation, which has
prioritized economic security, particularly a de-risking strategy toward China, as a central
component of the partnership. This strengthened cooperation has resulted in the U.S.-
Japan Competitiveness and Resilience Partnership and the Japan-U.S. Economic Policy
Consultative Committee.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• Japan’s economic security strategy is still ambiguous on several key parts. The Japanese
government should pass additional legislation to clarify Japan’s definition of economic
security and other concrete policy measures.
• More proactive measures should be taken to maximize the impact of Japan’s economic
security policies, which have traditionally relied on defensive measures.
• The Japanese government should increase cooperation between the government and
the private sector, including through additional regulatory steps and direct engagement
between government and private-sector stakeholders, in order to strengthen the
effectiveness of its economic security strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
13
JAPAN’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE AND ECONOMIC SECURITY u HOSOYA
I
n his first policy speech at the National Diet in October 2021, Prime Minister Fumio Kishida
talked about his vision for Japan’s growth. His growth strategy consisted of four pillars, and the
third one was “economic security.” According to his explanation, under this pillar Japan would
seek to advance its efforts to secure strategic goods and materials, prevent outflows of technology,
and achieve an autonomous economic structure.1 Prime Minister Kishida declared that, based on
the framework indicated above, “we will build a resilient supply chain and draw up legislative bills
that promote Japan’s economic security.” To attain this goal, he appointed Takayuki Kobayashi, a
young and talented Diet member of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), as the first minister
of state for economic security on October 4, 2021. This made Japan a leader in defining economic
security. To implement this vision, Kishida’s cabinet established the Council for the Promotion of
Economic Security soon after he became prime minister.
In November 2021 the Council for the Promotion of Economic Security held its first meeting
and presented three key objectives: “(i) increasing self-reliance, (ii) securing an advantage and
indispensability, and (iii) maintaining and strengthening the international order based on basic
values and the rule of law.” 2 Within months, it was clear to the expert community that Prime
Minister Kishida placed economic security at the center of his policy agenda. 3 After seven months
of intensive preparation within the Council for the Promotion of Economic Security, with Prime
Minister Kishida himself and Economic Security Minister Kobayashi playing key roles, Kishida’s
cabinet presented the draft Economic Security Promotion Act (ESPA), which was subsequently
enacted by the National Diet on May 18, 2022. The purpose of the ESPA is to promote economic
security by establishing systems to ensure the stable supply of specified critical products and
essential infrastructure services, while also safeguarding designated critical technologies
and intellectual property. It also acknowledges the increased complexity of the international
geopolitical environment and calls for measures to prevent economic activity that could harm the
security of the nation and its citizens. 4
The ESPA has four important pillars at its core: (1) ensuring resilient supply chains for
strategically critical industries, (2) protecting critical infrastructure from disruption, (3)
promoting and funding R&D for critical technologies and encouraging public-private cooperation
in their development, and (4) establishing a secret program for patents related to national security
(the first of its kind in Japan). 5 The four pillars address both the “promote” side and the “protect”
side of Japan’s economic security strategy, with the first, second, and fourth pillars relating mainly
to the former, while the third pillar relates primarily to the latter. 6
In sum, this legislation seeks to strengthen Japan’s ability to combat economic coercion by
enhancing its “strategic autonomy” and pursuing “strategic indispensability.” One aspect of this
vision is to continue developing and advancing key Japanese technologies on which countries and
 1 “Policy Speech by Prime Minister Kishida Fumio to the 205th Session of the Diet, ” Prime Minister’s Office of Japan, October 8, 2021, https://
japan.kantei.go.jp/100_kishida/statement/202110/_00005.html.
 2 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (Japan), White Paper on International Economy and Trade 2023 (Tokyo, 2023), 205, https://www.
meti.go.jp/english/report/data/wp2023/pdf/2-1-2.pdf.
 3 Kazuto Suzuki, “Inching Toward Economic Security: Kishida Cabinet to Focus on Defensive Tools, ” Nippon.com, February 9, 2022, https://
www.nippon.com/en/in-depth/a07901.
 4 A translation of the ESPA is available at https://www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/en/laws/view/4523/en.
 5 Cabinet Office (Japan), “Outline of the Economic Security Promoting Act, ” trans. Japanese Law Translation, https://www.
japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/outline/75/905R403.pdf. For further discussion of the Japanese government’s efforts to promote resilient
critical infrastructure through improved cybersecurity, see Mihoko Matsubara’s essay in this report.
 6 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (Japan), White Paper on International Economy and Trade 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
14
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
industries around the world depend. 7 “Strategic autonomy” and “strategic indispensability” are
generally regarded as the two key concepts that describe the features of Japan’s economic security
strategy. On the one hand, “strategic autonomy” means strengthening the foundations necessary
to maintain Japan’s social and economic activities while avoiding excessive dependence on other
countries.8 On the other hand, “strategic indispensability” means maintaining, strengthening,
and expanding the areas where Japan is considered irreplaceable by the international community.9
Japan must defend its own national interests based on these two concepts at a time when economic
security is becoming one of the core issues of great-power competition.
Many experts have noted that Japan was a first mover among major advanced economies
to draft and implement economic security legislation. 10 Mireya Solís, for example, has argued
that “the deterioration of Sino-American relations, the growing weaponization of economic
interdependence, and production dislocation amid the pandemic have given rise to a new track of
economic security.”11 From this perspective, the enactment of the ESPA is Japan’s response to the
expansion of U.S.-China strategic competition.
However, economic statecraft has always been at the center of postwar Japan’s foreign policy. 12
Given the constraints on military activity mandated by Article 9 of the country’s constitution, it
has been necessary for Japan as a pacifist power to rely mainly on economic measures in pursuing
its national interest. This economic-focused approach to foreign policy and grand strategy is
often called the Yoshida Doctrine, after Prime Minister Shigeru Yoshida, who first proposed
an economic-focused approach to international diplomacy as early as 1950. Yoichi Funabashi, a
leading Japanese journalist, wrote a book entitled Keizai anzenhosho ron (On Economic Security)
in 1978, reflecting the concept’s early emergence into widespread policy consciousness in Japan.
Since the beginning of the country’s economic rise, spurred on by effective industrial and
technology policy in the middle of the 1970s, Japan has often been regarded as a frontrunner of
economic security policy.
While economic security has been a familiar concept for Japanese policymakers over multiple
decades, the governments of both Kishida and his predecessor, Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga,
accelerated steps to develop the modern formulation of Japan’s economic security strategies. This
essay argues that Japan’s recent approach to resilience and economic security is closely linked to its
diplomatic strategy for enhancing the free and open international order based on the rule of law.
Economic Security in Japan’s National Security Strategy
Even beyond the ESPA, economic security was at the center of Kishida’s policy agenda during
his premiership. In December 2022, his cabinet adopted the new National Security Strategy, which
emphasized the importance of economic security in a way not seen in previous strategies. It provides
 7 Kazuto Suzuki, “How Will the Economic Security Law Change Japan’s Sci-Tech Policy?” Tokyo Foundation for Policy Research, May 9,
2023, https://www.tokyofoundation.org/research/detail.php?id=943.
 8 Kazuto Suzuki, “Japan’s Economic Security and Semiconductor Industry, ” Japan Institute of International Affairs, AJISS-Commentary, no.
293, February 3, 2022, https://www.jiia.or.jp/en/ajiss_commentary/japans-economic-security-and-semiconductor-industry.html.
 9 Ibid.
 10 “Japan’s Economic Security Legislation, ” European Parliamentary Research Service, July 2023, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/
etudes/ATAG/2023/751417/EPRS_ATA(2023)751417_EN.pdf.
 11 Mireya Solís, Japan’s Quiet Leadership: Reshaping the Indo-Pacific (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2023), 143.
 12 Yuichi Hosoya, “Kokka senryaku to shite no Keizai azenhosho” [Economic Security as National Strategy], in Keizai anzenhosho to wa
nanika? [What Is Economic Security?], ed. Institute of Geoeconomics (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 2024), 41–42.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
15
JAPAN’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE AND ECONOMIC SECURITY u HOSOYA
a clear definition of the concept, stating that “economic security is to ensure Japan’s national
interests, such as peace, security, and economic prosperity, by carrying out economic measures.”13
This National Security Strategy is the second after Prime Minister Shinzo Abe initiated the
introduction of Japan’s first National Security Strategy in 2013. At that time, economic security
was not at the center of Japan’s national security debates. In April 2020, however, the Japanese
government added an economic division to the National Security Secretariat. In July 2020 the
government included the term “economic security” for the first time in its policy guideline, titled
“Basic Policy of Economic and Financial Management and Reform 2020.” The rising tensions
between the United States and China during the first Trump administration were the backdrop
against which Japan began to focus on economic security. It was therefore natural that economic
security was included in Japan’s 2022 National Security Strategy document.
As the strategy was being drafted, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was seriously damaging the
foundation of the rules-based international order. Therefore, the strategy also clearly tied the risk
of economic disruption to Japan’s core security interests, stating that “in the face of various threats
at hand through economic means, Japan will coordinate ideas on necessary economic measures
and execute these measures comprehensively, effectively and intensively to enhance Japan’s self-
reliance and to secure the advantage and indispensability concerning our technologies and
others.”14 Recognizing these threats, the strategy clearly affirms the objectives of self-reliance and
technological leadership that motivated the passage of the ESPA earlier that same year, indicating
that the objectives of the law are central to the country’s overall strategy.
Thus, the 2022 National Security Strategy incorporated economic security into the Kishida
administration’s core policy document, reflecting the importance placed on this topic since the
beginning of the administration. 15 The National Security Secretariat began to stress technological
capabilities as one of five components of “comprehensive national power,” which also includes
diplomatic capabilities, defense capabilities, economic capabilities, and intelligence capabilities.
The Kishida administration aimed to enhance Japan’s technological capabilities to increase
national power, moving beyond mere discussions of economic diplomacy to identify economic
security as an integral part of Japan’s national security strategy for the first time.
The U.S.-Japan CoRe Partnership and the Economic 2+2
The foundation of Japan’s economic security policy had already been designed by the cabinets
of Shinzo Abe and Yoshihide Suga, building off their diplomatic strategy for consolidating the
rules-based international order in the context of rising U.S.-China confrontation and Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. The Japanese government has repeatedly described these developments as
striking at the foundation of this order. To navigate U.S.-China rivalry, policies of de-risking
and friendshoring have emerged globally, which are leading to supply chain shifts and increased
cooperation and coordination among like-minded countries.16
 13 Cabinet Office (Japan), National Security Strategy of Japan (Tokyo, December 2022), https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/siryou/221216anzenhoshou/
nss-e.pdf.
 14 Ibid.
 15 Y oshiyuki Sagara, “Japan Integrated Economic Security into Its New National Security Strategy, ” Institute of Geoeconomics, December 22,
2022, https://instituteofgeoeconomics.org/en/research/2022122642919.
 16 Tsuyoshi Kawase, “The Future of a World Divided into Economic Blocs: Multilateral Trade Contributes to Economic Security, ” Discuss
Japan: Japan Foreign Policy Forum, June 12, 2023, https://www.japanpolicyforum.jp/economy/pt2023061211402313110.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
16
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
While Japan’s economic security strategy has long been connected to its vision for global order,
these changes taking place within the international system have renewed U.S.-Japan cooperation,
with the concept of economic security as a core driving factor. 17 The shared emphasis by the U.S.
and Japanese governments on resilience has made the bilateral partnership increasingly relevant.
Prime Minister Suga fully recognized this trend and pursued a stronger partnership with the
United States to support Japan’s economic security priorities. In an international environment
where the U.S.-China rivalry has continued to affect other Indo-Pacific regional players, Japan
felt a strategic imperative to enhance the Japan-U.S. alliance. In particular, Prime Minister Suga
aimed to align with the United States’ decoupling or de-risking strategy toward China. With the
global supply chain undergoing a significant realignment, it was necessary to coordinate policies
relating to resilience and economic security.
When Prime Minister Suga visited Washington, D.C., on April 16, 2021, to meet President Joe
Biden, according to the official readout of the meeting, the two leaders “noted their shared universal
values, including freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law, and they shared the
view on strengthening the Japan-U.S. Alliance, which is the cornerstone of peace and prosperity in
the Indo-Pacific region.”18 More tangibly, they agreed to establish the U.S.-Japan Competitiveness
and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership. 19 This partnership is an important step forward to make the
bilateral relationship more relevant in the field of economic security based on the building and
strengthening of supply chains among like-minded countries.
The statement announcing the formation of the CoRe Partnership emphasized that the “new
partnership for competitiveness and innovation carries on [the] tradition [of bilateral cooperation],
focusing on scientific and technological advances.” It highlights a number of specific technological
priorities, including biotechnology, artificial intelligence, quantum information science and
technology, civil space cooperation (including the Artemis program and asteroid exploration), and
secure information and communications technology, among others. 20 While both the Japanese
and U.S. media focused on the issue of the Taiwan contingency at this summit, the agreement to
promote the CoRe Partnership was more significant in terms of the tangible impact on resilience
in the bilateral relationship. The CoRe Partnership also aims to enhance cooperation in the fields
of the digital economy, the Open Radio Access Network, cybersecurity and critical infrastructure
resilience, science and technology, civil space, international standards, export controls, and supply
chain resilience, among others.21 As a result, U.S.-Japan cooperation has expanded to include these
new policy areas, reflecting both countries’ heightened interest in economic and technological
resilience.
In an attempt to institutionalize the collaboration promised by the CoRe Partnership, the U.S.
and Japanese governments established a new framework for consultation in the field of economic
security. On July 29, 2022, the first meeting of the Japan-U.S. Economic Policy Consultative
 17 Shihoko Goto and Lucas Myers, “Testing the Bond of Shared Economic Security Interests, ” in “Reshaping U.S.-Japan Economic Security
Partnership in the Indo-Pacific, ” Wilson Center, 2023, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/publication/reshaping-us-japan-economic-security-
partnership-indo-pacific.
 18 “Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), April 16, 2021, https://www.mofa.go.jp/page4e_001123.html.
 19 “U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), April 16, 2021, https://www.mofa.
go.jp/files/100177722.pdf.
 20 Ibid.
 21 “The U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), Fact Sheet, May 23, 2022,
https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/files/100347255.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
17
JAPAN’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE AND ECONOMIC SECURITY u HOSOYA
Committee (the Economic “2+2”) was held in Washington, D.C. 22 The meeting was attended by
Minister for Foreign Affairs Yoshimasa Hayashi and Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry
Koichi Hagiuda, as well as Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Commerce Gina
Raimondo. Foreign Minister Hayashi stated that “the Economic 2+2, in which diplomacy, security,
and the economy are discussed as one, is a framework that responds to the demands of our time,
and that Japan and the United States intend to exercise leadership to maintain and strengthen
the free and open rules-based international economic order as well as sustainable and inclusive
economic growth.”23 Reflecting the Japanese government’s priorities, Foreign Minister Hayashi
clearly linked the issue of economic security with the “strengthening of the free and open rules-
based international economic order.” Moreover, the fact that economic issues were given equal
billing at a bilateral summit reflects the growing importance to the partnership of economic
diplomacy, which has long been central to Japan’s economic security strategy.
At this Economic 2+2, the ministers discussed four topics: (1) realizing peace and prosperity
through the rules-based economic order, (2) countering economic coercion and unfair and opaque
lending practices, (3) promoting and securing critical and emerging technologies and critical
infrastructure, and (4) strengthening supply chain resilience. On the first topic, Foreign Minister
Hayashi emphasized “the importance of Japan and the U.S. working together with like-minded
countries to maintain and develop the international order as well as to ensure the economic
security of each country, given the strong influence of economic matters on diplomacy and
security today.”24 At the end of the discussion, the four ministers “reaffirmed the need for Japan
and the U.S. to remain the greatest advocates of a free and open rules-based international economic
order.” They also “reaffirmed their determination to lead international cooperation in areas such as
economic policy of both countries, the establishment of a regional economic order…and economic
security.”25 As China has resorted to economic coercion and the so-called weaponization of
economic interdependence (discussed at length in Mariko Togashi’s essay for this report), both
the U.S. and Japanese governments have begun to reorient their foreign economic policies. China’s
closer cooperation with Russia has further sharpened the United States’ and Japan’s perception
of the limits of their cooperation with China. Thus, the start of the Economic 2+2 marked an
important turning point for their perception of the need for decoupling or de-risking with respect
to China.
The joint statement from the Economic 2+2 highlighted that cooperation between the
two countries is essential to achieve the objectives presented in the CoRe Partnership. It also
emphasized collaborating with like-minded partners and jointly working to strengthen the rules-
based economic order in the Indo-Pacific region and beyond. 26 Thus, the CoRe Partnership has
become a solid foundation establishing shared principles around economic resilience to inform
deeper cooperation in support of the rules-based economic order at a time when Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine poses a serious threat to international peace and stability.
 22 “Japan-U.S. Economic Policy Consultative Committee Meeting (the Economic ‘2+2’), ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), July 29, 2022,
https://www.mofa.go.jp/na/na2/us/page6e_000296.html.
 23 Ibid.
 24 Ibid.
 25 Ibid.
 26 “Joint Statement of the U.S.-Japan Economic Policy Consultative Committee Strengthening Economic Security and the Rules-Based Order, ”
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), July 29, 2022, https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/100376270.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
18
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
The second ministerial meeting of the Economic 2+2 was held on November 14, 2023. Yoko
Kamikawa joined the meeting as foreign minister, and Yasutoshi Nishimura joined as minister for
the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. At the outset, Foreign Minister Kamikawa pointed
out that while the international community is facing many challenges, such as the prolonged
Russian invasion of Ukraine, unstable and vulnerable supply chains, the global energy and food
crisis, and the ongoing conflict between Israel and Palestine, steady progress was being made in
cooperation between Japan and the United States as well as among like-minded countries. 27
The meeting focused on two topics: strengthening the rules-based economic order in the
Indo-Pacific region, and strengthening economic resilience, including through the promotion
and protection of critical and emerging technologies. 28 On the first topic, the U.S. and Japanese
governments agreed to strengthen the rules-based economic order in the Indo-Pacific region
by cooperating in seven areas: (1) promoting economic engagement with the Indo-Pacific, (2)
addressing nonmarket policies and practices, (3) addressing economic coercion, (4) addressing
trade restrictions not based on scientific principles or substantiated by scientific evidence, (5)
building transparent, resilient, and sustainable supply chains, (6) promoting quality infrastructure
and sustainable investment and addressing opaque lending practices, and (7) protecting personal
data and privacy.29 Both the United States and Japan became increasingly interested in deepening
their cooperation in the areas of economic security and critical and emerging technologies. As it
appeared more difficult than before to reach a compromise in either the World Trade Organization
or the G-20, cooperation among like-minded partners in these areas became essential.
In 2023, Japan held the presidency of the G-7, while the United States hosted the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) Summit. Seizing on the opportunities presented by their leadership
roles in key multilateral forums, the two governments affirmed their “continued commitment
to enhancing the rules-based international economic order and making our economies more
competitive and resilient.”30 Like the U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee (known as the
Security “2+2”), which was established in 2000, the Economic 2+2 has become an important tool
for the U.S.-Japan partnership in the field of economic security.
The G-7 Hiroshima Summit and Economic Security
The G-7 summit in Hiroshima held on May 19–21, 2023, marked an important step forward for
the advancement of cooperation among like-minded countries in the field of economic resilience
and economic security. In the communique released at the summit, the G-7 leaders agreed to
take concrete steps to “coordinate our approach to economic resilience and economic security
that is based on diversifying and deepening partnerships and de-risking, not de-coupling.” 31 In
the section “Economic Resilience and Economic Security,” they stated that “ensuring economic
resilience and economic security globally remains our best protection against the weaponization
 27 “Second Ministerial Meeting of the Japan-U.S. Economic Policy Consultative Committee (the Economic ‘2+2’), ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs
(Japan), November 14, 2023, https://www.mofa.go.jp/na/na2/us/page4e_001514.html.
 28 Ibid.
 29 “Joint Statement of the Japan-U.S. Economic Policy Consultative Committee, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), November 14, 2023,
https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/100581690.pdf.
 30 Ibid.
 31 “G7 Hiroshima Leaders’ Communique, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), May 20, 2023, https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/100506878.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
19
JAPAN’S APPROACH TO RESILIENCE AND ECONOMIC SECURITY u HOSOYA
of economic vulnerabilities.”32 Amid the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict and increased Chinese
economic coercion, the G-7 provided a foundation for cooperation among the like-minded liberal
democracies. Japan’s leadership of the summit in 2023 represented the strongest use to date of
this platform to pursue shared objectives around economic resilience. Participants also pledged
to “advance economic policies that enhance global economic resilience and economic security to
protect against systemic vulnerabilities” and to engage in dialogue and cooperation—both within
the G-7 and with partners around the world, including developing countries. 33
Session 5 of the G-7 Hiroshima Summit was devoted to economic resilience and economic
security. In the beginning of this session, Prime Minister Kishida stated that economic security
was included in the summit agenda for the first time due to the increased importance of
responding effectively and in a coordinated manner to economic security challenges. 34 The G-7
leaders affirmed that the group will be united in enhancing the resilience of supply chains and
critical infrastructure, strengthening a joint response to nonmarket policies and practices (as well
as to economic coercion), and appropriately managing critical and emerging technologies.
Recognizing that economic security is a strategic challenge that the G-7 should tackle, the
leaders pledged to closely coordinate in a holistic manner through the G-7 framework.35 They also
agreed to “enhance collaboration by launching the Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion
to increase our collective assessment, preparedness, deterrence and response to economic coercion,
and further promote cooperation with partners beyond the G-7.” 36 As China’s influence extends
into global supply chains, the G-7 countries are increasingly vulnerable to Chinese economic
coercion. Therefore, it is a logical decision for them to exhibit solidarity in their approach to
economic security and resilience.
Just as the Economic 2+2 has worked to institutionalize the principles of the U.S.-Japan CoRe
Partnership in a bilateral context, the G-7 upgraded its effort to coordinate policies by establishing
the Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion. Indeed, it is easy to see this platform as being
directly influenced by the progress of the Economic 2+2 in achieving tangible results during the
previous year, as was discussed above. The specific ways in which the platform will address these
challenges are discussed in detail in Togashi’s essay for this report.
The Way Ahead
This essay has shown how Japan has been a leading promoter of economic security among major
powers, both through its national legislation and strategy and through its bilateral and multilateral
leadership. However, the country’s economic security strategy includes many ambiguous parts,
and further clarification of concrete policy measures is needed. For example, there is still no
unified definition of economic security contained in the ESPA, which recognizes four pillars. In
addition, the National Diet enacted a new security clearance system in May 2024. Thus, additional
 32 “G7 Hiroshima Leaders’ Communique. ”
 33 Ibid.
 34 “G7 Hiroshima Summit (Session 5 Economic Resilience and Economic Security), ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), May 20, 2023,
https://www.mofa.go.jp/ecm/ec/page1e_000686.html.
 35 Ibid.
 36 “G7 Hiroshima Leaders’ Communique. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
20
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
legislation will be needed to ensure a more effective, coordinated economic security policy for
Japan.
At the same time, rooted in a postwar tradition of pacifism, Japan’s approach to economic
security relies mainly on defensive measures. To maximize the impact of its economic security
policy, however, Japan will need to adopt more proactive measures. In addition, an effective
economic security policy depends on cooperation between the government and the private sector,
which will require additional regulatory steps and direct engagement between the government
and private stakeholders.
Facing multiple challenges, Japan has taken a strategic approach to resilience and economic
security. While pursing economic security as an integral part of national security, it has also
tried to enhance the rules-based international order. At the same time, Japan needs like-minded
partners to pursue this path. Its current prime minister, Shigeru Ishiba, has pledged to base his
foreign policy on Kishida’s policy trajectories. While his political capital is expected to be limited,
continuity in the general trends identified in this essay will likely be the order of the day.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
21
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #116 | february 2025
MICHAEL BEEMAN is a former Lecturer in international policy and Visiting Scholar at
Stanford University’s Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center and is the
former Assistant U.S. Trade Representative for Japan, Korea, and APEC. He can be
reached at <profmbeeman@gmail.com>.
The United States’ New Search
for Economic Resilience
Michael Beeman

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This essay argues that the redefinition and expansion of traditional security-focused
objectives by Washington is resetting the role of the state in the economy and leading
policymakers to broadly reset U.S. international commitments in the name of economic
resilience, with dramatic implications for the rules-based international economic order.
MAIN ARGUMENT
The U.S.’s pursuit of economic resilience is transcending its traditional, narrowly defined
goal of protecting critical U.S. technologies with sweeping new efforts to protect against a
more extensive array of perceived external risks to U.S. economic security. From countering
cyberattacks to mitigating climate change to reducing dependencies on exports from
countries of concern, policymakers are reassessing the nation’s exposure to these and other
vulnerabilities and instituting new economic tools to respond to them. Bolstering economic
resilience—a new zeitgeist reflecting these broader economic security aims—has led to
reinvigorated steps to redirect an array of more traditional trade and investment decisions
in industries such as electric vehicles and solar panels toward new national economic goals.
These measures range from expanding and strengthening technology controls for U.S.
exports and foreign investments in areas such as advanced semiconductors and artificial
intelligence to the introduction of new incentives such as industrial subsidies and tariff
increases. These choices weaken the adherence of the U.S. to the rules and principles of open
and liberal trade that it once promoted and pose new challenges both for its foreign relations,
including with allies such as Japan, and for domestic and foreign businesses operating in the
U.S. and around the world.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• Washington’s newly expanding definition of economic security is redefining priority U.S.
national interests. Driven by domestic political change and new technological and global
realities, this fundamental reorientation is transforming U.S. policy choices toward
trade rules, fiscal priorities, and technological controls and incentives in the pursuit of
economic resilience.
• New U.S. policy choices are eroding U.S. support for the rules-based approach to global
trade and economic relations that Washington long championed, with major impacts on
the future of the international trading system.
• From allies and adversaries to U.S. and foreign businesses, these choices are having a
profound impact on the stability and security of the global international system that
defined the past several decades.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
23
THE UNITED STATES’ NEW SEARCH FOR ECONOMIC RESILIENCE u BEEMAN
W
hen viewed from abroad, the United States’ indigenous capacity for economic
resilience appears immense. Its outsized wealth and natural resources, capacity
for technology and innovation, flagship research universities, and vigorous
entrepreneurialism, as well as the U.S. dollar’s position as the world’s reserve
currency, are just a few of the attributes that have enabled the country to maintain its position
as the world’s largest and, arguably, most dynamic and diverse economy. It is striking, therefore,
that an American zeitgeist of concern over economic dependence on foreign goods, production,
and technologies has re-emerged in recent years, elevating economic “resilience” as a new national
policy imperative. As Washington’s decision-makers rush to reassess and reduce the United
States’ vulnerability to a range of potential foreign supply or other dependency shocks, they are
implementing new measures to “de-risk” the U.S. economy by disentangling and diversifying the
nation’s dependency on foreign production and sources of critical goods. These steps have seen
mixed success. They also are having outsized impacts on U.S. adversaries and allies alike, raising
new diplomatic challenges and carrying large implications for the United States’ commercial and
technological leadership in new industries such as artificial intelligence (AI).
This essay begins with a short review of past priorities and policies. It then summarizes
the various threads and motives underlying the United States’ push for economic resilience
and the steps Washington is taking to implement new policies to secure its own technological
and industrial future. These actions are changing the nature of its economic and commercial
relationships, including with allied countries like Japan. Some of the larger implications of these
efforts for the United States’ future international engagements are also explored.
The Evolution of the U.S. National Security State
Motivated by the strategic imperative to defend itself and the free world, the United States
developed during the Cold War a new national security apparatus that, over time, increasingly
included security-focused policies with economic components. Several of these polices remain
in place today. They include the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS)
system to review and, if necessary, limit foreign direct investment in the United States, along with
an extensive legal and regulatory export control regime to systematically monitor and restrict
exports of sensitive products and technologies with significant national security implications.
These systems serve national security as their primary objective, although certain concerns focused
on economic security also have proved to be influential in turning away foreign commercial
investment in limited cases.1
Through the Cold War and into the 1990s and early 2000s, as Washington limited access
to a narrow range of critical technologies and products for national security, it simultaneously
pursued a policy of open international trade and investment in goods and services. The United
States helped establish and then lead the postwar rules-based trading system, based on principles
of nondiscrimination and gradual market opening, to foster stable, predictable, and open
global trade. It did so for its own growth and commercial objectives, as well as to help prevent
the world from returning to pre–World War II beggar-thy-neighbor trade policies that inflamed
 1 See, for example, the case of more informal U.S. political pressure that contributed to a planned takeover of a U.S. semiconductor manufacturer
to be scrapped. David E. Sanger, “Japanese Purchase of Chip Maker Canceled after Objections in U.S., ” New York Times, March 17, 1987.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
24
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
international tensions. For 75 years following the end of global war in 1945, international trade
soared under this system as nearly every nation eventually became a member. Rules-based trade
served a range of economic security goals that recognized the benefits of peaceful interdependence
to support global growth and poverty alleviation through generally predictable opportunities for
nations to trade.
Accordingly, except for its restrictions on a narrow range of military-use technologies and goods,
Washington adopted a generally open international posture toward economic and commercial
activity. Maintaining this open approach sparked domestic political controversy at times,
especially when foreign governments and industries organized to capitalize on it to supercharge
their own export and development goals. During the 1980s, challenges posed by Japan’s targeted
policies to promote specific commercial technologies and industrial sectors contributed to the
United States’ first national reckoning with this open approach, leading policymakers to respond
to what a special MIT commission described as “a decline in U.S. industrial performance perceived
to be so serious as to threaten the nation’s economic future.”2
A generation later, China’s technological and industrial targeting and other policies, along
with its re-emergence as a strategic adversary, triggered the start of a second reckoning, ushering
in another national imperative to de-risk U.S. entanglements with China and other countries to
bolster U.S. economic security. The method and impact of China’s industrial and technological
rise have led to even greater challenges than those posed by Japan decades earlier. From the
mid-2010s into the 2020s, the United States’ renewed prioritization of economic security included
both a deepening and building out of traditional military-focused technology control efforts
alongside a broad new expansion of industrial self-reliance and other objectives pursued under the
umbrella term of “economic resilience.” The Obama administration, for example, cited resilience
as a motivation to tackle climate-related challenges alongside emerging new technological
vulnerabilities such as cybersecurity. 3 Beginning in 2017, the Trump administration took a
sharper turn to redefine, widen, and elevate U.S. economic security aims. Paramount among its
priorities was to spurn the United States’ core commitment to the open global trading system in
favor of new tariffs and other policies that prioritized industrial self-reliance and sovereignty in the
pursuit of an “America first” brand of economic security. Following the revelation of supply chain
vulnerabilities that resulted in global supply shocks for some essential goods during the Covid-19
pandemic, the Biden administration took a less confrontational but not dissimilar approach
by invoking “resilience” and “de-risking” as reasons to maintain tariffs and build out efforts to
increase U.S. industrial and technological self-reliance. The remainder of this essay focuses on
these most recent efforts and developments.
The United States’ Pursuit of Economic Resilience
Today, the United States’ pursuit of economic resilience is focused on two broad objectives. The
first is the substantial deepening of efforts to protect leading and critical U.S. technologies, both
to limit their availability for military and other national security applications by U.S. adversaries
 2 Michael L. Dertouzos, Robert M. Solow, and Richard K. Lester, Made in America: Regaining the Productive Edge (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989), ix.
 3 The Obama administration referenced the need for “resilience” when formulating new policies to secure critical infrastructure and to address
climate change. See, for example, White House, “Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience, ” Presidential Policy Directive, February 12,
2013; and White House, “Preparing the United States for the Impacts of Climate Change, ” Executive Order 13653, November 1, 2013.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
25
THE UNITED STATES’ NEW SEARCH FOR ECONOMIC RESILIENCE u BEEMAN
and to protect the U.S. technological edge in foundational technologies. These steps include
extending and expanding traditional U.S. national security state goals and tools to cover a wider
range of technologies in industries, sectors, and products subject to these controls. The second
is to bolster domestic industrial production and supply chain diversification goals. Individual
measures range widely, but they generally focus on either re-establishing or expanding industrial
capacity at home in designated sectors or reducing in other ways foreign supply chain risks and
vulnerabilities. The following subsections examine the new goals shaping economic resilience in
each of these dimensions.
Re-tooling the National Security State for Economic Resilience
The Biden administration characterized its policy as a “small yard, high fence” approach to
securing the United States’ technological resilience. 4 This branding, however, reflects little new or
revolutionary in U.S. declaratory policy around export controls. Washington’s preexisting controls
on exports, inward investment restrictions, and other policies over several decades have been used
to achieve a similar end—protecting (“high fence”) a narrow (“small yard”) set of technologies
essential for national security. Alongside this approach, U.S. policy has prioritized placing few such
limitations on businesses and individuals for ordinary commercial activity. Since the late 2010s,
however, U.S. administrations have pursued a broad expansion in these restrictions, principally in
response to concerns with China’s rapidly developing technological prowess and its implications
for U.S. technological leadership.
The shift in the U.S. approach to enhance technological resilience has been to build this “high
fence” a little taller and to make its “small yard” ever larger through adding more goods to the list
of potentially sensitive technologies. Characteristic of these efforts are the Trump administration’s
bans not only on the use in the United States of telecommunications technology (e.g., switching
equipment) made or sold by foreign companies of concern but on the export of U.S. inputs to these
firms. These steps to reduce the United States’ technological vulnerability to Chinese entities in the
commercial telecommunications sector soon after were emulated by several other governments.
Washington’s urgency to erect defenses against real and potential threats from China helped
drive a bipartisan consensus to enact new legal tools to defend against them, a remarkable feat given
deep U.S. political division on other issues during the same period. These new tools are contained
in two sweeping overhauls passed by the U.S. Congress in 2018—one to comprehensively update
and reform the United States’ export control regime (the Export Control Reform Act) and the
other to overhaul its system of foreign investment reviews and protections (the Foreign Investment
Risk Review Modernization Act). 5 Among other steps, both laws placed a higher priority on
mitigating the risks of sensitive technologies and called for the executive branch to examine and
implement controls on a broader array of dual-use goods (commercial products with technologies
that have potential defense or other national security implications). While many of these reforms
are not limited to specific countries, each new toolkit has been customized to better facilitate its
use vis-à-vis Chinese entities. Thus, China has impelled U.S. administrations to take bolder and
broader actions to strengthen the United States’ technological resilience.
 4 “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on the Biden-Harris Administration’s National Security Strategy, ” White House,
October 12, 2022.
 5 For comprehensive overviews of these legislative reforms, see “The U.S. Export Control System and the Export Control Act of 2018, ”
Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for Congress, R46814, June 7, 2021; and “Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA), ” Congressional Research Service, CRS Insight, IN10924, July 3, 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
26
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
The Biden administration took additional steps in the early 2020s to newly define and safeguard
other technological risks. These include developing new regulations to ban the sale or sharing
of sensitive data on U.S. citizens with designated countries, as well as new inquiries to examine
the necessity of further controls on the collection and control of other U.S. data in commercial
products and services of Chinese-owned or -controlled entities (whether interconnected
autonomous driving systems or remote monitoring and control of electronic operating systems in
cranes at U.S. ports).6
At the epicenter of the U.S. search for technological resilience is the semiconductor industry.
Long treated as primarily a commercial sector, the United States’ new concerns about dual-
use technologies and economic competitiveness have revealed vulnerabilities up and down the
production process and across supply chains, especially for advanced chips, leading to a wave of
new “higher” fence, “larger” yard policy responses from Washington. Decisions in this sector
epitomize the new challenges, issues, and concerns for regulators and commercial actors alike.
Already a growing economic security concern by the late 2010s, the interruption of production
and resulting shortages of semiconductors during the Covid-19 pandemic contributed to a cascade
of major supply chain bottlenecks across consumer goods and other industries and exposed
deep vulnerabilities in global supply chains. Chip shortages also underscored the United States’
high dependence on foreign supply. Set against China’s rising use of economic coercion (the
weaponization of curbs on imports or exports to achieve political goals), along with deepening
concerns over China’s intentions vis-à-vis Taiwan (home to the most advanced chip production in
the world), the need to bolsterer U.S. economic security and resilience in the chip sector took on a
particular new urgency.
To slow Beijing’s strides toward attaining advanced chipmaking capacity, the United States
took the major step in October 2022 of banning exports to China of the highest-end chips as well
as semiconductor-manufacturing machines by the sole U.S.-based maker. To avoid disadvantaging
this U.S. firm and to slow China’s capacities, Washington sought pledges from the two other nations
with these capabilities—the Netherlands and Japan—to also ban their firms from exporting the
most advanced chipmaking machines to China. While they agreed to keep their companies from
selling to and pursuing other commercial opportunities in China, the boundaries of cooperation
were still tested over issues such as whether to prohibit these companies from also servicing their
machines in operation in China’s chip factories.
China is countering by working to circumvent these restrictions and obtain the most advanced
chips and their underpinning technologies. It also has increased state subsidies to move its
indigenous industry into the world’s most advanced chipmaking club. These are just a few of the
challenges the United States faces in its attempt to limit exports and technological know-how
amid a new range of competing commercial and economic security goals. As U.S. policymakers
peel back and examine each layer of the threat in the attempts to circumvent existing U.S. policy
measures targeting established industries such as semiconductors, they are discovering further
potential vulnerabilities that call for deeper inquiry and possible action. Among these new
concerns is the risk of technology leakage through some outward investments by U.S. entities
 6 “President Biden Issues Executive Order to Protect Americans’ Sensitive Personal Data, ” White House, Fact Sheet, February 28, 2024;
“Citing National Security Concerns, Biden-Harris Administration Announces Inquiry into Connected Vehicles, ” U.S. Department of
Commerce, Press Release, February 29, 2024; and “Biden-Harris Administration Announces Initiative to Bolster Cybersecurity of U.S.
Ports, ” White House, Fact Sheet, February 21, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
27
THE UNITED STATES’ NEW SEARCH FOR ECONOMIC RESILIENCE u BEEMAN
into foreign countries, along with new consideration of reasons to disallow transactions that may
undermine U.S. economic security.
How to implement such a system in a way that does not unfairly disadvantage U.S. businesses
vis-à-vis their foreign competitors, but that targets only necessary restrictions on their activities, is
just one challenge underpinning many of these new U.S. approaches. New restrictions announced
on U.S. outbound investment in Chinese companies in limited product and service areas raise
similar issues of whether further national security requirements will limit the ability of U.S. firms
to invest in China and thereby unproductively hinder the expansion of their operations to stay
ahead in competition with Chinese and other foreign firms. 7
Another new U.S. resilience priority is to better protect “foundational” commercial technologies
in leading-edge sectors, including prior to their widespread commercialization. One example is
the effort underway to limit foreign access to quantum-computing components and know-how—a
technology not yet commercialized but with seismic potential in its commercial and defense
applications. For AI and other new foundational technologies already on the market, regulators
are left making decisions in real time to balance the need to give U.S. firms room to grow their
businesses with new technology-related controls that constrain some potential sales and exports.
Attempts to keep AI capabilities out of the hands of adversaries and their militaries serve national
security goals, but if they employ restrictions too onerous for U.S. companies to maintain their
commercial and technological lead, these restrictions ultimately could undermine the United
States’ economic security over the longer term.
To date, Washington’s AI-related controls have been placed on exports of underpinning
technologies, principally the leading-edge semiconductors and the engineering and design services
needed to make AI functional. These technologies, however, are also products and services with
their own commercial value. The 2022 ban on exports to China of chips needed for AI, along with
the services to design them and the machines to make them, was broadened in 2023 and reflects
the difficult trade-offs and other choices U.S. policymakers face in safeguarding the United States’
technology resilience while supporting its commercial advance. 8
As in the case of AI, Washington’s expanding definition of economic security is ensnaring a
growing range of other technologies previously treated as commercial. New regulatory decisions
about which technologies to impose controls on and at what levels hold immense implications
for U.S. firms that expect to reap the commercial opportunities from new products and services
(or to license or sell their innovations). These restrictions also have new ramifications for foreign
firms and states. Foreign firms that are already licensed to import U.S.-controlled goods are
subject to rules with penalties to prohibit re-exporting these goods and technologies to hostile
states in their own products and services. Washington’s broader new limits on commercial goods
and services add to a wider array of legal limits and are creating some new surprises for leading
private firms.
 7 “Treasury Issues Regulations to Implement Executive Order Addressing U.S. Investments in Certain National Security Technologies and
Products in Countries of Concern, ” U.S. Department of the Treasury, Press Release, October 28, 2024.
 8 “Commerce Implements New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic
of China (PRC), ” U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release, October 7, 2022; and “Commerce Strengthens Restrictions on
Advanced Computing Semiconductors, Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment, and Supercomputing Items to Countries of Concern, ”
U.S. Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release, October 17, 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
28
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
Re-making Trade and Inventing New Industrial Policies for Economic Resilience
The semiconductor sector, as both a key target for resilience policies in the first dimension
and the main vehicle to implement these policies for other technologies such as AI, reflects the
United States’ quest for economic resilience in the second dimension: the elevated priority placed
on greater industrial self-reliance and reduced dependence on supply from abroad. To accomplish
these goals, the United States now utilizes tariffs, subsidies, and other measures as incentives to
spur production at home (reshoring/onshoring), along with other efforts to mitigate supply chain
risks from abroad (diversification). U.S. efforts to promote industrial resilience represent a marked
departure from past practice as the United States turns away from its traditional approach of
openness to free trade toward a stronger emphasis on policies for direct reshoring. These trends
will only accelerate as the second Trump administration begins to implement its own agenda and
vision to achieve a similarly defined goal.
The Biden administration identified semiconductors early in its term among a short list
of designated “critical and essential” goods for U.S. economic security, along with six key
industrial sectors (defense, health and biological preparedness, information technology and
communications, transportation, energy, and food), as priority areas for new reshoring and supply
chain diversification initiatives. 9 These issues are complex and unique in each area, necessitating
extensive and multifaceted steps to achieve resilience. Nonetheless, some patterns in U.S. policy
preferences have emerged. To highlight the intent, tools, and direction of the United States’ new
efforts to increase the country’s industrial resilience, this subsection considers key measures
taken in three of the designated products and sectors—semiconductors, electric vehicles (EVs),
and solar products.
Semiconductors. For the semiconductor sector, the Biden administration, with significant
bipartisan support, identified reshoring chip production to reduce supply dependence on China as
a top priority for increasing U.S. industrial resilience. To accomplish this goal, the administration
kept in place the Trump administration’s 25% tariffs on chip imports from China and later doubled
these tariffs in 2024 to 50%. With tariffs in place to insulate the U.S. market and local producers
from imports from China, the administration worked to secure bipartisan congressional passage
of the 2022 CHIPS and Science Act, which added $30 billion in subsidies as incentives for private
firms to construct plants that produce leading-edge chips in the United States, as well as related
inputs and components deemed at risk of disruption. To qualify to receive subsidies under the
CHIPS Act, private companies must agree to a long list of eligibility requirements, most notably
limits on expansion of their chip business operations involving China—reflecting the deep concern
that excessive exposure to China poses risks to U.S. resilience.
While the process of shifting semiconductor supply chains, particularly through the
construction of new fabs, is inherently slow, these government-led efforts have taken additional
time to get off the ground. Nonetheless, manufacturing incentives were allocated after two years,
and construction is underway on several large new semiconductor plants in the United States.
Once online, these factories will substantially increase U.S.-based production capacity, especially
in high-end chips, which stood at only 12% of global output at the time the 2022 CHIPS Act was
passed.10 Whether maintaining tariff walls or adding billions more in U.S. government subsidies
 9 “Securing America’s Critical Supply Chains, ” White House, Fact Sheet, Press Release, February 24, 2021.
 10 Semiconductor Industry Association, “2022 Factbook, ” May 2022, i–ii, https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/SIA-
2022-Factbook_May-2022.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
29
THE UNITED STATES’ NEW SEARCH FOR ECONOMIC RESILIENCE u BEEMAN
will be necessary to sustain this scale of new chip investments, jobs, and production in the United
States into the next generation of chip production will emerge as a new test of Washington’s long-
term commitment to securing industrial resilience (via direct reshoring) in this sector.
The administration also engaged allies and other chipmaking nations through dialogues to
strengthen resilience in the sector, beginning with securing stable supply chains for the inputs
necessary for chip manufacturing. These dialogues initially focused on improving information
sharing, with limited progress made toward more concrete outcomes. Ultimately, the signals these
efforts send to adversarial countries like China could prove to be their most important function—
blunting China’s potential to leverage its exports to coerce nations dependent on them. This web
of new chipmaking alliances forged by the United States has established principles of stable,
predictable, and diversified supply chains as a basic starting point.
Electric vehicles . The Biden administration adopted similar approaches to promote U.S.-
based production of EVs, along with efforts to diversify supply chains away from dependence on
China for EV batteries. As with semiconductors, the Biden administration embraced the Trump
administration’s tariffs of 25% (raised from 2.5%) on imported automobiles from China. Then,
in 2024 the Biden administration announced a further increase in tariffs on EVs from China up
to 100%.
The administration also worked for passage in 2022 of the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which
includes billions of dollars in government subsidies to encourage production of EVs and associated
batteries in the United States. Compared with the CHIPS Act, which focused on subsidies for
new manufacturing, the IRA’s subsidies seek to increase demand for domestically produced EVs
through generous tax credits to U.S. consumers and businesses for EV purchases. To support more
EV production in the United States, the subsidies also set broad criteria to exclude most foreign-
made goods from qualification. EVs must be produced in North America and EV batteries must
be produced either in North America or in a limited number of allied or partner countries to be
eligible.
Numerous U.S. trading partners, from allies and adversaries alike, sharply criticized
Washington for overtly discriminatory criteria excluding most foreign goods, calling it a plain-
letter violation of the United States’ nondiscrimination commitments under international trade
rules. Even as China continued to subsidize its own EV industry, it filed a complaint at the World
Trade Organization over U.S. subsidies. Meanwhile, other countries with major EV manufacturers
attempted to keep up by establishing their own subsidy programs, often with explicit domestic
preferences.
This choice to prioritize domestic manufacturing through discriminatory subsidies, which
is precisely the kind of race that the United States has traditionally aimed to avoid, reflects the
preeminence the Biden administration gave to industrial reshoring over other objectives to
increase resilience.11 The Biden administration often defended these EV subsidies as an essential
policy tool to meet U.S. climate obligations. Yet the decision to disqualify most imports from
receiving the IRA subsidies might slow the rate of EV adoption and thus undercut U.S. efforts to
mitigate climate change.
 11 As one indication of the new U.S. priorities, in 2009, to help the auto industry recover after the 2007–8 global financial crisis, Congress
approved a tranche of consumer tax-break subsidies for purchases of vehicles that met higher environmental standards. Domestic
preferences like those included in the 2022 IRA were considered but ultimately rejected in favor of nondiscrimination in treatment of U.S.-
and foreign-made automobiles under the 2009 program.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
30
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
Solar products . Policies to bring solar industry production back to the United States reflect a
similar mix of choices to those made for EVs and semiconductors. These efforts have been routinely
updated to stay apace of rapid changes in market conditions for this industry. Global production
of solar products is highly concentrated in China and affected by its dominance and policies that
include enormous state subsidies and allowance of deeply problematic labor practices.
Both the Trump and Biden administrations have relied on large tariff hikes on imports—
increasing and decreasing these as industry dynamics have changed—to help revive and bolster
the fragile U.S. solar industry. These restrictive measures have been accompanied by tax break
subsidies under the IRA for residential and commercial solar panel installation, along with
additional incentives for purchases of U.S.-made panels. The IRA also includes subsidies for
companies that invest in new U.S. manufacturing capacity for solar and other clean energy–related
products. The survival of U.S. producers facing significantly higher production costs than many
international competitors might require long-term political support to sustain tariffs. When set
against the economic and environmental costs of a slower and costlier rollout of solar products,
these policy choices reflect the superseding priority the U.S. government is placing on promoting
resilience in the form of domestic manufacturing and reshoring over other policy objectives.
The cases of semiconductors, EVs and EV batteries, and solar products epitomize the character
of the United States’ search for industrial resilience. As a slogan lent political relevance by the
outsized electoral priority placed on support for manufacturing jobs, “resilience” has been used in
a malleable way to encompass goals ranging from domestic production to supply chain security
to climate change mitigation. Among them, reshoring efforts often have taken precedence. Tariff
protection, generous subsidies, and other measures continue to redefine U.S. trade policy priorities
and spur new U.S. industrial policies. These choices are unprecedented during the United
States’ postwar history—both for the sharpness in turn toward industrial planning, protection,
and market intervention for commercial goods and for the turn away from support for open,
nondiscriminatory global trade.
Supply chain diversification and security initiatives were the other key hallmarks of the Biden
administration’s approach to industrial resilience. These were manifested through domestic
efforts, ranging from supply chain “mapping” to real-time information sharing and reporting
on imports among U.S. ports. International efforts range widely and included bilateral and
minilateral engagements to diversify supply chains and facilitate more informed coordination.
Each was pursued with the stated goal of increasing the capacity of the United States, or of its allied
members, to minimize future disruptions from pandemics, natural disasters, military conflicts,
or other unanticipated global developments. The future of these various efforts under the second
Trump administration is unclear.
A New Economic Resilience
The United States’ new search for economic resilience has been motivated by a range of
objectives, including environmental, political, economic, and security concerns. Many of these,
particularly those connected to technological leadership, have been given increased impetus by
the rise of China as an economic and strategic competitor. Others, however, are principally driven
by deeper goals, such as greater industrial self-reliance.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
31
THE UNITED STATES’ NEW SEARCH FOR ECONOMIC RESILIENCE u BEEMAN
The United States, due to its size, influence, and technological leadership, drove the global
agenda in economic security for 75 years. For sensitive technologies, it developed a “high fence,
small yard” approach to control its most important know-how and military hardware. Principally
in response to China’s technological and military ascendency, the United States has made this
fence higher and this yard larger, seeking to bring along other countries in line with its controls. In
nonsensitive areas, Washington had pursued a rules-based approach for nearly 75 years to foster
greater trade interdependence, but it is now turning away from this approach to prioritize other
goals. These new trade policy choices, which often aim to serve an agenda and priorities that are
domestically driven, will only dramatically accelerate under the second Trump administration.
Due to the United States’ size and powerful position in both global technology and trade, these
choices also will create uncertainty for the rest of the world and have an impact on U.S. foreign
interests and relations. For the United States, closer cooperation and coordination with allies and
other leading nations in advanced technology, such as Japan, whose approach to economic security
and resilience is discussed in a separate essay in this report, is essential to meet the growing
technological and economic security risks posed by China and others. Even as many of their core
interests are often aligned, U.S. decisions on which additional dual-use technologies to limit and
which ordinary commercial good imports to discourage from abroad will further test the United
States’ ability to forge new and maintain existing commercial and other alliances with these
nations. Where differences in threat perceptions or traditional commercial interests exist, U.S.
allies increasingly are likely to find themselves, if not by choice then by unilateral action, expected
to “pick a lane”—whether between the strategic and military interests of the United States and
China or between acquiescence to Washington’s new trade barriers and insistence on adherence to
the international trade rules and system.
The Biden administration attempted to seek acceptance by other nations of its “economic
resilience” priorities and encouraged them to join the United States to pursue “similar approaches
and build alignment and complementarity across our polices and our investments.” 12 The second
Trump administration will likely pursue new technological and economic security priorities
with greater unilateralism and assertiveness. Thus, as the United States redefines its national
self-interest, even though specific tactics might change, the broad shift in U.S. economic strategy
toward resilience is likely to persist.
 12 “Remarks by APNSA Jake Sullivan at the Brookings Institution, ” White House, October 23, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
33
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #116 | february 2025
HIROYUKI SUZUKI is Deputy Director General of the Corporate Planning Department
and a Startup Investment Committee Member at the Japan Bank for International
Cooperation (JBIC). He can be reached at <hiro-suzuki@jbic.go.jp>.
The Strategic Role of Japan’s
Development Finance under the New
Dimension of Digital Infrastructure
Hiroyuki Suzuki

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This essay argues that the rapid expansion of the digital economy has made the development
of reliable digital infrastructure in both developed and developing countries critical to
ensuring digital resilience.
MAIN ARGUMENT
China is increasing its presence in global digitalization efforts through the Belt and Road
Initiative, and in response the United States and like-minded partners in Europe and Asia
are developing new digital infrastructure strategies as a countermeasure. Given the strength
of Japanese industry in the digital domain, strengthening Japan’s digital infrastructure
efforts should be an important factor. In fact, the Japanese government is in the process
of developing a new infrastructure strategy, and support for digital infrastructure and the
digital transformation (DX) is expected to be one of the pillars. While the Japan Bank for
International Cooperation, Japan’s development finance institution, has been expanding
its support for the efforts of Japanese companies in the digital area, such as subsea cables
and data centers, through cooperation with the U.S., Australia, South Korea, and other
like-minded countries, more work must be done to continuously and strategically enhance
ongoing projects. In recent years, as the expansion of digital demand, including for artificial
intelligence (AI), has caused power consumption to rapidly increase, the integration of DX
and green transformation (GX) has been progressing, adding another critical set of policy
considerations to digital infrastructure financing.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• Like-minded countries should utilize development finance institution s strategically to
strengthen their support for the development of digital infrastructure, with cooperation
between actors in the private and public sectors.
• Taking into account the huge increase of power demand stemming from the development
of AI, support for digital infrastructure should be further developed by integrating DX
and GX.
• Global standards for quality infrastructure should be updated promptly, especially
considering the rapid expansion of generative AI.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
35
THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF JAPAN’S DEVELOPMENT FINANCE u SUZUKI
W
ith the increasing adoption of digital and telecommunications technologies around
the world, the enormous demand for data is growing rapidly on a global scale. Digital
transformation (DX) has become both the center of fierce competition among global
companies and one of the major challenges in the economic development of the
global South. In this regard, the digital sector has become a key pillar of economic growth in both
developed and emerging economies.
In recent decades, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has been a leading player in digital
infrastructure development in the global South, especially by providing financial and technical
support through the Digital Silk Road Initiative as part of its broader Belt Road Initiative (BRI).
These efforts, and the resulting digital foothold the PRC has gained in the digital ecosystems of
developing markets, have spurred other major economic powers to increase their commitment
to compete in this domain. The Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII),
a U.S.-led G-7 infrastructure cooperation platform, and the European Union’s Global Gateway
have emerged as leading alternatives to China’s infrastructure development programs. Japan
has also been very active in digital areas. Recently, the synergies between the digital sector and
conventional infrastructure projects have also become key in the economic corridors supported
by PGII, such as the Lobito Corridor linking the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola,
and Zambia to the Port of Lobito, the Luzon Economic Corridor in the Philippines, and others. 1
Beyond these government-level initiatives, U.S. and Japanese companies are significantly
expanding collaboration in such vital areas as submarine cables, 5G, and Open RAN (Open Radio
Access Network).
Because of the increased importance of the sector, ensuring that the underlying digital
infrastructure is resilient has become a key policy objective for Japan, the United States, and others.
This essay examines the Japanese government’s policies toward digital infrastructure development
and the strategic trends emerging in the digital sector as Japanese firms carry out projects with
financial assistance from the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC). It concludes
with a discussion of recent developments that are expected to further strengthen expansion and
cooperation in this sector.
Japan’s International Digital Development Strategy and the New
Digital Infrastructure Initiative
In Japan’s overarching vision of its place among the world’s democratic nations, the country
hopes to play a role in bridging the gap on economic and technology policy between the two poles
of the EU and the United States. Recognizing the importance of data and the digital infrastructure
across which it flows, former prime minister Shinzo Abe announced his vision of Data Free Flow
with Trust to the world in 2019.2 Since then, Japan’s efforts have continued, though they remain a
work in progress. While large, primarily U.S. private-sector companies are leading the way in the
field of data on the internet, Japan is expected to have the potential to accelerate the utilization
of real data, especially industrial data to stimulate innovation. The country’s focus on digital
 1 “Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment Lobito Corridor: Supporting Transcontinental Connectivity, ” U.S. Department
of State, September 24, 2024, https://www.state.gov/partnership-for-global-infrastructure-and-investment-lobito-corridor-supporting-
transcontinental-connectivity.
 2 World Economic Forum, “Data Free Flow with Trust (DTFF): Paths Towards Free and Trusted Data Flows, ” White Paper, May 2020, https://
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Paths_Towards_Free_and_Trusted_Data%20_Flows_2020.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
36
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
infrastructure construction reflects an effort to lean into these national advantages and carve out a
role for Japan in the global digital ecosystem.
While private-sector cooperation is integral to fostering resilient infrastructure, in order to
further strengthen these strategic Japanese and U.S. corporate partnerships, the role of development
finance institutions (DFIs) such as JBIC and the U.S. Development Finance Corporation (DFC) is
becoming more immediate and vital. Likewise, the United States and Japan continue to support
aligned strategic-level policy dialogues in minilateral frameworks, such as the Competitiveness
and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership and the Quad (with Australia and India). 3 Meanwhile, on its
own initiative and with the support of the Japanese government, JBIC is expected to be increasingly
capable of helping implement relevant Japanese and U.S. private-sector projects in like-minded
countries, leveraging public-private partnerships to increase resilience. 4
As mentioned above, utilizing JBIC’s financial support, Japanese companies are accelerating
their global expansion in the digital sector. The government of Japan is also preparing a new
strategy in response to these developments. In 2024, it developed a new infrastructure strategy for
the year 2030, and during the National Council for Infrastructure Cooperation Strategy, held on
June 5, 2024, three strategy pillars were articulated: 5
• Enhancing Japan’s “earning power” and international competitiveness, responding to the needs
of partner countries, and creating projects together, including in new areas that go beyond the
conventional infrastructure concept, opening up the world’s economic prosperity.
• Securing supply chains, economic security, and national interests, including by closely
cooperating with like-minded countries and the global South.
• Achieving sustainable growth for Japan and the world through agile responses to green, digital,
and other social transformations that will become major growth markets and opportunities.
The following items are specifically stated for the digital sector, indicating that this sector is a
key pillar of the plan:
• In order to secure the national interest, Japan will focus on developing critical infrastructure
in the digital sector, including 5G/Open RAN, optical submarine cables, and data centers.
In addition to strategically acquiring orders for peripheral infrastructure that supports this
infrastructure through public and private financing, Japan will support the necessary human
resource development. In doing so, care will be taken to ensure that there is no risk of illegal
functions being embedded in infrastructure equipment or used as a means of sabotage.
• The G-7 countries will promote efforts to realize safe, secure, and reliable AI through the
Hiroshima AI Process launched during Japan’s G-7 presidency in 2023 and lead the development
of sustainable digital infrastructure to support the explosive growth in demand for AI.
• In the area of critical infrastructure for economic security, Japan will further strengthen
cooperation with like-minded countries through proactive risk-taking.
• To strengthen public finance as a complement to private finance, Japan will establish various
mechanisms, such as blended finance, that appropriately combine public and private financing.
 3 “U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership, ” White House, Fact Sheet, April 16, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/04/16/fact-sheet-u-s-japan-competitiveness-and-resilience-core-partnership.
 4 See the May 2021 issue of JBIC Today, available at https://www.jbic.go.jp/en/information/today/image/jtd_202105.pdf.
 5 See Keikyo infra senryaku kaigi [Japan’s National Council for Infrastructure Cooperation Strategy] (Tokyo, 2024).

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
37
THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF JAPAN’S DEVELOPMENT FINANCE u SUZUKI
The prioritization of resilience is immediately evident in the above points. Ensuring that
critical infrastructure necessary to preserve economic security is resilient against risks of sabotage
or other malicious use is a central part of efforts to minimize disruptions across these networks.
Moreover, as AI-enabled applications increasingly leverage advanced digital infrastructure and
the cross-border flow and storage of data, ensuring that these applications are safeguarded against
misuse is also a key part of achieving broader resilience objectives. Finally, as shown in the above
examples, public-private partnerships inherently result in more resilient, sustainable project
concepts. With the above in mind, it will be important for both the public and private sectors to
work together with the United States and other like-minded countries. Japan has already been
making significant progress toward these goals through JBIC’s efforts to support public-private
cooperation across the global South. The following section highlights several examples of these
efforts and the impact they are achieving.
Japan’s Digital Infrastructure Development in Practice
As Japan’s DFI, JBIC is the key actor in supporting the strategic global expansion of Japanese
companies, in a manner linked to government-level initiatives. Recently, the number of projects
that JBIC is supporting in the digital sector has expanded through increased cooperation with like-
minded countries, including the United States. As the following examples show, the development
of digital infrastructure has also become a core component of Japan’s efforts to strengthen ties
with the global South.
Japan-U.S.-Australia Collaboration: Submarine Cables in Palau
In January 2021, JBIC concluded a $4 million buyer’s credit loan agreement with the Belau
State Submarine Cable Corporation. 6 The loan was the first project under a November 2018
trilateral memorandum of understanding between the U.S., Japanese, and Australian DFIs and
was issued to finance the purchase of submarine cable–related equipment from NEC. The trilateral
partnership on infrastructure investment targeting the Indo-Pacific aims to realize individual
projects in which Japanese, U.S., and Australian companies collaborate in the region. The three
partners highlighted that the priority for these projects was to advance infrastructure development
on terms that adhere to high global standards and are built to last while enhancing the resilience
and self-sufficiency of host countries.7
By supporting a project such as this one, the three countries’ DFIs provided a strong signal in
support of resilient digital infrastructure. The fact that the project was announced by the foreign
ministers of the three countries at the Indo-Pacific Business Forum reflects the importance
of the project. The loan will strengthen the telecommunications infrastructure of Palau, a vital
Indo-Pacific island nation, and will contribute both to expanding telecommunications capacity
and to improving the overall stability of international telecommunications.
 6 “Buyer’s Credit for State-Owned Submarine Cable Corporation of Palau, ” JBIC, Press Release, January 14, 2021, https://www.jbic.go.jp/en/
information/press/press-2020/0114-014143.html.
 7 “JBIC Signs MOU with U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, ” JBIC, Press Release, April 12, 2024, https://www.jbic.go.jp/
en/information/press/press-2024/press_00005.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
38
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
Japan-U.S.-Australia Collaboration: South Pacific Telecommunications Operators
Building off the above success in trilateral efforts to support resilient digital infrastructure, both
JBIC and the U.S. DFC in March 2023 concluded separate $50 million agreements with Export
Finance Australia, covering a portion of its loan to Telstra Group, a major telecommunications
operator in Australia. The agreement between the two Australian institutions supported the
funding of the acquisition of Digicel Pacific, a local mobile telecommunications operator in the
South Pacific Islands region, by the Telstra Group.8
Digicel Pacific has a market share of over 60% in the Pacific Island countries, and therefore it
plays a central role in the stability of the telecommunications sector in the region. In addition,
Digicel Pacific has extensive telecommunications infrastructure in rural areas and is actively
working to expand these networks. Absent these efforts, the reliability of rural networks and
the connectivity they promote in these regions would be severely undermined. The importance
of these secure and high-quality telecommunications networks was referenced in a joint press
statement by the United States, Japan, and Australia on the sidelines of the G-20 in November
2022, which also recognized the importance of this financial assistance in realizing these policy
objectives.9 The project’s efforts to establish a reliable telecommunications network in the South
Pacific region are part of a strategic initiative seeking to ensure the realization of a free and open
Indo-Pacific region.
The South Pacific region has traditionally used inexpensive Chinese telecommunications
equipment, which has raised concerns over the resilience of these networks in the face of
potential risks. The Australian government intends to utilize the “trusted vendor” approach in the
reconstruction of telecommunications networks to upgrade to 4G and 5G. This approach is based
on the statement adopted at the Prague 5G Security Meeting held in May 2019, with participants
from 32 countries, including Japan, the United States, and Australia. The statement highlighted as
its first proposal that “communication networks and services should be designed with resilience
and security in mind,” reflecting the importance of these objectives to a wide range of like-minded
partners.10 The possibility of Japanese companies’ participation is also expected to be enhanced,
reflective of their long history of delivering resilient, secure infrastructure projects across the
Indo-Pacific.
Japan-U.S.-ROK Cooperation: High-Level Meeting with the U.S. DFC and
the Export-Import Bank of Korea for Cooperation in the Digital Sector
The partnerships among like-minded countries and their DFIs to boost private-sector
cooperation in the digital infrastructure sector are also becoming more active as part of the
commitment to trilateral cooperation between the United States, Japan, and the Republic of
Korea (ROK) that emerged out of the Camp David Summit in April 2023. In March 2024, JBIC
agreed with the U.S. DFC and the Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) to consider and deepen
cooperation for the development of India’s digital infrastructure in order to further strengthen the
 8 “Joint Statement by Australia, Japan and the United States on Telecommunications Financing, ” U.S. DFC, Press Release, May 19, 2023,
https://www.dfc.gov/media/press-releases/joint-statement-australia-japan-and-united-states-telecommunications-financing.
 9 “United States-Australia-Japan Joint Statement on Cooperation on Telecommunications Financing, ” White House, November 15, 2022,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/11/15/united-states-australia-japan-joint-statement-on-cooperation-
on-telecommunications-financing.
 10 “Prague 5G Security Conference Announced Series of Recommendations: The Prague Proposals, ” Government of the Czech Republic, May
3, 2019, https://vlada.gov.cz/en/media-centrum/aktualne/prague-5g-security-conference-announced-series-of-recommendations-the-
prague-propos.als-173422.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
39
THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF JAPAN’S DEVELOPMENT FINANCE u SUZUKI
trilateral partnership. 11 The three institutions signed a memorandum of understanding pledging
to continue discussions to support the development of such digital infrastructure by making full
use of the various financial tools of each institution.
Global internet traffic is expected to be 30 times as high in 2030 as in 2021, placing significant
strain on the digital infrastructure that is an important driving force in economic development.
The burden will be especially heavy in India, where the information and communications
technology (ICT) sector accounts for more than 13% of GDP. 12 India also plans to develop its
digital infrastructure at the national level and increase its ICT sector to a trillion-dollar scale by
2025.
In April 2024 the three institutions held discussions directly with India’s Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology and confirmed that they would collaborate on measures to develop
India’s digital infrastructure. The three organizations introduced the ministry to Japanese, U.S.,
and South Korean technologies and initiatives related to digital infrastructure and discussed ways
to promote future cooperation possibilities. The participants agreed to continue discussions to
support the development of India’s digital infrastructure, including 5G, Open RAN, data centers,
and smart cities, by making full use of various financial tools. 13
Japan-U.S.-ROK Cooperation: Loan for the Data Center Business of
the NTT Group in India
This dialogue between Japan, the United States, and the ROK has led to actual project support
with the Indian market in mind. In March 2024, JBIC concluded an agreement with NTT Global
Data Centers and Cloud Infrastructure India, an Indian subsidiary of NTT, for a loan of 10.2
billion rupees to support data center construction and operation in Maharashtra. 14
The Indian government for its part has set forth a plan to make India a hub for data centers in
its Data Center Policy 2020. It also is promoting business through preferential measures and the
establishment of special economic zones, in both financial and nonfinancial terms. These policies
have facilitated India’s rise as a regional data center hub—a trend that is expected to continue
as the volume of data communication further increases with the expansion of generative AI,
e-commerce, social media, and other uses.15
Export Credit Line for the Development Bank of Angola
In 2016, JBIC signed an agreement with Banco de Desenvolvimento de Angola, the national
bank of the Republic of Angola, for a loan of approximately $65.8 million to finance the purchase
of a complete optical submarine cable system by a domestic telecommunications operator directly
 11 “DFC (U.S.), KEXIM (Korea), and JBIC (Japan) Seek to Strengthen Their Coordinated Approach to Digital Transition during their
High-Level Trilateral Meeting in Tokyo, ” JBIC, Joint Statement, March 6, 2023, https://www.jbic.go.jp/ja/information/topics/topics-2023/
image/20240306_the_Joint_Statement.pdf.
 12 “JBIC Signs Arrangement with U.S. International Development Finance Corporation and Export-Import Bank of Korea, ” JBIC, Press
Release, October 28, 2024, https://www.jbic.go.jp/en/information/press/press-2024/press_00090.html.
 13 “DFC, JBIC, and Korea Eximbank Expand Partnership with India through New Framework to Promote Digital Infrastructure Initiatives, ”
U.S. DFC, Press Release, October 25, 2024, https://www.dfc.gov/media/press-releases/dfc-jbic-and-korea-eximbank-expand-partnership-
india-through-new-framework.
 14 “Loan for Data Center Business of NTT Group in India, ” JBIC, Press Release, April 19, 2024, https://www.jbic.go.jp/en/information/press/
press-2024/press_00007.html.
 15 “India to be a Cloud Computing and Data Centre Hub, ” Press Information Bureau (India), December 8, 2022, https://static.pib.gov.in-
WriteReadData-specificdocs-documents-2022-dec-doc2022128141601.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
40
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
connecting Angola and Brazil. 16 This project is the world’s first optical submarine cable to
connect the African and South American continents across the southern Atlantic Ocean. It will
also connect to a submarine cable leading from Brazil to the United States, thereby establishing
a communications network from Angola to North America. The cable will use the world’s
most advanced technology in terms of transmission capacity, connectivity, and expandability,
establishing a high-quality telecommunications infrastructure network from Africa to
countries in South America and improving the resilience of Angola’s and the region’s access to
telecommunications. Disruption to undersea cables off the coasts of West and South Africa earlier
this year led to internet outages across the continent. By establishing more novel routings for
connectivity, this project will mitigate the risk of future disruptions.
Future Challenges
While the emergence of Japan’s new infrastructure strategy reflects the great opportunities
the Japanese government perceives in supporting the rollout of resilient digital infrastructure,
current projects are being influenced by geopolitical risks, the gap between public interest and the
actions of major platform companies (e.g., Google, Apple, Meta, and Amazon), the development
of generative AI, and synergies with decarbonization. This section discusses these challenges and
their implications.
The Geopolitical Movements of Platforms for Submarine Cables
A key aspect of establishing a secure and resilient digital ecosystem in the Indo-Pacific is the
expansion of undersea cable networks to connect data centers to consumption areas. Given that
AI requires large amounts of power, data centers of the future are likely to be selected in regions
with large and stable supplies of electricity, especially green power. This presents challenges for
regions such as the Pacific Islands where data centers are not commercially viable. In these cases,
undersea cables will play an increasingly important role and often will require public funds. U.S.
and Japanese public-private partnerships are working to address this challenge.
While routes for laying submarine cables were previously decided among governments and
operators, recently major platform companies have begun taking the lead in investing in new
projects to meet the massive demand for data. In fact, several submarine cables connecting the
United States to the Indo-Pacific, Latin America, and Europe are being planned and constructed,
mainly through projects in which platform companies are investing. This includes multiple
submarine cables in the Indo-Pacific to connect the United States with Southeast Asia in order to
bypass chokepoints such as the South China Sea.17
In this context, Japan, Hong Kong, and Singapore have become intra-Asian hubs, and Australia
and the ROK are emerging as hubs as well. In addition, due to hurdles resulting from the need
to seek permission from China to lay cables in the South China Sea, as well as to technological
advances in submarine cables, several submarine cables have been planned in recent years to
connect the United States to Southeast Asia via Australia.
 16 “Export Credit Line for Development Bank of Angola, ” JBIC, Press Release, March 31, 2016, https://www.jbic.go.jp/en/information/press/
press-2015/0331-47541.html.
 17 “Big Tech and Geopolitics are Shaping the Internet’s Plumbing, ” Economist, December 20, 2023, https://www.economist.com/
business/2023/12/20/big-tech-and-geopolitics-are-reshaping-the-internets-plumbing.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
41
THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF JAPAN’S DEVELOPMENT FINANCE u SUZUKI
In addition, there are growing concerns about economic security risks associated with
submarine cables, such as the risk of cable cuts and information leaks, and addressing these risks is
also important. In response to this situation, the Japan-U.S.-Australia-India Partnership for Cable
Connectivity and Resilience was announced in the joint statement from the Quad summit in May
2023. The partnership is expected to be linked to infrastructure support. 18 Other major challenges
include delays in landing country licensing and tight submarine cable repair and maintenance
capacity. The latter, in particular, is a poorly profitable business, and therefore the availability of
concessional financing will be an important aspect of future digital infrastructure development.
The mobilization of private capital through blended finance is expected to play a critical role in
addressing this challenge.
The Convergence of Digital Transformation and Green Transformation
Currently, leading U.S. tech and AI companies are investing in data centers in new markets.
With the advent of the AI era, the data center market size is expected to reach $440 billion in 2028
(a 40% increase over 2022), and demand for GPUs, the main type of semiconductor used in AI
applications, is expected to reach 18 times the 2022 level in the next ten years. 19 Over 90% of the
market is currently dominated by AI chips packaged by Nvidia in the United States, SK Hynix in
the ROK, and TSMC in Taiwan.
As mentioned above, low-cost clean power supplies are needed for data centers that consume
enormous amounts of electricity. Specifically, electricity demand for data centers and other facilities
will double between 2022 and 2026, according to the International Energy Agency, reaching a
level comparable to Japan’s current electricity demand.20 On the other hand, U.S. tech companies,
which dominate AI semiconductors, have set a goal of using renewable energy to cover the power
consumed by their data centers, and the challenge will be how to secure stable, clean power at low
cost. They are setting their sights on the Indo-Pacific region as a new market for AI development
and investments in data centers. 21 In terms of lowering the cost of power, India, Malaysia, and
Australia are promising options. The United States is expected to strategically promote reduced
reliance on China, using its own technology as leverage and continuing to restrict the flow of
advanced technologies to China. 
Trends around the decarbonization of power sources will continue to push industry toward the
fusion of green transformation (GX) and DX. To this end, host countries could provide competitive
subsidies for renewable energy to attract investment in data centers for the promotion of innovation
in AI. In the global South, in particular, it is important to promote business opportunities for
the energy transition by utilizing advanced technologies in the development of renewable energy
sources and power grids. Given the vast amount of investment that will be required, DFIs like JBIC
will need to play a leading role in supporting the rollout of these modern grids. It is important that
policymakers remember that such grids are not just an energy or environmental question but also
inextricably linked to digital infrastructure issues.
 18 “The Wilmington Declaration Joint Statement from the Leaders of Australia, India, Japan, and the United States, ” White House, Press
Release, September 21, 2024, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2024/09/21/the-wilmington-declaration-joint-
statement-from-the-leaders-of-australia-india-japan-and-the-united-states.
 19 “ AI Power: Expanding Data Center Capacity to Meet Growing Demand, ” McKinsey, October 29, 2024, https://www.mckinsey.com/
industries/technology-media-and-telecommunications/our-insights/ai-power-expanding-data-center-capacity-to-meet-growing-demand.
 20 International Energy Agency, “Electricity 2024: Analysis and Forecast to 2026, ” Report, January 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/
electricity-2024.
 21 Author’s conversations with a U.S. tech company.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
42
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
The Development of Digital Governance and Infrastructure Standards
In December 2023 the “Hiroshima AI Process G-7 Digital and Technology Ministerial
Statement” was adopted at the G-7 Digital and Technology Ministerial Meeting, building on the
leader-level initiative outlined at the May 2023 summit in Hiroshima. The statement presents the
first international guidelines for generative AI, as well as a work plan to promote the Hiroshima
AI Process. It focuses on risks that have been a concern for generative AI, such as the proliferation
of disinformation, and calls for improved literacy, cooperation in vulnerability detection, and
information sharing to ensure that digital networks remain resilient in the AI era. The statement
also establishes a work plan to achieve these goals, including outreach to countries that are not
members of the G-7 and the introduction of monitoring tools for companies and others to patrol
the guidelines, in addition to the formulation of international guidelines. Italy took over the
promotion of the Hiroshima AI Process as the G-7 president in 2024, but it remains to be seen
whether the process will be integrated with the governance of infrastructure support. Given the
critical role of digital infrastructure in the adoption of AI at scale, coordination between these
governance mechanisms is of utmost importance.
Regarding the governance of infrastructure support, Japan also participates in the Blue Dot
Network framework, which was developed as a tool to operationalize high-level principles of
resilience at the actual project level.22 The Blue Dot Network offers certification based on economic,
social, governance, and environmental criteria intended to provide investors and stakeholders
with credible indicators that a project is sustainable, resilient, open, transparent, and efficient.
The ultimate goal is to ensure the high quality and resilience of infrastructure investments made
by like-minded partners, which were agreed on at the G-20 summit hosted by Japan in 2019.
Certification will make projects more appealing to investors and serve to facilitate fundraising. It
is also expected to simplify environmental, social, and governance reporting; improve evaluation
by stakeholders such as construction contractors and project developers; and secure advantages
in bidding. In addition, for governments and local communities, certification will promote
sustainable development and infrastructure investment.
The secretariat has been established, and the certification process has begun. The Blue Dot
Network is also considering the establishment of a digital platform, further simplification of
certification procedures for projects involving multilateral development banks and DFIs, and
support for developing countries. Building off the framework provided by the Hiroshima AI
Process to create global standards for the role of AI in digital infrastructure that can be put into
practice through the network in the future will be another test of the viability of the public-private
partnership approach exemplified by the Blue Dot Network.
Conclusion
While Japan is increasing its engagement in the digital sector and infrastructure development, it
will be important for the country to develop a strategy that is linked to geopolitical realities as well
as to broader industrial supply chains and access to the semiconductors and data centers needed
 22 Blue Dot Network, “Blue Dot Network Certification Framework, ” April 9, 2024, https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/65fd77fec4ad696366329acd/t/6639dfc746f3b664a741cc2e/1715068873022/Blue+Dot+Network+certification+framework.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
43
THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF JAPAN’S DEVELOPMENT FINANCE u SUZUKI
to fuel digital growth. Any new strategies should also include clean energy and decarbonization as
key components.
It will also be important for the public and private sectors to work together to develop digital
governance that takes into account the development of generative AI. Technology in the digital
field is advancing at an extremely rapid pace. Effective public-private partnerships that accurately
take this into account will be required. DFIs, including JBIC, will need to continue their efforts
to enhance cooperation between the private and public sectors, collaborating with like-minded
countries.
As digital infrastructure is entering a new dimension under DX and GX, both the public and
private sectors should recognize that responding quickly to new developments will provide direct
opportunities to enhance resilience and find solutions to geopolitical disruptions. The catalytic
function of DFIs in bridging the public and private sectors, if used to move strategically, boldly,
and quickly, will be critical for unlocking this potential.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
45
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #116 | february 2025
MIHOKO MATSUBARA is Chief Cybersecurity Strategist for the NTT Corporation in
Tokyo, where she is responsible for cybersecurity thought leadership. She served at
the Japanese Ministry of Defense before completing an MA at the Johns Hopkins
School of Advanced International Studies on a Fulbright scholarship. Prior to
joining NTT, she worked as vice president and public sector chief security officer
for the Asia-Pacific at Palo Alto Networks. She is an awarded author of two books on
cybersecurity and the war in Ukraine. She can be reached at <tga@nbr.org>.
Japan’s Cybersecurity Resilience Efforts
in Collaboration with the United States
Mihoko Matsubara

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This essay examines Japan’s efforts to bolster its cybersecurity and resilience, prompted by
the outbreak of the war in Ukraine in February 2022, its growing concerns over a potential
conflict in the Taiwan Strait, and the major ransomware attack on the Port of Nagoya in
July 2023.
MAIN ARGUMENT
Japan is currently working to enhance its cybersecurity and resilience. Not only has it
passed legislation on active cyberdefense to minimize the damage caused by substantive
cyberattacks that can compromise national security, but it also has established new
requirements for critical infrastructure companies to enhance their cybersecurity practices
under the revised Economic Security Promotion Act. These and other efforts will require
legal initiatives and domestic and international public-private partnerships through the
legislation on active cyberdefense, the government sharing intelligence on cyber threats
with industry, threat-hunting collaboration, and global law-enforcement cooperation to
disrupt cyberattacks. While the defeat suffered by Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba’s ruling
coalition in the October 2024 election could delay some legislative efforts, the country has
been proactively contributing to global resilience through law-enforcement collaboration
to disrupt ransomware criminal activities and its participation in an international annual
cyber exercise with Australia, the United Kingdom, and the U.S. By bringing not only the
Japan Self-Defense Forces and Ministry of Defense but also civilian agencies and critical
infrastructure companies to the exercise, these initiatives enable Japan to serve as a regional
hub for cybersecurity and resilience collaboration and better prepare for major disruptive
cyberattacks on critical infrastructure services during a national security crisis.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• While Japan’s legislation on active cyberdefense tends to attract attention to offensive
capabilities, it is equally important for Japanese policymakers to increase the country’s
defensive capabilities through secure-by-design and secure-by-default strategies, as well
as by providing support for under-resourced small and medium-sized businesses.
• The Japanese government should establish a procedure to declassify cyber threat
intelligence to share with industry stakeholders, so that individuals without a security
clearance can use the intelligence to better protect their assets and contribute to national
security and resilience.
• The government needs to create a legal framework to issue a waiver from regulatory
requirements for companies to accept its threat-hunting offer. Otherwise, companies that
are concerned about potential legal risks if government threat hunters find a gap between
their cybersecurity practices and regulatory requirements will decline to participate in
government initiatives.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
47
JAPAN’S CYBERSECURITY RESILIENCE EFFORTS u MATSUBARA
C
ybersecurity is one of the major pillars in Japan’s economic and national security. The
country is increasingly aware of the need for cyber resilience to prepare for the potential
of disruptive or destructive cyberattacks after three wakeup calls: the Russian invasion of
Ukraine in February 2022, which included cyber elements; the ransomware attack on the
Port of Nagoya in July 2023, which paralyzed cargo shipping operations for two days; and potential
cyber disruptions to critical infrastructure if conflict were to occur in the Taiwan Strait.
The ongoing war in Ukraine has reminded Japan that cyberattacks are an integral part of
modern war and that long-term cyber resilience efforts—through international public-private
partnerships—can drastically strengthen national cyberdefense capabilities even against
formidable adversaries. 1 The cyberattack on the Port of Nagoya also prompted Japan to take
measures to enhance the cybersecurity resilience of critical infrastructure services to help achieve
broader economic security goals.
This essay analyzes the current cyber threat landscape and Japan’s efforts to strengthen its
cybersecurity capabilities and resilience. Under the 2022 National Security Strategy, the Japanese
government is developing new legislation on active cyberdefense to minimize the damage to the
country’s national security that would be caused by a substantive cyberattack, or even to neutralize
a cyberattack before it is launched. The essay explores ongoing Japan-U.S. collaboration in the field
and considers next steps the allies could take.
The Current Cyber Threat Landscape Facing Japan and
the United States
Japan’s 2022 National Security Strategy states that the primary cybersecurity threats consist
of disruptive or destructive cyberattacks on critical infrastructure services and nonkinetic
operations precursive to armed attacks as part of hybrid warfare. 2 Such nonkinetic operations
include both cyberattacks and information operations. For example, Russia reportedly embedded
wiper malware in the network of Ukrainian Railways prior to its invasion in February 2022. A
cybersecurity team from the U.S. Army’s Cyber Command, defense contractors, and private
cybersecurity firms, however, were able to discover and delete the malware when they visited
the country in late 2021. This threat-hunting effort prevented devastating damage to Ukraine’s
capabilities to conduct civilian evacuations, provide humanitarian aid, and organize military
logistics in wartime. 3
Since the outbreak of the war in Ukraine, Japan has become increasingly worried about
potential conflict in the Taiwan Strait. Upon the release of the 2022 National Security Strategy,
Prime Minister Fumio Kishida revealed at a press conference that the government had conducted
realistic simulations to test Japan’s current defense capabilities and stated that the results indicated
the country’s capabilities were insufficient for deterrence or defense. He called for Japan to
 1 Yuster Yu and Mihoko Matsubara, “Taiwan and Japan Must Learn from Russian Cyberwarfare, ” Nikkei Asia, January 25, 2024, https://asia.
nikkei.com/Opinion/Taiwan-and-Japan-must-learn-from-Russian-cyberwarfare.
 2 Government of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan (Tokyo, December 2022), 6, https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/siryou/221216anzenhoshou/
nss-e.pdf.
 3 Mehul Srivastava, Madhumita Murgia, and Hannah Murphy, “The Secret U.S. Mission to Bolster Ukraine’s Cyber Defences Ahead of Russia’s
Invasion, ” Financial Times, March 9, 2022, https://www.ft.com/content/1fb2f592-4806-42fd-a6d5-735578651471. Wiper malware deletes
data and files in the infected systems and prohibits the victim from accessing the data and files, which can not only paralyze the business
operations of the victim organization but also create cascading effects for other companies through supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
48
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
strengthen its cyber, space, and electromagnetic capabilities as the line between peacetime and
wartime is becoming increasingly blurry due to growing use of hybrid warfare. With both the
prime minister and the National Security Strategy emphasizing the Japan Self-Defense Forces
(JSDF) defense posture in the Ryukyu Islands, it was clear that a potential Taiwan crisis was the
motivating concern.4
If China invades Taiwan, the operation is expected to include a large number of cyberattacks.
U.S. FBI director Christopher Wray pointed out that China has been studying lessons from the
war in Ukraine—including those relating to cyberwarfare—to prepare for a Taiwan contingency. 5
The U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence predicted in its 2023 threat assessment
that China “almost certainly would consider undertaking aggressive cyber operations against U.S.
homeland critical infrastructure and military assets worldwide” to distract U.S. decision-making,
create chaos, and prevent the deployment of the U.S. military if a major conflict with the United
States were imminent.6
Such preparation seems to be underway in the cyber domain. In fact, the U.S. government
announced in January 2024 that a Chinese state-sponsored group of actors called Volt Typhoon
had targeted the U.S. “communications, energy, transportation, and water sectors” and that U.S.
law enforcement disrupted the Chinese botnet. 7 Unfortunately, the Volt Typhoon operations are
ongoing. Lumen Technologies, a U.S. telecommunications firm, revealed in August 2024 that it
had detected a series of cyberattacks against four U.S. companies and one Indian company in
the information technology (IT) sector, which it attributed with moderate confidence to Volt
Ty phoon.8 Furthermore, Volt Typhoon breached Singapore Telecommunications in June 2024,
and this hack seems to have been intended to test its capabilities to prepare for future cyberattacks
against U.S. telecommunication companies and other foreign critical infrastructure companies. 9
A major challenge with Volt Typhoon stems from difficulties in detecting its cyberattacks due
to the use of stealthy “living-off-the-land” tactics. In a living-off-the-land attack, the adversary
uses legitimate administration tools to evade detection but is still able to steal information and
escalate privileges to access more sensitive data.10 For example, the U.S. government admitted that
Volt Typhoon hackers maintained their malicious access to victims for at least five years in some
cases.11 This is a very long time for an attacker to remain undetected, allowing it to collect a large
amount of information for future cyber operations.
 4 “Kishida Naikaku Sori Daijin Kisha Kaiken” [Press Conference by Prime Minister Kishida], Prime Minister’s Office of Japan, December 16,
2022, https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/101_kishida/statement/2022/1216kaiken.html.
 5 “FBI: Iran Govt Hackers Targeted U.S. Children’s Hospital, ” Agence France-Presse, June 1, 2022, https://www.france24.com/en/live-
news/20220601-fbi-iran-govt-hackers-targeted-us-children-s-hospital.
 6 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, “ Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community, ” February 6, 2023, 10.
 7 “U.S. Government Disrupts Botnet People’s Republic of China Used to Conceal Hacking of Critical Infrastructure, ” Office of Public Affairs,
U.S. Department of Justice, Press Release, January 31, 2024, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-government-disrupts-botnet-peoples-
republic-china-used-conceal-hacking-critical.
 8 “Taking the Crossroads: The Versa Director Zero-Day Exploitation, ” Black Lotus Labs, Lumen Technologies, August 27, 2024, https://
blog.lumen.com/taking-the-crossroads-the-versa-director-zero-day-exploitation; and Lawrence Abrams, “Chinese Volt Typhoon Hackers
Exploited Versa Zero-Day to Breach ISPs, MSPs, ” Bleeping Computer, August 27, 2024, https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/
chinese-volt-typhoon-hackers-exploited-versa-zero-day-to-breach-isps-msps.
 9 Jordan Robertson and Katrina Manson, “Chinese Group Accused of Hacking Singtel in Telecom Attacks, ” Bloomberg, November 5, 2024,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-11-05/chinese-group-accused-of-hacking-singtel-in-telecom-attacks.
 10 “Cybersecurity Advisory: People’s Republic of China State-Sponsored Cyber Actor Living off the Land to Evade Detection, ” U.S.
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, May 24, 2023, https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa23-144a.
 11 “Cybersecurity Advisory: PRC State-Sponsored Actors Compromise and Maintain Persistent Access to U.S. Critical Infrastructure, ” U.S.
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, February 7, 2024, https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa24-038a.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
49
JAPAN’S CYBERSECURITY RESILIENCE EFFORTS u MATSUBARA
In addition, U.S. law enforcement conducted its second disruption of the Chinese hacking
efforts in September 2024. In this instance, another group of Chinese state-sponsored hackers,
Flax Typhoon, had infected more than 200,000 consumer devices, such as routers and surveillance
cameras, to steal sensitive information and position themselves for future disruptive cyber
operations. Approximately half of the infections were in the United States, but the affected devices
were spread around the world, including in Vietnam, Germany, and India.12
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency deployed its threat-hunting team to “water, power, energy, and transportation” companies
97 times in fiscal year 2023 alone to “find and eradicate” Chinese cyber operations, while also
publishing more than 1,100 cybersecurity advisories. 13 Although it remains unknown whether
those threat-hunting operations found any indications that Chinese hackers had compromised
critical infrastructure, a public-private partnership would allow the U.S. government and industry
to clarify the needs of critical infrastructure companies to strengthen their cyberdefenses and
foster mutual trust for closer cooperation.
Furthermore, ransomware attacks have posed serious threats to economic and national security
for both the United States and Japan, as well as more broadly around the globe. A cybersecurity
company based in the United Kingdom, Sophos, conducted a survey across fourteen countries in
2024 and found that 59% of respondents experienced ransomware attacks over the previous year.14
Even when a financially motivated criminal group targets a single company, that cyberattack
can create cascading impacts on multiple industrial sectors through supply chain disruptions.
For example, the 2023 ransomware attack on the Port of Nagoya caused the port—the largest
commercial port in Japan—to suspend its cargo shipping operations for two days. 15 As critical
infrastructure becomes increasingly digitized, the risks of cyberattacks having disproportionate
impacts on societal resilience rise, while the distinction between financially motivated and
state-sponsored disruptive attacks diminishes. Given the importance of privately owned critical
transportation infrastructure such as ports, railways, and airports for military deployment during
a crisis, it is unsurprising that these companies remain priority targets—whether in Ukraine or
the Indo-Pacific. That is why it is imperative for those firms and the government to collaborate to
increase their cyberdefenses and resilience so that victims can resume their business operations
quickly.
Japan’s Efforts to Promote Cybersecurity and Resilience
Japan has taken steps to strengthen its cybersecurity and resilience by passing the Economic
Security Promotion Act (ESPA) and by shifting toward an active cyberdefense policy under the
2022 National Security Strategy. Given that cyberattacks are borderless and damages can spread
 12 “Court-Authorized Operation Disrupts Worldwide Botnet Used by People’s Republic of China State-Sponsored Hackers, ” U.S. Department
of Justice, Press Release, September 18, 2024, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/court-authorized-operation-disrupts-worldwide-botnet-used-
peoples-republic-china-state; and “Joint Cybersecurity Advisory: People’s Republic of China-Linked Actors Compromise Routers and IoT
Devices for Botnet Operations, ” U.S. Internet Crime Complaint Center, September 18, 2024, 4.
 13 “Opening Statement by CISA Director Jen Easterly, ” Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, April 30, 2024, https://www.cisa.gov/
news-events/news/opening-statement-cisa-director-jen-easterly-0.
 14 Sophos, “The State of Ransomware 2024, ” April 2024, 3.
 15 Sean Lyngaas, “Japan’s Largest Port Hit with Ransomware Attack, ” CNN, July 6, 2023, https://edition.cnn.com/2023/07/06/tech/japan-port-
ransomware-attack/index.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
50
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
beyond national borders, Japan is also expanding international collaboration on cybersecurity, as
will be discussed in detail in the next section.
First, the Port of Nagoya incident reminded Japan of the importance of securing essential
services, which include critical infrastructure, from disruptive cyberattacks to protect supply
chains. Although the port was not designated as essential infrastructure at the time of the attack,
Economic Security Minister Sanae Takaichi suggested this change immediately after the incident,16
and the Japanese government later designated ports and associated logistics infrastructure as
essential infrastructure as part of revisions to the ESPA in May 2024. 17
Furthermore, the ESPA designates that 210 companies across fifteen sectors of essential
infrastructure services, such as electric power and finance, are required to submit relevant
information to the government. This includes the name of companies that manufactured their
key systems and the location, board members, and major shareholders of those manufacturers.
Companies must also describe the measures they are taking—including cybersecurity—to
manage potential risks of disruption to their essential services before the designated service
providers deploy key systems in their facilities or contract maintenance work for those systems. If
the government identifies any major risks that are not addressed in the provided information, the
ESPA permits it to require that essential infrastructure service providers modify their approach or
stop deploying the systems. This kind of government audit of critical infrastructure aims to ensure
continued stable operation of essential infrastructure services. 18
Second, under the 2022 National Security Strategy, Japan is establishing a new mandate
for active cyberdefense to promote cyber resilience against attacks that pose a serious threat
to national security. The government will seek to disable such cyberattacks even if they do not
constitute an armed attack, aiming to minimize the damage they can cause to Japan or its critical
infrastructure. While the Japanese government has yet to define the scope of active cyberdefense
or specific cases in which its use would be triggered, the mention of the term in the strategy implies
the necessity of some offensive capabilities to neutralize potential cyberattacks against Japan.
The National Security Strategy suggests that the government should help critical infrastructure
service providers with gathering intelligence and responding to incidents, as well as collaborate
with telecommunication service providers and use their data to detect compromised servers
utilized by adversaries. 19
In June 2024 the Japanese government established a panel of experts to discuss what other
legislation is needed to materialize active cyberdefense. 20 According to an interim report in
August 2024, the panel members suggested that active cyberdefense entails a whole-of-society
resilience approach by supporting small and medium-sized businesses for better cybersecurity
 16 “Kikan infura jizen shinsa, kowan tsuika wo kento Takaichi Keizai Anpo-sho” [Economic Security Minster Takaichi Suggested to Consider
Adding Port to a Subject of Mandated Previews for Critical Infrastructure], Nikkei, July 14, 2023, https://www.nikkei.com/article/
DGXZQOUA149P90U3A710C2000000.
 17 “Takaichi Naikakufu Tokumei Tanto Daijin kisha kaiken yoshi Reiwa 6 nen 5gatsu 17 nichi” [Press Conference by Minister Takaichi on May
17, 2024], Cabinet Office, May 17, 2024, https://www.cao.go.jp/minister/2309_s_takaichi/kaiken/20240517kaiken.html.
 18 “Kikan infura no shinsa kaishi = saiba kogeki boshi—Seifu” [The Government Started Preliminary Review of Designated Essential
Infrastructure Service Providers to Prevent Cyberattack Damages], Jiji Press, May 17, 2024; and Cabinet Office, “Outline of the Essential
Infrastructure System and Required Information: Operation of the System Commences on May 17, 2024, ” July 2024, https://www.cao.go.jp/
keizai_anzen_hosho/suishinhou/infra/doc/pamphlet_itaku_eng.pdf.
 19 Government of Japan, National Security Strategy of Japan, 23–24.
 20 “Expert Panel toward Improving Response Capabilities in the Field of Cybersecurity, ” Prime Minister’s Office of Japan, June 7, 2024,
https://japan.kantei.go.jp/101_kishida/actions/202406/07cyber.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
51
JAPAN’S CYBERSECURITY RESILIENCE EFFORTS u MATSUBARA
and increasing adoption of secure-by-design and secure-by-default practices. 21 While active
cyberdefense often attracts attention to the offensive elements of the approach, defensive elements
are equally important. The government cannot respond to every single cyberattack with active
cyberdefense, since some attacks will not meet the threshold to justify a government response.
Thus, incorporating security from the beginning through secure-by-design and secure-by-default
practices is a constructive way to enhance resilience. Furthermore, the government needs to help
under-resourced small and medium-sized businesses, given their important role to play in supply
chains.
While the panel noted the need to analyze telecommunications data to understand the scope of
cyberattacks, it also asked for legislation to balance public welfare, the constitutional requirement
to protect the secrecy of communications, and human rights. Public welfare includes national
security needs, but the panel discussions did not clarify how to draw a line between national
defense and privacy concerns. The panel also recommended the establishment of an independent
organization to audit data collection and usage.22
Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba had stated that his administration would accelerate its efforts
to submit legislation on active cyberdefense as soon as possible, based on the discussions by an
expert panel during a Upper House plenary session on October 8, 2024.23 The cabinet approved the
proposed legislation on active cyberdefense, and it was sent to the Diet on February 7, 2025. The
Japanese government is keen to pass the bills during the regular session of the Diet and implement
them.24 Yet Prime Minister Ishiba’s coalition of the Liberal Democratic Party and Komeito lost
the snap election held in late October 2024, with no party winning a majority of seats in the Diet.
Thus, the defeat could prevent the Diet from smoothly passing the bills.
International Public-Private Collaboration
To deal with cyberattacks that can easily transit international borders and that utilize and
target private-sector devices and technology, international public-private partnerships are
indispensable. Sharing cyber threat intelligence and best practices to minimize damages is crucial,
as is conducting joint exercises to test communication channels and incident response capabilities
in real-world scenarios.
Japan became a member of the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD
COE) in November 2022, 25 and even prior to membership, it had begun working with the center
through its annual cyber exercises, Locked Shields, to practice responses to large-scale disruptive
cyberattacks on critical infrastructure services. In April 2021 the Japanese team competed in
the cyber exercise for the first time. The delegation included the Ministry of Defense, the JSDF,
 21 “Saiba anzen hosho bunya deno taio noryoku no kojo nimuketa yushikisha kaigi koremade no giron no seiri” [Interim Summary of the
Discussions by the Panel of Experts on National Cybersecurity], Cabinet Secretariat, August 7, 2024, 3–5, https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/seisaku/
cyber_anzen_hosyo/giron_seiri/giron_seiri.pdf.
 22 Ibid., 7–10.
 23 “Ishiba shusho, nodoteki saiba bogyo hoseibi wo kasoku Y ato ha kiseiho saikaisei yokyuu Sanin daihyo shitsumon” [Prime Minister Ishiba
Said His Administration Would Accelerate Its Efforts for Active Cyber Defense, but the Opposition Party Demands to Re-revise the Political
Money Control Act during an Upper House Plenary Session], Sankei Shimbun, October 8, 2024, https://www.sankei.com/article/20241008-
CWZK43FGSZOOVI4TTD5LK2EGV4.
 24 “Japan Govt. Approves Draft Legislation to Forestall Cyberattacks, ” NHK World, February 7, 2025, https://www3.nhk.or.jp/nhkworld/en/
news/20250207_16.
 25 “NATO saiba boei kyoryoku senta no katsudo heno seishiki sanka nitsuite” [Officially Joined NATO CCD COE Activities], Ministry of
Defense (Japan), November 4, 2022, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/press/news/2022/11/04b.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
52
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, the Information Technology Promotion
Agency, the Japan Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Center, and private-
sector critical infrastructure companies. 26 Japan’s team partnered with the U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command, highlighting the robust alliance between the two countries. The partnership allowed
them to assess their capabilities to jointly deal with disruptive cyberattacks on the financial sector,
mobile information and communications technology services, and water supplies and to practice
coordinating their responses between military and civilian agencies and multiple private critical
infrastructure companies. 27
Given that a potential Taiwan contingency might begin with cyberattacks to disrupt critical
infrastructure services and consequently military assets and deployment in the region, it
is indispensable for Japan and the United States to build up their resilience and cyberdefenses
together and with other like-minded countries. Since the 2021 exercise, Japan also worked with the
UK Ministry of Defence in Locked Shields 2022 and 2024 and with Defence Australia in Locked
Shields 2023.28 These experiences have bolstered cyberdefense coordination between like-minded
U.S. allies, with Japan serving as a hub for regional and global collaboration.
Besides international military cooperation in the context of joint exercises, Japan has also
been contributing to global law-enforcement efforts to address ransomware threats. In October
2021, following the fallout from the Colonial Pipeline attack, the White House launched the
Counter Ransomware Initiative. Approximately 30 allies and partners collaborated to disrupt
the ransomware crime ecosystem through law-enforcement investigations and anti–money
laundering measures. 29 As an inaugural member, Japan has taken an active role in supporting
international investigations. For example, the Japanese National Police Agency aided international
investigations into ransomware attacks on U.S. law-enforcement agencies and other organizations
around the world, which led to the indictment of a Russian national in May 2023.30 It also provided
a decryption tool to help law enforcement from ten countries disrupt the malicious operations
of the prolific LockBit ransomware group by closing its accounts, arresting its members, and
shutting down its IT infrastructure. 31 These experiences in working with other law-enforcement
agencies will enable Japan not only to continue to support international efforts to combat
ransomware threats but also to learn from other countries to more effectively target the malicious
IT infrastructure and malign financial practices of cybercriminals.
 26 “NATO saiba boei kyoryoku senta niyoru saiba boei enshu ‘Locked Shields 2021’ heno sanka nitsuite” [Participating in NATO CCD COE’s
Cyber Exercise, “Locked Shields 2021”], Ministry of Defense (Japan), April 13, 2021, 1, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/press/news/2021/04/13b.pdf.
 27 Shannon Vavra, “NATO Tests Its Hand Defending Against Blended Cyber-Disinformation Attacks, ” CyberScoop, 2012, https://www.
cyberscoop.com/nato-blended-cyber-disinformation-defense-locked-shields-article-v.
 28 “NATO saiba boei kyoryoku senta niyoru saiba boei enshu ‘Locked Shields 2022’ heno sanka nitsuite” [Participating in NATO CCD COE’s
Cyber Exercise, “Locked Shields 2022”], Ministry of Defense (Japan), April 19, 2022, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/press/news/2022/04/19e.html;
“NATO saiba boei kyoryoku senta niyoru saiba boei enshu ‘Locked Shields 2023’ heno sanka nitsuite” [Participating in NATO CCD COE’s
Cyber Exercise, “Locked Shields 2023”], Ministry of Defense (Japan), April 18, 2023, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/press/news/2023/04/18d.
html; and “NATO saiba boei kyoryoku senta niyoru saiba boei enshu ‘Locked Shields 2024’ heno sanka nitsuite” [Participating in
NATO CCD COE’s Cyber Exercise, “Locked Shields 2024”], Ministry of Defense (Japan), April 23, 2024, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/press/
news/2024/04/23c.html.
 29 “Joint Statement of the Ministers and Representatives from the Counter Ransomware Initiative Meeting October 2021, ” White House,
October 14, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/10/14/joint-statement-of-the-ministers-and-
representatives-from-the-counter-ransomware-initiative-meeting-october-2021.
 30 “Russian National Charged with Ransomware Attacks against Critical Infrastructure, ” U.S. Department of Justice, Press Release, May 16,
2023, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/russian-national-charged-ransomware-attacks-against-critical-infrastructure.
 31 “Law Enforcement Disrupt World’s Biggest Ransomware Operation, ” Europol, February 20, 2024, https://www.europol.europa.eu/media-
press/newsroom/news/law-enforcement-disrupt-worlds-biggest-ransomware-operation.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
53
JAPAN’S CYBERSECURITY RESILIENCE EFFORTS u MATSUBARA
Next Steps to Take
As Japan faces an elevated cyber threat environment with growing ransomware attacks and
geopolitical tensions, it has undeniably taken significant steps to build up its cybersecurity
capabilities and expand international collaboration. The government is adopting legislation on
active cyberdefense so that it is better equipped to deal with cyber disruptions that can threaten
national security. Furthermore, Japanese law enforcement’s contribution to tackle ransomware
attacks has been internationally recognized by the U.S. government and Europol. The Ministry of
Defense and JSDF have been collaborating with critical infrastructure companies through their
participation in international cyber exercises, in contrast with their counterparts in Australia, the
UK, and the United States that have not brought in industry partners.
Moving forward, Japan should work to improve its threat-hunting capabilities and increase the
government’s ability to share intelligence on cyber threats with companies. So far, there has been
no public report of the Japanese government conducting any threat-hunting engagements. Since
the Ministry of Defense and JSDF acknowledged the importance of threat hunting in the Defense
Buildup Program for risk management and plan to provide cybersecurity assistance for other
entities,32 new legislation on active cyberdefense could allow the JSDF to more readily provide
threat-hunting engagements to protect national security against cyber disruptions targeted at
critical industries.
However, if the government wishes to provide this kind of threat hunting for private companies,
measures will need to be taken to address industry concerns over potential liabilities. For instance,
government threat hunters often identify gaps between current cybersecurity procedures and
regulatory requirements for a company’s networks. While companies may initially agree to accept
threat hunting, if the industry becomes more worried about potential legal trouble following the
government’s involvement, companies will reject such offers from the government. Therefore, a
framework for issuing waivers needs to be developed and agreed on with critical infrastructure
companies before the government officially launches threat-hunting initiatives.
The expansion of security clearance to private-sector cybersecurity practitioners contributing
to economic or national security objectives would make it easier for the Japanese government
to share classified information on cyberattacks with industry partners. It is also crucial for the
government to establish a procedure to desensitize and declassify cybersecurity information in a
timely manner in crisis situations so that employees of critical infrastructure companies who do
not hold a security clearance can take advantage of government intelligence to better defend their
networks. Given the fast pace of potential crises, these policies must be in place upfront to have
any effect.
Still, threat-hunting assistance does not need to always come from the government. Public-
private partnerships often face delays due to legal and bureaucratic challenges. An increasing
number of organizations across various sectors, however, are exploring direct information-
sharing agreements. These agreements provide a framework for companies to collaborate
proactively on cybersecurity issues while safeguarding their most critical assets. 33 Organizations
can leverage these agreements to share information, tactics, and approaches in real time,
 32 “Defense Buildup Program, ” Ministry of Defense (Japan), December 16, 2022, 11, 51, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/policy/agenda/guideline/
plan/pdf/program_en.pdf.
 33 Author’s email interview with David Beabout, September 30, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
54
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
significantly enhancing their effectiveness. Even if not utilized regularly, these agreements ensure
that organizations are prepared to respond far more swiftly in emergencies than government
coordination typically allows. 34
The aforementioned initiatives would empower Japan to enhance its cybersecurity resilience.
They would also contribute to the cybersecurity and resilience of the Japan-U.S. alliance as the
world continues to be more connected and adversaries typically attack the weakest link. Increased
resilience and collaboration are also essential to achieve broader regional and global cybersecurity
objectives and minimize growing concerns over the Taiwan Strait.
 34 Author’s email interview with David Beabout.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
55
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #116 | february 2025
MARIKO TOGASHI is a Visiting Research Fellow at the Institute of Geoeconomics.
Prior to her current position, she was a Research Fellow for Japanese Security and
Defence Policy and a Matsumoto-Samata Fellow at the International Institute for
Strategic Studies in London, focusing on Japan’s economic security policy. She also
worked at the Edwin O. Reischauer Center for East Asian Studies, focusing on the
economic security of the United States, Japan, and China. She can be reached at
<mariko.togashi@ihj.global>.
Countering Economic Coercion
Mariko Togashi

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This essay analyzes countermeasures to economic coercion both theoretically and practically
and draws implications for Japanese strategy and U.S.-Japan cooperation.
MAIN ARGUMENT
The theoretical and technical challenges in assessing the effectiveness of countermeasures
to economic coercion should not diminish the importance of such analysis. The freedom
of countries to choose their own course of action without fear of being punished is the
fundamental basis of the liberal international order. There are two main approaches to
counter economic coercion: deterrence by denial and deterrence by punishment . While the
latter is likely to be deployed more quickly and can be politically popular, the former offers
a long-term solution and carries less risk of escalation. Japan has experienced two major
cases of economic coercion since 2010 and countered them by diversifying either demand or
supply. Both countermeasures have been generally effective. Japan has continued to develop
preemptive and reactive measures, including passing the Economic Security Promotion Act
in 2022 and leading international cooperation, especially with the U.S. Strengthening supply
chains and creating collective mechanisms for managing times of disruption provide a long-
term solution that has less negative impact than short-term retaliatory measures. Moreover,
this approach advances Japan’s broader foreign policy goal of protecting a free and open
Indo-Pacific.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
To maintain the momentum of their efforts to counter economic coercion collectively, the
U.S. and Japan will need to address three potential challenges for policy coordination:
• The two countries’ views on free trade have diverged in the past few years. While Japan
still prioritizes the principles of free trade, the U.S. seems to have shifted away from
traditional free-trade approaches.
• Whereas Japan focuses on denial strategies, U.S. policies traditionally rely on punitive
measures.
• Japan and the U.S. could disagree on the meaning of strengthening supply chains or
the definition of national security, driven by different degrees of protectionism in their
economic and industrial policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
57
COUNTERING ECONOMIC COERCION u TOGASHI
O
ver the past decade, the use of economic coercion has increased significantly, resulting
primarily from the People’s Republic of China (PRC) increasingly employing coercive
measures as a tool to achieve its broader foreign policy objectives. Research shows that
China has used economic coercion as many as 123 times from 2010 to 2022.1 Examples
include restrictions on salmon imports from Norway after the Nobel Committee selected Liu
Xiaobo, who was convicted of inciting subversion of state power in China, as the recipient of the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2010; limits on banana imports from the Philippines amid tensions in the
South China Sea in 2012; and the closure of China-based stores belonging to Lotte, a major Korean
retail chain, when South Korea decided to allow the United States to deploy the Terminal High
Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system in 2017.
Countering economic coercion has thus become a policy priority for many countries, including
Japan and the United States. Japan gained first-hand experience with PRC economic coercion in
2010 when Beijing halted the export of certain rare earths to Japan following the detainment of a
Chinese national whose fishing vessel collided with two Japanese coast guard ships in disputed
waters. The experience led the country to become an early adopter of measures to mitigate risks
and respond to coercion. Beyond the direct impact, economic coercion fundamentally challenges
the rules-based international economic order, the defense of which is a top strategic priority for
Japan. The United States, meanwhile, has vital interests in shaping and constraining the PRC’s
behavior and ultimately emerging victorious in bilateral strategic competition.
Given their shared fundamental values, the size of their economies, and their historically
strong ties, Japan and the United States have led the international effort to counter economic
coercion. Although the overall macroeconomic impact of PRC economic coercion is often limited
both qualitatively and quantitatively,2 there would be detrimental consequences on multiple levels
if the coercive actions were left unaddressed. On the business level, the economic costs could
be significant, damaging the targeted industry. On the state level, even if the macroeconomic
impact might be limited, the freedom to make decisions, especially for smaller economies, will be
constrained (the so-called chilling effect of economic coercion). Finally, on the international level,
the liberal economic order backed by the rule of law—the foundation of the “free and open Indo-
Pacific” concept developed by Japan and supported by the United States—will be damaged.
This essay will deepen understanding of economic coercion and analyze countermeasures,
focusing on Japanese strategy. Following this introduction, the first section provides an overview
of economic coercion, including its theoretical underpinnings and the characteristics of modern
economic coercion, and explores its effectiveness. The second section briefly examines deterrence
theory to inform the effective development of countermeasures. The next section then analyzes
countermeasures in practice, considering Japan’s two previous cases of being a target of economic
coercion and its broader strategy to prevent the recurrence of this experience, including through
increased international cooperation. Finally, the concluding section analyzes the benefits of the
current path taken to counter economic coercion collectively and assesses potential challenges for
U.S.-Japan leadership in the coming years.
 1 Aya Adachi, Alexander Brown, and Max J. Zenglein, “Fasten Y our Seatbelts: How to Manage China’s Economic Coercion, ” Merics China
Monitor, August 25, 2022, https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2023-02/Merics_ChinaMonitor_EconomicCoercion_EN-4.pdf.
 2 Matthew Reynolds and Matthew P . Goodman, “Deny, Deflect, Deter: Countering China’s Economic Coercion, ” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, March 2023, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2023-03/230321_Goodman_
CounteringChina%27s_EconomicCoercion.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
58
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
Understanding Economic Coercion
Definition of Economic Coercion
Although countries increasingly use and discuss the term “economic coercion,” there is no
global consensus on its definition. The G-7 defines economic coercion as incidents that “seek
to exploit economic vulnerabilities and dependencies and undermine the foreign and domestic
policies and positions of member countries as well as partners around the world.” 3 The European
Union adopts a somewhat narrower definition of economic coercion as “a situation where a third
country attempts to pressure the EU or a member state into making a particular choice by applying
or threatening to apply, measures affecting trade or investment against the EU or a member state.”4
Theoretically, economic coercion is best understood as a specific form of economic statecraft, 5
which David Baldwin defines as “governmental influence attempts relying primarily on resources
that have a reasonable semblance of a market price in terms of money.”6 Daniel Drezner defines it
as “the threat or act by a sender government or governments to disrupt economic exchange with
the target state, unless the target acquiesces to an articulated demand.” 7 Based on these theoretical
underpinnings and the practical definitions used by organizations that have attempted to define
economic coercion in the context of responding to it, this essay defines economic coercion as a
tool of economic statecraft that exploits economic dependencies to influence behavior by imposing
or threatening to impose economic costs.
The use of economic tools for foreign policy goals is by no means new, but there are a few
characteristics that distinguish modern economic coercion from previous instances. First,
the measures used in today’s economic coercion vary. China’s coercive approaches have
been categorized into six types: popular boycotts, administrative discrimination, empty
threats, legal defensive trade measures, trade restrictions, and tourism restrictions. 8 Second,
economic coercion today is often deployed through informal means, especially in the case of
Chinese economic coercion. This is connected to the third feature, which is the vagueness of
policy objectives. In many cases, China denies the causal relationship between the diplomatic,
territorial, or strategic issues and the economic measures taken, rendering the policy objectives
unclear. The fourth characteristic of modern economic coercion is that it leverages asymmetric
economic dependencies in the globalized world. Today’s economic coercion is often referred to
as a weaponization of economic interdependencies for this reason, making it harder to grasp the
total effect of coercive measures.
Effectiveness of Economic Coercion
Measuring the effectiveness of economic coercion is a challenging empirical problem. Due
to the vagueness of the policy objectives of Chinese economic coercion, it is not even easy to
define—let alone measure—the success of a campaign. For instance, if China’s goal was to reverse
 3 “G-7 Leaders’ Statement on Economic Resilience and Economic Security, ” White House, Press Release, May 20, 2023, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/05/20/g7-leaders-statement-on-economic-resilience-and-economic-security.
 4 “Trade: Council Adopts a Regulation to Protect the EU from Third-Country Economic Coercion, ” European Council, Press Release,
October 23, 2023, https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/10/23/trade-council-adopts-a-regulation-to-protect-the-
eu-from-third-country-economic-coercion.
 5 Reynolds and Goodman, “Deny, Deflect, Deter: Countering China’s Economic Coercion. ”
 6 David A. Baldwin, Economic Statecraft (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985).
 7 Daniel W . Drezner, “The Hidden Hand of Economic Coercion, ” International Organization 57, no. 3 (2003): 643–59.
 8 Adachi et al., “Fasten Y our Seatbelts. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
59
COUNTERING ECONOMIC COERCION u TOGASHI
countries’ targeted behavior, past instances show that most cases were not successful. However,
if the goal was to impose costs on certain sectors or companies, alter the cost calculation, or
intimidate nontargeted, smaller economies so that they will not act against Chinese interests,
China might have been successful in many cases. In most of the cases, the targeted countries made
some concessions but did not shift the course of their behavior completely. In 2010, for instance,
Tokyo released the Chinese captain but did not apologize to Beijing as demanded. This case will be
discussed in more detail later.
Even if the meaning of successful Chinese economic coercion could be defined, there are no set
ways to measure the effectiveness of economic coercion, as is the case with economic sanctions.
Sanctions are most likely to be successful (meaning the implementing country achieves its policy
objectives) when the costs of defiance borne by the target are greater than its perceived costs of
compliance. While this formula is simple, it is extremely difficult to measure these costs and the
target’s perception accurately.9 One analysis of 170 cases of economic sanctions since World War
I argues that even if the sender’s relative size and leverage are greater than those of the target,
which is often the case in Chinese economic coercion, a campaign is only likely to be successful if
the relative intensity of interest is higher for the sender than the target.10 In other words, as long as
the target country is more determined to protect its interests than China is to target the country,
the act of economic coercion is unlikely to be successful. Regarding other factors determining
the effectiveness of economic coercion, a more recent study articulates several characteristics that
make Chinese economic coercion less effective: the unilateral deployment, the relatively low cost
imposed on the target country, the economic and political strength of the target, the targeting of
adversaries, poor signaling, and lack of adequate inducements. 11
Among numerous variables that determine the costs of defiance (the willingness of the target
country to bear the costs and not alter its course to align with Chinese interests), economic costs are
one important element. While the economic costs imposed by Chinese coercion on specific sectors
or companies can be significant, the macroeconomic costs tend to be limited. One study shows that
the effect of a decrease in exports to China on the countries that received the Dalai Lama for an
official visit at the highest level disappeared in the second year after the meeting.12 That being said,
given the complexity of today’s economic interdependencies, measuring the ripple effect stemming
from the disruptions of supply chains is arduous. For instance, during the pandemic, we saw how
disruptions in the semiconductor supply chains could stop or delay the production of a variety of
goods, such as automobiles, industrial machineries, smartphones, and computers. Therefore, when
measuring economic costs to assess the effectiveness of Chinese economic coercion, indirect costs
should be considered as well, which can potentially extend beyond the target economy.
Measuring the effectiveness of economic coercion is even more complicated when the impact
of the so-called chilling effect on countries’ decision-making is considered. Countries that are
reliant on China economically or militarily might choose a course of action that is in line with
its interests, sacrificing other national interests out of fear of potential coercion. The relative
difficulty in measuring costs beyond simple macroeconomic indicators should not diminish their
 9 Gary C. Hufbauer, Jeffrey Schott, and Kimberly Ann Elliott, Economic Sanctions Reconsidered, 2nd ed. (Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute
for International Economics, 2007), chap. 2.
 10 Ibid.
 11 Reynolds and Goodman, “Deny, Deflect, Deter: Countering China’s Economic Coercion. ”
 12 Andrea Fuchs and Nils-Hendrik Klann, “Paying a Visit: The Dalai Lama Effect on International Trade, ” Journal of International Economics
91, no. 3 (2013): 164–77.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
60
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
importance when attempting to understand the effectiveness of economic coercion or develop
countermeasures. The freedom of countries to choose their own course of action without fear of
being punished is the fundamental basis of the liberal international order.
Countermeasures in Theory
From a theoretical perspective, countries can choose to pursue two approaches to counter
economic coercion, as with any other coercive action: deterrence by denial and deterrence by
punishment. Both approaches attempt to change the adversary’s calculation, but the specific target
in the adversary’s decision-making process differs.
Deterrence by denial aims to dissuade an action by making it unlikely to succeed, thereby
reducing the adversary’s confidence that taking the coercive action will achieve its desired
objectives. In short, deterrence-by-denial strategies seek to leverage the adversary’s fear of failure
to decrease the perceived benefit of its actions. 13 Deterrence-by-denial strategies in the context
of economic coercion include measures such as strengthening supply chains and establishing
mechanisms to absorb the impact of economic coercion, such as by mitigating costs for affected
businesses or by helping them find alternative markets. In pursuing such strategies in the context
of economic coercion, countermeasures can be categorized into two types that are mutually
reinforcing: preemptive and reactive measures. 14 Preemptive measures seek to build economic
resilience within the country and with partners, decreasing the asymmetric vulnerabilities that
could be exploited as opportunities for economic coercion. Reactive measures are intended to
mitigate the impact of economic coercion after the adversary’s action.
On the other hand, deterrence-by-punishment strategies seek to prevent an action out of
fear of retaliation by threatening consequences, raising the perceived cost of the action to the
adversary.15 Examples of deterrence by punishment in the context of economic security include
retaliation through sanctions, tariffs, and other restrictions. Since deterrence by punishment
inherently develops countermeasures preemptively, credibility of threats is necessary for this
approach to work. Comparing the two strategies, while the deterrence-by-punishment approach
is likely to be deployed more quickly and can be politically popular as an active measure that
imposes costs on an adversary, the deterrence-by-denial strategy offers a long-term solution and
carries less risk of escalation.
Countermeasures in Practice: Japan’s Denial Strategy
Japan’s Experience and Reaction to Chinese Economic Coercion
In 2010 a Chinese fishing vessel collided with Japanese coast guard ships near the contested
Senkaku Islands (known as the Diaoyu Islands in China). In response to the detention of the
Chinese captain, China effectively halted rare earth exports to Japan. 16 Despite clear evidence that
 13 Reynolds and Goodman, “Deny, Deflect, Deter: Countering China’s Economic Coercion. ”
 14 Ibid.
 15 Michael J. Mazarr, “Understanding Deterrence, ” RAND Corporation, Perspective, 2018, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/
perspectives/PE200/PE295/RAND_PE295.pdf.
 16 Oki Nagai, “No Compromise: How a Decade-Old Clash Points to China Today, ” Nikkei Asia, September 5, 2020, https://asia.nikkei.com/
Politics/International-relations/No-compromise-How-a-decade-old-clash-points-to-China-today.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
61
COUNTERING ECONOMIC COERCION u TOGASHI
the captain’s actions violated Japanese law, Japan released him to preserve the bilateral relationship
and prevent escalation of the economic coercion. Given the reliance of Japan’s tech-centric
economy on rare earth minerals, the incident was a wake-up call for Japan regarding its high
dependency on China to acquire certain strategic goods.
A month after Beijing effectively banned rare earth exports to Japan, Tokyo announced a
comprehensive policy package to support the development and diversification of rare earth
supplies, for which 100 billion yen (approximately $1 billion at the time) was appropriated in
the supplemental budget. The policy package added “advancement of the rare earth utilization
industry” as a pillar alongside the four pillars already addressed in the Japanese government’s
supply strategy: (1) securing overseas resources, (2) promoting recycling, (3) developing
substitution materials, and (4) building up stockpiles.17
Within a decade, Chinese rare earth minerals fell from around 90% of all Japanese rare earth
imports to 60%.18 These efforts to reduce Japan’s rare earth dependency on China are ongoing. In
2022 the Japanese Diet approved 6 billion yen for a project to extract resources for electric and
hybrid vehicles in Minamitorishima, a coral atoll located approximately 1,900 kilometers southeast
of Tokyo.19 Furthermore, in 2023 Japan acquired its first financial interest in mining heavy rare
earth elements in Australia as part of this effort to reduce dependency on China. Sojitz, a Japanese
trading firm, and the Japan Organization for Metals and Energy Security (JOGMEC) invested
approximately A$200 million in Australia’s Lynas Rare Earths, which is the biggest non-Chinese
rare earth mining company.20
Despite the effective policy response and mitigation of risks in the rare earths sector, Japan
once again became a target of Chinese economic coercion. In August 2023, shortly after Japan
released treated water from the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, China banned all
imports of Japanese seafood. In 2022, it was the top destination for Japanese seafood, accounting
for more than 20% of Japan’s total seafood exports. 21 A month after the ban, the market price of
cold shellfish in Tokyo had decreased by 20%–30%, suggesting that even if coercion is assumed to
have a limited macro-level impact, the effect on businesses can still be significant. 22
After the Chinese ban on Japanese seafood imports, several domestic and foreign government,
scientific, and private-sector statements were made affirming the safety of Japanese seafood, and
Japan took measures to increase domestic demand and diversify export destinations. The Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, for example, announced a slogan for people to “eat five
scallops per person.”23 Some sushi restaurant chains and Japanese websites for hometown tax—a
tax system that encourages taxpayers in urban areas to pay their income taxes and residential taxes
 17 Oshima Takeshi, “Reametaru shigen kakuho no genjo to kadai” [The Current Situation and Challenges in Securing Rare Metal Resources],
Rippo to Chosa, December 2010, https://www.sangiin.go.jp/japanese/annai/chousa/rippou_chousa/backnumber/2010pdf/20101201043.pdf.
 18 “Reaasu Nihon Taichu izondo nao rokuwari” [Japan’s Rare Earth Dependency on China Still Around 60%)], Nikkei, February 15, 2020,
https://www.nikkei.com/article/DGKKZO55674300U0A210C2EA2000.
 19 “Minamitorishimaoki de reaasu saikutsu e gijutsukaihatsu, nijuyonen nimo saikutsu kaishi” [Rare Earth Mining Technology to Be
Developed Offshore of Minamitori-shima, Exploratory Mining to Begin in 2012], Nikkei, December 18, 2022, https://www.nikkei.com/
article/DGXZQOUA094KI0Z01C22A1000000.
 20 Mamoru Tsuge and Shoya Okinaga, “Japan Takes First Stake in Heavy Rare Earths to Reduce China Reliance, ” Nikkei Asia, March 9, 2023,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Supply-Chain/Japan-takes-first-stake-in-heavy-rare-earths-to-reduce-China-reliance.
 21 “China’s Ban on Japanese Seafood is Absurd, ” Nikkei Asia, August 30, 2023, https://asia.nikkei.com/Opinion/The-Nikkei-View/China-s-ban-
on-Japanese-seafood-is-absurd.
 22 “Hotate souba V-ji kaifuku, Chugoku kinyu ichinen, hanro hirogari futatabi shinausu” [Scallop Market V-shaped Recovery One Y ear after
the Chinese Embargo, Sales Channels Expanded, and Scallops Are Once Again in Short Supply], Nikkei, August 20, 2024, https://www.
nikkei.com/article/DGXZQOUB1469X0U4A810C2000000.
 23 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
62
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
to rural municipalities instead of where they reside and to receive gifts in return—also launched
campaigns to increase domestic demand. After these campaigns, household spending on scallops
across Japan increased 1.5 times in the fourth quarter of 2023 compared with the same time period
in 2022, according to a survey by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 24 On top
of domestic efforts to increase demand, Japan diversified its seafood exports. Year-on-year scallop
exports to the United States increased by 64%, exports to Canada by 7.2 times, exports to Thailand
by 3.5 times, and exports to Vietnam by 7.9 times.25
Considering both examples, Japan’s countermeasures to respond to Chinese economic coercion
appear to have been generally effective. In the 2010 case, Japan limited the demand for the PRC’s
rare earths by developing domestic production and diversifying external supply channels. In the
2023 case, within a year the price of the banned scallops had returned to the same level as before
the Chinese ban on Japanese seafood imports. These cases empirically show that for Japan the
damage of economic coercion can be mitigated and overcome after a period of time, depending
on the difficulty of replacing either the demand or the supply. Japan’s experience, however,
underscores the importance of having both the ability to deploy significant resources—which is
more difficult for small or developing economies—and the policy resolve to do so.
Japan’s Denial Strategy and International Cooperation
Building on its effective responses to these first-hand experiences as a target of economic
coercion, Japan has continued to develop preemptive and reactive measures in recent years. In
May 2022, it passed the Economic Security Promotion Act. One of the act’s four pillars specifically
focuses on building resilient supply chains. Various forms of financial subsidies are provided
to approved companies with supply chain restructuring plans to help strengthen supply chain
resilience, which in turn preemptively mitigates or deflects the impact of disruptions, including
coercive ones.
Japan’s concrete reactive measures are laid out in the Action Plan for Strengthening Industrial
and Technological Foundation to Enhance Economic Security, which was announced in October
2023 and revised in May 2024 by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. Japan’s approach
in reactive measures is to utilize international frameworks and take actions based on international
rules while supporting the private sector. 26 In supporting the private sector, Tokyo seeks to help
companies develop and promote alternative overseas sales channels, provide technical assistance
from experts through the Japan External Trade Organization, and cover the risks associated with
the development of sales channels and losses for exchange rate fluctuations, controls on imports,
and economic sanctions through Nippon Export and Investment Insurance.
In terms of international cooperation to counter economic coercion, the U.S.-Japan bilateral
relationship has played a leading role. The two countries discussed ways to counter economic
coercion at the first Japan-U.S. Economic Policy Consultative Committee Meeting (the Economic
“2+2”) in July 2022, including the need to act in coordination with other partners. 27 Since then,
 24 “Hotate souba V-ji kaifuku, Chugoku kinyu ichinen, hanro hirogari futatabi shinausu. ”
 25 Ibid.
 26 “Keizai anzenhoshou ni kansuru sangyou gijutsukiban kyouka akushon puran kaiteiban” [Revised Action Plan for Strengthening Industrial
and Technological Infrastructure for Economic Security], Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, May, 2024, https://www.meti.go.jp/
policy/economy/economic_security/240515actionplan.pdf.
 27 “Japan-U.S. Economic Policy Consultative Committee Meeting (the Economic ‘2+2’), ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), Press Release,
July 29, 2022, https://www.mofa.go.jp/na/na2/us/page6e_000296.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
63
COUNTERING ECONOMIC COERCION u TOGASHI
the United States and Japan have formed and developed multiple platforms to collectively counter
economic coercion.
Reflecting the leadership of Japan in this area, one of the most significant developments took
place during its G-7 host year, when participating leaders launched the Coordination Platform
on Economic Coercion at the Hiroshima Summit in May 2023. The platform seeks to increase
“collective assessment, preparedness, deterrence and response to economic coercion,” as well as
“further promote cooperation with partners beyond the G-7.”28 Concretely, within the coordination
platform, the G-7 countries seek to “use early warning and rapid information sharing, regularly
consult each other, collaboratively assess situations, explore coordinated responses, deter and,
where appropriate, counter economic coercion, in accordance with our respective legal systems.”
The importance of the coordination platform was reiterated during the following G-7 summit in
Apulia, Italy, in June 2024. 29 The platform is a key tool for member states to counter economic
coercion collectively, given their global political capital, technological advantage, and economic
weight. Institutionalizing the platform is important so that these efforts can continue regardless of
leadership changes.
Another major development in countering economic coercion collectively was agreed on
among the United States, Japan, and South Korea at the Camp David Summit in August 2023. The
three countries agreed to cooperate toward the launch of an early-warning system for information
sharing and policy coordination to counter economic coercion. 30 The development under the
trilateral platform is also significant, given the importance of the three economies for China,
especially in terms of access to critical and emerging technology. Moreover, the fact that Japan
and South Korea can work together as partners on this issue is likely to raise the cost of imposing
economic coercion strategically within the region.
More broadly, other major groupings moving toward building resilient supply chains in the
region include the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF) and the Quad (Japan,
Australia, India, and the United States). The U.S.-led IPEF Supply Chain Agreement, which went
into effect in February 2024, was the first multilateral agreement on this issue. The agreement
instructs member states to create action plans for critical supplies and allows them to use the crisis
response network when facing a disruption.31 The Quad also has stood up working groups focused
on supply chains in specific sectors, including clean energy and critical and emerging technology.32
These and other multilayered mechanisms to counter economic coercion are laying the foundation
for major economies that have deep economic relations with China to act collectively in the event
of economic coercion.
 28 “G7 Leaders’ Statement on Economic Resilience and Economic Security, ” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan), Press Release, May 20, 2023,
https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/100506815.pdf.
 29 “ ‘ Apulia G7 Leaders’ Communiqué, ” G-7 Italy, June 14, 2024, https://www.g7italy.it/wp-content/uploads/Apulia-G7-Leaders-Communique.pdf.
 30 “The Spirit of Camp David: Joint Statement of Japan, the Republic of Korea, and the United States, ” White House, Press Release, August 18,
2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/08/18/the-spirit-of-camp-david-joint-statement-of-japan-the-
republic-of-korea-and-the-united-states.
 31 “U.S. Department of Commerce Announces Upcoming Entry into Force of the IPEF Supply Chain Agreement, ” U.S. Department of
Commerce, Press Release, January 31, 2024, https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2024/01/us-department-commerce-
announces-upcoming-entry-force-ipef-supply-chain.
 32 “Quad Leaders’ Track Working Groups, ” Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Australia), 2023, https://www.pmc.gov.au/
resources/quad-leaders-summit-2023/quad-leaders-track-working-groups.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
64
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u FEBRUARY 2025
Looking Ahead: U.S.-Japan Leadership in Collectively Countering
Economic Coercion
Japan and the United States have made significant progress in building and developing
multilateral platforms to counter economic coercion collectively in recent years. The initiatives the
two countries have led to strengthen supply chains and create mechanisms for managing times
of disruption are becoming more effective in mitigating and deflecting the impact of economic
coercion arising from asymmetric economic dependencies. This simply means that Japan and like-
minded countries now have fewer vulnerabilities that adversaries could exploit economically. As
a result, such adversaries will be less likely to deploy economic coercion in the first place, which
achieves the policy goal of preventing economic coercion without suffering the costs of either
coercion itself or reactive responses to incidents. This approach provides a long-term solution,
with less negative impact than short-term retaliatory measures that heighten economic disruption.
Moreover, strengthening supply chains and creating mechanisms that can be used in times
of disruption advance Japan’s broader foreign policy goal of protecting a free and open Indo-
Pacific. Strengthening supply chains allows countries to counter economic coercion by appealing
to the rule of law, which is the basis of the international liberal trade order, rather than deploying
targeted retaliatory measures that can be criticized as discriminatory. This not only will prove
more diplomatically or politically attractive to Japan’s partners but also is more economically
beneficial because it creates a predictable trade and business environment and contributes to
greater overall economic security. In today’s highly globalized economy, the ripple effect of
unpredictable economic restrictions, such as export controls and investment restrictions, can hurt
not only the economy of the country being targeted but also all that country’s trading partners.
Therefore, countering economic coercion in a way that does not hurt business relations is critical
to achieving both economic security and economic growth. In this respect, building resilient
supply chains and creating a system for collectively responding to disruptions provide a solution
that achieves two potentially competing policy goals.
Although efforts by the United States and Japan have helped establish a foundation and
facilitated international cooperation to counter economic coercion, it is now essential to maintain
this momentum and institutionalize these measures both domestically and internationally. The
biggest variable is leadership changes around the world, but especially in the United States. It is
critical for like-minded countries to act collectively to counter economic coercion effectively, and
therefore it will be essential that these bilateral and plurilateral efforts persist even as new leaders
take office in participating countries. Unpredictable policy shifts in the United States have created
uncertainty over its commitment to the IPEF as well as over U.S.-led efforts to work with partners
and allies in the region to strengthen collective anti-coercion measures.
Institutionalizing international counter-coercion efforts both domestically and internationally
will require looking beyond initial commitments and implementing more concrete domestic
policies and regularized frameworks for international engagement. In this process, there are
three potential challenges for U.S.- and Japanese-led initiatives to counter economic coercion
collectively. First, there is a difference between the two countries’ views on free trade. While
admitting the need to adjust the existing system to better address new risks such as economic
coercion, Japan continues to uphold the principles of free trade. On the other hand, the United
States has implemented policies that demonstrate a shift away from traditional free-trade
approaches, such as its withdrawal from what became the Comprehensive and Progressive

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
65
COUNTERING ECONOMIC COERCION u TOGASHI
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, the launch of the IPEF as a keystone regional framework
that lacked any form of binding trade liberalization, and the increased use of industrial policy.
Several high-level officials during the Biden administration acknowledged this shift. U.S. Trade
Representative Katherine Tai, for example, stated that “aggressive liberalization and tariff
elimination” made the United States and other countries too dependent on China for critical
materials and that “we are writing a new story on trade.” 33 In the same month, National Security
Advisor Jake Sullivan called for measures to rebuild industrial capacity within the United States,
shifting away from neoliberal assumptions and emphasizing the disadvantages of liberalization. 34
Second, Japan seems to put more weight on denial rather than punishment strategies than the
United States does. The Japanese action plan on economic security clearly states the country’s
focus on denial, while policy discourse in the United States—including the proposed Countering
Economic Coercion Act, which includes punitive measures—suggests a high level of openness
to the traditional U.S. reliance on punitive measures, such as tariffs and sanctions, as tools of
economic statecraft.
Third, Japan and the United States could disagree on the meaning of strengthening supply
chains or the scope of national security, driven by different degrees of protectionism in their
economic and industrial policies. Although the two countries have managed their differences
so far, such as through the clarification of the scope of the Inflation Reduction Act, the risk of
divergence remains if the gap continues to widen.
Despite these differences, Japan and the United States both have strategic interests in countering
economic coercion together and leading the international efforts. Regardless of the leadership, the
cost of facing economic coercion without effective countermeasures is much higher than the cost
of overcoming the differences between the two countries.
 33 David Lawder, “U.S. Trade Chief Tai Defends Pursuit of Non-traditional Trade Deals, ” Reuters, April 5, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/
world/us/us-trade-chief-tai-defend-pursuit-non-traditional-trade-deals-2023-04-05.
 34 “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on Renewing American Economic Leadership at the Brookings Institution, ” White
House, Press Release, April 27, 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2023/04/27/remarks-by-national-
security-advisor-jake-sullivan-on-renewing-american-economic-leadership-at-the-brookings-institution.

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
Seattle and Washington, D.C.
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, washington 98101 usa
phone 206-632-7370, fax 206-632-7487
1819 l st nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 usa
phone 202-347-9767, fax 202-347-9766
nbr@nbr.org, www.nbr.org
