
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY
SUPPLY CHAINS
IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC
OPTIONS FOR THE UNITED STATES
TO DE-RISK AND DIVERSIFY

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
NBR Board of Advisors
William Abnett
NBR
Se Hyun Ahn
University of Seoul
Dennis C. Blair
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Ketty Chen
Taiwan Foundation for Democracy
Josh Corless
ConocoPhillips
Linda Distlerath
PhRMA (ret.)
Nicholas Eberstadt
American Enterprise Institute
Karl Eikenberry
Former Ambassador (U.S.);
Lt. General, U.S. Army (ret.)
Bates Gill
Asia Society Policy Institute
Clara Gillispie
NBR
Stephen Hanson
College of William and Mary
Harry Harding
University of Virginia
Mikkal Herberg
University of California San Diego
Carla A. Hills
Hills & Company
Robert Holleyman
C&M International
Chun In-Bum
Lt. General, ROK Army (ret.)
Mark Jones
Wells Fargo
Amit Kapoor
India Council on Competitiveness
Nobukatsu Kanehara
Professor
Doshisha University
Tariq Karim
Former Ambassador (Bangladesh);
Independent University
Heino Klinck
U.S. Army/Department of Defense (ret.)
David Lampton
Johns Hopkins University
Stephen Lanza
Lt. General, U.S. Army (ret.)
Nicholas Lardy
Peterson Institute for International
Economics
Richard Lawless
New Magellan Ventures
William McCahill
Department of State (ret.)
Dewardric L. McNeal
Longview Global
Meredith Miller
Albright Stonebridge Group
Tami Overby
Albright Stonebridge Group
John S. Park
Harvard Kennedy School
Pamela Passman
APCO Worldwide
Rajeswari Rajagopalan
Observer Research Foundation
Clarine Nardi Riddle
Kasowitz, Benson, Torres
& Friedman LLP
Ryo Sahashi
University of Tokyo
Ulrike Schaede
University of California San Diego
Robert Scher
BP
David Shambaugh
George Washington University
Benjamin Shobert
Microsoft
Mike Studeman
Rear Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Travis Sullivan
Boeing Company
Travis Tanner
Greenpoint Group
Arzan Tarapore
Stanford University
Jessica Teets
Middlebury College
Dana White
Ankura
NBR Chairs and Counselors
Richard J. Ellings
NBR (ret.)
Thomas B. Fargo
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
Aaron L. Friedberg
Princeton University
Charlene Barshefsky
U.S. Trade Representative (ret.)
Charles W . Boustany Jr.
U.S. House of Representatives (ret.)
Norman D. Dicks
U.S. House of Representatives (ret.)
Jonathan W . Greenert
Admiral, U.S. Navy (ret.)
John M. Shalikashvili Chair
Ashley J. Tellis
Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
NBR Board of Directors
John V . Rindlaub
(Chair)
Regional President (ret.)
Wells Fargo Asia Pacific
Thomas W . Albrecht
(Vice Chair)
Partner (ret.)
Sidley Austin LLP
Ahn Ho-young
Former Ambassador (South Korea)
Roger W . Bowlin
Founder and Managing Partner
Real Estate Transition Solutions
Richard J. Ellings
President Emeritus and Counselor
NBR
Kurt Glaubitz
(Vice Chair)
General Manager, Corporate Affairs
Asia Pacific Exploration and Production
Chevron Corporation
Charles Hooper
Senior Counselor
The Cohen Group
Roy D. Kamphausen
President
NBR
Ryo Kubota
Chairman, President, and CEO
Kubota Vision Incorporated
Quentin W . Kuhrau
(Treasurer)
Chief Executive Officer
Unico Properties LLC
Melody Meyer
President
Melody Meyer Energy LLC
Huan Nguyen
Rear Admiral (ret.), U.S. Navy;
Senior Advisor to Naval Sea
Systems Command
Long Nguyen
Chairman, President, and CEO
Pragmatics, Inc.
Kenneth B. Pyle
Professor, University of Washington
Founding President, NBR
William Rademaker
Entrepreneur
Duthie Hill LLC
Jonathan Roberts
Founder and Partner
Ignition Partners
Tom Robertson
Corporate Vice President and
Deputy General Counsel
Microsoft
Joseph E. Tofalo
Vice President, Engagement and
Customer Affairs
Huntington Ingalls Industries, Inc.
Mitchell B. Waldman
Principal
M Barnet Advisors LLC
Cynthia A. Watson
Professor and Dean Emerita
National War College
Honorary Director
George F . Russell Jr.
Chairman Emeritus
Russell Investments

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #106 | november 2023
critical technology
supply chains
in the asia-pacific
Options for the United States
to De-risk and Diversify
Taylore Roth, Samuel Naumann, Sarah Mortensen,
Peter Heine, Amanda Sayre, John VerWey,
and Adam Attarian

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
the national bureau of asian research
The NBR Special Report provides access to current research on special topics conducted by
the world’s leading experts in Asian affairs. The views expressed in these reports are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of other NBR research associates or
institutions that support NBR.
The National Bureau of Asian Research helps decision-makers better understand Asia and
craft concrete, actionable policy. NBR is an independent research institution based in Seattle
and Washington, D.C. We bring world-class scholarship to bear on the evolving strategic
environment in Asia through original, policy-relevant research, and we invest in our future
by training the next generation of Asia specialists.
Our research is conducted by a global network of specialists and tackles critical issues
identified by stakeholders in anticipation of future challenges. The findings are a result
of independent scholarship and do not reflect institutional perspectives. Our rigorous
standards facilitate informed decision-making based on knowledge rather than ideology.
Established in 1989, NBR is a legacy organization of Senator Henry M. Jackson, who foresaw
the national need for an institution to study and inform public policy on Asia in both the
public and private sectors. Building on Senator Jackson’s bipartisan approach, NBR engages
policymakers looking for reliable Asia expertise through sustained interaction in high-trust,
nonpartisan settings. Our experts and research have shaped congressional legislation and
administration policies, brought issues to the top of the U.S. foreign policy agenda, and
attracted worldwide media attention. We mobilize expertise on Asia for a more effective
foreign policy.
NBR receives support from foundations, corporations, government (including foreign
governments of allies and liberal democracies), and public agencies, and philanthropic
individuals. NBR reserves the right to publish findings. We do not undertake classified or
proprietary research work, and we observe policies to avoid conflicts of interest.
To download issues of the NBR Special Report, please visit the NBR website
http://www.nbr.org.
This report may be reproduced for personal use. Otherwise, the NBR Special Report may
not be reproduced in full without the written permission of NBR. When information from
NBR publications is cited or quoted, please cite the author and The National Bureau of
Asian Research.
This is the one-hundred-and-sixth NBR Special Report.
NBR is a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation under I.R.C. Sec. 501(c)(3), qualified to receive
tax-exempt contributions.
© 2023 by The National Bureau of Asian Research.
Cover design by Nate Christenson.
For further information about NBR, contact:
The National Bureau of Asian Research
One Union Square
600 University Street, Suite 1012
Seattle, Washington 98101
206-632-7370 Phone
nbr@nbr.org E-mail
http://www.nbr.org

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
critical technology
supply chains
in the asia-pacific
Options for the United States
to De-risk and Diversify
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 2
 Executive Summary
 4
 Methodology
 8
 Commodity Analysis
 18
 Findings and Policy Implications
 20
 Conclusion and Next Steps
 22
 Appendix
nbr special report #106 | novmeber 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
1
the national bureau of asian research
nbr special report #106 | november 2023
TAYLORE ROTH is a National Security Specialist at Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory. She can be reached at <taylore.roth@pnnl.gov>.
SAMUEL NAUMANN is a Data Scientist at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. He
can be reached at <samuel.naumann@pnnl.gov>.
SARAH MORTENSEN is a Post-masters Research Associate at Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory. She can be reached at <sarah.mortensen@pnnl.gov>.
PETER HEINE is a Senior Advisor at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. He can be
reached at <peter.heine@pnnl.gov>.
AMANDA SAYRE is a Research Analyst at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. She
can be reached at <amanda.sayre@pnnl.gov>.
JOHN VERWEY is an Advisor at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. He can be
reached at <john.verwey@pnnl.gov>.
ADAM ATTARIAN is a Senior Data Scientist at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.
He can be reached at <adam.attarian@pnnl.gov>.
Critical Technology Supply Chains
in the Asia-Pacific
Options for the United States
to De-risk and Diversify
Taylore Roth, Samuel Naumann, Sarah Mortensen,
Peter Heine, Amanda Sayre, John VerWey,
and Adam Attarian

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report uses an econometric approach to identify several chokepoints within critical
technology supply chains, draws key policy implications, and considers several options for
policymakers to diversify U.S. trade relationships with countries in the East Asia-Pacific
region.
MAIN ARGUMENT
The People’s Republic of China controls key nodes throughout U.S. critical technology
supply chains, intensifying pressure for U.S. policymakers to diversify and establish
alternatives. This analysis leverages an econometric approach to evaluating critical
technology supply chains, as defined by the U.S. Department of Commerce’s International
Trade Administration, with the intention of identifying U.S. supply chain vulnerabilities and
opportunities for trade diversification. As the Biden administration’s Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework looks to bolster investment and trade relationships with allies and partners in
the region, trade analysis can help identify specific areas of mutual interest and opportunity.
In particular, four critical technologies are key to future advances in computing and clean
energy (fuel cells, nuclear power, neodymium magnets, and semiconductors), while specific
supply chain nodes present strategic vulnerabilities.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
• Raw materials underlying numerous critical technology supply chains are considered
global chokepoints with fewer options for diversification. Policies to alleviate these
chokepoints can act as a multiplier for supply chain security across multiple sectors.
• The East Asia-Pacific region presents ample opportunities for critical technology supply
chain diversification. South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan already possess a foundation
from which to scale up production of many chokepoint commodities, while growing
manufacturing hubs in Southeast Asia are prime candidates for U.S. investments and
supports for trade diversification.
• The U.S. is making historic investments in domestic industry to alleviate perceived
national and economic security concerns surrounding critical technology supply chains.
The U.S. cannot fully onshore each of these supply chains, however, and a data-driven
approach, such as the one adopted in this report, can help policymakers understand
where strategies like friend-shoring or trade facilitation may most effectively support
U.S. policy objectives.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
3
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
E
merging technologies are rapidly shaping the global trajectory of economic growth
and national security. Near-term advances in technologies like biotechnology, artificial
intelligence (AI), quantum computing, and microelectronics will confer asymmetric
national security advantages to nations leading their development and deployment while
unlocking and expanding new commercial markets. Each of these emerging technologies relies on
complex supply chains of products and services that support their overall innovation ecosystem,
making critical and emerging technology innovation contingent on the security and resilience of
these supply chains.
The United States, like the rest of the world, relies on firms in the East Asia-Pacific region
(EAP) for raw, intermediate, and finished goods that support many of these critical technology
supply chains.1 For example, recent reports estimate that firms in the People’s Republic of China
(PRC) produce 97% of silicon wafers for solar power and control 80% of electric vehicle battery
cell manufacturing capacity, Taiwanese firms produce 92% of the world’s leading-edge logic
semiconductors, and Japanese firms control 73% of the world’s supply of select electronic-grade
chemicals.2
Supply chain disruptions, whether due to a pandemic or economic coercion by a trade
partner, can have wide-ranging impacts even when only disrupting the supply of minor inputs.
Compounding supply chain risks have highlighted the importance of granularly quantifying and
characterizing U.S. dependence on EAP countries for critical technology supply chains. In 2021,
the Biden administration issued Executive Order 14017, which undertook a whole-of-government
review of critical supply chains to identify risks and policy options.3 Many of the reports generated
in response to the executive order emphasized the need to further map U.S. supply chain
reliance on EAP countries, looking for risks where chokepoints may lead to an interruption and
opportunities where collaboration with allies could mitigate these risks.
Moreover, recognizing the geopolitical importance of emerging technologies to both national
and economic security, particularly in an era of intensifying strategic competition with the PRC,
U.S. policymakers are engaged in ambitious efforts to protect and promote U.S. leadership in
critical technologies. 4 Simultaneously, U.S. policymakers are pursuing strategies to increase
critical technology supply chain security and resilience. 5 Landmark legislation like the CHIPS
and Science Act, the Inflation Reduction Act, and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law demonstrates
a renewed national focus on industrial policy, with the U.S. government investing billions of
dollars in bolstering U.S. innovation and manufacturing capacity for critical technologies.
 1 This region is defined based on the U.S. Department of State’s Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs country list. This list includes the
following countries: Australia, Brunei, Burma, Cambodia, Cook Islands, Fiji, Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, Laos, Malaysia, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia, Mongolia, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, North Korea, Palau, Papua New Guinea, People’s Republic of China, the Philippines,
Samoa, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Vietnam.
 2 “The Biden-Harris Plan to Revitalize American Manufacturing and Secure Critical Supply Chains in 2022, ” White House, Press Release,
February 24, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/02/24/the-biden-harris-plan-to-revitalize-
american-manufacturing-and-secure-critical-supply-chains-in-2022; “Chinese Photoresist Companies See a Rise in Their Share Price after
Report of an Impending Ban from Japan, ” Gizmochina, March 15, 2023, https://www.gizmochina.com/2023/03/15/chinese-photoresist-
companies-rise-share-price-after-ban-from-japan; U.S. Department of Energy, Grid Energy Storage: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment
(Washington, D.C., February 2022), https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/Energy%20Storage%20Supply%20Chain%20
Report%20-%20final.pdf; and U.S. Department of Energy, Solar Photovoltaics: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment (Washington, D.C.,
February 2022), https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/solar-photovoltaics-supply-chain-review-report.
 3 Joseph R. Biden, “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains, ” White House, February 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/02/24/executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains.
 4 “Critical and Emerging Technologies List Update, ” White House, February 8, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2022/02/02-2022-Critical-and-Emerging-Technologies-List-Update.pdf.
 5 Biden, “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
4
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
Such investments have the potential to alter the structure of supply chains by onshoring and
nearshoring manufacturing of the emerging technologies that are expected to dictate the course of
economic growth and national security.
In addition to investments in domestic competitiveness, cooperation with like-minded allies
and partners, including in the EAP, will be essential for efforts to improve the resilience of
critical technology supply chains by identifying vulnerabilities (chokepoints) and opportunities
(alternative sources). 6 The analysis presented in this report can inform U.S. policymakers of
opportunities for collaboration with EAP countries to increase critical technology supply chain
security, including through the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity, the G-7
Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion, the Minerals Security Partnership, and the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).
This report presents an econometric approach to characterizing vulnerabilities and
opportunities in the EAP region for policymakers interested in increasing the resilience of U.S.
critical technology supply chains. While other studies leverage econometric methods to highlight
trade concentrations and dependencies within select sectors or commodities, 7 this report is the
first to use the Harmonized System (HS) codes in the U.S. International Trade Administration
(ITA) list of critical technologies to demonstrate how international trade data can be used to
identify vulnerabilities in critical supply chains. The following analysis finds that the United States
is in some cases heavily reliant on imports from the region for raw, intermediate, and finished
critical technology products. Vulnerabilities can occur when one country or a subset of countries
is responsible for a significant share of worldwide trade in a critical technology commodity or U.S.
imports of that commodity. This report also demonstrates how international trade data can be
used to identify opportunities in supply chains: in the event that a vulnerability is observed, this
methodological approach can highlight alternative sources of critical technology commodities
and instances where collaboration with allied countries could mitigate a vulnerability.
Methodology
Data
This report uses 2021 BACI international trade data in combination with a list of critical
technologies (and their intermediate inputs) generated by the ITA within the U.S. Department
of Commerce.8 Trade data is used to calculate several metrics that are used to assess U.S. supply
chain resiliency and identify potential risks, dependencies, and opportunities associated with
U.S.-EAP trade.
BACI data.9 Compiled by the Centre d’Études Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales,
BACI data provides information on the bilateral trade flows between 200 countries using six-digit
 6 Biden, “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains. ”
 7 See, for example, Olivia White et al., “The Complication of Concentration in Global Trade, ” McKinsey, January 12, 2023, https://www.
mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/the-complication-of-concentration-in-global-trade; and Eliana Zeballos, Xiao Dong, and Ergys Islamaj, “ A
Disaggregated View of Market Concentration in the Food Retail Industry, ” U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Report, no.
314, January 5, 2023, https://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details?pubid=105557.
 8 U.S. International Trade Administration (ITA), “Draft List of Critical Supply Chains, ” https://www.trade.gov/data-visualization/draft-list-
critical-supply-chains.
 9 Centre d’Études Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales (CEPII), “BACI: International Trade Database at the Product Level, ” http://
www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_modele/bdd_modele_item.asp?id=37.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
5
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
HS codes. BACI data is sourced from the UN Commodity Trade Statistics Database and processed
through a mirror analysis to correct reporting errors and fill missing gaps. 10
Critical technologies . In response to Executive Order 14017, “Executive Order on America’s
Supply Chains,” the ITA drafted a list of products within four critical sectors: public health and
biological preparedness, information and communications technology (ICT), energy, and critical
minerals.11 Within each of these sectors, subsectors of critical technologies were identified. For
example, within the energy sector, subsectors related to commodities like large-capacity batteries,
neodymium magnets, nuclear power, platinum group metals, solar, and wind were identified. This
report focuses on the fuel cell, nuclear energy, neodymium magnet, and semiconductor subsectors.
These subsectors are particularly relevant for industries critical to U.S. economic and national
security, such as aerospace, defense, clean energy, and automotives.
This report focuses on items within the ICT and energy sectors as well as their associated
subsectors. Table 1 enumerates the number of items of interest per subsector imported by the
United States. The ITA critical technologies list presents the items according to the eight- and ten-
digit tariff lines as detailed within the U.S. Harmonized Tariff Schedule. This report, by contrast,
uses six-digit BACI data, truncating the more specific eight- and ten-digit level codes within their
corresponding six-digit codes based on the products within the ITA list.
 10 The UN Comtrade Database is available at https://comtradeplus.un.org.
 11 Biden, “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains”; and U.S. ITA, “Draft List of Critical Supply Chains. ”
t a b l e 1 U.S. Department of Commerce critical technology sectors and subsectors
Sector Subsector Number of HS codes that
the United States imports
Energy
Carbon capture 17
Electric grid 53
Fuel cells 107
Hydropower 24
Large-capacity batteries 49
Neodymium magnets 22
Nuclear power 32
Platinum group metals 17
Solar 51
Wind 54
ICT
Audiovisual equipment 26
Computer equipment 20
Other electronic components 38
Semiconductors/electronic components 1
Telecom/network equipment 31
Semiconductors 97

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
6
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
Countries. This study focuses on exports to the United States from countries within the East
Asia-Pacific as defined by the U.S. Department of State’s Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
(see Table 2). The scope does not include intraregional trade but is limited to the exports of critical
technologies and materials to the United States and its reported imports.
Metrics
This study uses the following metrics to analyze the trade flows of critical technologies to
observe trends in country-level competitiveness (market share and comparative advantage) and
commodity-level dependence (import and export market concentration): Relative Market Share
(RMS), Normalized Revealed Comparative Advantage (NRCA), and the Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI). Together, these three metrics lend insight into the structure and competitiveness
of a given market. For example, analyzed in conjunction with one another, these data points can
illustrate whether a market is dominated by a few large players with a high market share or is
highly competitive between many suppliers with low individual market share.
Relative Market Share. Market share calculations show a specific country’s share of worldwide
exports for a particular commodity. This calculation takes the value of a country’s exports of a
commodity and divides it by the worldwide exports of that commodity. Market share is useful for
making general observations about a country’s export competitiveness in a specific product. For
example, one method of estimating U.S. competitiveness in the market for commercial aircraft is
to calculate U.S. exports of aircraft as a percentage of worldwide exports of aircraft.
RMS improves on basic market share by comparing a country’s exports of a commodity with
those of its top competitor. To compute this metric, the market share of the top supplier is divided
by the next largest supplier’s market share. The market share of every other supplier is then divided
by that of the top supplier. In this way, an RMS score can be generated for each country in a
market. The top supplier’s RMS indicates how many times as large its market share is as that of its
largest competitor. The RMS scores of all other countries indicate the size of their market shares
relative to the score of the top supplier.
t a b l e 2 U.S. State Department list of countries and areas in the EAP
Australia Kiribati North Korea Taiwan
Brunei Laos Palau Thailand
Burma (Myanmar) Malaysia Papua New Guinea Timor-Leste
Cambodia Marshall Islands Philippines Tonga
People’s Republic of China Micronesia Samoa Tuvalu
Fiji Mongolia Singapore Vanuatu
Indonesia Nauru Solomon Islands Vietnam
Japan New Zealand South Korea –
s o u r c e : U.S. Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-
secretary-for-political-affairs/bureau-of-east-asian-and-pacific-affairs.
n o t e : Not on the State Department list but also included in this study are the Christmas Islands and Hong
Kong, as they are broken out in BACI trade data and treated as their own countries. The Cook Islands and
Niue are not included in this analysis, although they appear in the State Department’s country list.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
7
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
Assuming that market share is an indication of control over a market, RMS can offer insight
into the relative strength of any market participant against its leading rival. The market leader’s
RMS helps characterize its level of dominance over the market. An RMS score greater than 1
indicates a market leader, while a score below 1 represents a country’s market share as a percentage
of the leader’s. Broadly, RMS scores above 0.5 suggest a significant player in the market, while
scores below 0.3 suggest that suppliers will suffer from significant competitive disadvantages due
to the economies of scale and economies of experience enjoyed by bigger players. For example, the
U.S. RMS for heavy aircraft exports (HS 8802.40 airplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight
exceeding 15,000 kilograms) is 0.53, while France’s RMS for these exports is 1.73. This means that
the United States’ market share for that commodity is slightly more than half of France’s and that
France enjoys a 73% lead over its top competitor (Germany).
Normalized Revealed Comparative Advantage . This report uses NRCA, which is based on
calculations of Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA), a metric derived by comparing a product’s
share of a country’s exports to that product’s share of all world exports. NRCA improves upon the
RCA metric by standardizing scores along a scale from -1 to +1, enabling the comparison of a
country’s comparative advantage across different commodities. 12 A positive NRCA value suggests
that a country has a comparative advantage for a good, a negative value suggests a comparative
disadvantage, and a score of 0 means that a country’s market share is equal to the average global
market share. A larger NRCA absolute value indicates a greater advantage or disadvantage, with
an absolute value above approximately 0.7 suggesting a significant comparative advantage or
disadvantage.
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index . This report uses HHI to measure market concentration. 13
HHI is calculated by squaring the market share of each supplier in a given market and then
adding them together. 14 The index varies between 0 and 1, indicating perfect diversification and
total monopolization, respectively. The higher the score, the more concentrated the market for
a particular commodity. A commodity with a high HHI score is likely produced by only a few
countries. HHI increases both as the number of countries supplying a commodity decreases and
as the disparity between those countries’ market shares increases.
For this analysis, HHI illustrates the market concentration for commodities across two
different markets: global exports to all countries (HHI World) and global exports to the United
States (HHI U.S.).15 After scoring both markets using the same metric, it is possible to identify
commodities where the United States imports from a more concentrated set of partners than the
global market as a whole and could therefore diversify without the introduction of new suppliers.
HHI scores above 0.25 indicate a concentrated market with relatively few suppliers, while HHI
scores below 0.15 indicate a diversified market with many potential suppliers. Looking again at the
market for heavy aircraft (HS 8802.40), the United States’ import market for this commodity has a
concentration of 0.24, while the world market is slightly more diverse at 0.21.
 12 Run Yu, Junning Cai, and PingSun Leung, “The Normalized Revealed Comparative Advantage Index, ” Annals of Regional Science 43 (2009): 267–82.
 13 See UN Conference on Trade and Development, “Indicators Explained #1: Export Market Concentration Index, ” https://unctadstat.unctad.
org/en/IndicatorsExplained.html.
 14 U.S. Department of Justice, Antitrust Division, “Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, ” https://www.justice.gov/atr/herfindahl-hirschman-index.
 15 In certain markets, U.S. exports contribute significantly to global market concentration. If the United States is an important market
participant among several influential suppliers, then its contributions will decrease concentration. If it is a dominant market leader that
dwarfs other competitors, it may increase concentration. If policymakers seek to diversify U.S. imports using the HHI World metric, they
should adjust for the way U.S. contributions to HHI World may impact diversification targets.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
8
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
The United States can decrease market concentration in two ways. First, it can increase the
number of suppliers to the market. Second, it can increase the contributions of small market
participants and decrease those of large participants. In the market for heavy aircraft, the top U.S.
supplier (France) would need to lose 4.5% of its U.S. market share to a new competitor to decrease
HHI U.S. by 0.03 and reach parity with the world market.
Commodity Analysis
U.S. imports for most critical technology subsectors are highly concentrated. A number of them
have an HHI score above 0.25, which indicates that the United States relies on a small number
of supplier countries for these critical technologies. A comparison of worldwide imports of these
critical technology subsectors through HHI scores indicates that U.S. import dependence exceeds
the worldwide average in all subsectors analyzed. While variance between the world and U.S.
HHI scores is statistically predictable, the magnitude of this difference suggests that some supply
chains will be more easily diversified than others (see Table 3). For example, the average difference
between HHI U.S. and HHI World for the carbon capture subsector is 0.300, indicating multiple
opportunities within the supply chain for the United States to pursue diversification strategies
with other partners. In contrast, the difference between U.S. and global trade concentrations in
t a b l e 3 Average HHI scores for subsectors within the energy and ICT sectors
Sector Subsector Average HHI
U.S.
Average HHI
World
Difference
(HHI U.S. and
HHI World)
Label
Energy
Hydropower 0.282 0.105 0.177 1
Carbon capture 0.413 0.113 0.300 2
Fuel cells 0.258 0.125 0.132 3
Electric grid 0.363 0.133 0.230 4
Solar 0.368 0.153 0.215 5
Nuclear power 0.351 0.191 0.160 6
Wind 0.381 0.171 0.211 7
Neodymium magnets 0.268 0.169 0.098 8
Large-capacity batteries 0.317 0.185 0.133 9
Platinum group metals 0.435 0.245 0.190 10
ICT
Telecom/network
equipment 0.215 0.178 0.037 11
Semiconductors 0.282 0.185 0.096 12
Computer equipment 0.266 0.186 0.080 13
Audiovisual equipment 0.331 0.234 0.096 14
Semiconductors/
electronic components 0.311 0.162 0.149 15
Other electronic
components 0.194 0.126 0.068 16

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
9
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
the semiconductor subsector is nearly one-third that (0.096), meaning that greater diversification
throughout the supply chain will be more difficult to achieve.
The following sections analyze U.S. chokepoints and market concentrations with EAP suppliers
among key subsectors. This report provides analysis for the fuel cell, nuclear energy, neodymium
magnet, and semiconductor subsectors, which are included within the ITA’s ICT and energy
sectors. To identify chokepoint commodities in the tables below, we selected commodities with
annual exports to the United States above $1 million and identified all commodities for which
a single EAP supplier held at least 33% of the U.S. market share. The individual commodities
analyzed for each subsector are a subselection of these.
Patterns of Interest
The analysis in this report investigates four primary patterns of market concentration with
implications for U.S. domestic and foreign economic policy (see Figure 1). In general, U.S. trade
within the critical technology supply chains examined demonstrates room for diversification,
though some subsectors present more opportunities than others (see Figure 2).
Commodities with room to diversify (high HHI U.S. vs. low HHI World). For some commodities,
U.S. imports are highly concentrated (HHI U.S. greater than 0.25), while global supply remains
relatively diversified (HHI World less than 0.15). Of the 47 HS codes that qualify for this study’s
prerequisites,16 5 exhibit a high HHI U.S. with a low HHI World and are therefore candidates
 16 These criteria require that a commodity account for more than $1 million in U.S. imports, have an EAP supplier that controls at least 33%
of the U.S. market, and be within a subsector of interest (fuel cells, nuclear power, neodymium magnets, or semiconductors). Based on this
criteria, specific commodities were selected for deeper analysis in the appendix.
f i g u r e 1 Patterns of interest based on market concentration
HHI U.S.
Low High
HHI
World
Low
Both the world and the U.S.
markets are diversified and have
low supply risk.
The United States faces
an outsized risk of supply
disruption compared to the
world but it may be able to find
alternative suppliers.
High
The United States is doing a
better job of finding diverse
suppliers than other importers
around the globe.
Both the world and the U.S.
markets are highly concentrated,
indicating a high risk of
global supply disruption and
few immediate options
for diversification.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
10
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
for potential diversification. The PRC is the leading supplier to the United States for one of these
commodities (HS 2811.19 other inorganic acids and other inorganic oxygen compounds of
non-metals, other). The others were supplied by Japan (HS 8458.11 lathes: for removing metal,
horizontal, numerically controlled), South Korea (HS 8404.10 auxiliary plant for use with steam or
other vapor generating boilers; and HS 8458.99 lathes: for removing metal, other than horizontal or
numerically controlled lathes), and Malaysia (HS 8542.31 electronic integrated circuits: processors
and controllers).17 Table 4 identifies alternative suppliers within the EAP region that could scale
up existing exports to the United States. 18 Diversification of suppliers of these commodities could
 17 Between 2005 and 2016, an average of 75% of U.S. imports of integrated circuits from Malaysia were actually produced by subsidiaries of
U.S. firms. Furthermore, Malaysian companies primarily provide assembly, test, and packaging (ATP) services within the semiconductor
supply chain. ATP services contribute about 10% of an integrated circuit’s value; however, as the last step in the value chain, bilateral trade
statistics tend to overstate the manufacturing capacity and value-added contributions of Malaysian firms within this supply chain. See John
VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors, ” U.S. International Trade Commission, Executive
Briefing on Trade, March 2018, https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/executive_briefings/ebot-semiconductor_gvc_final.pdf; and Mihir
P . Torsekar and John VerWey, “East Asia-Pacific’s Participation in the Global Value Chain for Electronic Products, ” USITC Journal of
International Commerce and Economics, March 2019, https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/journals/east_asia-pacifics_participation_in_
the_global_value_chain_for_electronic_products.pdf.
 18 Alternative suppliers include those jurisdictions that already export some level of the chokepoint commodity identified in the table to the
United States. The analysis in this report does not account for distortions in trade data arising from transshipment, and further analysis is
needed to determine the manufacturing capacity present in alternative supplier jurisdictions.
f i g u r e 2 Subsector average market concentrations
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
00 .1 0.20 .3 0.40 .5
HHI Worlld
HHI U.S.
1 23
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
n o t e : This figure depicts U.S. and global market concentrations for subsectors within the ITA ’s list as
indicated by HHI scores for the U.S. and global markets. Darker shading indicates greater market diversification,
while lighter shading suggests greater market concentration.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
11
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
strengthen U.S. supply chain resilience while capitalizing on growing manufacturing sectors
among suppliers such as Taiwan, Malaysia, and Vietnam.
Global chokepoint commodities (high HHI U.S. and high HHI World) . For some chokepoint
commodities, the United States and its allies and partners may need to co-invest in building entirely
new alternative supply chains. These commodities are characterized by high HHI scores for both
the world and U.S. markets, which indicate high levels of global concentration. Within the EAP
region, the PRC is the leading U.S. supplier for five of the seven global chokepoint commodities
identified, many of which fall within the semiconductors subsector.19 Critical mineral commodities
support diverse technology supply chains like semiconductors and neodymium magnets, which is
why HS codes often co-occur in those subsectors. As a result, vulnerabilities generated by raw
material and mineral import dependencies can ripple throughout several critical supply chains,
increasing the potential impact of disruptions. Conversely, due to the ubiquitous demand for
critical minerals across supply chains, efforts to diversify suppliers could act as a supply chain
resilience multiplier. With the global supply of such commodities already heavily concentrated
among a few suppliers, efforts to diversify will likely require additional investment and trade
support to help new suppliers enter the market or scale up existing production. Furthermore,
efforts to diversify trade might focus on countries like Japan and South Korea, where a strong
existing industrial base could be scaled up. Additional trade diversification opportunities for
countries of interest are presented in Table 5.
Figure 3 demonstrates the average market concentration of different subsectors in the ITA’s list,
as well as the individual commodities within them. The x-axis indicates U.S. market concentration
(HHI U.S.), with commodity imports becoming increasingly concentrated toward the right of the
axis. The size of each data point indicates the value of U.S. imports for that commodity (relative to
the subsector). The vertical lines indicate the average U.S. market concentration for each subsector.
The HS codes highlighted in the plot are analyzed in the Appendix.
 19 Although China may be the leading U.S. supplier for these commodities in the EAP , in some instances, overall worldwide concentration in
a commodity is not due to Chinese market share. For example, though China is the United States’ leading supplier of fluorine and bromine
(HS 2801.30), the leading supplier countries worldwide are Israel, Jordan, and India.
t a b l e 4 Select critical technology commodities and alternative sources
HS code and
description
Affiliated critical
technology
Leading U.S.
supplier in the EAP
Alternative suppliers in the
EAP
2811.19 - Inorganic
acids (Arsenic acid)
Semiconductors
and critical minerals PRC
Japan, Taiwan, Malaysia,
Indonesia, South Korea,
Singapore, Thailand
8404.10 - Boilers Nuclear power South Korea Japan, Taiwan, Philippines,
Malaysia, Thailand
8458.11 - Lathes Neodymium
magnets Japan South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore
8458.99 - Lathes Neodymium
magnets South Korea Japan, Singapore, Thailand
8542.31 - Electronic
integrated circuits Semiconductors Malaysia Vietnam, Taiwan, South Korea,
Japan, Philippines

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
12
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
Fuel Cells
Fuel cells are technologies that convert chemical energy into clean and efficient electricity,
employing a variety of fuels and feedstocks and providing power for a wide range of applications.20
While fuel cells can be used to produce energy from numerous renewable energy sources, they
are a critical technology for enabling hydrogen to become a viable economy-wide source of
energy. The United States currently has manufacturing capabilities across most nodes of the fuel
cell supply chain, from processed materials and subcomponent manufacturing to final product
manufacturing. Because the global development of hydrogen technologies and applications is
still in its relative infancy, the U.S. manufacturing base for enabling technologies like fuel cells
remains relatively small. 21 This is expected to change over the coming years as a growing number
of countries implement policies incentivizing investment in hydrogen technologies, while the
cost of producing hydrogen from renewable energy is predicted to decrease by 30% by 2030. 22 As
global demand for hydrogen technologies grows, it will be critical for U.S. policymakers to support
the scaling up of domestic fuel cell manufacturing while maintaining visibility into new or
growing chokepoints within the supply chain. According to the U.S. Department of Energy, over-
the-horizon challenges include expanding the relatively small number of U.S. suppliers for key
 20 U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, “Fuel Cells, ” https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/fuel-
cells; and U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Policy, America’s Strategy to Secure the Supply Chain for a Robust Clean Energy Transition
(Washington, D.C., February 2022), https://www.energy.gov/policy/securing-americas-clean-energy-supply-chain.
 21 U.S. Department of Energy, Water Electrolyzers and Fuel Cells Supply Chain: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment (Washington, D.C.,
February 2022), https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/Fuel%20Cells%20%26%20Electrolyzers%20Supply%20Chain%20
Report%20-%20Final.pdf.
 22 International Energy Agency, “The Future of Hydrogen: Seizing Today’s Opportunities, ” June 2019, https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-
of-hydrogen.
t a b l e 5 Select chokepoints for critical technology commodities and alternative sources
HS code and
description Affiliated critical technology
Leading U.S.
supplier in the
EAP
Potential alternative
sources in the EAP
2504.10 and 2504.90
- Graphite: in powder,
flakes, or other forms
Fuel cells, large-capacity
batteries, semiconductors, and
critical minerals
PRC Japan, South Korea
2801.30 - Fluorine:
bromine
Semiconductors and critical
minerals PRC Japan, South Korea
2825.80 - Antimony
oxides
Semiconductors and critical
minerals PRC Thailand, Japan, South
Korea
3701.99 -
Photographic plates
and film
Semiconductors Japan Singapore, Malaysia,
Taiwan, South Korea
3707.90 -
Photographic goods Semiconductors Japan South Korea, Taiwan,
Vietnam
8505.11 - Magnets Neodymium magnets and wind
energy PRC
Japan, Philippines,
Vietnam, Thailand,
Malaysia

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
13
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
processed materials and avoiding overreliance on foreign suppliers of raw materials like graphite,
iridium, platinum, strontium, and yttrium. 23
The United States imports 105 ITA fuel cell HS codes from EAP countries. In 2021, total U.S.
imports of commodities within this subsector amounted to $143 billion. Of this amount, $64 billion
originated from the EAP region, with the largest volumes coming from the PRC ($32.0 billion),
Japan ($8.9 billion), and Taiwan ($5.53 billion). Fifteen of these commodities had a total value
 23 U.S. Department of Energy, Water Electrolyzers and Fuel Cells Supply Chain.
f i g u r e 3 U.S. market concentration across subsectors
Fuel cells
Nuclear power
Neodymium magnets
Semiconductors
Computer equipment
Concentration (HHI U.S.)
Diverse Typical Concentrated
Subsector
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Mean HHI U.S.
Value of U.S. imports
(normalizaed by subsector)
3926.90 8543.90 8108.20
0.26
0.35
0.27
0.27
0.28
8401.30 2846.902805.30
8458.99 8505.11
8486.20
 3701.993707.90
8528.52 8471.30
n o t e : This figure demonstrates the average market concentration of different subsectors in the ITA ’s list, as
well as the individual commodities within them. The x-axis indicates U.S. market concentration (HHI U.S.),
with commodity imports becoming increasingly concentrated toward the right of the axis. The size of each
data point indicates the value of U.S. imports for that commodity. The black vertical lines indicate the average
U.S. market concentration for each subsector. HS codes listed in the plot are those analyzed in the appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
14
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
exceeding $1 million and an EAP supplier that accounted for over one-third of U.S. imports. The
PRC was the market leader for 23 fuel cell commodities, the most of any EAP country.
Additionally, 28 of the commodities in this subsector have a market leader whose RMS is greater
than 1.33, indicating that they supply the United States with at least 33% more than the second-
largest supplier. Combined with a relatively low average HHI World score (0.12), the global fuel
cell supply chain exhibits intense competition between many suppliers, with a few strong leaders.
Despite a competitive global market, U.S. imports of some commodities in this supply chain are
concentrated even when the global supply is diverse, as indicated by the subsector’s higher average
HHI U.S. score of 0.26 (see Figure 4). Overall, this difference suggests that there may be room for
diversification within the fuel cell subsector.
Nuclear Power
The nuclear power subsector includes the raw materials, components, and technologies used
to produce and power nuclear reactors. Nuclear energy currently supplies around 20% of U.S.
electricity. The U.S. nuclear fleet will need to maintain its current capacity and likely expand to
f i g u r e 4 Fuel cell subsector market concentration
3926.90
8543.90 8108.20
World
n o t e : This figure depicts U.S. and global market concentrations for commodities within the fuel cell
subsector, as indicated by HHI scores for the U.S. and global markets. Darker shading indicates greater market
diversification, while lighter shading suggests greater market concentration. HS code callouts in the figure are
further analyzed in the appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
15
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
meet U.S. goals of achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050.24 Despite the growing importance
of the industry, the U.S. Department of Energy has identified nuclear reactor components as a U.S.
manufacturing-capability area of concern. An aging workforce, a shortage of certified domestic
vendors, and persistent dependence on Russian enriched uranium imports intensify the need
for proactive U.S. policy for the industry. 25 Following sanctions on Russia due to its ongoing
invasion of Ukraine, the U.S. government has implemented numerous measures to expand the
domestic production of enriched uranium and reduce reliance on the Russian market. With
the commissioning of new advanced nuclear reactors having stalled, however, the domestic fuel
industry has few market incentives to ramp up production. 26 This is exemplative of challenges
felt throughout critical U.S. supply chains in which atrophied downstream infrastructure or
still emergent market demand prevents the strengthening of the upstream supply chain. For the
nuclear industry, U.S. policymakers should look to couple support for the upstream supply chain
with efforts to deploy new reactors that can build downstream demand.
The United States imports 31 different commodities with HS codes falling within the ITA’s
nuclear energy subsector from EAP suppliers, totaling $650 million in 2021. The top suppliers
within this subsector are the PRC ($259.3 million), Japan ($159.9 million), and South Korea
($103.5 million). Among U.S. imports from the region within the nuclear power subsector, seven
commodities have EAP countries supplying over one-third of U.S. imports where the export
value is greater than $1 million. Moreover, global supply for commodities from this subsector is
relatively diversified, with an average HHI World score of 0.164. The U.S. market remains highly
concentrated, however, with an HHI U.S. score of 0.35 (see Figure 5). Most U.S. nuclear-affiliated
trade occurs with countries outside the EAP region, and efforts to diversify may benefit from
expanding trade with some regional suppliers.
Neodymium Magnets
Neodymium magnets are among the strongest magnets in the world, and their global
consumption is increasing across the energy, defense, and electronics sectors. Examples of
neodymium magnet applications range from electric vehicle batteries, wind turbines, computer
hard drives, drones, missile systems, and rotors for aircraft, making them a critical input
supporting several key U.S. industries. 27 Presently, the majority of the neodymium supply chain
is concentrated in foreign countries and is highly opaque. Substitutions along the supply chain
are difficult due to the unique performance metrics of neodymium magnets and the rare earth
minerals used to produce them. 28 In its neodymium magnet supply chain report in response to
Executive Order 14017, the U.S. Department of Energy specifically calls out U.S. supply chain
vulnerabilities due to the PRC’s virtual monopoly over rare earth separation, warning that PRC
“firms can exert control over international and U.S. domestic markets for raw materials, metals,
 24 U.S. Department of Energy, Nuclear Energy: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment (Washington, D.C., February 2022), https://www.energy.
gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/Nuclear%20Energy%20Supply%20Chain%20Report%20-%20Final.pdf.
 25 U.S. Department of Energy, America’s Strategy to Secure the Supply Chain for a Robust Clean Energy Transition; and U.S. Department of
Energy, Nuclear Energy: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment.
 26 Paul Day, “U.S. Ramps Up Advanced Fuel Production Capabilities, ” Reuters, February 16, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/
us-ramps-up-advanced-fuel-production-capabilities-2023-02-16.
 27 “Neodymium, ” American Chemical Society, https://www.acs.org/greenchemistry/research-innovation/endangered-elements/neodymium.
html; and “ Application of Neodymium Magnets in Aerospace Industry, ” Stanford Magnets, https://www.stanfordmagnets.com/application-
of-neodymium-magnets-in-aerospace-industry.html.
 28 U.S. Department of Energy, “ Achieving American Leadership in the Rare Earth Magnets Supply Chain, ” February 24, 2022, https://www.
energy.gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/Neodymium%20Magnets%20Supply%20Chain%20Fact%20Sheet%20Final.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
16
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
magnets, and components through market manipulations like restricting output to increase prices
and price dumping to lower prices to discourage investment or make competing firms outside of
the PRC less profitable.”29 The Department of Energy’s concerns are based on historical instances
of PRC economic coercion using its rare earths monopoly. In 2010, for example, the PRC leveraged
this monopoly against Japan during a rift over sovereignty in the East China Sea, and in 2019, it
threatened to cut off exports to the United States amid ongoing trade tensions.30
At present, U.S. policies affecting the neodymium magnet supply chain are largely focused on
solving the challenge of access to critical minerals. The Biden administration has already invested
billions of dollars in projects intended to shore up the U.S. domestic supply of critical minerals as
well as to develop new refining and recycling capacities. For example, in 2022, the U.S. Department
of Defense’s Industrial Base Analysis and Sustainment Program awarded U.S. company MP
Materials $35 million to establish heavy rare earth element separation and processing capabilities
 29 U.S. Department of Energy, Rare Earth Permanent Magnets: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment (Washington, D.C., February 2022), https://
www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2022-02/Neodymium%20Magnets%20Supply%20Chain%20Report%20-%20Final.pdf.
 30 Panos Mourdoukoutas, “China Threatens to Cut Rare Earths Supplies to the U.S.—Bad Idea, ” Forbes, May 16, 2019, https://www.forbes.
com/sites/panosmourdoukoutas/2019/05/16/china-threatens-to-cut-rare-earths-supplies-to-the-us-bad-idea/?sh=23cb7ee67486; and “Does
China Pose a Threat to Global Rare Earth Supply Chains?” Center for Strategic and International Studies, ChinaPower, https://chinapower.
csis.org/china-rare-earths.
f i g u r e 5 Nuclear power subsector market concentration
8401.30 2846.90
2805.30
World
n o t e : This figure depicts U.S. and global market concentrations for commodities within the nuclear power
subsector, as indicated by HHI scores for the U.S. and global markets. Darker shading indicates greater market
diversification, while lighter shading suggests greater market concentration. HS code callouts in the figure are
further analyzed in the appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
17
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
at its Mountain Pass facility in California. 31 While this investment is lauded as restoring a wholly
domestic and vertically integrated U.S. magnet supply chain, continued U.S. government support
will likely be needed to unlock additional capacity as commercial demand continues to expand.
The United States imports 22 commodities from EAP suppliers with HS codes falling within
the ITA’s neodymium magnet subsector, totaling $1.8 billion in 2021. The top suppliers within this
subsector are the PRC ($668.5 million), Japan ($658.5 million), and South Korea ($244.9 million).
Within the subsector, there are six commodities for which an EAP supplier accounts for over one-
third of U.S. imports and the value of the export exceeds $1 million. Of these six chokepoints, the
PRC dominates two, as demonstrated by an RMS greater than 7.0. For the subsector, U.S. imports
are relatively concentrated among a few suppliers, as illustrated by an average HHI U.S. of 0.268
across all relevant commodities. The average HHI World for the subsector is 0.169, demonstrating
opportunities for U.S. diversification (see Figure 6).
 31 “Securing a Made in America Supply Chain for Critical Minerals, ” White House, Fact Sheet, February 22, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/02/22/fact-sheet-securing-a-made-in-america-supply-chain-for-critical-minerals.
f i g u r e 6 Neodymium magnet subsector market concentration
8458.99
8505.11
World
n o t e : This figure depicts U.S. and global market concentrations for commodities within the neodymium
magnet subsector, as indicated by HHI scores for the U.S. and global markets. Darker shading indicates greater
market diversification, while lighter shading suggests greater market concentration. HS code callouts in the
figure are further analyzed in the appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
18
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
Semiconductors
Semiconductors are foundational electronic components that enable everyday computing
capabilities for products like cell phones and cutting-edge advances in AI. Due to their ubiquity,
the semiconductor supply chain is critical to key U.S. industries like automotive, health, defense,
energy, and aerospace. Advances in the semiconductor industry are also critical for enabling
advances in next-generation technologies like AI and quantum computing—key arenas of
intensifying economic, technological, and military competition between the United States and the
PRC.32 As such, in addition to maintaining supply chain security, the United States has a long-
term competitive interest in maintaining industrial leadership within the semiconductor industry.
The Covid-19 pandemic created enormous strains on the global semiconductor industry,
with fabrication plants in multiple countries pausing production as global demand for consumer
electronics skyrocketed to accommodate a transition to virtual life. Initially, semiconductor supply
chain interruptions most severely affected the U.S. automotive industry, causing auto inventories
to dwindle and prices to soar. 33 While the severity of the global semiconductor shortage has been
somewhat alleviated, strategic competition between the United States and the PRC has caused U.S.
policymakers to double down on calls for developing a domestic semiconductor supply chain. The
resulting CHIPS and Science Act represents a once-in-a-generation investment to accomplish this
goal by channeling $52.7 billion into U.S. semiconductor R&D, manufacturing, and workforce
development. Highlighting the role of strategic competition in modern U.S. industrial policy, the
law also includes provisions that prevent recipients from channeling their investments back into
the PRC or other countries of concern.34
Based on the ITA’s list, the United States imports 97 different commodities falling within the
semiconductor subsector from the EAP region, for a total of $46.3 billion. In 2021, the greatest value
was imported from Malaysia ($13.2 billion), Japan ($8.84 billion), and the PRC ($7.02 billion). 35
Within this list, 43 commodities have HHI U.S. scores greater than 0.25. This indicates that the
U.S. market is concentrated among a few suppliers for almost half of all commodities along the
semiconductor supply chain. Fortunately, sixteen of these commodities have HHI World scores
below 0.15, suggesting there are opportunities to diversify (see Figure 7).
Findings and Policy Implications
The United States maintains highly concentrated supply chain relationships for commodities
used to produce critical technologies . This concentration results in a preponderance of commodity
chokepoints in which one supplier country—usually the PRC—provides over one-third of U.S.
imports for a commodity. Fortunately, the United States has room to diversify its suppliers for
some of these commodities. This report identifies five important chokepoint commodities for
 32 U.S. Department of Energy, America’s Strategy to Secure the Supply Chain for a Robust Clean Energy Transition.
 33 Ondrej Burkacky et al., “Semiconductor Shortage: How the Automotive Industry Can Succeed, ” McKinsey, June 10, 2022, https://www.
mckinsey.com/industries/semiconductors/our-insights/semiconductor-shortage-how-the-automotive-industry-can-succeed.
 34 “CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs, Strengthen Supply Chains, and Counter China, ” White House, Fact Sheet, August 9,
2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-
jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-china.
 35 Malaysia’s large export values overstate its role in the semiconductor value chain. The country is a hub for final assembly of integrated
circuits rather than high value–added design and manufacturing. As the final node along the semiconductor supply chain, Malaysia’s
exports register the full value of the good despite the fact that most of its value was contributed by the firms that designed and manufactured
the integrated circuits before it arrived in Malaysia for ATP . See VerWey, ”Global Value Chains. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
19
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
which the United States could relatively easily diversify its suppliers, given a highly unconcentrated
global market. Diversification could strengthen select U.S. supply chains by capitalizing on robust
and expanding manufacturing sectors in Taiwan, Malaysia, Vietnam, and other countries. U.S.
policymakers should pursue efforts to encourage U.S. firms to diversify their supply chains for
these materials to preemptively mitigate disruption risks.
Of the commodity chokepoints facing the United States, some have very few options for
diversification. This analysis identifies seven important U.S. imports that can be considered global
chokepoints (high U.S. and global market concentration), of which the PRC is the dominant
supplier for five. Of these chokepoints, four are critical minerals used to produce key technologies
like semiconductors and neodymium magnets. These commodities represent prime areas for
additional investment by the United States and like-minded partners in establishing alternative
supply chains to mitigate the risks of disruption.
U.S. policymakers should consider strategies to diversify trade with key allies and partners in the
EAP region. U.S. allies Japan and South Korea offer multiple options for trade diversification. Both
countries already export most of the chokepoint commodities identified and maintain an existing
industrial base to support production scale-up. Encouraging this increased diversification will
alleviate some dependence on PRC imports. Statistics used within this report, such as Normalized
f i g u r e 7 Semiconductor subsector market concentration
8486.20
3701.99
3707.90
World
n o t e : This figure depicts U.S. and global market concentrations for commodities within the semiconductor
subsector, as indicated by HHI scores for the U.S. and global markets. Darker shading indicates greater market
diversification, while lighter shading suggests greater market concentration. HS code callouts in the figure are
further analyzed in the appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
20
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
Revealed Comparative Advantage, can be used to identify these opportunities. For example,
the PRC currently supplies about 72% of the permanent magnets and metal articles intended to
become magnets after magnetization (HS 8505.11) used in both the neodymium magnet and wind
subsectors. Japan has a positive NRCA for these articles, suggesting an opportunity for the United
States to expand trade with a regional ally to alleviate this chokepoint.
Policymakers should also consider economic strategies that enable Vietnam, Malaysia, Thailand,
and Indonesia to scale up exports of key chokepoint commodities. At present, these countries supply
small amounts of chokepoint commodities to the United States because of ongoing challenges in
cultivating high-end talent, improving local infrastructure, and accessing markets, which limit
their role in U.S. critical technology trade. Policies supporting educational exchange, infrastructure
development, regulatory capacity building, commercial investment, and improved terms of trade
could help these countries better meet U.S. demand under a supply chain diversification strategy.
Cultivating these trade relationships would enable EAP countries to increase their exports of
raw materials and components for critical technologies while decreasing market monopolization
within key sectors. Further research should examine the degree to which other EAP suppliers can
provide cost-effective substitutes in the time horizon necessary to achieve adequate diversification.
Policymakers engaging with leaders throughout the region should identify priority industries and
commodities for regional partners as well as synergies with U.S. goals for diversification.
The United States cannot and should not seek to domestically produce all commodities used
throughout critical supply chains . Strategies to drive investments in domestic manufacturing
capacity with the goal of reducing supply chain vulnerabilities should employ rigorous analysis
that goes beyond the identification of supply chain chokepoints to understand which investments
along the supply chain align with U.S. comparative advantages and strategic goals. For example,
statistics identified in this report, such as NRCA, can pinpoint areas where the United States
could expand an existing advantage or bolster an area of weakness. Combined with a survey of
U.S. policy objectives, such research could identify specific supply chain nodes where domestic
investments should be concentrated.
Conclusion and Next Steps
Overall, U.S. imports of commodities listed within the ITA’s energy and ICT sectors are highly
concentrated among a few suppliers. This concentration necessitates a dynamic set of trade-offs for
the United States. Supplier concentration can increase efficiency and reduce transaction costs for
advanced inputs, but it can also produce vulnerabilities to supply chain disruptions or economic
coercion by trading partners. Not every concentrated relationship should be seen as a vulnerability,
and close trade relationships with trusted partners can be a source of economic and geopolitical
resilience. For example, while Japan supplies 67% of the U.S. titanium powder (HS 8108.20)
imports used to produce fuel cells, this trade relationship presents fewer vulnerabilities given
the strong U.S.-Japan alliance. U.S. producers may also benefit from fewer transaction costs and
collaborative relationships with Japanese exporters.
Over the last decade, U.S. policymakers have steadily incorporated supply chains into a new
conception of economic and national security. Disruptions to critical technology supply chains
have wreaked havoc on critical domestic industries, while a broadening conception of technological
competitiveness emphasizes the need for both localized innovation and manufacturing capacity.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
21
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
In response to these evolving dynamics, U.S. policymakers are involved in an ambitious effort to
modernize the U.S. toolkit for protecting and promoting U.S. technology competitiveness as a
facet of national security. In devising industrial policy investment strategies, trade negotiations,
and even export-control regulations, U.S. policymakers require a data-driven approach to
characterizing supply chain concentrations, dependencies, and comparative advantages. The
analysis in this report establishes an initial step in this process, with future research required to
match the opportunities identified with strategic priorities in both the United States and partner
countries.
The United States will not be able to diversify every supply chain through the substitution
of trade partners. In some cases, alternative suppliers may not have the capacity to fulfill U.S.
demand and improving production capacity will require significant investments and lead times.
In other cases, as highlighted in this report, some industries are too concentrated on a global scale
for this to be a solution. The analysis in this report provides a first step in identifying where the
United States should consider alternative suppliers, but further analysis is required to evaluate the
viability of this strategy for individual commodities and suppliers.
Researchers should seek to quantify and understand the degree to which supply chains in the
sectors analyzed are shifting among U.S. trade partners. This report presents a snapshot in time
of U.S. trade dependencies with EAP partners and thus does not capture the ongoing dynamics
of evolving supply chains. Future research should incorporate trend analyses to understand
which markets are becoming increasingly concentrated or diverse, as well as which countries are
gaining and losing shares in critical supply chains. Whereas market forces may already be driving
diversification in some commodities, the United States should prioritize interventions targeting
critical commodities where vulnerabilities appear to be increasing. For commodities where the
United States seeks diversification, further research should examine the degree to which other
suppliers in the EAP region can provide substitutes and along what timeline and at what price
point. Policymakers engaging with leaders throughout the region should look to target priority
industries and commodities for regional partners and identify synergies with U.S. goals for
diversification. To provide just one example, the United States could support investments to build
Thailand’s capacity for lathe production as a means of alleviating existing dependencies while
simultaneously supporting Thailand’s goal to develop competitiveness in the new-generation
automotive industry.36
 36 Akshay Prasad and Hirotaka Uchida, “Unleashing Thailand’s Electric Mobility Potential, ” Arthur D. Little, November 2022, https://www.
adlittle.com/en/insights/report/unleashing-thailand’s-electric-mobility-potential.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
22
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
APPENDIX
S
everal chokepoint commodities exist within each subsector analyzed in this report. A
selection of these commodities is discussed below. Each commodity was selected for
meeting the following two criteria: (1) a single supplier with a market share above 33%, and
(2) a total U.S. import value greater than $1 million.
Chokepoint Commodities in the Fuel Cell Subsector
HS 8108.20 (unwrought titanium; powders). HS 8108.20 contains high-grade titanium powders,
a key component in the fuel cell manufacturing process. Titanium powders are used to create
porous titanium or titanium foam, which is used to manufacture electrodes found in polymer
electrolyte membrane fuel cells. 37
Japan supplies about 67% of U.S. imports of HS 8108.20. Japanese exporters maintain a market
share nearly six times as large as the next largest global competitor, expressed by an RMS of 5.807.
The United States has other EAP trading partners, but they currently supply negligible amounts of
this commodity (less than 1% relative and absolute market share). The U.S. import market for this
commodity is significantly more concentrated than the global market, with an HHI U.S. score of
0.48 compared to the HHI World score of 0.17. While the global market is more diversified, Japan
is the leading global supplier, suggesting that the United States may be capitalizing on Japan’s
comparative advantage (NRCA 0.808) in titanium production. Due to the dearth of alternative
suppliers in the EAP, the United States may need to look to other regions if it chooses to reduce
its dependence on Japanese exports for titanium powders. Furthermore, negative NRCA values
among all other EAP suppliers of titanium powders suggest that they have disadvantages in this
export market and may not be viable alternatives for U.S. demand.
HS 8543.90 (parts of electrical machines and apparatus, nes) . This commodity heading
includes electrical machines that are designed to convert electrical energy into mechanical work.
More specifically, this subheading includes parts and components of physical vapor deposition
apparatuses. These machines are used in factory lines for fuel cell production or in fuel cell–
powered generators and vehicle drives.38
The PRC supplies 53% of U.S. imports of this HS code, totaling over $1.1 billion in trade in
2021. Chinese exporters maintain a U.S. market share advantage that is nearly four times as large
(RMS 3.921) as the next largest competitor (Japan). U.S. market concentration exceeds global
concentration by about 0.11, suggesting that there is some room for diversification. While the
PRC does have a comparative advantage in the production of electric machines (NRCA 0.449),
the United States could diversify its market through an increase in exports from Japan. Currently,
Japan exports 13.6% of the total U.S. imports of electric machines. Japan’s NRCA is valued at
0.521, suggesting a larger competitive advantage, which could accommodate an increase in
production. Alternative suppliers within the EAP that demonstrate positive NRCA values, though
 37 “Titanium Porous Material for Pem Fuel Cell Electrodes, ” Baoji Highstar Titanium Metal, https://www.bjhighstar.com/titanium-porous-
material-for-pem-fuel cell-electrodes/; Chul Min Hwang et al., “Effect of Titanium Powder Loading in Gas Diffusion Layer of a Polymer
Electrolyte Unitized Reversible Fuel Cell, ” Journal of Power Sources 202 (2012): 108–13; and N. Abdullah and S.K. Kamarudin, “Titanium
Dioxide in Fuel Cell Technology: An Overview, ” Journal of Power Sources 278 (2015): 109–18.
 38 At the six-digit level, this HS code represents seven different sub-commodities, of which the ITA is only concerned with one: HS 8543.90.12.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
23
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
smaller in magnitude, include Thailand, Singapore, and Malaysia. These countries already export
this commodity to the United States and globally. Vietnam, Indonesia, and Singapore are other
potential candidates for diversification, as these countries hold a higher absolute market share
globally than for the United States. This characteristic suggests that these countries may have
capacity to supply the U.S. market. Some of the production in these countries already may be
due to the presence of U.S. firms with facilities in the region, creating a potential basis for U.S.
policymakers to facilitate more investments that help scale up production.39
HS 3926.90 (other articles of plastics and articles of other materials, nes). A subset of specialized
plastics is used in fuel cell production. 40 Specialized plastics can serve as a lightweight skeleton for
other critical materials and can be used to construct electrolyte membranes, membrane electrode
assemblies, bipolar plates (electrode plates), end plates, gaskets, and other parts used in fuel cell
production.41 Recent research also suggests that these plastics could be used as a future fuel source
within fuel cells. 42
With U.S. imports totaling $5.5 billion in 2021, specialized plastics are an important share
of the subsector’s value. The PRC provides nearly 45% of U.S. imports of this commodity, which
is almost four times as large (RMS 3.668) as the next global competitor and nearly twelve times
as large (RMS 11.7) as Taiwan, the region’s second-largest supplier. With an NRCA of 0.297, the
PRC has a comparative advantage in the production of plastics. Overall, the U.S. plastics import
market is more concentrated than the global market, with an HHI U.S. score of 0.23 compared
with the HHI World score of 0.12. This difference suggests that the United States can diversify its
supply of this commodity. Within the EAP region, Taiwan, Japan, Vietnam, and Thailand have
existing trade relationships with the United States for specialized plastics (all supplying between
1% and 4% of the U.S. market). Most of these suppliers have a negative NRCA score, indicating a
disadvantage in plastics production. Taiwan is the only supplier within the region to demonstrate
a positive value (NRCA 0.020) and may be the best option for expanding supply.
Chokepoint Commodities in the Nuclear Power Subsector
HS 2846.90 (compounds, inorganic or organic [excluding cerium], of rare-earth metals, of
yttrium, scandium, or of mixtures of these metals, nes); HS 2805.30 (rare-earth metals, scandium
and yttrium, whether or not intermixed or interalloyed) . The PRC supplies about 67% of U.S.
imports of HS 2846.90 and 63% of HS 2805.30, two categories of rare earth metals. Rare earths
like gadolinium are used to capture neutrons in nuclear reactors, while other rare earth elements
provide luminescence to screens and other electronic devices used within nuclear power plants. 43
HHI U.S. scores for both HS codes are around 0.25 points higher than HHI World scores, meaning
that the United States could potentially diversify its rare earths suppliers.
While the PRC dominates the U.S. market for HS 2846.90 rare earth compounds (RMS 7.192) and
has a small comparative advantage for compounds (NRCA 0.139), some of the United States’ other
 39 “Singapore Overview, ” Applied Materials, https://www.appliedmaterials.com/sg/en/about/singapore-overview.html; and “DOE Awarding
$1.16B to 9 Battery Component Manufacturing Projects as Part of $2.8B Funding, ” Green Car Congress, October 20, 2022, https://www.
greencarcongress.com/2022/10/20221020-doecomponents.html.
 40 The ITA only lists one of the 26 eight-digit subcodes for HS 3926.90 as critical for fuel cells: 3926.90.45.
 41 “Polymers for Fuel Cells and Fuel Cell Systems: Renewed Interest in Hydrogen Fuel Cells for Long-Range E-mobility, ” CHEManager,
January 31, 2014, https://www.chemanager-online.com/en/news/polymers-fuel-cells-and-fuel cell-systems.
 42 Tetsuya Hori et al., “Fuel Cell and Electrolyzer Using Plastic Waste Directly as Fuel, ” Waste Management 102 (2020): 30–39.
 43 Nikk Ogasa, “How Rare Earth Elements’ Hidden Properties Make Modern Technology Possible, ” Science News, January 16, 2023, https://
www.sciencenews.org/article/rare-earth-elements-properties-technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
24
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
trading partners have a larger comparative advantage than the PRC, which presents opportunities
for import diversification. Japan, Malaysia, and South Korea supplied rare earths to the United
States in 2021, with market shares of 9%, 4%, and 2%, respectively, for HS 2846.90. Both Japan and
Malaysia have larger NRCA values (0.229 and 0.843, respectively) and existing trade relationships
with the United States. Malaysia’s strong advantage makes it a potential U.S. partner for imports.
Increasing the market shares of these two countries presents diversification options to reduce
the current dependency on the PRC within the U.S. market. As of 2021, the United States was
the world’s fourth-largest exporter of these compounds. Reducing U.S. dependency on Chinese
imports could also involve scaling up domestic production.
Like the market for rare earth compounds, the U.S. market for HS 2805.30 rare earth
metals is much more concentrated (HHI U.S. 0.508) than the global market (HHI World 0.25).
The PRC remains the leading supplier, providing 89% more rare earths than the next global
supplier (RMS 1.894). With an NRCA of 0.253, the country has a strong comparative advantage,
while each of its EAP competitors has a negative NRCA score that demonstrates comparative
disadvantage. Efforts to diversify rare earth imports are particularly warranted. The importance
of rare earths to multiple critical supply chains is evidenced by their inclusion in the ITA’s nuclear
power, neodymium magnet, and critical minerals subsectors.
HS 8401.30 (fuel elements [cartridges]: non-irradiated, and parts thereof). Japan supplies around
55% of U.S. imports of non-irradiated fuel cartridges, which are used to contain nuclear material
that is inserted into a reactor core. With an RMS of 2.6, Japan has a significant lead over its main
competitor, Taiwan. U.S. imports indicate a level of concentration (HHI U.S. 0.534) that exceeds
the overall worldwide concentration (HHI World 0.354), meaning there are alternative suppliers
in the market. Nonetheless, diverting imports between suppliers is difficult in the case of nuclear
fuel cartridges, which must be designed and certified for each specific reactor model. It thus can be
incredibly difficult for a new supplier to take over production for a specific reactor.
In addition to Japan, Taiwan supplied approximately 21% of U.S. imports of non-irradiated fuel
cartridges in 2021, and South Korea supplied around 8%. However, only South Korea demonstrates
a positive NRCA value (NRCA 0.288), whereas Japan (NRCA -0.340) and Taiwan (NRCA -0.597)
have disadvantages with cartridge production. Depending on the trajectory of the U.S. nuclear
buildout and the specific reactor models chosen, the United States could look to expand trade
with these suppliers, particularly South Korea, or look to other key suppliers around the world,
including Sweden, Spain, Germany, or France. In addition, as of 2021, the United States exports
about 8.5% of the global supply of this commodity, and companies like Global Nuclear Fuel supply
a large proportion of domestic nuclear fuel element needs. 44 Policymakers could invest in scaling
up this production capacity to further meet domestic demand.
Chokepoint Commodities in the Neodymium Magnet Subsector
HS 8505.11 (electromagnets; permanent magnets and articles intended to become permanent
magnets after magnetization, of metal) . The PRC has a strong comparative advantage in magnet
production (NRCA 0.576) and supplies 72.4% of U.S. imports of HS 8505.11. Chinese exporters
of these commodities maintain a U.S. market share 12.8 times as large (RMS 12.8) as the next
biggest competitor, Japan, which supplies 5.7% of U.S. imports. Combined with high HHI scores
 44 U.S. Department of Energy, Nuclear Energy: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
25
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SUPPLY CHAINS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC u ROTH ET AL.
for both U.S. and global imports, it is clear that the PRC heavily dominates this market. But
the HHI U.S. score (0.532) for this commodity is 0.178 points higher than the HHI World score
(0.354), indicating that there are opportunities for the United States to diversify its suppliers. The
PRC accounted for 58% of global permanent magnet exports in 2021, while Japan, the Philippines,
and Vietnam were the next largest exporters, representing 10.2%, 7.8%, and 4.7% of global supply,
respectively.45 The United States could increase permanent magnet imports from these countries
and facilitate U.S. investments to help increase production.
Although the PRC’s comparative advantage in the production of these goods scores high
(NRCA 0.576), other EAP suppliers present options for supply chain diversification, particularly
Japan, Vietnam, and the Philippines. Both Japan and Vietnam have positive NRCA values of 0.494
and 0.459, respectively, demonstrating high levels of comparative advantage. The Philippines even
exceeds the PRC’s comparative advantage in magnet production (NRCA 0.896) and is another
potential supplier.
HS 8458.11 (lathes: for removing metal, horizontal, numerically controlled); HS 8458.19 (lathes:
for removing metal, horizontal, other than numerically controlled); HS 8458.91 (lathes: for removing
metal, numerically controlled, other than horizontal lathes); HS 8458.99 (lathes: for removing metal,
other than horizontal or numerically controlled lathes) . U.S. imports of lathes (machine tools used
for cutting metal) are highly concentrated among a few suppliers in the EAP region, namely South
Korea, Japan, Taiwan, and the PRC. Each supplier dominates U.S. imports for a different lathe
type (RMS greater than 1.2), with categories denoting the lathe configuration (horizontal, vertical,
multi-axis, etc.) and the presence of automation (numerically controlled or non-numerically
controlled). Overall, the global supply for each type of lathe is considered diverse, with HHI World
scores all falling below the 0.15 threshold, meaning that the United States could pursue multiple
options for diversification. Furthermore, the United States can build upon existing production
capacity in multiple EAP countries for lathes, as all partners have some comparative advantage in
their production (positive NRCAs). In addition to diversifying lathe imports from Japan, South
Korea, Taiwan, and the PRC, the United States could look to increase imports from Thailand and
the Philippines, which supplied small quantities of HS 8458.11 and HS 8458.91 to the United States
in 2021.
For three of the four lathe types (HS 8458.11, HS 8458.91, and HS 8458.99), increasing exports
from Japan and South Korea could reduce U.S. reliance on a single country for a single type of
lathe. Both markets have comparative advantages for these goods (NRCA greater than 0.35),
while other EAP suppliers like Taiwan (HS 8458.11 and 8458.99), Thailand (HS 8458.11), and the
Philippines (HS 8458.91) also have some capacity to meet U.S. demand. By contrast, HS 8458.19
lathes are limited in additional EAP suppliers, with only the PRC and Taiwan demonstrating
positive NRCA scores.
Chokepoint Commodities in the Semiconductor Subsector
HS 3707.90 (photographic goods: chemical preparations for photographic uses; unmixed products
for photographic uses other than sensitized emulsions); HS 3701.99 (photographic plates and film:
[for other than color photography], in the flat, sensitized, unexposed, with no side exceeding 255
mm, of any material other than paper, paperboard, or textiles) . Photographic plates and goods
 45 “Metal Permanent Magnets, Articles Intended as Magnets, ” Observatory of Economic Complexity, https://oec.world/en/profile/hs/metal-
permanent-magnets-articles-intended-as-magnets.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
26
NBR SPECIAL REPORT u NOVEMBER 2023
are used by the semiconductor industry in the photolithography process, a subset of the broader
semiconductor fabrication process. Out of EAP suppliers to the United States, Japanese exporters
of photographic commodities (HS 3707.90 and 3701.99) exhibit the highest market share, supplying
86% and 82% of U.S. imports, respectively. HHI U.S. scores for both commodities (0.750 and
0.656) predictably reflect significant U.S. market concentration, while HHI World scores (0.310
and 0.367) indicate that alternative suppliers exist, despite a relatively concentrated global market.
Japan supplies over 23 times as much as its leading competitor for HS 3797.90 commodities
(RMS 23.231) and over 9 times as much for HS 3701.99 commodities (RMS 9.336). This dominance
is further highlighted by the country’s strong comparative advantage in the production of both
goods (NRCA 0.874 and NRCA 0.885). Despite a strong U.S.-Japan alliance, Japan’s market
dominance could create vulnerabilities for the United States should supply disruptions occur. To
diversify this market, the United States could look to South Korea and Taiwan. Both suppliers
have positive NRCA values for HS 3707.90 photographic goods (NRCA 0.327 and NRCA 0.577,
respectively). Of all other EAP suppliers, only Taiwan has a slight positive trade advantage (NRCA
0.075) for HS 3701.99 photographic plates. The United States currently imports these goods from
South Korea and Taiwan and could seek to scale up these relationships. Finally, the United States
is the world’s third-largest exporter of chemical preparations for photographic goods, so efforts to
improve supply chain resilience could involve investments to expand domestic production.
HS 8486.20 (machines and apparatus of a kind used solely or principally for the manufacture
of semiconductor devices or of electronic integrated circuits) . HS 8486.20 contains machines used
for semiconductor production, including dicing machines, probing machines, polish grinders,
and sliced wafer demounting and cleaning machines. 46 Japan supplies nearly 44% of U.S. imports
of HS 8486.20 and enjoys a strong comparative advantage within the market (NRCA 0.759).
The Japanese share of the U.S. market is almost three times as large (RMS 2.691) as the next
largest competitor, Singapore. Singapore’s higher comparative advantage (NRCA 0.764) indicates
the country likely has the capacity to increase its exports to support U.S. demand. Currently,
Singapore holds a U.S. market share of 16.3% and is closely followed by the Netherlands at 13.4%.47
Taiwan, the PRC, and Malaysia are other significant exporters of HS 8486.20 machines to the
United States (around 5%). Of these suppliers, only Taiwan has a positive NRCA value (NRCA
0.075). Looking at the metrics of overall market concentration, the HHI U.S. score sits at the edge
of the middle range (0.15–0.25) for market diversification at 0.247, suggesting a moderate level of
concentration. Compared with the HHI World score of 0.199, only marginal diversification may
be possible given current market conditions.
 46 “Products: Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment, ” ACCRETECH, https://www.accretech.jp/english/product/semicon/index.html.
 47 U.S. semiconductor manufacturing equipment firms maintain a global presence, including facilities in Japan, Singapore, Taiwan, and the
Netherlands. As a result, some of the volume of U.S. imports from these countries may be the result of domestic U.S. firms importing
equipment from non-U.S.-based overseas subsidiaries. See “Singapore Overview. ”

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Seattle and Washington, D.C.
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, washington 98101 usa
phone 206-632-7370, fax 206-632-7487
1819 l st nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 usa
phone 202-347-9767, fax 202-347-9766
nbr@nbr.org, www.nbr.org
