
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
A
ssociation of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member countries and the United States share an
innovation-driven approach to artificial intelligence (AI) and a common interest in maximizing its impact.
To realize this potential, both sides need to upgrade the architecture and ambition of their cooperation. As
it advances the international pillar of its AI Action Plan, the Trump administration should make ASEAN a priority
partner. Not only is Southeast Asia a growing market for AI services, but the United States has deep investment,
technology, and security ties to key regional countries. Stronger engagement would also help offset the uncertainty
and distrust that stems from U.S. tariffs and trade negotiations. For ASEAN countries, the United States offers
access to world-leading AI technologies, infrastructure, and expertise—and, under the Trump administration, a
partner eager to support their global deployment.
A renewed U.S.-ASEAN AI agenda must be a partnership, not a one-way transaction. While U.S. firms lead the
global AI market, policymakers from ASEAN countries are rightly focused on how cooperation can expand local
AI capabilities and opportunities. U.S. AI and tech firms are already heavily invested and engaged in the region.
However, they could benefit from the U.S. government’s “AI statecraft”—the use of diplomatic, economic, and
strategic tools by governments to shape the global development, governance, and deployment of AI in ways that
advance national interests and values—to further their engagement and better compete against AI firms from
China and elsewhere. This brief outlines the key challenges to deeper U.S.-ASEAN collaboration, compares U.S.
and Chinese engagement with ASEAN on AI, and proposes options for a new, more strategic AI agenda for the
United States and ASEAN .
Nigel Cory is a Director at Crowell Global Advisors and a Nonresident Fellow at the National Bureau of Asian Research.
CODEVELOPING THE MODEL
U.S. AND ASEAN COOPERATION IN SHAPING AND DEPLOYING AI
BRIEF BY NIGEL CORY, CROWELL GLOBAL ADVISORS

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
2
Three Challenges for the United States to
Working with ASEAN on AI
U.S. AI statecraft in ASEAN faces three key
challenges. First, U.S. tariffs and trade negotiations
create an unfavorable context for broader
cooperation. Second, it is unclear what resources
and expertise the U.S. government can deploy to
support AI engagement with ASEAN. Third, it is
uncertain whether the Trump administration’s AI
export strategy will be aligned with ASEAN values
and interests.
Can cooperation on AI survive U.S. tariffs and
trade negotiations? The resurgence of tariffs under
the Trump administration and subsequent trade
negotiations between the United States and its
major partners have introduced uncertainty that
risks spilling over into the digital and AI domains.
For ASEAN policymakers, the shifting U.S. trade
posture raises questions about the reliability and
predictability of broader economic engagement.
This trade turbulence complicates efforts to build
confidence in U.S.-ASEAN collaboration on AI,
as businesses and governments weigh the risks of
disrupted supply chains, data-flow restrictions, or
retaliatory measures that could affect digital trade.
Tariffs and trade talks also divert political attention
and institutional bandwidth away from AI statecraft.
If cooperation on AI is to endure, both sides will
need to insulate their digital and technology
partnerships from trade frictions to ensure that
economic uncertainty does not undermine shared
ambitions to build open, interoperable, and trusted
AI ecosystems across the Indo-Pacific.
Can the United States deploy the expertise and
resources to support AI engagement in ASEAN?
The United States has the technical expertise,
institutions, and private-sector capacity to be
ASEAN’s leading AI partner, but translating that
potential into sustained, visible engagement requires
political commitment, institutional expertise, and
dedicated resource support. U.S. firms, research
institutions, and standards bodies already set global
benchmarks in AI innovation and deployment.
However, these advantages do not automatically
convert into influence or partnership abroad. In the
absence of robustly funded diplomatic engagement
and development initiatives to advance AI
cooperation, U.S. efforts may be eclipsed by China’s
more coordinated, government-backed approach to
AI engagement and deployment across the region.
The question, then, is not whether the United States
can lead—it clearly can—but whether Washington
will invest in the institutions, mechanisms,
and partnerships needed to do so. Sustaining
momentum requires continuity of programs,
technical assistance, and interagency coordination
to bridge trade, innovation, and foreign policy. This
is where the Trump administration’s policy decisions
have mattered most: by determining which AI and
digital cooperation initiatives continue, and which
are wound down, Washington shapes ASEAN’s
perception of U.S. reliability and long-term intent.
The Trump administration cut many development
programs in Southeast Asia but saved some.
For example, it cut the digital policy–specific
USAID Better Access and Connectivity project
in the Philippines, which included work on AI. It
cut the U.S.-Singapore Third Country Training
Program, which since 2012 had organized capacity-
building courses for Southeast Asian countries,
including on digital policy issues. But it saved the
ASEAN-U.S. Partnership Program, which supports
regional policies, cooperation, and capacity
building and is the only program focused on
ASEAN remaining. The Standards Alliance and the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) also
retain State Department grants on engagement and
capacity training for new and emerging technologies
like AI. Furthermore, the U.S. International
Development Finance Corporation (DFC) not only
survives but is likely to receive increased funding
and an enhanced focus on digital infrastructure as
part of its upcoming congressional reauthorization. 1

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
3
Can the Trump administration align U.S. AI
strategy with ASEAN values and interests? ASEAN
countries, like U.S. trading partners everywhere,
wait for details as to how the administration will
operationalize the AI Action Plan and whether
the full range of policies it outlines, such as export
controls, come together in a clear, consistent,
and workable framework. There is considerable
uncertainty, and concern, over how the Trump
administration will reset and balance export
promotion and security-driven controls in U.S. AI
policy, as well as over what role, if any, there is for
ASEAN firms and technology in the U.S.-based AI
tech stack.
The Trump administration’s AI Exports Program
and Action Plan emphasizes U.S. “dominance” of
AI and the export of full-stack (U.S.) AI technology
packages globally. 2 The director of the U.S. Office
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), Michael
Kratsios, stated that the goal is “enabling allies
and trade partners to build their own sovereign AI
ecosystems with secure American technology” and
that “through dealmaking and diplomacy, we can
create an AI ecosystem that fosters and promotes
mutual prosperity and security.” 3 He also posed the
question, in the context of U.S. AI exports, as to how
“we meet our customers where they are.” 4
Given these U.S. priorities, a key question for
policymakers in ASEAN is whether the U.S. full-
stack AI offering is a set course menu or more of
a buffet that also includes local options. For U.S.-
ASEAN collaboration to succeed, it needs to be
the latter. ASEAN diplomatic, economic, trade,
and technology strategy is grounded in diversified
and mutually beneficial trade and economic
partnerships, whether with the United States,
China, Japan, the European Union, or other major
powers and trading partners. An inflexible, take-it-
or-leave-it approach to using the full U.S. AI tech
stack clashes with ASEAN’s approach to trade and
technology development .
Restrictive AI Sovereignty Policies
in ASEAN Pose Challenges for
Collaboration with the United States
ASEAN countries need to avoid enacting new
restrictive and protectionist AI policies that would
otherwise make it challenging to cooperate with
the United States on AI. Across ASEAN, a new
generation of AI and data governance policies is
emerging—and with it, a growing emphasis on “AI
sovereignty.” Several member states are pursuing
strategies to secure domestic control over AI
infrastructure, data, and models and keep out foreign
partners. Others are taking a more enlightened
approach to AI sovereignty that emphasizes
openness, collaboration, and innovation. While the
goal of building local capacity and capabilities is
understandable, overly restrictive or protectionist
measures risk fragmenting the region’s digital
economy. They also undermine ASEAN’s ability to
leverage private-sector partners from the United
States and elsewhere as part of an open, competitive,
and innovative AI-powered digital economy.
Vietnam’s draft Law on Artificial Intelligence,
scheduled to take effect in 2026, epitomizes this
trend.5 The law adopts a risk-based classification
system (unacceptable, high, medium, and low)
and imposes obligations on providers of general-
purpose AI models, including compliance with
local standards and disclosure of training data. It
also introduces significant penalties and potential
system bans for national security concerns. The
parallel draft Digital Law goes further, requiring
prior authorization for overseas transfers of “core”
and “important” data while granting broad access
rights to domestic authorities. These localization
requirements not only disrupt cross-border AI
services but also constrain Vietnamese firms’ ability
to use global cloud infrastructure.
Indonesia has signaled similar ambitions.
Policymakers there have invoked “technological

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
4
sovereignty” as a guiding principle for upcoming
AI regulations, citing the need to strengthen
domestic ecosystems. 6 While such impulses reflect
a legitimate desire to ensure national resilience
and inclusivity, they also risk isolating national
AI markets from regional and global value chains.
A balance must be struck between fostering local
innovation and maintaining access to world-leading
AI technologies, infrastructure, and partnerships.
This is where the U.S. and ASEAN perspectives
on AI sovereignty diverge, but could also converge.
As OSTP Director Kratsios remarked in July, “We
want everyone in the world who’s developing AI
to be using American software…. [W]e have the
best chips. We have the best clouds. We have the
best models.” 7 His vision emphasizes the strength,
resilience, and accessibility of the U.S. AI stack.
Yet, for many ASEAN policymakers, AI sovereignty
is more about local impact in terms of developing
local expertise and success stories and directing AI
deployment in alignment with their own interests.
Aligning these views is essential. ASEAN’s version
of sovereignty should be about codevelopment, not
isolation—ensuring that AI benefits are shared, local
developers are empowered, and regional ecosystems
remain open. For U.S. policymakers and firms,
this means framing cooperation not as a one-way
technology transfer, but as empowerment and
partnership in building ASEAN’s own AI capacity.
The critical question is whether ASEAN can become
a codeveloper in the global AI value chain rather than
being merely a recipient of American technologies .
Geopolitical Context: Competing
Models for AI Cooperation in ASEAN
ASEAN finds itself at the center of competing
models for digital and AI cooperation. One model
is shaped by China’s deepening regional presence
and engagement. The other is still coming together
and recovering from a Biden administration that
undervalued the role of private-sector tech and digital
trade partnerships. The difference lies not just in values
or governance approaches, but in how each partner
turns commitments into tangible impact.
While China has institutionalized its digital and
AI engagement with Southeast Asia like many other
countries, including the United States, Chinese
engagement is noticeable for its breadth, depth, and
focus on applications. 8 Mechanisms include the
ASEAN Digital Ministers’ Meeting with China,
the Action Plan for Implementing the ASEAN-
China Partnership on Digital Economy Cooperation
(2021–2025), and the 2024 and 2025 ASEAN-China
Digital Work Plans. These programs emphasize AI
infrastructure, applications, training, computing
power, sub-sea cables, and data flows.9 All of this is in
addition to the digital economy chapter in the recently
upgraded China-ASEAN free trade agreement.
Crucially, China’s approach is highly applied
and visibly operational. The establishment of the
China-ASEAN AI Application Cooperation Center
in Nanning—supported by the “AI Plus” initiative
for ministerial-level engagement—signals that
China is not merely discussing cooperation but
deploying it. The center has already signed over 65
AI cooperation projects—including 16 with ASEAN
partners—and collected more than 450 real-world AI
application scenarios in sectors ranging from smart
healthcare and transportation to social governance
and agriculture. 10 China’s model extends to AI
infrastructure and connectivity. The China-ASEAN
Information Harbor (a flagship project of the Digital
Silk Road) has established twelve terrestrial optical
cables linking the province of Guangxi with ASEAN
countries, supporting cross-border data flows critical
for AI model training and deployment. China is also
exporting applied AI models through sector-specific
pilot programs and training initiatives, such as the
China-ASEAN Digital Academy, the Smart Agriculture
“Digital Countryside” Innovation Competition, and
the China-ASEAN College Students’ AI Application
Innovation Invitation Competition.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
5
Collectively, these efforts demonstrate that
Beijing’s strategy is not limited to high-level
dialogue; it is anchored in physical infrastructure,
local partnerships, and applied projects that weave
Chinese technology and connectivity into ASEAN’s
digital ecosystems. This “build and operate” model
contrasts sharply with the prior U.S. administration’s
approach, which focused more on governance and
ethics frameworks than on large-scale deployments
or infrastructure investment. China has rolled out
a wide array of programs promoting AI cooperation
and digital engagement across Africa, the Middle East,
and Latin America. ASEAN, however, stands out as
a priority region because of its geographic proximity,
digital market scale, and strategic importance. This
is reinforced by the rapidly expanding commercial
footprint of Chinese tech firms across Southeast Asia,
from AI-enabled e-commerce and logistics to cloud
computing and smart infrastructure, underscoring
Beijing’s intention to make ASEAN a showcase for
applied AI collaboration.
By contrast, U.S.-ASEAN cooperation has
been predominantly governance- and principle-
based, focused on creating environments for safe,
trustworthy, and interoperable AI. In short, if China
has built the applied model of engagement, the United
States has built the normative model. The ASEAN-
U.S. Digital Work Plan (2023–2025), the ASEAN-U.S.
Leaders’ Statement on Promoting Safe, Secure, and
Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence, and the ASEAN-
U.S. Cyber Policy Dialogue all underscore the United
States’ commitment to standards alignment, ethics,
and digital security. These efforts have built valuable
diplomatic goodwill and institutional foundations.
Yet, compared with China’s visible projects, the U.S.
government’s approach has been less tangible and less
commercially catalytic. Obviously, the U.S. private
sector helps bridge this gap, but such commercial
engagement has lacked clear and consistent U.S.
government support.
The challenge for Washington is to formally bridge
this gap. The United States already enjoys deep
technological, investment, and security ties with
ASEAN, and U.S. firms are among the region’s most
trusted providers of cloud and AI services. But to match
the momentum and visibility of China’s applied model,
Washington and its private-sector partners need to move
from frameworks to fieldwork by translating shared
principles into codeveloped projects, pilot deployments,
and commercial partnerships that deliver immediate
benefits across the region. ASEAN’s policymakers want
a partnership that upholds shared values and AI policies
while producing concrete outcomes. Therefore, the next
phase of U.S.-ASEAN cooperation should prioritize
a codevelopment model that links U.S. technological
leadership with ASEAN’s policy innovation, market
potential, and local AI ecosystems. The goal is to
maximize mutual benefits and impact.
Pathways for U.S.-ASEAN AI
Cooperation
There are many ways the United States and ASEAN
can work together to advance their shared vision for
AI impact.
• Elevate and intensify the U.S.-ASEAN digital
and AI dialogue . In the past, a U.S. State
Department official led U.S. engagement. The
United States should elevate its engagement on
AI. For example, China engages with ASEAN
at the ministerial level. While the United States
does not have a digital ministry like other
countries, U.S. engagement could be led by
either OSTP Director Kratsios or the secretary
of commerce, along with relevant senior
officials from the National Security Council,
the Department of Commerce, and the State
Department in order to cover all relevant
issues, such as AI export promotion, export
controls, technical standards, and policy
discussions. U.S. government officials should
also set up regular working-level engagement
with ASEAN’s new AI Working Group
(currently chaired by Singapore).

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
6
• Establish a U.S.-ASEAN AI impact agenda.
• Commercial program (can also include
other ideas below) . The United States
should make ASEAN a priority project for
the Department of Commerce’s American
AI Exports Program. As part of this, the
Trump administration should identify
or recruit Department of Commerce
commercial service officers experienced
in AI to conduct an initial market and
competitiveness assessment of AI in
ASEAN markets. In parallel, these officers
should engage and survey U.S. AI tech
stack firms in the region to assess what
configuration of the U.S. AI tech stack best
fits each market. For example, the U.S.
tech stack is more fully present in both
Singapore and Malaysia, but less so in the
Philippines. Each market would require
a different level of U.S. tech. Commerce
Department and State Department officials
should also engage ASEAN counterparts
about their goals and interests regarding
AI and how U.S. AI tech solutions can
address their needs.
• Policy program (can also include other
ideas below) . The United States should
develop an AI adoption and impact
toolkit. OSTP could lead the interagency
development of this toolkit as part of its
AI export program. This should cover
infrastructure development, skills and
training programs, the role and value of
public-private partnerships, open-based
data initiatives, public procurement (see
below), and cross-border data and AI
practices. It should include a flagship
public-private AI adoption conference to
share emerging best practices on how best
to support AI adoption. This could lead
to a commercial matchmaking platform
and expo.
• Prioritize the public procurement of AI.
Government adoption is a critical catalyst for
broader adoption of technology like AI. The
Trump administration’s AI procurement
policy is a core part of its AI Action Plan.
The United States and ASEAN should share
information and best practices about how to
use AI in government. U.S. and ASEAN firms
can demonstrate their capabilities in how they
could help respective governments use AI. It
could also cover procurement, security, and
other major factors. U.S. companies could then
present product portfolios matched against
ASEAN government needs.
• Facilitate ASEAN access to U.S. AI compute.
ASEAN countries are scrambling to develop
and access sufficient local compute for AI
model training. U.S. firms are the world’s
largest provider of computing power, and they
are already major providers of AI compute
in ASEAN. On the promotion side of the
ledger, a public-private initiative could gather
details about existing and forthcoming AI
service offerings in ASEAN to highlight what
governments and others in the region can
access. On the defensive side of the ledger,
the U.S. government should provide guidance
about how U.S. compute providers in ASEAN
should manage access to cutting-edge AI
model training services to address underlying
concerns that many potential users would have
about access (and being potentially denied or
cut off from these services). As part of this, U.S.
and ASEAN officials could launch a public-
private initiative via an open competition to
provide preferential access to U.S. AI compute
to stakeholders (whether this be in the private
sector, academia, or elsewhere) for select
projects in ASEAN.
• Launch a “trust and use U.S. AI” workstream.
A public-private workstream on why ASEAN
stakeholders should trust U.S. AI services is
important to building trust when ASEAN
stakeholders are considering what AI to adopt.
U.S. government (e.g., the Center for AI
Standards and Innovation, as discussed below)
and industry could showcase policy tools and
operational service offerings that actually
address underlying sovereignty concerns about
the development and deployment of AI and

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
7
the data it uses and how these compare with AI
and tech services from other major providers.
• Promote joint innovation and deployment
projects and workshops. The United States (both
government and industry) and ASEAN could
identify public-private pilot programs for the
use of their respective AI in smart agriculture,
transportation/logistics, health diagnostics,
and other specific use cases to test and deploy
U.S. AI in ASEAN. In particular, the two sides
could establish a dedicated work program on
AI for cybersecurity, given that the United
States is home to leading cybersecurity firms.
• Develop a trusted cloud and AI strategy. There
are significant synergies between cloud and
AI technologies as well as overlapping policy
issues. The United States should develop a
trusted cloud strategy and commercialization
program for ASEAN. This would address the
cloud layer of the U.S. AI tech stack. ASEAN
policymakers need to know and trust how
their data and AI are being used and deployed,
via audits, certifications, and other legal and
administrative tools. U.S. government and
industry should also build on existing work
with ASEAN to develop an ASEAN-level cloud
framework agreement to support greater cloud
adoption across the region.
• Prioritize investment in ASEAN’s digital
infrastructure. The United States should align
financing tools such as the International
Development Finance Corporation with
ASEAN priorities for digital infrastructure. In
particular, gaps in local digital infrastructure
need to be closed, whether this is for undersea
cable projects or cloud data centers. The DFC’s
forthcoming digital infrastructure strategy
should prioritize projects in ASEAN and
should have staff dedicated to ASEAN.
• Prioritize AI standards engagement. The
Department of Commerce, the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
and ANSI should prioritize AI standards
engagement with ASEAN (under the State
Department grant to ANSI for work on
standards for new and emerging technologies).
This could involve NIST socializing and
building out the crosswalk between its AI Risk
Management Framework and Singapore’s AI
Verify testing framework and how this relates
to ASEAN’s AI governance guide and other
national AI frameworks and strategies.11
• Develop best practices for AI model evaluation
and auditing. The U.S. Center for AI Standards
and Innovation should hold a joint training
workshop with ASEAN counterparts on
developing best practices for evaluating U.S.,
ASEAN, and third-country AI systems and
how tests can be used to identify potential
security vulnerabilities.
• Conduct joint regulatory agency deep dives
on AI. More countries are using a sectoral
approach to AI regulation and development,
where regulators issue guidance to provide
clarity and certainty about how they apply
existing laws (instead of enacting new AI-
specific laws). The United States and ASEAN
should get respective regulators, such as
for financial services, to share emerging
best practices on how to regulate AI while
encouraging innovation.
• Set up rapid -response mechanisms for digital
trade and AI . As part of the American AI
Exports Program, the U.S. Department
of Commerce should set up a rapid-
reaction function where it organizes a U.S.
counterproposal when U.S. industry or
government officials learn of a potential
commercial opportunity in ASEAN involving
technology from other countries. Similarly,
the United States should set up a rapid-
response process to enable quick engagement
when restrictive or problematic AI or digital
laws, regulations, and technical standards
emerge that impact AI-based trade and the
deployment of the U.S. AI tech stack. This
second mechanism would provide technical
and policy assistance and advice (alongside U.S.
industry) to ensure that legitimate concerns
(e.g., about privacy and security) are addressed
without creating unnecessary barriers to AI-
based digital trade and the deployment of the
U.S. AI tech stack.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
2
the national bureau of asian research
1819 l street nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 • 202-347-9767
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, w a 98101 • 206-632-7370
www.nbr.org @nbrnews
Endnotes
1 Erin L. Murphy, “ A New Chapter for the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), October 8, 2025, https://www.csis.org/
analysis/new-chapter-us-international-development-finance-corporation.
2 White House, “Promoting the Export of the American AI Technology Stack, ” Executive Order, July 23, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/07/promoting-the-
export-of-the-american-ai-technology-stack.
3 “Remarks by Director Kratsios at the APEC Digital and AI Ministerial Meeting, ” White House, August 5, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/2025/08/remarks-by-director-kratsios-
at-the-apec-digital-and-ai-ministerial-meeting/.
4 “Unpacking the White House AI Action Plan with OSTP Director Michael Kratsios, ” CSIS, Transcript, July 20, 2025, https://www.csis.org/analysis/unpacking-white-house-ai-action-plan-
ostp-director-michael-kratsios.
5 The text of the draft law is available at https://www.dfdl.com/insights/legal-and-tax-updates/vietnam-draft-law-on-artificial-intelligence-released-for-public-consultation.
6 “Indonesian Govt to Submit Draft AI Regulation by August, ” Antara, July 11, 2025, https://en.antaranews.com/news/365809/indonesian-govt-to-submit-draft-ai-regulation-by-august?utm_
source=chatgpt.com.
7 “Unpacking the White House AI Action Plan with OSTP Director Michael Kratsios. ”
8 “Joint Media Statement of the 5th ASEAN Digital Ministers’ Meeting and Related Meetings, ” January 17, 2025, https://asean.org/joint-media-statement-of-the-5th-asean-digital-ministers-
meeting-and-related-meetings.
9 “Why China and ASEAN Must Deepen Digital Innovation Cooperation, ” Chinadiplomacy.org.cn, May 3, 2025, https://en.chinadiplomacy.org.cn/2025-05/03/content_117856697.shtml
10 See http://en.gxzf.gov.cn/2025-09/05/c_1122568.htm.
11 Josh Lee Kok Thong, “Explaining the Crosswalk Between Singapore’s AI Verify Testing Framework and the U.S. NIST AI Risk Management Framework, ” Future of Privacy Forum, January
23, 2024, https://fpf.org/blog/explaining-the-crosswalk-between-singapores-ai-verify-testing-framework-and-the-u-s-nist-ai-risk-management-framework.
Conclusion
The United States and ASEAN stand at a pivotal
moment in efforts to shape how AI is developed and
deployed across the Indo-Pacific. Both sides share a
commitment to innovation, openness, and practical
cooperation, but realizing AI’s full potential will
require moving from dialogue to deployment. U.S.
AI statecraft should focus on codevelopment, not
dominance, through helping ASEAN countries
build local capacity, align governance, and
scale real-world applications using trusted U.S.
technology. For ASEAN, engaging the United States
offers not just access to world-class AI tools but a
pathway to embed its own priorities—an enlightened
view of AI sovereignty that is cooperative, inclusive,
and interoperable—into the global AI economy.
A modernized U.S.-ASEAN AI agenda rooted
in mutual benefit, interoperability, and tangible
outcomes could ensure that AI becomes not another
arena of competition but a shared engine of growth,
security, and digital trust . •
