
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JUNE 2026
T
he Trump administration is undertaking a historic effort to reorganize global critical minerals supply
chains and insulate the United States, as well as its allies and partners, from coercive economic actions by
the People’s Republic of China (PRC), such as the 2025 export controls on rare earth elements. Initiatives
such as the Export-Import Bank of the United States’ Project Vault, the U.S. State Department’s reorganization
and re-energizing of the Minerals Security Partnership into the Forum on Resource Geostrategic Engagement
as well as the newly launched Pax Silica Initiative, the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation’s
expanded mandate, 1 and the U.S. Trade Representative’s proposed Agreement on Trade in Critical Minerals
(ATCM) highlight the administration’s whole-of-government approach to the issue.
The Republic of Korea (ROK) has been a long-standing target of PRC economic coercion and is particularly
at risk when it comes to critical minerals. More than 95% of South Korea’s consumption of critical minerals is
imported. The country imports 71% of anode and cathode active materials necessary for lithium-ion batteries
and 56.6% of semiconductor manufacturing processed metals from China. 2 These minerals are essential in
the production of some of South Korea’s largest and most competitive exports (e.g., semiconductors, electric
batteries, and petrochemicals). The most high profile of the PRC’s actions was in retaliation for the United States’
2017 deployment of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) in South Korea. More recently, China
imposed extraterritorial critical minerals export controls in 2025. While the former was a concerted campaign to
boycott Korean-made goods and zero-out Chinese tourism, the latter aimed to prevent Korean companies from
Jaemin Baek is a Director with DGA Group and is based in Washington, D.C. He is also a Nonresident Fellow at the
National Bureau of Asian Research.
SOUTH KOREA’S CRITICAL MINERALS BALANCING ACT
COMMENTARY BY JAEMIN BAEK, DGA GROUP

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JUNE 2026
2
exporting products made of Chinese-processed
critical minerals to U.S. defense contractors. Both
instances demonstrated South Korea’s vulnerability
to Chinese economic coercion.
South Korea and the United States would appear
to be aligned on critical minerals policy. Yet, despite
South Korea in theory being one of the primary
beneficiaries of U.S.-led critical minerals initiatives,
its approach to cooperation with the United States
is bounded by opposing domestic political and
corporate interests. Progressive president Lee Jae
Myung espouses a willingness to chart a more
independent foreign policy, but still ultimately
recognizes the United States as South Korea’s greatest
strategic ally. However, Korean corporations operate
quarter-to-quarter and their short-term, profit-
maximizing instincts run counter to the long-term,
painful experiences necessary to reduce dependence
on the PRC for supplies of critical minerals.
These competing interests can be categorized into
three themes: (1) profits vs. supply chain stability,
(2) U.S. alliance management vs. Chinese
economic retaliation, and (3) domestic politics vs.
foreign policy.
Profits vs. Supply Chain Stability
Paradoxically, the Korean private-sector actors
most exposed to critical minerals supply chain
instability currently benefit immensely from the
status quo. Companies ultimately seek to maximize
profits and market share, and a central imperative of
doing so is keeping input costs low. Due to the PRC’s
market manipulation strategy, critical minerals
costs are at historic lows, and Korean semiconductor
companies are enjoying record profits, with
electric battery companies able to decrease prices
precipitously over ten years. 3 LG Energy Solutions
has specifically highlighted the effect of the
improved material cost ratio. 4 These benefits often
outweigh the well-recognized and demonstrated
risks of overreliance on importing low-cost inputs
from China. The PRC has shown it is more than
willing to leverage its critical minerals supply to
advance its own foreign policy interests—oftentimes
running directly against South Korea’s own foreign
policy or commercial interests. In short, Korean
companies have accepted supply chain instability in
exchange for low input costs.
The implication of this disconnect is perhaps
most exemplified in how South Korea is cautiously
approaching the U.S.-led ATCM. The initiative aims
to create a preferential market between trusted
trading partners and disconnect its participants
from China’s distorted critical minerals market—in
effect, cutting off access to cheap mineral inputs.
Despite Mexico, Japan, and the European Union all
agreeing to an action plan that lays out a framework
for the ATCM negotiations, South Korea has yet to
commit to the plan. Korean companies that rely on
imports of critical minerals have made their voices
clear, submitting public comments on the ATCM
explicitly noting that a mineral price floor, one of
the potential outcomes of the agreement, would
erode their profitability. 5
That said, many Korean stakeholders recognize
the importance of long-term, strategic decision-
making to reduce South Korea’s critical minerals
vulnerabilities and build secure supply chains, and
the Korean government has already attempted to
take steps to address these issues. In recent years,
the National Assembly passed the Framework Act
on Supply Chain Stabilization Support and the
Special Act on National Resource Security, while
the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Resources
overhauled its organizational structure to create
the Industry Resources Security Office aimed
specifically at rapid response to supply chain
issues.6 The government has called for reducing
South Korea’s import reliance for lithium, cobalt,
graphite, and others from 80% to 50% by 2030—an
ambitious but admirable goal. 7 These policies, while
a step in the right direction, do little to address the

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JUNE 2026
3
underlying issue of supply chain security and instead
establish a framework for coordinating reactions.
Several Korean companies have also made efforts
to wean themselves off Chinese critical minerals,
notably POSCO, which is strategically developing
lithium mines and vertically integrating rare earth
supply chains around the world, including in the
United States.
U.S. Alliance Management vs. Chinese
Economic Retaliation
South Korea, as the adage goes, finds itself a “shrimp
between whales” as it seeks to align with major U.S.
critical minerals initiatives while simultaneously
avoiding the ire of Beijing. To President Lee’s credit,
he has done so impressively—signing on to, and even
leading, some of the United States’ less controversial
critical minerals initiatives but also continuing to
work with China to ensure an ongoing supply of
critical minerals to South Korea.
South Korea has signed on to some of the more
palatable components of the United States’ critical
minerals policies. It serves as the chair of the Forum
on Resource Geostrategic Engagement, which
was reorganized and re-energized by the Trump
administration as the successor to the Minerals
Security Partnership. South Korea is also an inaugural
member of Pax Silica, the first multilateral consortia
focused on the full artificial intelligence stack’s
economic security. However, the country has stayed
away from the more combative elements of the U.S.
critical minerals strategy, notably the ATCM, which
would almost certainly lead to economic retaliation
from Beijing. South Korea’s decision to avoid joining
the ATCM, in contrast with Mexico, Japan, and the
European Union, despite their complicated bilateral
relationships with the PRC, highlights the ROK’s
deep economic integration with the PRC.
South Korea maintains a similarly arms-length
approach to China. The two countries earlier this
year established a hotline and joint committee
aimed at smoothing Korean companies’ ability to
import Chinese critical minerals, while the ROK
Ministry of Foreign Affairs recently “reaffirmed
the need to stably manage supply chains for
critical minerals” (between South Korea and
China) following an April 2026 Joint Economic
Commission meeting. 8 This rhetoric, however,
has been at odds with South Korea’s clearly
messaged and stated policy priorities to reduce
its dependence on importing from a concentrated
group of countries (especially China). Ultimately,
the United States is South Korea’s only treaty ally,
and the two countries are deeply intertwined across
security, business, and culture, limiting the extent
of ROK-PRC cooperation and alignment .
Domestic Politics vs. Foreign Policy
South Korea’s political leadership is faced with
a major impediment: how to manage a legislature
driven by an electorate that is increasingly sour on
the bilateral relationship with the United States,
while pursuing the needed strategic cooperation
to secure critical mineral supply chains. Since
President Donald Trump’s 2025 inauguration, the
Korean public has steadily viewed the United States,
and specifically Trump, less favorably. 9 For the first
time in almost ten years, Koreans’ view of a sitting
U.S. president is not the most favorable among
world leaders, with Trump now trailing Japanese
prime minister Sanae Takaichi in popularity. This
trend is likely driven by the effects of the president’s
trade policy on Korean companies, written and
spoken attacks on South Korea’s trade policy and
security burden-sharing with the United States, and
high-profile incidents involving Korean nationals
(particularly the U.S. immigration raid in Georgia
on a joint Hyundai Motor–LG plant).
While foreign policy toward the United States
rarely captures the attention of an electorate, in
South Korea it is a significant factor in evaluating
a president’s popularity. In a May 2026 poll
conducted by Gallup Korea, 10% cited foreign policy
as a reason for their approval of President Lee’s

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JUNE 2026
4
performance—the second-highest reason behind
only economy/livelihood. 10 Koreans clearly care
deeply about their chief executive’s direction and
ability to conduct foreign policy.
As a result, pushing targeted legislation needed
for critical minerals cooperation could be difficult,
if not impossible, for the ROK government if it is
seen by legislators as leading to Chinese economic
retaliation due to South Korea’s perceived alignment
with U.S. foreign policy objectives. This dynamic
was aggravated by President Trump’s remarks earlier
this year specifically targeting the Korean legislature
for slow walking the implementation of the bilateral
trade deal, as well as by the more recent tit-for-tat
letters with the U.S. House of Representatives on
digital trade issues. 11 This hesitancy in South Korea’s
domestic political environment is particularly
relevant to the negotiation and potential
implementation of the ATCM. Any special tariff
law or newly established critical minerals tariff
regime would have to be passed by the National
Assembly. Given the potential agreement’s clear
intention to reduce dependence on China for critical
minerals, securing its passage in the legislature
could prove difficult, leaving South Korea’s ability to
meaningfully participate in question.
Conclusion
While South Korea should naturally align with the
United States’ efforts to create an alternative critical
minerals supply chain, competing domestic priorities
and interests prevent it from wholeheartedly doing
so. The need to protect corporate interests, balance
relations with its two most important trade partners
(the United States and China), and manage its own
domestic politics as they intersect with foreign policy
means that South Korea is unable to fully commit
to some of the United States’ more ambitious, yet
impactful, critical minerals policies.
That being said, South Korea clearly recognizes the
need for an alternative critical minerals supply chain
based on its own experiences with economic coercion
and the impacts on both economic competitiveness
and national security. South Korea knows it cannot
be at the whim of a single country with a domineering
monopoly on critical minerals production and
refining that can simply choose to stop exports at
its convenience. Instead, the ROK must carefully
consider its domestic priorities—across politics, the
private sector, and civil society—to find a balanced
approach that still achieves its economic and national
security goals . •
Endnotes
1 “South Korea Sets Its Sight on African Critical Minerals, ” Nanyang Technological University, February 26, 2025, https://www.ntu.edu.sg/cas/news-events/news/detail/
south-korea-sets-its-sight-on-african-critical-minerals; and “DFC Secures Expanded Authorities with FY26 NDAA Signed into Law, ” U.S. International Development
Finance Corporation, Press Release, December 18, 2025, https://www.dfc.gov/media/press-releases/dfc-secures-expanded-authorities-fy26-ndaa-signed-law.
2 Yu Junho, “If China Blocks Exports of Key Minerals, ” trans. by AI, Maeil Business, October 19, 2025, https://www.mk.co.kr/en/economy/11445057.
3 Gracelin Baskaran, “Building a New Market to Counter Chinese Mineral Market Manipulation, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies, June 12, 2025,
https://www.csis.org/analysis/building-new-market-counter-chinese-mineral-market-manipulation; Soonchan Park, “Samsung, SK Hynix Lead 158.6% Surge in
Major Firms’ Q1 Profits, ” Chosun Daily, May 18, 2026, https://www.chosun.com/english/industry-en/2026/05/18/UEKYZLVCMZED5JWTS4RYYNLL2Q; and
Colin McKerracher, “New Record Lows for Battery Prices, ” BloombergNEF , December 19, 2025, https://about.bnef.com/insights/clean-transport/new-record-lows-
for-battery-prices.
4 “LG Energy Solution Releases 2024 Financial Results, ” Battery Inside, January 24. 2025, https://inside.lgensol.com/en/2025/01/lg-energy-solution-releases-2024-
financial-results.
5 Jiyeon Han, “K-Battery Industry Voices Concern over U.S. Critical Minerals Pact: ‘Profitability Burden, ’” trans. by AI, Maeil Business, April 14, 2026, https://www.
mk.co.kr/en/business/12016695.
6 Jo He-rim, “Overhaul Tightens Supply Chains, Expands AI Policy and U.S. Trade Ties, ” Korea Herald, December 23, 2025, https://www.koreaherald.com/
article/10642445.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • JUNE 2026
2
the national bureau of asian research
1819 l street nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 • 202-347-9767
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, w a 98101 • 206-632-7370
www.nbr.org @nbrnews
7 Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (South Korea), “국가 핵심광물 수급위기 대응 및 공급망 안정화 대책 발표” [Measures to Respond to the
National Critical Minerals Supply Crisis Response and Supply Chain Stabilization Measures Announcement], February 27, 2023, https://www.korea.kr/briefing/
pressReleaseView.do?newsId=156554864&pWise=sub&pWiseSub=C3.
8 Heejin Kim and Jack Kim, “South Korea Seeks Critical Minerals Ties with China after Joining U.S. Trade Bloc, ” Reuters, February 5, 2026, https://www.reuters.com/
world/asia-pacific/south-korea-seeks-closer-china-cooperation-secure-critical-mineral-supply-chains-2026-02-05; and “Korea, China Reaffirm Need to Ensure
Stable Supply Chains for Critical Minerals, Rare Earths, ” Y onhap, April 21, 2026, available at https://www.koreatimes.co.kr/foreignaffairs/20260421/korea-china-
reaffirm-need-to-ensure-stable-supply-chains-for-critical-minerals-rare-earths.
9 Asan Institute for Policy Studies, “South Koreans and Their Neighbor 2026, ” Asan Poll, 2026, https://www.asaninst.org/data/file/s3_4_2_eng/222742fa858281cd85cc
5db0e71d3150_3td5bRC8_127d4e5cbd1288f321b43852c40bb0ceed4d9af1.pdf.
10 “데일리 오피니언 제663호(2026년 5월 2주)—지방선거 결과 기대, 특검 공소 취소 권한” [Daily Opinion No. 663 (2nd Week of May 2026}—
Expectations for Local Election Results, Authority to Withdraw Special Prosecutor Indictments], Gallup Korea, May 14, 2026, https://www.gallup.co.kr/gallupdb/
reportContent.asp?seqNo=1641#A.
11 Bahk Eun-ji, “96 Korean Lawmakers Blast U.S. for ‘Infringing on Judicial Sovereignty’ over Coupang Probe, ” Korea Times, April 28, 2026, https://www.koreatimes.
co.kr/southkorea/politics/20260428/96-korean-lawmakers-blast-us-for-infringing-on-judicial-sovereignty-over-coupang-probe.
