
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • SEPTEMBER 2025
G
overnance of artificial intelligence (AI) is a multidimensional exercise, and for emerging economies like
India it goes beyond a simple optimization between promoting innovation and mitigating risk. With
effects cutting across the economy, national security, public order, and individual safety, AI governance
encompasses the need to manage the technology’s cascading effects while harnessing its transformative potential.
As the global AI race radiates geopolitically, India must simultaneously keep pace with the breakneck speed of
innovation, improve socioeconomic development outcomes, and protect national interests and public safety while
reducing individual risk of harm.
As the fourth-largest economy in the world with a vibrant AI start-up ecosystem, India must align with the “pro-
innovation regulatory/governance approach” in the G-20 leaders’ declaration to maintain and accelerate economic
growth, given the productivity and efficiency gains that stem from AI-related growth drivers. This includes the need
to ensure that AI productivity dividends benefit critical sectors like healthcare, agriculture, education, and defense,
among others. The Indian government’s approach has been to serve as an ecosystem enabler through its flagship
IndiaAI Mission . The initiative seeks to build AI innovation capabilities in the country on one level and identify
pathways to expand AI applications on another. This includes enabling compute availability, supporting indigenous
model development, and establishing a national dataset platform to put in place the foundational building blocks
for AI innovation.
Concurrently, a thread that has appeared through successive policy documents, starting with the 2018 National
Strategy for AI and gathering momentum with the 2025 release of the Report on AI Governance Guidelines
Development, has been one of responsible, safe, secure, and trustworthy AI. This had been expanded in the 2021
document on responsible AI and reaffirmed in multilateral initiatives and forums like the Global Partnership on
Artificial Intelligence, G-20, and Paris Action Summit.
The proposed governance guidelines chart a pathway for operationalizing this approach by leveraging existing
laws and using technical tools to scale detection and compliance. The safe and trusted pillar of the IndiaAI Mission
has extended support for the development of technical tools, guidelines, and frameworks in this space along
Anulekha Nandi is a Fellow in the Centre for Security, Strategy and Technology at ORF. Her primary area of research includes digital
innovation management and governance, focusing on artificial intelligence, emerging technologies, and digital infrastructures.
AI GOVERNANCE IN INDIA
BY ANULEKHA NANDI, ORF

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • SEPTEMBER 2025
2
with the proposed establishment of an AI safety
institute toward which the Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology had released a call for
partnerships. The guidelines report also proposed a
whole-of-government approach to AI governance
through recommendations for an interministerial
AI coordination committee or working group, a
technical secretariat, and an AI incident database.
As AI adoption rapidly accelerates across different
segments of the economy, trustworthy systems have
become increasingly important. Deepfakes of female
celebrities have thrown the issue of nonconsensual use
of images into sharp relief. This elicited intervention
from the Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology in December 2023 to include clauses
under the existing intermediary liabilities regime for
proactively addressing AI-generated misinformation
or deepfakes. Furthermore, incidents surfaced of
foundational large language models developed in
other countries producing warped or biased outputs
that do not align with Indian contextual realities.
In March 2024 the ministry’s revised guidelines
focused on notice and labeling requirements for
AI-generated content. Overall, increasing adoption
of AI has opened up governance requirements on
multiple fronts, with implications spanning domains
such as data protection, intellectual property rights,
liabilities, accountability, and social justice that often
call for simultaneous resolution.
In sum, India’s approach to AI governance has
been a mix of deliberative and reactive policies to
augment the AI innovation ecosystem; ensure that
the applications of such innovation are reaching
critical sectors like agriculture, health, education,
and defense; and develop frameworks for known
and emerging risks while building up the country’s
competitive advantage in the rapidly evolving
geopolitical landscape of AI governance. This brief
scans the evolution of India’s AI strategy within
the context of proposed modes and rationales of AI
governance to identify a way forward for India.
India’s AI Strategy and
Operationalization
The 2018 National Strategy highlighted the need
for AI technologies to solve persistent socioeconomic
problems in India. In particular, it envisioned these
technologies as addressing institutional voids at the
last mile for education, health, and agriculture and
driving urban transformation through smart cities
and smart mobility and transportation. Since the
publication of the 2018 National Strategy, India’s
strategic approach and policy priorities have evolved
to realize the document’s vision.
The next several years were devoted to
understanding the conditions and landscape that can
help or hinder AI development and adoption. The
2018 report was accompanied by the constitution of
four expert committees to inform India’s strategy
and policy direction. This included reports by
each of the four subcommittees constituted by the
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
on data and platforms, applications in key sectors,
ecosystem conditions, and cybersecurity. This was
then followed by the release of the 2023 IndiaAI
report with recommendations from seven working
groups on areas spanning centers of excellence, a
dataset platform, data management, the startup
ecosystem, AI skills, computation, and chipsets. This
report also contained a number of recommendations
for institutional development, platform design, and
organizational structure, with recommendations for
developing enabling systems and policies.
In addition, sectoral regulators like the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) and Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI) are exploring the expanding
role of AI in banking and financial services. RBI has
appointed a committee for responsible AI adoption
in the financial sector, which submitted a report in
August 2025 with a dual emphasis on innovation
enablement and risk mitigation. A 2019 circular from
SEBI includes reporting requirements of the offer or

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • SEPTEMBER 2025
3
use of AI tools by market intermediaries. Moreover, a
2024 consultation paper contains recommendations
for assigning responsibilities to SEBI-regulated entities
for the use of AI, particularly when AI-related outputs
are used for decision-making. Regulators like the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India have also been
exploring the role of AI in the telecommunications
sector, particularly for detecting financial fraud and
curbing unregistered telemarketers.
The 2018 Task Force for Strategic Implementation
of AI for National Security and Defence report
outlined a roadmap for the defense sector to adopt AI
and integrate and embed it in defense strategy. Public
defense production units (defense public sector
undertakings and ordnance factories) were assigned
roadmaps for developing AI-enabled products. This
led to the establishment of the Centre for Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics at the Defence Research
and Development Organization to develop AI-
based solutions for signals intelligence and enhance
intelligence collection, collation, and analysis
capabilities. The aim was to develop AI-based tools
to detect automated human intrusion partially based
on principles of the Internet of Things. This was done
to have AI augment armed forces in decision support,
sensor data analysis, predictive maintenance,
situational awareness, operational management, and
logistics support.
The operationalization of the National Strategy
for AI over time has included considered and
deliberative approaches to develop innovation
capacity. The deliberative approach informed by
expert research and landscape analysis over time has
informed the budgetary allocations and government
support toward shaping the IndiaAI Mission and
its mandates. Overall, the approach to governance
and implementation of India’s AI strategy has
been to support domestic innovation by boosting
foundational model developers, publicly provisioning
GPUs through empaneled industry partners, and
inviting public solutions for safe and trustworthy AI
solutions and frameworks.
Modes of AI Governance and Rationales
The 2025 governance guidelines recommended
adopting an approach combining regulatory
methods and technical tools to build trust and
address risks. This approach resonates with one
used within India’s digital public infrastructure
system, which uses privacy-preserving consent
and authentication mechanisms across a range
of services. The governance guidelines propose
taking a life-cycle view of AI systems (development,
deployment, and diffusion), adopting an ecosystem
view of actors (data principals and providers, model
developers and deployers, and end-users), and
leveraging technology for governance with the aim
of complementing legal and regulatory regimes with
appropriate technological mechanisms to identify
and manage risks at scale. On the regulatory front,
the overall proposed direction appears to be one of
leveraging existing laws to address AI-related risks
rather than implementing a single overarching law
for AI governance. On the technical side, the safe and
trusted pillar of the IndiaAI Mission aims to support
projects across themes such as machine unlearning,
bias mitigation, auditing tools, explainable AI
frameworks, and approaches to fairness testing.
Modes of AI governance globally have tended
to focus on AI harms and safety driven by ethical
principles. However, countries are realizing that AI
governance is not a simple exercise of optimizing for
risk and innovation as the underlying technology
continues to learn, evolve, and mutate, introducing
new areas to be regulated. Given the diverse
ecosystem of actors involved in the AI life cycle and
the modes by which algorithms learn and evolve, one
of the challenges that remains is to locate points of
failure and attribute responsibility. Accounting for
this challenge within proposed modes of governance
would require mandated institutional and compliance
mechanisms for start-ups and developers that can be
attuned to varying levels of size and organizational
capacity. These in turn would require tangible

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
BRIEF • THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • SEPTEMBER 2025
investments in institutionalizing systems that can
oversee responsible AI compliance and inclusion of
governance-by-design mechanisms within product
development methodologies.
Cutting across the levels of technical, social,
and legal specificities of AI systems are core realist
rationales of national and economic security and
global competitiveness, compounded by challenges
associated with operationalizing high-level principles.
This requires a system of governance that extends
from the granular specificities of cascading design
decisions to ensuring that domestic innovation is not
affected by geopolitical consequences. For developing
countries like India, this has to be done in a way that
does not place additional burden on public spending
in a country with competing social and economic
priorities, but charts a pathway to the promised
AI future.
Conclusion: The Way Forward
India’s approach to AI governance has
proceeded by combining available expertise,
building communities of practice, and working to
streamline and address sectoral priorities to arrive at
a comprehensive governance framework. Like many
emerging economies, the country has taken a reflective
approach to innovation without the rush to regulate
or leaving unbridled innovation unaddressed.
However, given the dual focus on legal and
technological approaches to AI governance within the
proposed guidelines, one of the overlooked aspects
that needs to be addressed is the professionalization of
the AI governance space. This is because existing laws
will need to be rationalized to make them applicable
to AI at one level, while technical approaches need
an ecosystem of skills, expertise, and standardized
methods to legitimize. This would require developing
audits and audit mechanisms, delineating risk
management and auditing standards, and defining
the legal liability of auditors. For example, the
Telecommunication Engineering Centre at the
Department of Telecommunications has come up with
the Fairness Assessment and Rating of AI Systems
(TEC 57050:2023 ). The adoption of this standard
could be strengthened through harmonization and
streamlining into standard compliance and auditing
processes in conjunction with applicable or relevant
criteria released by international bodies such as the
ISO 42001. Such oversight would help both public and
private organizations developing and deploying AI
do so in an appropriate manner in line with national
regulatory and governance priorities.
Developing AI governance capabilities highlights
the need to build institutional capacity at both
the center and state levels. This could include
implementing the recommended interministerial
coordination committee with the technical
secretariat to understand the dimensions of AI risks
and modes of mitigating them, whether it be through
technical means (compliance by design), standards
of practice, or mechanisms for accountability as
proposed in the 2025 AI governance guidelines.
This underscores the importance of understanding
the multidimensionality of AI risks, establishing
governance mechanisms that are able to engender
trust in systems that can lead to further adoption
downstream, and ascribing responsibility to various
actors depending on the extent and nature of
their involvement.
To realize this process of institutionalization, it
is important for India’s AI governance framework to
work in tandem with the IndiaAI Mission’s mandate
to develop foundational AI innovation capabilities. A
clear operationalization of governance mechanisms
is key to enable downstream innovation and adoption
by easing and clarifying compliance processes and
legitimizing technical modes of governance. Overall,
the evolution of India’s AI strategy and governance
approach reflects a strong commitment to foster
innovation and develop governance mechanisms that
can support an AI-driven economy. •
4
