
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
A
s the Trump administration continues to highlight non-tariff barriers against U.S. firms as a policy priority
in trade negotiations, the discriminatory use of competition policy against U.S. firms has emerged as a
priority issue. The administration’s stance reflects growing concern that U.S. adversaries and allies alike
are using competition laws and enforcement actions—once narrowly focused on consumer welfare and market
efficiency—as tools of economic statecraft and industrial policy to target U.S. firms. While countries retain the
sovereign right to regulate both domestic and foreign companies and to enforce their competition laws, targeted
or politically motivated actions by competition authorities undermine the rule of law, distort markets, violate
international trade obligations, and inhibit innovation and economic growth.
Among these authorities, the Korea Fair Trade Commission (KFTC) stands out for the scale and nature of
its enforcement actions against U.S. firms. Even when compared with other active regulators, such as the EU
Directorate-General for Competition, the KFTC’s approach has raised significant concerns among U.S. and other
foreign firms. Although KFTC-proposed legislative initiatives—such as the Platform Competition Promotion
Act, which is modeled on the European Union’s Digital Markets Act—have not yet been enacted, the agency’s
enforcement practices are aggressive, discretionary, and at times apparently arbitrary. The KFTC’s approach
has been problematic for several years. It prompted the first-ever Korea-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (KORUS)
consultations in 2019, underscoring U.S. concerns that the commission’s actions amount to a non-tariff barrier to
trade under KORUS.1 The KFTC’s practices also show a pattern of alignment with the type of barriers identified
in the Trump administration’s reciprocal trade memo. 2
The KFTC’s actions do not occur in isolation. They reflect a broader South Korean policy perspective that
views competition policy primarily as a domestic tool, with limited regard for international trade obligations.
Nigel Cory is a Director at Crowell Global Advisors and a Nonresident Fellow at the National Bureau of Asian Research.
UNDERSTANDING THE IMPACT OF KFTC ENFORCEMENT ON U.S. FIRMS
QUALITATIVE EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS
REPORT BY NIGEL CORY, CROWELL GLOBAL ADVISORS

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
2
South Korean policymakers, including members
of the National Assembly and among KFTC
leadership, reject claims of protectionism, arguing
that foreign and domestic firms are treated equally.
However, interviews with U.S. firms reveal that
the practical effect of KFTC enforcement has been
disproportionate scrutiny of U.S. firms, raising
questions about de facto discrimination and the
politicization of competition policy.
To assess the scope and impact of the KFTC’s
actions, the National Bureau of Asian Research
(NBR) conducted a series of interviews with several
U.S. firms that have been subject to multiple KFTC
investigations. These firms span a range of sectors
and scales of operation in South Korea, with some
holding significant market share, while others
are smaller participants. All reported recurrent,
burdensome, and unpredictable actions, reinforcing
concerns about the KFTC’s transparency,
proportionality, and adherence to South Korea’s
international commitments and best practices for
the enforcement of international competition policy.
Each interviewed firm reported distinct
experiences with the KFTC. Some faced multiple
investigations on an almost regular cadence, while
others encountered more occasional scrutiny. Firms
also varied in their engagement strategies. Some
proactively shared information to help build the
KFTC’s understanding of emerging technologies
and market and competition dynamics, while others
adopted a more cautious, defensive posture.
Despite these differences, all firms expressed
common concerns regarding the KFTC’s
investigative practices. Recurring themes included
the following:
• A low threshold for opening investigations
• A lack of details and transparency about the
specific alleged misconduct and the associated
theory of harm
• Unnecessarily aggressive investigative tactics
and raids
• Overly broad information requests and data
seizures
• The frequent use of (or threats to use) criminal
referrals as an enforcement and intimidation
tool
Taken together, these practices convey a pattern
that firms widely perceived as protectionist in effect,
if not in intent. Interviewees cited media, political,
and institutional pressures that incentivize the
KFTC to pursue high-profile actions against U.S.
tech firms. These pressures overlap with industrial
policy objectives aimed at promoting Korean tech
firms and products and reducing perceived foreign
dominance. U.S. firms also emphasized that the
KFTC’s technical and market understanding often
lags the industries it regulates. Many KFTC officials
and third-party expert advisers reportedly lack
deep legal or technological expertise, leading to
oversimplified and mistaken assessments of complex
digital business models and competition dynamics.
This knowledge gap, coupled with strong political
and media incentives, has fostered a regulatory
enforcement that U.S. firms view as unpredictable,
politicized, and tilted against them.
Interview findings indicate that the KFTC’s
enforcement practices are clearly protectionist
when compared with those of other jurisdictions.
The duration, frequency, and intensity of Korean
competition oversight of U.S. firms have increased
over time and may escalate further if South Korea
enacts new platform legislation. The ongoing
debate around this legislation underscores that
now is a critical moment to reassess the KFTC’s
approach—both to prevent further escalation and
to ensure that existing concerns are addressed
constructively.
U.S. firms consistently emphasize that they fully
recognize and respect South Korea’s sovereign right
to regulate trade, including for competition policy.
However, they also stress that enforcement must be
transparent, nondiscriminatory, and predictable,

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
3
consistent with South Korea’s international
commitments under KORUS and in line with
broader global norms.
U.S. firms report that the impact of the KFTC’s
actions are many, varied, and commercially
significant. They face significant reputational
damage from being dragged through multiple
KFTC investigations and long and drawn-out legal
challenges. U.S. firms report that the heavy-handed
and aggressive regulatory scrutiny extends well
beyond the KFTC to the Korea Communications
Commission (KCC), South Korea’s National Tax
Service, and the Korean National Assembly. New
legislation that might be adopted would mean even
higher legal and administration costs.
A comprehensive description of the core themes
and issues highlighted in the interviews follows.
This report then analyzes recent developments
relating to competition policy under the new
administration of President Lee Jae-myung and
the potential implications for KFTC enforcement
activities. The report concludes by examining how
the issues identified in the interviews amount to a
non-tariff barrier .
Key Issues from Interviews
This section identifies, synthesizes, and analyzes
key issues identified by several U.S. firms that have
been impacted by KFTC policies and enforcement
actions. During anonymous interviews, U.S.
firms described several major common issues
that represent discriminatory and other highly
problematic conduct in South Korea, especially
when compared with other developed countries.
U.S. firms asked to speak anonymously for fear of
KFTC retaliation, noting that attempts to push back
against the commission’s overreach often precipitate
more aggressive actions, such as additional or
extended dawn raids.
Lack of procedural fairness and due process in KFTC
investigations. U.S. firms’ principal complaint about
KFTC enforcement is the lack of basic procedural
fairness and due process. There are several elements
of KFTC investigations that undermine due-process
protections. When considered together, their effects
are compounded and lead to a situation where firms
are unable to defend themselves as they would
normally in other countries.
The KFTC strictly limits the information that
firms receive during investigations. Unlike in the
EU, the United States, and other countries, the
KFTC does not as a matter of course provide the
firm under investigation with access to its case
file. This impedes the firm’s ability to understand
the full scope and specific details of the alleged
misconduct and thus defend itself. Firms complain
about the overly broad and onerous requests for
data and information, yet the only information
they are able to access is that which the KFTC
chooses to present in the examiner’s report (which
is a summary of findings). As such, firms often are
unable to highlight exculpatory evidence that the
KFTC has not included. In contrast, in the EU and
elsewhere, there is a formal “access to file” process
where a firm under investigation can review all
the information that the regulatory authority has
collected throughout the investigation. As the
European Commission’s Directorate-General for
Competition notes, “access to the Commission’s
file is one of the procedural guarantees intended to
apply the principle of equality of arms and to protect
rights of defense.” 3 While the 2020 amendments
to the Monopoly Regulation and Fair Trade Act
(MRFTA) were intended to address this complaint
and establish a similar procedure to that in the
EU,4 by 2021 this had reportedly once again been
restricted to information in the examiner’s report. 5
Companies continue to report that, in practice,
access to relevant information is not provided by
the KFTC. As such, the issue is fundamentally not
about the nature of South Korean law or how South
Korea exercises its right to regulate, but rather with
the KFTC’s compliance with the legal requirements

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
4
under which it operates. Furthermore, by only being
able to review a limited subset of information at a
relatively late stage of the investigation, firms lack
the opportunity to challenge or clarify information
or allegations that the KFTC receives from other
parties. Given that firms have noted that there is
often significant political pressure on the KFTC
commissioners not to reduce or undermine the
remedies suggested in the examiner’s report, this
functionally means that companies cannot proffer a
defense or rebut the evidence against them prior to
the penalty being determined.
This issue persists despite the fact that there are
specific provisions of KORUS and discussions
that relate to this issue. Article 16.1.3 states that
a party in an administrative hearing related to
competition must “have a reasonable opportunity
to...review and rebut the evidence and any other
collected information on which the determination
may be based.” In 2019 the Office of the U.S. Trade
Representative requested the first-ever consultations
with South Korea under the chapter on competition-
related matters (chapter 16) to address this specific
issue, which clearly remains unresolved. 6 In
response, in 2020 South Korea enacted amendments
to the MRFTA, which extended the respondents’
right to inspect and reproduce documents relating
to a decision by the KFTC. The amendments also
created a requirement that the KFTC comply with
document requests by parties, unless the materials
requested contain trade secrets, relate to leniency
applications, or are otherwise prohibited from
production by another statute. However, U.S. firms
do not feel that this requirement has been effective.
U.S. firms also consistently commented that they
have limited or even no legal recourse to challenge
the evidence against them and the rationale or
scope of KFTC investigations in court until after
the final decision is released. This contrasts with
the United States, where U.S. firms could appeal
to a judge to narrow the scope of the investigation
or information disclosure if it is not relevant to
the alleged misconduct. While firms have often
succeeded in highlighting procedural violations
and overturning KFTC decisions in court, the
investigations and the costs these impose on firms
have already been borne—and indeed are amplified
by the need to prepare throughout the process for
an eventual court challenge. Beyond the monetary
costs, firms also suffer reputational damage
from being accused of violating South Korean
law—which is enhanced by the KFTC’s trumpeting
of its enforcement actions and penalties and cannot
be reversed even if the penalty is. Moreover, the fact
that firms are often successful on appeal suggests
deep procedural or substantive flaws across the
KFTC’s investigative process, again reflecting that
its concern is not about South Korean law but rather
overaggressive enforcement.
Other features of KFTC investigations compound
the impact of these issues on due-process protections.
Firms report that the KFTC rarely shares details
about the underlying complaint or theory of harm
and that complainants remain anonymous, even
when the allegations are vague or unsupported.
Taken together, these factors make the KFTC
investigatory process highly opaque, with regulatory
authorities being reluctant to clarify the rationale
behind their actions. The lack of transparency
and procedural safeguards undermines the ability
of firms to defend themselves as they would in
other advanced economies throughout the G-7
and Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD). These procedural
deficiencies in the KFTC’s processes create a climate
of uncertainty and risk, making it costlier for firms
to operate in South Korea and raising the prospects
of political targeting of disfavored firms.
The low and arbitrary threshold for investigations
leads to frequent investigations that are nearly
continuous. The KFTC has an exceptionally low
bar for launching investigations. This includes
acting on single, anonymous complaints without
clear, substantiated accusations of wrongdoing.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
5
Both U.S. and Korean firms report being under
nearly constant KFTC scrutiny, but U.S. firms note
that investigations targeting them are especially
frequent and arbitrary. According to multiple firms,
these investigations often are initiated on a regular
cadence, with executives becoming nervous when
the KFTC has not launched a new investigation for
several months—since this necessarily implies that
one is imminent. The predictable tempo, with some
firms describing investigations as being launched
roughly every two to four months on average,
suggests that the KFTC is under significant pressure
to launch investigations into U.S. firms. Indicative
of this low and arbitrary threshold for action, the
KFTC often launches investigations of U.S. tech
firms in the lead-up to the Korean National Assembly
audit—a high-profile investigation of both regulators
and firms in September and October. Following the
audit, at which KFTC leaders are typically grilled
about what they are doing to combat U.S. “big tech,”
the commission often conducts a series of intensive
on-site investigations and interviews.
As a result of this low threshold, firms have
noted investigations launched into minor technical
or business decisions that are clearly not anti-
competitive, such as ceasing orders or relationships
that are unprofitable. Firms report that early-stage
KFTC interviews often primarily consist of basic
questions about the functioning of certain products
or services or the basic structure of a market in
South Korea—questions that other regulators
would answer themselves well before launching a
formal investigation. Firms have also highlighted
that the KFTC appears responsive to complaints
from Korean firms, particularly in cases where the
U.S. firm is a new entrant to a market dominated
by a Korean firm. This situation is ironic given that
competition law is designed specifically to protect
such entrants.
KFTC investigations can span years and often
overlap or recur, draining resources and disrupting
normal business operations—particularly when
multiple separate investigations target a single firm
simultaneously. The agency’s justification is that
this is due to the broad scope of laws it enforces; the
need to protect complainants; staffing constraints,
including a lack of legal, economic, and technology
expertise; and the involvement of new technologies,
which makes it hard to determine whether a law
has been broken. The KFTC’s lack of technical
competence is reflected in the fact that it often
requires firms to process or analyze data in line
with its requests—rather than conducting its own
analysis—or even to translate documents made
public as part of other regulators’ investigations.
The latter is a time-consuming process that is
generally handled by the regulators themselves. In
practice, the combination of a low bar to launch
investigations and the long duration of investigatory
processes results in a continuous cycle of costly and
distracting inquiries, requiring the retention of
significant additional in-house legal and compliance
staff as well as Korean outside counsel and making
it more difficult for key leadership and business staff
to pursue beneficial innovations.
Antagonistic enforcement tactics: Dawn raids,
office occupation, and staff intimidation. KFTC
enforcement is characterized by unnecessarily
aggressive tactics, including the pro forma use
of unannounced dawn raids at the start of an
investigation. While U.S. firms describe some
interactions with KFTC investigators as respectful,
the prevailing experience is one of hostility and
pressure to comply. The KFTC conducts additional
dawn raids or antagonistic interviews against firms
that push back, which firms note as a deterrent to
exercising their legitimate rights.
The KFTC’s authority to conduct dawn raids
and other investigations is established by Article
81 of the MRFTA and is in itself not a problematic
legal authority. While competition authorities in
other countries also conduct unannounced on-site

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
6
inspections, and these are certainly justified in
particular circumstances, firms state that the
KFTC is unique in making them a regular, central
feature of investigations—suggesting that their role
is related not so much to legitimate objectives like
the preservation of evidence but more to efforts
to intimidate staff, disrupt business operations, or
compel the production of information from the U.S.
parent company regardless of the justifiability of the
request.7 The KFTC’s use of dawn raids contrasts
with common best practices in the United States
and elsewhere, where an investigation typically
starts with a request for information or interviews.
This is not a new issue. As a result of pushback
from the United States, the 2020 amendments to
the MRFTA aimed to improve respondents’ rights
when subjected to dawn raids. Specific provisions
include an obligation that the KFTC provide targets
of dawn raids with documents explaining the scope,
purpose, duration, and methods of the on-site
searches. They also include a limitation on dawn
raids and interviews after an examiner’s report is
issued, except upon the filing of a formal application
to reinvestigate by the KFTC case team and approval
by the commissioners of the KFTC. 8 However, firms
still report that dawn raids are a regular feature
of aggressive KFTC actions, can be extended or
reinitiated in response to them pushing back against
KFTC demands (see below), and often do not include
a clear indication of the purpose of the raid or the
scope of the investigation—suggesting that, much
like with the amendments related to due process,
the KFTC has not meaningfully implemented
procedural reforms as required by law.
Following a dawn raid, KFTC staff often continue
to occupy office space, sometimes for weeks, which
makes it difficult for firms to carry on normal
business operations. The KFTC often uses the
threat of more dawn raids during interviews and
investigations to encourage firms not to push back
against broad requests for information (RFIs) or
other enforcement activities (see below). In many
cases, KFTC officials do indeed return for additional
on-site investigations and interviews.
During dawn raids and subsequent investigations,
staff are subjected to intense, prolonged interviews,
often at both company offices and KFTC premises.
They are frequently required to sign KFTC-
prepared statements before being allowed to leave.
Staff recount cases where investigators scream at
their legal counsel and demand access to employee
devices, even when this is physically impossible
because passwords from staff who are not present are
unavailable. The psychological toll can be significant.
The situation is made more challenging because the
KFTC often threatens individual employees with
criminal obstruction of justice charges if they do not
comply with KFTC requests, even when the requests
are overly broad or not relevant to the investigation,
forcing them to sign statements confirming that they
are personally refusing a KFTC request and that
they are aware that this may amount to obstruction.
The ability of U.S. firms to defend themselves is
all the more challenging because the rules of what
constitutes obstruction of an investigation in South
Korea are unclear, giving the KFTC broad leverage
to use the threat of an obstruction charge to coerce
or intimidate employees into compliance. 9
Overly broad information disclosure requirements
and risks to proprietary data. The KFTC has broad
(and largely unconstrained) authority to request and
seize huge amounts of information during raids and
investigations, in contrast to other jurisdictions.
Firms do not have the same legal avenues available
in the United States and elsewhere to take regulatory
agencies to court to challenge their requests for
information and thus compel them to narrow their
requests to what is relevant to the investigation.
In South Korea, firms face repeated, broad, and
onerous requests for data and information from
the KFTC, including demands for highly sensitive
proprietary data such as source code. Unlike the

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
7
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, which allows for
negotiation and legal counsel participation, the
KFTC’s approach is described as pushing for a
“floodgate” of information. Firms report that the
information-gathering process is intense and not in
line with best practices for discovery in international
contexts. Moreover, it is very difficult to limit the
scope of information requests via engagement with
KFTC authorities, which is the only realistic option
given the lack of recourse to the courts. Firms are
concerned that these unconstrained information
requests not only impose a heavy administrative
burden but also expose them to risks of competitive
harm, reputational damage, and the loss of
intellectual property.
KFTC information requests are often numerous
and vaguely defined. Some firms noted that they
receive more requests for information from the
KFTC than from any other competition authority.
At the level of the individual request, the KFTC’s
requests are often expansive in scope, such as for
all the emails and documents from an employee
over the last several years—without any limitations
relating to the scope of the investigation. The volume
of required disclosures is therefore immense and
far beyond the standard for other regulators, with
firms submitting thousands of files and hundreds of
gigabytes of data. During a dawn raid, the KFTC’s
official notice of investigation is often very vague,
making it difficult for firms to understand what
requested information might even be out of scope.
The impact of complying with these frequent and
broad requests for information is that when multiple
agencies are involved, the requests often overlap,
compounding the impact. This process can be
repeated several times over the course of a few weeks
as agencies issue new requests for information. The
impact can extend beyond South Korea to emails,
documents, and guidance from outside the country
(i.e., from a firm’s headquarters staff), which poses
additional concerns relating to internal review
and compliance.
The KFTC’s broad powers to request whatever
information it wants is made more problematic
for U.S. firms trying to defend themselves because
attorney-client privilege is not recognized in South
Korean law.10 This differs from major common law
jurisdictions like the United Kingdom, the United
States, Australia, and other countries, where
there are blanket protections for communications
between an attorney and a client. While civil law
jurisdictions have their own legal procedures for
protecting the confidentiality of attorneys’ advice,
firms suggest that these are insufficient in practice
when it comes to KFTC investigations, particularly
in the context of wide-ranging RFIs—and especially
when the RFIs target information from staff outside
South Korea. The KFTC can, without recourse or
any meaningful protection, see the legal advice
that a firm’s in-house or external legal counsel has
prepared as part of the firm’s efforts to defend itself
against the KFTC. This may include analysis of the
strengths and weaknesses of their legal defense
strategy. There have been cases where the KFTC uses
as evidence documents that reflect legal advice from
a firm’s attorney. 11 A secondary impact of the lack
of attorney-client privilege is a chilling effect under
which employees are discouraged from seeking
legal counsel for fear that consultations could be
used as evidence against them. The impact on a
firm’s employee conduct is further compounded by
the KFTC’s unique predilection toward leveraging
criminal sanctions as a supplement to its civil
proceedings. Ultimately, this makes it harder for
firms to comply with South Korean law.
The KFTC’s expansive requests are also often
made with unreasonably short deadlines. Requests
can involve hundreds of documents and gigabytes
of files physically located both in South Korea and
elsewhere that the U.S. firm’s in-house and external
legal counsel—including U.S.-based counsel for
documents relating to the U.S. headquarters—need
to identify, gather, assess for relevance, and transfer.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
8
Moreover, the KFTC is unique in, on occasion, asking
firms to process or analyze data for them rather
than simply provide the commission with access
to raw data (as is the norm in other jurisdictions).
When firms push back against the production of
a particular document or set of documents (e.g.,
because they see it as irrelevant to the investigation)
or when they ask for an extension to produce the
requested information, the KFTC often responds—as
discussed above—by claiming that the individual
employee is obstructing the investigation.
Broad, exploratory investigations targeting
unspecified or nebulous harms. Firms—both U.S. and
others—report that the KFTC is not transparent and
upfront about the scope or focus of its investigations
and that they often lack, at the outset, a specific
theory of harm or allegation of anti-competitive
misconduct. 12 When the KFTC turns up at a
dawn raid, the official notice that the firm is under
investigation often only includes broad and vague
statements and ambiguous terms. Furthermore,
firms lack legal avenues to understand, respond,
and challenge the basis for and allegations within a
KFTC investigation. These factors undermine firms’
due-process rights and allow the KFTC to move the
goal posts throughout an investigation, shifting its
scope or focus on a whim and making it significantly
more difficult for firms to prepare a defense.
The lack of transparency about the purpose and
scope of investigations makes it very difficult for
firms to defend themselves and to ensure that the
investigation and requests for information and
interviews relate to specific alleged misconduct.
Firms often must piece together information from
interviews and informal discussions to surmise,
frequently well after the start of an investigation, the
central focus and overall scope of an investigation.
In addition, firms bear the cost of managing
ambiguous investigations that stem from the
KFTC’s unwillingness to use other forums and tools
to improve its understanding of technology and
market dynamics before launching an investigation.
Compounding the difficulty, firms note that the
KFTC makes it unreasonably difficult to arrange
a formal meeting for an open and meaningful
discussion about the scope of an investigation and
to provide an opportunity for firms to respond to
the allegations and related evidence.
Firms suggest that the lack of transparency is
not merely a procedural deficiency but rather a
purposely ambiguous attempt to put together
large-scale “fishing expeditions” where, at the end,
the KFTC too often determines that everyone is
guilty of something. The intentional ambiguity of
many KFTC investigations is reflected in a clear
lack of understanding of basic details about certain
technology or market dynamics, and thus an
inability to articulate in what ways a firm’s conduct
might be anti-competitive. According to some
firms, the KFTC has initiated investigations only
to find out that the product or service at the center
of the investigation is not even offered in South
Korea. It has nevertheless continued to investigate
separate products or services rather than simply
dropping the investigation. In some cases, U.S. firms
report that this leads the KFTC to search for and
issue substantial penalties for minor infractions,
presumably to justify the opening of an investigation
even when anticompetitive behavior is not found.
Criminal investigations as a threat after the closure
of a KFTC case. A unique and deeply troubling
aspect of the KFTC’s behavior is the increasing
willingness of South Korean authorities to regularly
refer targets for criminal prosecution (in addition
to administrative sanctions). This feature of the
Korean competition regime is seen as an outlier
globally and creates a chilling effect on business
operations and decision-making. Another distinct
feature is that administrative enforcement under
South Korea’s MRFTA targets only corporations,
whereas criminal enforcement can also target
individuals. Criminal sanctions can therefore be

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
9
imposed on top of administrative enforcement, as
an additional layer. 13 Firms see the KFTC’s use of
the threat of criminal referral as a key tool in its
efforts to intimidate firms and their employees to
provide whatever information it wants and to not
push back against overreach. The normalization
of criminal referrals in competition enforcement
stands in stark contrast with the practices of other
major jurisdictions.
The MRFTA has long allowed the prosecution
authority to enforce competition rules, including
abuse without dominance, either upon the KFTC’s
referral or independently of the KFTC’s enforcement
actions. 14 After civil legal proceedings (involving
fines or other legal remedies) are concluded, the
prosecutorial authority can review the same case
for criminal liability, exposing employees and
executives to personal risk, including prison time,
for business practices that are not criminalized in
other jurisdictions. The KFTC has guidelines that
set criteria for filing criminal complaints against
companies (legal entities) or individuals. 15
However, U.S. firms note that the KFTC uses
criminal sanctions, and just as importantly the
threat of them, much more regularly now than in
the past and to cover a wider range of conduct than
in other comparable jurisdictions. Before, there
was generally a low risk of criminal sanctions for
allegations that a firm abused its market dominance
via vertical conduct (i.e., anticompetitive practices
involving firms at different levels of a supply chain).
According to a news article based on a National
Assembly report, from July 2022 to June 2023
(the first year of former president Yoon Suk Yeol’s
administration), the number of referral requests by
the criminal prosecution authority increased fivefold
compared with the previous year. 16 The impact of
potential criminal sanctions extends beyond the
KFTC. Even if the KFTC decides not to criminally
refer a firm’s employees, other Korean regulatory
agencies, such as the Chair of the Board of Audit
and Inspection, the Ministry of SMEs and Startups,
and the Administrator of the Public Procurement
Service, can also initiate investigations. 17
Criminal enforcement is an area where South Korea
stands out and apart from global best practices in
relation to competition enforcement. As one Korean
academic describes this feature: “in modern, liberal,
and democratic countries, criminal sanctions,
including imprisonment, for competition law
violations (aside from hardcore cartels) are certainly
uncommon. Only a few countries permit the use
of criminal sanctions, and even fewer jurisdictions
actively enforce them. South (not North) Korea,
notably, is one of these rare exceptions.” 18
Concerns about the KFTC targeting U.S. firms, but
not similarly situated Chinese ones. More recently,
there are growing concerns that the KFTC targets
U.S. firms more aggressively than Chinese or
domestic companies. Some U.S. firms, but not all,
report signs of a pattern of selective enforcement,
with KFTC investigations disproportionately
targeting U.S. companies while overlooking Chinese
competitors operating in South Korea, regardless of
their relative market share. In practice, this means
that U.S. firms that have entered the Korean market
began to face KFTC scrutiny sooner than Chinese
competitors that are now entering and gaining
market share—without similar headwinds from the
KFTC. Firms report anecdotal evidence that the
KFTC gives Korean and Chinese competitors more
leeway for policies and business arrangements for
which U.S. firms are often investigated and fined.
Some U.S. firms attribute this to strong political
and commercial ties between Chinese firms and
Korean conglomerates, as well as government
influence in choosing “winners and losers” in the
market. However, much of the evidence thus far
is circumstantial, based on enforcement patterns
and stakeholder perceptions rather than explicit
regulatory bias. The KFTC’s potentially biased
treatment of U.S. firms will likely remain a key point

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
10
of interest, given the ever-increasing number of
KFTC enforcement actions and the global expansion
of Chinese firms, which are seeking to tilt the playing
field in their favor and against U.S. competitors .
Recent Developments Under Lee
Jae-myung
Despite having vowed in his unsuccessful 2021
presidential campaign to reduce the regulatory
burden on foreign companies, following his victory
in the 2025 election, President Lee Jae-myung
has indicated his intent to pursue an increasingly
aggressive approach to competition policy
enforcement. 19 Given the KFTC’s attentiveness to
political signals, this will almost certainly result
in intensified investigations into U.S. firms. The
KFTC’s new chair has pledged to ensure that
enforcement activities are in line with South Korea’s
international obligations, particularly toward the
United States, but this is yet to be demonstrated. 20
Beyond enforcement, the KFTC has seized on the
momentum provided by the new Lee administration
to pursue legislative initiatives that would expand its
powers, undermine the protections promised (but
not enacted) in the previous MRFTA amendments,
and enact targeted, ex ante restrictions on U.S. firms
that would legally enshrine the unfair treatment
that these firms have reported already exists in
practice. Despite previous efforts to introduce a
bill modeled on the EU Digital Markets Act in
the form of the Platform Competition Promotion
Act stalling due to intense pushback from a wide
range of stakeholders, rather than abandoning its
efforts, the KFTC instead has attempted to push
substantively similar measures in the form of
further MRFTA amendments. 21 At the beginning
of the Lee administration, Democratic Party
lawmakers introduced the Online Platform Fairness
Act and urged rapid passage of the bill before U.S.
firms could raise concerns. This iteration of the
KFTC’s efforts is, in many respects, even broader
than previous legislative proposals—providing the
KFTC with wider latitude in deciding which firms
to target, expanding the scope of KFTC enforcement
to smaller entrants, and placing a broad range of
commercial practices under the microscope of
KFTC scrutiny. 22
The elevation of competition policy issues to a
major U.S. priority in tariff negotiations and the
ongoing work to conclude a bilateral agreement
has, fortunately, led to a postponement of these
legislative efforts. 23 The willingness by the U.S.
administration to highlight its—and the U.S.
private sector’s—concerns about the proposed
bills represents a welcome new step in what is now
a years-long saga of working to hold the KFTC to
account. However, it is clear from the repeated re-
emergence of similar legislative proposals in different
costumes that the KFTC will continue to pursue its
agenda even in the face of staunch domestic and
international opposition. As such, it is important to
highlight the trade-restricting nature of not only the
desired legal outcome but also ongoing activities .
Why Korea’s Approach to Competition
Policy Enforcement Is Protectionist and
a Non-Tariff Barrier to Trade
South Korea is not unique in having an active
competition policy authority. Each country has
a right to regulate competition and other digital
policy issues, but this needs to be balanced with
rule-of-law safeguards and international trade
obligations. This right should not be exercised
without sufficient legal and procedural protections,
limits, and safeguards. As outlined above, KFTC
enforcement activities clearly impede U.S. firms’
ability to engage in free and fair business and trade
in South Korea. Several factors, taken together, show
why the KFTC’s conduct breaches the threshold in
becoming a non-tariff barrier to trade, especially
when compared with practices in other advanced
economy jurisdictions.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
11
At the heart of the issue is that the KFTC
undermines firms’ fundamental legal rights,
especially relating to due process and procedural
fairness, which impacts their ability to compete
fairly in South Korea. U.S. firms operating in the
country lack many of the same legal and procedural
safeguards that they possess in most other advanced
economy jurisdictions, which imposes significant
costs and risks to doing business. Compounding
this, U.S. firms are singled out with numerous and
consistent investigations and feel disproportionately
targeted compared with Korean firms—further
enhancing their costs and tilting the playing field
against them. The KFTC has proved it is willing
to target U.S. firms even when they are new and
minor (from a market share perspective) players in
a market in South Korea. U.S. firms recognize that
Korean chaebols are also investigated, but most
think this happens less frequently or consistently. If
U.S. firms had access to strong legal protections and
safeguards (as in other comparable jurisdictions)
to defend themselves against the KFTC, frequent
investigations would be less of an issue because
spurious allegations could easily be thrown out.
However, this is clearly not the case, despite prior
efforts by the United States to push South Korea
to live up to its KORUS commitments and make
legislative and procedural changes to how it enforces
competition law. This lack of safeguards ultimately
enables and facilitates unfair treatment, making it
de facto a non-tariff barrier.
The KFTC’s ambiguous, broad, and aggressive
investigations compound the impact on U.S. firms’
ability to enter and compete in Korean markets on
fair and level terms. U.S. firms face major direct
and indirect costs in trying to manage KFTC
investigations while maintaining normal business
operations. The KFTC’s broad power, combined
with the low bar to launch investigations, means
that once an investigation begins, regardless of
the alleged misconduct, firms will have to spend
significant resources in providing information,
engaging with the KFTC, and fighting the charges.
Despite this, fines or penalties nevertheless feel
inevitable to targeted firms—requiring them to
then either accept and pay that additional direct
cost or incur additional costs to fight the penalty in
court. Korean authorities’ ability to launch criminal
investigations against firms and individuals is
another unique factor that compounds the impact
of the KFTC’s targeting of U.S. firms—a threat that,
even if not exercised, provides a powerful incentive
for firms not to fight back against overreach.
Many Korean firms and other stakeholders
consider the KFTC’s approach as normal and
are inured to these behaviors despite their clear
divergence from global best practices. Some even
characterized it as the cost of doing business in
South Korea, quipping that it is not “pay to play” but
“pay the violation to play.” Firms report that Korean
counsel have suggested that they should just accept
the premise of the KFTC’s actions, go through the
motions of an investigation, decline to resist, pay
the fine or take the legal remedy, and move on,
preparing for further investigations in the future.
While the KFTC’s conduct may appear normal
for South Korea, it is certainly not normal when
compared with other jurisdictions, particularly
OECD members. Ultimately, the fact that Korean
firms and stakeholders consider the KFTC’s conduct
as normal still does not detract from the fact that it
has elements that are protectionist barriers to trade.
While many Korean chaebols are also KFTC
targets, they benefit from political and industrial
policy support that—as shown above—can play a
role in the KFTC’s decision about whether to launch
an investigation. Moreover, the fact that the chaebols
are headquartered in South Korea means that
they tend to push back less against KFTC actions,
preferring to instead engage politically and thereby
receive lighter treatment. Since U.S. firms cannot
make a similar tradeoff, this prima facie represents a
non-tariff barrier against them.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
12
Korean chaebols also clearly benefit from the
KFTC focusing more on U.S. firms. The “cost of
doing business” calculation is very different when
one is an incumbent company as opposed to a new
and foreign entrant. The fact that several U.S. firms
have significantly lower market share in South
Korea than in other comparable markets—making
the country a clear global outlier, even to other
jurisdictions with strong, active, and well-developed
competition policy regimes—points toward the
protectionist impact of Korean regulations in favor
of local firms. The prevalence of highly concentrated
local industries and conglomerates in South Korea
played a direct role in the development of an active
competition regulatory authority. Ironically, given
the impact on domestic competition, the KFTC now
seems focused less on its original raison d’etre and
more on serving as a bulwark against foreign market
access and competition. Future research will seek to
quantify the magnitude of the lost market share for
U.S. firms resulting from this differential treatment,
but early estimates suggest that it easily exceeds
several billion dollars.
U.S. and Korean stakeholders see several societal,
political, institutional, media, and industrial policy
elements contributing to the targeting of U.S. tech
firms in South Korea. Firms have noted that the
KFTC often wishes to be seen as responsive to the
regular Korean media pressure to be tough on U.S.
“big tech.” Although such media pressure is not in
itself unique or unfairly protectionist, the launching
of politically motivated, costly investigations in
response certainly is. Ironically, the South Korean
government, media, and regulatory authorities are
also sensitive to the perception of being left behind
or treated differently in the global development of
new technology goods and services by international
firms. Korean authorities have contacted firms to
inquire as to why South Korea is not among the
first to receive access to new products or services.
Unsurprisingly, because of the lack of safeguards,
some U.S. firms see the country as a high-risk
market from a regulatory compliance perspective.
This reflects how South Korea’s regulatory approach
acts as a clear protectionist barrier to trade in
practice: firms are unable or unwilling to sell
products or services in the Korean market because
of the overreach of the KFTC.
There are also interrelated institutional and
political dynamics at play. The KFTC, as clearly
demonstrated by its repeated efforts to promote new
legislation, wants to expand its regulatory authority
over online platforms, in part by displacing other
sector-specific regulatory agencies (which tend to
push back against the KFTC’s efforts). This explains,
in part, the push for ex ante regulation. There is
rivalry among regulatory agencies and conflict as
it relates to their ambitions to grow. The Korean
National Assembly (through its annual audit) is seen
as a driving force for regulators and like-minded
lawmakers to set (or at least be seen as setting, given
the prevailing media narrative) a tough regulatory
agenda to target U.S. tech firms. If the National
Assembly calls for action, the KFTC reacts to
advance its institutional interests—regardless of the
evidentiary basis. Lawmakers and the KFTC work
together on legislative proposals, in part because
they want to protect themselves from media and
public criticism that they do not do enough to target
U.S. tech firms. This dynamic leads to the situation
described above wherein U.S. tech firms brace for
investigations and dawn raids right before and after
the annual National Assembly audit.
The KFTC shows a strong deference to industrial
policy objectives, further suggesting its role as a
protectionist agency. U.S. and Korean stakeholders
commented that when South Korean policymakers
and regulators often state that their goal is to protect
and promote small or medium-sized firms and
competition, what they really mean is local industry
and firms. This extends to legislative proposals
regarding platforms and artificial intelligence.
South Korea’s problematic track record in enacting
protectionist digital policies also provides critical

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
13
context for assessing its competition policies. For
example, South Korea is unique in the world in that
it precludes U.S. firms from transferring mapping
data out of the country. 24 Its protectionist approach
to the public cloud is also representative. The Cloud
Security Assurance Program is unique among
OECD members in requiring cloud providers
to physically separate services for public- and
private-sector clients; to exclusively use equipment,
resources, and personnel in South Korea; to only
store data in South Korea; to use a Korea-specific
encryption algorithm; and to exclusively rely on
Korean National Intelligence Service certification
for key infrastructure. 25
The combination of targeted investigations,
disproportionate costs faced by U.S. firms as a result
of this regulatory environment, and alignment
between the KFTC and other Korean industrial
policies clearly indicates that KFTC actions
function as a non-tariff barrier, protecting Korean
firms—even those that themselves face a degree
of KFTC scrutiny. As the Trump administration
and U.S. Congress continue to focus on non-tariff
barriers to trade, the concerns identified by firms
interviewed for this report should remain a policy
priority.26 •
Endnotes
1 “USTR Requests First-Ever Consultations under the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS), ” Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Press Release, March 15,
2019, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2019/march/ustr-requests-first-ever.
2 White House, “Reciprocal Trade and Tariffs, ” Memorandum, February 13, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/2025/02/reciprocal-trade-and-tariffs.
3 European Commission, “ Access to File, ” https://competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/index/access-file_en.
4 Jeffrey J. Amato, “Korea Enhances Due Process Protections for Companies Subject to KFTC Investigations, ” Winston & Strawn LLP , May 19, 2020,
https://www.winston.com/en/blogs-and-podcasts/competition-corner/korea-enhances-due-process-protections-for-companies-subject-to-kftc-investigations.
5 Namwoo Kim et al., “South Korea: Recent Statutory Changes and Cases, ” Global Competition Review, April 21, 2021, https://globalcompetitionreview.com/review/
the-asia-pacific-antitrust-review/2021/article/south-korea-recent-statutory-changes-and-cases.
6 “USTR Requests First-Ever Consultations under the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS). ”
7 Stéphane Dionnet, Axel Schulz, and Henrik Viaene, “Cooperate, Protect, and Challenge: Responding to Dawn Raids Conducted by EU Competition Authorities, ”
McDermott Will & Schulte, August 13, 2025, https://www.mwe.com/insights/cooperate-protect-and-challenge-responding-to-dawn-raids-conducted-by-eu-
competition-authorities.
8 Belinda S. Lee, Meaghan P . Thomas-Kennedy, and Elizabeth C. Gettinger, “Korea, ” in “Cartels: Enforcement, Appeals, and Damages Actions, ” 10th ed., 2022,
https://www.lw.com/en/practices/antitrust-and-competition/admin/upload/SiteAttachments/GLI-CAR22_Korea.pdf.
9 “Developments Regarding the KFTC at the National Assembly Audit, ” Kim & Chang, October 17, 2018, https://www.kimchang.com/en/insights/detail.kc?sch_
section=4&idx=19172.
10 “Recent Developments Regarding Attorney-Client Privilege in Korea, ” Lee & Ko, July 5, 2024, https://www.leeko.com/leenko/news/newsLetterView.
do?lang=EN&newsletterNo=1073.
11 Lee et al., “Korea. ”
12 Ibid.
13 Sangyun Lee, “Main Developments in Competition Law and Policy 2024—Korea, ” January 31, 2025, available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=5172277.
14 See Articles 124, 125, 128, and 129 of the MRFTA. In addition, see Article 4(1)(1)(a) of the Prosecutors’ Office Act (partially amended by Act No. 18861 on May
9, 2022, and effective as of September 10, 2022) and Article 2(2)(5)(b) of the Attached Form 2 in the Presidential Enforcement Decree on Rules for the Scope of
Crimes Subject to Prosecutorial Investigation (as partially amended on September 8, 2022, and enforced from September 10, 2022, per Presidential Decree No.
32902).
15 Guidelines include the severity of the violation, the extent of involvement in decision-making, and the degree of awareness of the violation’s illegality.
16 The news article is available at https://www.etoday.co.kr/news/view/2261209. See also Sangyun Lee, “Duplicate Powers in the Criminal Referral Process and the
Overlapping Enforcement of the Competition and Criminal Authorities in Korea: An Analysis through the Lens of the Redundancy Theory, ” October 30, 2024,
available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=5004296.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH • NOVEMBER 2025
2
the national bureau of asian research
1819 l street nw, ninth floor
washington, d.c. 20036 • 202-347-9767
600 university street, suite 1012
seattle, w a 98101 • 206-632-7370
www.nbr.org @nbrnews
17 Lee, “Duplicate Powers in the Criminal Referral Process. ”
18 Lee, “Main Developments in Competition Law and Policy 2024. ”
19 “DP’s Lee Tells Amcham He Will Reduce Red Tape, ” Korea JoongAng Daily, December 2, 2021, https://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/2021/12/02/business/industry/
Lee-Jaemyung-Amcham-US/20211202183747887.html; and “Overview of the New Korean Administration’s Competition Policy Agenda, ” Bae Kim & Lee, June 11,
2025, https://www.bkl.co.kr/law/insight/newsletter/detail?lang=en&whichOne=NEWSLETTER&newsletterNo=6080.
20 Y eo Dong-joon, Naver, September 4, 2025, https://n.news.naver.com/mnews/article/003/0013460075.
21 Kim Moon-sun, “KFTC’s Platform Act Concern: ‘Policies That Do Not Take into Account the Digital Environment Will Hinder Market Competition and the
Growth of Domestic Industries, ” Platum, February 1, 2024, https://platum.kr/archives/222061; and “Overview of the New Korean Administration’s Competition
Policy Agenda. ”
22 Lilla Nóra Kiss and Hilal Aka, “Korea’s New Fairness Act Risks Chilling Innovation and Derailing Trade Talks, ” Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, July 24, 2025, https://itif.org/publications/2025/07/24/koreas-new-fairness-act-risks-chilling-innovation-and-derailing-trade-talks.
23 Song Sang-ho, “Trump Threatens to Impose ‘Substantial’ Tariffs on Countries with Digital Taxes, Rules, ” Y onhap, August 26, 2025, https://en.yna.co.kr/view/
AEN20250826006100315.
24 “Suggested Steps South Korea Could Take to Address Digital-Related Restrictions, ” Computer and Communications Industry Association, April 2025,
https://ccianet.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/CCIA-South-Koreas-Barriers-to-U.S.-Digital-Service-Suppliers-and-Suggested-Commitments.pdf.
25 “CCIA Comments on Korea’s Revision of Notice on Security Certification of Cloud Computing Services, ” Computer and Communications Industry Association,
February 23, 2024, https://ccianet.org/library/ccia-comments-on-koreas-revision-of-notice-on-security-certification-of-cloud-computing-services.
26 For policy options to address these concerns, see Nigel Cory and Robert Holleyman, “Safeguarding U.S. Companies from Unfair South Korean Competition
Policies, ” NBR, Policy Brief, June 12, 2025, https://www.nbr.org/publication/safeguarding-u-s-companies-from-unfair-south-korean-competition-policies.
