
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
1
A Semantic Analysis
of the Recent Evolution
of AI Research
Juan Mateos-Garcia, Joel Klinger, Konstantinos Stathoulopoulos and Russell Winch
November 2019
Executive summary
Fast-improving Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems are being applied in a growing number
of areas, from internet search and social media to the analysis of health scans and
management of power grids. Economists are hailing AI as a general purpose technology
that will revolutionise our economy and policymakers are putting in place national
strategies to spur its development and diffusion.
Powerful deep learning networks that identify patterns in vast datasets and reinforcement
learning algorithms that learn through trial and error in synthetic environments, have
overtaken previous AI approaches that programmed logic into computers and taught them
from experts. Although these new methods have achieved sensational breakthroughs, they
also have important limitations that could restrict their applicability and benefits, and/
or create risks when they are deployed, for example in terms of discrimination against
vulnerable groups, manipulation by malicious actors and unexpected outcomes when they

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
2
interact with each other in the wild. An increasing awareness of these issues means that
policies to encourage more AI activity and its diffusion – in particular, to tackle big societal
challenges through innovation missions – are going hand in hand with research on fairness,
accountability, transparency and safety, regulatory changes and a proliferation of ethical
charters to encourage responsible innovation. Taken together, these efforts amount to what
we call a third-wave Research, Development and Innovation (R&D&I) policy, concerned not
just with the levels of AI activity but also its direction.
This policy programme needs to be informed by relevant, inclusive, trusted and open data
and indicators, which go beyond aggregate measures of the volume of AI research and how
it is evolving, to consider its composition, inclusion, diffusion, geography and purposes: we
need smarter data about smarter machines.
We have collected and enriched data from arXiv, an open repository of research widely
used by the AI community. We combined it with several other sources and analysed it using
data science methods to map trajectories in AI research and explore its drivers, illustrating
how novel data sources and methods can inform novel policy frameworks to steer AI in
societally-beneficial directions.
Our analysis shows that AI research has grown rapidly in recent years: 77 per cent of
AI papers in arXiv were published in the last five years. This is not just about computer
science: other fields have also experienced fast increases in the number of papers that
use AI methods to tackle important scientific challenges. Growth in activity has been
accompanied by shifts in its composition, with deep learning algorithms and applications
such as computer vision overtaking symbolic and statistical methods: the share of papers
about deep learning has multiplied four-fold since 2012, while the share of papers using
statistical methods has halved. These thematic changes have been accompanied by shifts
in the geography of the field, with China trebling its share of global AI research since 2012
and some European countries falling behind, especially in cutting edge methods.
In forthcoming work, we will explore how various factors such as gender diversity, corporate
participation, regional clustering and the involvement of countries with different political
values in AI research are shaping its trajectories. This analysis will illustrate how smarter
data about smarter machines can inform activist AI R&D&I policies to steer AI in a direction
where its benefits are more widely shared and its risks more wisely managed.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
3
1. Introduction
An AI revolution (again)
Building intelligent machines has been one of the driving ambitions of computer science
since the days of Alan Turing and significant efforts have been devoted to this purpose in
the decades since (Dyson 2012). Previous strategies to achieve Artificial Intelligence (AI)
had limited success, however. Symbolic approaches to program logic into computers in the
1950s, and expert systems that learn rules of behaviour from human experts in the 1980s
were too difficult to scale to the variety of situations where an AI system might be expected
to operate (Markoff 2016). Important aspects of our intelligence and how we perceive and
behave in the world were found to be too hard to codify and therefore implement in AI
systems (Russell 2019).
Machine learning approaches that bypass the challenge of programming intelligence in
machines by, instead, training them from examples or letting them learn through trial and
error in synthetic environments, have overcome some of these challenges and delivered
AI systems that are able to function effectively in a variety of situations; in some cases
even outperforming humans (Russell 2019; Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016; LeCun,
Bengio, and Hinton 2015; AI Index 2017). Some domains where AI systems have experienced
rapid improvements include game playing, machine translation, information retrieval,
image classification and speech recognition. Differently from previous AI booms, today’s
AI systems are already powering mainstream applications in search engines, social media
networks, translation systems, voice assistants and (partially) self-driving cars (Brynjolfsson
and McAfee 2014; McAfee and Brynjolfsson 2017).
AI impacts and risks
It is widely believed that AI systems could transform many domains beyond the technology
sector including health, manufacturing, transport or scientific research (McAfee and
Brynjolfsson 2017). They could also help tackle some of society’s biggest challenges, such
as the prevention and treatment of chronic diseases, environmental sustainability and
the decline in productivity in scientific research, to name a few (Topol 2019; Rolnick et
al. 2019; Agrawal, McHale, and Oettl 2018). The broad relevance of the capability that
AI systems promise to deliver (‘to behave appropriately in many different situations’) has
led economists to herald AI as the latest example of a general purpose technology that
will define a new economic era in the same way that steam, electricity or the transistor
did in past times (Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern 2018; Klinger, Mateos-Garcia, and
Stathoulopoulos 2018; Trajtenberg 2018). AI’s potentially pervasive impact has raised
concerns about disruption in labour markets as smarter machines encroach on an
expanding range of tasks and occupations (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018; Restrepo and
Acemoglu 2018; Ford 2015), perhaps even to the point where humanity itself is rendered
obsolete by exponentially improving machine ‘super-intelligences’ (Bostrom 2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
4
In the shorter term, there are increasing concerns about the risks of AI systems that
could entrench inequality if they learn the biases in historical data or make mistakes that
disproportionately impact minorities and vulnerable groups (Bostrom 2017; Noble 2018;
Eubanks 2018; Buolamwini and Gebru 2018), be gamed by malicious actors (Brundage et
al. 2018), turned into weapons or tools of surveillance that abuse personal data to monitor
and exploit users and citizens (Zuboff 2019), or create barriers for entry in increasingly
concentrated markets (Furman and Seamans 2018). AI systems could also behave in unsafe
ways if the metrics they seek to optimise are not well aligned with human goals (Amodei et
al. 2016), or if they create dangerous emergent phenomena when they interact with each
other in complex environments, like high frequency trading algorithms did during the ‘flash
crash’ of the New York Stock Exchange in 2010.
Some of these risks stem from modern AI systems’ reliance on deep learning algorithms
that learn increasingly abstract patterns from large amounts of unstructured data, such as
video or text (we will sometimes use the term ‘connectionism’ to refer to this programme
of research). Although deep learning systems have strong predictive power inside the
domains where they are trained, they lack robustness, interpretability and common sense.
This tends to break down when exposed to new situations, including strategic behaviours
by users seeking to manipulate them. It can also be difficult to understand their internal
operation and outputs. Further, they can create safety issues when they greedily optimise
performance metrics independently of the actual goals of their programmers, users and
wider society (Mateos-Garcia 2018; Marcus and Davis 2019). Their reliance on large datasets
and computational power could make them anti-competitive, privacy-infringing and
environmentally unsustainable (Amodei and Hernandez 2018). Some have argued that these
limitations require new approaches to AI that combine modern connectionism with ideas
from previous (symbolic and rule-based) AI eras (Marcus and Davis 2019; Marcus 2018).
Third-wave research, development and innovation policies for AI
There is increasing recognition of the need for policy action to manage the processes
through which AI systems are developed and deployed, leading to a proliferation of `AI
strategies’ around the world (Stilgoe et al. 2013; Jobin et al. 2019).1 These Strategies generally
seek to nurture national high-growth AI industries, and encourage the diffusion of AI systems
into other sectors in ways that are safe and consistent with ethical and political values.
Meanwhile, private sector organisations, non-governmental organisations and the research
community are creating ethical charters and guidelines to encourage responsible innovation
(Jobin, Ienca, and Vayena 2019), and fairness, accountability and transparency, and safety
research groups, are exploring technical and institutional solutions to various AI risks.
Together, these activities represent an example of what we have described in previous work
as a ‘third wave’ research, development and innovation (R&D&I) policy framework (Nesta
2019). Differently from older (first wave) approaches that focused on increasing research
and development investment levels without paying attention to its purpose (first wave),
and (second wave) models aimed at increasing the transfer of knowledge from university
to industry, the third wave of R&D&I policy is directional: it seeks to steer the development
and diffusion of new technologies mindful of their purposes and impacts (Stirling 2009,

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
5
2014). This approach is informed by a growing body of research in evolutionary economics,
complexity economics, and science and technology studies suggesting that increasing
returns (growing momentum) in the deployment of new technologies can create sub-optimal
scenarios where second best (or worse) technologies end up being adopted (Aghion, David,
and Foray 2009; W. Brian Arthur 1994; David 1985). There are many potential reasons
for this including random events, strategic behaviours (e.g. investments on marketing or
lobbying) and the preferences of lead developers and adopters early in the lifecycle of a
technology or industry (Brian Arthur 2014; Garud and KarnÃže 2001). Once a technology
gains an early advantage against its competitors, network effects and sunk investments in
complementary assets such as infrastructure and skills could make its success irreversible
even if it is inferior in the longer run.
An implication of this is that the emergence and deployment of new technologies does not
have a single equilibrium. Instead, we could imagine a collection of parallel universes, each
of which is dominated by a qualitatively different technology. Activist R&D&I policymakers
try to identify, among all these technological universes, which is more societally desirable
and put in place interventions to bring it about (Mazzucato 2015, 2018; Kattel and
Mazzucato 2018; Cantner and Vannuccini 2018). Some examples include:
 • Stronger levels of public engagement during the development of R&D&I policies.
 • Policies to increase inclusion in the R&D&I workforce.
 • Mission-oriented innovation policies to support R&D&I activities to tackle specific social
challenges.
 • Developing norms and practices to incorporate ethical considerations into technology
development.
Smarter data about smarter machines
We argue that in order to be effective, third-wave R&D&I policies to steer AI in societally-
beneficial trajectories need to be informed by new, ‘smarter’ data (Bakhshi and Mateos-
Garcia 2016; Nesta 2019). By this, we mean data that is:
 • Relevant: Smarter data for AI policies should capture AI R&D&I activity with high
timeliness and resolution, helping to measure not only aggregate levels of AI activity
but also their composition in terms of the technological trajectories that are being
pursued and deployed (Teece 2008; Dosi 1982). It should also capture geographical,
institutional and relational dimensions of R&D&I: where the activity happening, and
what organisations and networks are involved in it. Ultimately, this data should enable
analyses that not only describe, but also explain the dynamics of AI R&D&I, thus helping
formulate policies to shape those dynamics.
 • Inclusive: We need to understand what social groups and types of organisations
participate in AI R&D&I, and what communities and interests are absent and therefore
potentially neglected when AI technologies are selected, opportunities pursued and
risks highlighted or downplayed. This requires timely indicators of socio-demographic,
sectoral and spatial inclusion in AI R&D&I, and their links with the nature of technologies
that are developed and the goals they seek to achieve.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
6
Traditional data sources and indicators based on publication and patent counts, number of
AI businesses or university graduates with AI skills are insufficient to deliver the relevant and
inclusive evidence that AI policymakers need. New data sources that capture the creative
and collaborative mechanisms used in AI R&D&I – crucially including open source, data
and dissemination channels as well as conventional Intellectual Property Rights – and its
diffusion have much to contribute. Data science methods that extract quantitative patterns
from text descriptions of AI R&D&I activities and enrich them with additional information
about the identities of participants, their locations, affiliations, goals and networks can help
capture the micro-dynamics of AI R&D&I and its drivers (Bakhshi and Mateos-Garcia 2016).
This illustrates how AI and allied techniques such as machine learning and natural language
processing can recursively transform its own analysis.
However, like in other domains where AI is being applied, these methods also come with
challenges. In particular, there is the risk that complex analytical methods to map AI
may yield results that are difficult to explain, interpret or use to make policy decisions, or
that the size and proprietary nature of the data sources they rely on and their technical
sophistication create barriers for their replication and expansion. We believe that in order to
address these significant risks, smarter data for AI policy also needs to be:
 • Trusted: In order to be used, new data sources and methods to measure and map AI
need to be trusted first. The best way to create this trust is through rigorous validation
with better known and understood data sources and domain experts, and the use of
qualitative methods to make new results interpretable, meaningful and actionable. It is
also vital that the results of AI mapping efforts based on new methods are reproducible.
The results of machine learning, natural language processing and clustering analyses
can be sensitive to the datasets used for training, and the selection of parameters by
the analyst (or the algorithm). Understanding the robustness of experimental results to
different contexts, assumptions and model specifications is critical for determining where
and how they can be used to make decisions.
 • Open: The best way to build trust in new data and methods is by making them openly
available (while subject to constraints around the release of sensitive information such
as personal data) so that other researchers can review, validate and build on them (Peng
2011; Burgess et al. 2016). This strategy makes it easier to improve methods, detect errors
and combine sources to triangulate findings and explore new questions. It also reduces
inefficiency in research and lowers barriers to the adoption of new techniques, making
the field of AI mapping more inclusive too.
In this report, we present a pipeline for data collection, processing and analysis of data
about AI research that fulfils these features of relevance, inclusiveness, trust and openness
with the goal informing directional AI policies. Before describing its pipeline, we summarise
relevant work.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
7
Relevant work and our contribution
The notion of technological trajectory was put forward by evolutionary economists in the
1990s as a challenge to mainstream economics’ aggregate, undifferentiated ‘black box’ view
of technological change, where innovation is conceptualised as a productivity-enhancing
investment in knowledge, disregarding the fact that this could take many different forms
and bring out wildly-varying outcomes in terms of economic structures, distributions of
benefits and costs, technological risks etc (Dosi 1982). Influenced by economic history,
sociology of science and complexity science, the analysis of technological trajectories
pays strong attention to the historical process through which new technologies emerge
and evolve, and the preferences, worldviews and goals of those involved, as well as their
economic incentives (Rosenberg and Nathan 1994, 1982; Kuhn 2012; W. Brian Arthur 1994; W.
B. Arthur 1999; Garud and KarnÃže 2001). It acknowledges that historical phenomena are
path-dependent and sometimes irreversible, potentially leading to sub-optimal outcomes
(David 1985).
Some of these ideas are echoed in the work of AI researchers and practitioners who
have described the evolution of AI as a collection of parallel trajectories involving various
technologies and markets that are integrated and interact as ‘Comprehensive AI Systems’
(David 1985; Drexler 2019). Others have called for better models of AI progress that measure
the links between inputs (computation, data and skilled workers) and outputs (advances
in AI capabilities) in order to inform technology foresight (Brundage 2016; Prediger 2017),
and expressed concerns about how discrimination in the AI workforce may embed
discrimination in the (path-dependent) AI systems that are deployed (Stathoulopoulos and
Mateos-Garcia 2019; Myers West, Whittaker, and Crawford 2019). The majority of these
analyses have until now remained conceptual and qualitative.
Parallel to them, we have started to see a growing number of studies that use novel
methodologies to measure AI R&D&I activity. Some examples include maps of the AI
research and development landscape using publications and patents (Elsevier 2018;
Intellectual Property Office, n.d.; Cockburn, Henderson, and Stern 2018; Mann and Püttmann
2017), in some cases linked to business activity (Centre 2018). Other initiatives such as the
AI index have adopted a broad-based approach to the measurement of AI R&D&I using a
variety of indicators that also capture skills supply and improvements in AI performance
metrics among other factors (Index 2017, n.d.). Most of these analyses are descriptive,
capturing the evolution of activity in AI R&D&I, its diffusion in different academic fields and
its geography. Although several of them use natural language processing methods, such as
topic modelling or keyword co-occurrence analysis to create topical maps of AI research
and the trajectories that different countries specialise on, so far there has been limited
effort to understand the reasons for the patterns that are identified and their theoretical
or policy implications. There is a lack of standardisation in the strategies used to define
and operationalise AI, creating the risk of contradictory findings, for example regarding the
position of the European Union in ‘global AI rankings’.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
8
We have previously contributed to this literature through analyses of AI R&D in the
arXiv database (about which we will have more to say later) with a specific focus on the
geography of deep learning and its drivers (which we characterised using topic modelling)
(Klinger, Mateos-Garcia, and Stathoulopoulos 2018), and a study focusing on gender
diversity in AI research, helping build the evidence base about (lack of) inclusion in the field
(Stathoulopoulos and Mateos-Garcia 2019). In addition to publishing our results, we have
released the data and code for our analysis so that other researchers can reproduce and
build on our efforts.2
Here, we present new results of our analysis of AI activity in arXiv data with a particular
focus on the research trajectories followed in ‘open’ AI R&D and their drivers. Our goal
is to provide a detailed account of the recent evolution of the field – in particular, how
it has been transformed by the advent of deep learning – and to illustrate opportunities
to generate policy-relevant, smarter data about smarter machines, using data science
methods and new combinations of open data sources. In doing this, we seek to provide an
empirical grounding for current perceptions and concerns about the evolution of the field,
providing a rationale for directional AI R&D&I policies. This report will be followed by a
collection of case studies focusing on:
 • The connection between AI technological trajectories and gender diversity in research
teams.
 • Participation of the private sector in AI research and its link with the research trajectories
that are pursued.
 • Regional concentration of AI research and its links with the geography of automation
(with a focus on England).
 • Participation of illiberal countries in AI research with a particular focus on their
involvement in the development of controversial visual surveillance AI technologies.
Together with the report, we have also published arXlive, an open-source, real-time tool
to monitor AI research trends found in the arXiv repository, providing a source of data to
update our analysis and undertake new ones.3
Section 2 outlines our data and methodology. In Section 3 we summarise recent trends in
the evolution of the field, and Section 4 is our conclusions.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
9
2. Data and methodology
This section introduces our data sources – how we collected them and enriched them – as
well as key components of our analysis.
Data sources and processing
Our analysis involves a complex assemblage of data sources and methods. Figure 1
represents this pipeline.
Figure 1: Data sources and process
/uni00A0
arXiv
Citations
Places
Titles
Microsoft
Academic Graph
Institutions
Global Research
Identifier DatabasearXiv enriched
Analysis
AI detection
Field classification
Topic modelling

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
10
The core dataset we use in our analysis is arXiv, an open pre-prints website with 1.6 million
papers that is widely used by various Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
research communities.4 In recent years, arXiv has become an important channel for the
dissemination of AI research in academia and the private sector. As an example, almost
all research papers by DeepMind and OpenAI, two leading AI research labs, are available
from arXiv.5 Just under 60 per cent of the documents referenced in import ai, an influential
newsletter monitoring AI research trends, are in arXiv.6
We collect data from arXiv and enrich it with information about the institutional affiliation
of AI researchers and their location. Klinger et al (2018) and Stathoulopoulos et al (2019)
provide a detailed account of the methodology used for this. Here we summarise.
The institutional and geographical analysis involves two fuzzy matching steps. We match
arXiv papers with the Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG), a publications database, on
titles. This gives us access to additional information about the papers in arXiv, such as the
outlet where they were published, if they were published through an outlet (this includes
conference proceedings, an important dissemination channel in computer science), their
citation counts, authors, and in particular their institutional affiliation. We then match
institutional affiliations with the Global Research Identifier Database (GRID), an open
database of research institutions with information about their location and character (e.g.
whether they are an educational, government or third-sector organisation, or a private
sector company).7 This matching process leaves us with 2.7 million unique paper-author
pairs with detailed institutional and geographical information (including the geographical
coordinates of each institution).
Semantic analysis
We undertake four streams of semantic analysis with the abstracts available in the arXiv
data.
First, we use an expanded keyword search to identify AI and AI-related papers in the arXiv
corpus. Full details of this analysis are available in Stathoulopoulos and Mateos-Garcia
(2019). In summary, we expand an initial seed list of keywords related to AI with those that
are semantically close (.ie. appear in similar contexts) in a vector space estimated with the
word2vec algorithm (Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013). We then tag as ‘ AI’ those papers where
those keywords appear after removing uninformative keywords (i.e. those that appear
frequently in the whole corpus). This way, we identify just over 72,000 AI papers in the
corpus. Manual validation of a random sample of observations suggests good classification
performance, with 90 per cent precision and 90 per cent recall.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
11
We are interested in reporting and comparing differences between research disciplines in
our analysis but the taxonomy provided by arXiv has too many elements to do that easily,
and papers are in any case labelled with multiple categories, hindering their classification.
To address this, we cluster arXiv categories based on their co-occurrence in papers using
the Louvain community detection algorithm, resulting in 25 research fields. We then
create a labelled dataset of papers with categories in a single field and train a multi-label
classification model to predict those categories. This gives us a vector of probabilities for
each paper where every value indicates the probability that a paper belongs to a field. We
classify each paper into its top field according to the probabilities predicted by the model,
noting that our analysis could be expanded to consider explicitly the interdisciplinary nature
of papers based on this classification exercise.
We use topic modeling to obtain a detailed understanding of the composition of AI research
and loosely associate the topics extracted through this analysis with the notion of research
trajectories – consistent collections of ideas potentially capturing methods, tools, analytical
and technical strategies and application areas for AI research. Through our analysis of
their evolution, linkages and drivers, we seek a policy-relevant sense of the direction of
AI research and the interests shaping it. We estimate these topics with topSBM, a topic
modelling algorithm that exploits the network structure of text corpora (the fact that it is
possible to draw bipartite graphs of topics based on their co-occurrence in documents, and
networks of documents based on the words that co-occur in them) in order to extract topics
(communities of keywords in the aforementioned network) and estimates the weight of each
topic in a document (Gerlach, Peixoto, and Altmann 2018).
TopSBM has some important advantages over other popular topic modelling such as
Latent Dirichlet Allocation. It makes less stringent assumptions about the distribution that
generates the data, automatically selects a suitable number of topics and generates a
hierarchy of topics in the data at different levels of detail. We focus our analysis on the
lowest level of resolution, with 290 topics. In order to facilitate reporting and interpretation
later, we cluster these topics into higher-level aggregates using community detection on
a binary topic co-occurrence matrix, which we label manually. One limitation of topSBM
is that in its current implementation it is difficult to scale up to large corpora of text so we
train it in a random sample of 25,000 AI papers (over a third of the population of AI papers
that we have identified), and focus our analysis on those papers.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
12
3. Results: the state of play in AI open
 research
We begin our analysis by studying the presence and evolution of AI activity in arXiv and its
diffusion into other scientific fields beyond computer science and statistics (thus testing the
idea that AI is an ‘invention in the methods of invention’ with broad applicability to scientific
research and development (R&D) problems). We also want to measure qualitative changes:
how has the composition of the AI field changed with the arrival of deep learning? Do we
see evidence of a ‘paradigm shift’ as AI researchers and developers adopt new techniques
able to solve problems that previous (symbolic and statistical) approaches were less suitable
for? And how has disruption in the thematic content of AI research been associated with
disruption in its geography?
Evolution of activity
Figure 2 confirms the idea of rapid expansion in the levels of AI activity in arXiv, particularly
since the mid 2010s. Seventy-seven per cent of all the AI papers in our corpus have been
published since 2014. The rate of activity in AI has grown much faster than the rest of the
corpus, confirming that our findings are not simply driven by an increase in the popularity
of arXiv as an outlet for research dissemination, or even of STEM disciplines as an area of
research.
Figure 2: Evolution of AI activity in arXiv
/uni00A0
Year
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
25
20
15
10
5
0
AI paper
Not AI
AI

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
13
Diffusion of activity
The increase of AI activity is
not confined to computing
and data related disciplines
- when we measure the share
of AI papers in different fields,
we find an increase not only
in the ‘machine learning and
data’ topic community but
also in other fields, including
physics, biology and materials
science.
As Figure 3 shows, AI research
activity has grown faster
than the average in each
field, consistent with the idea
that AI is an ‘invention in the
methods of invention’ that
could revolutionise how R&D
is conducted, for example
by enabling the analysis
of larger datasets and the
automated exploration of
more hypotheses. We find
many interesting examples
of AI applications outside of
computing, from predictive
models of solar radiation in
astrophysics to optimisations
of radiotherapy treatment
in the medical sciences and
the modelling of molecular
dynamics in materials science.
Figure 3: AI activity by research field
Societal
Informatics
Biological
Complex systems
Astrophysics
Mathematical physics
Year
Societal
Informatics
Biological
Complex systems
Astrophysics
Mathematical physics
Year
Machine learning data Societal
Statistics probability Informatics
Optimisation Biological
Physics education Complex systems
Materials quantum Astrophysics
Particle quantum Mathematical physics
Year Year
Statistics probability Informatics
Optimisation Biological
Physics education Complex systems
Materials quantum Astrophysics
Particle quantum Mathematical physics
Year Year
Informatics
Biological
Complex systems
Astrophysics
Mathematical physics
Year
Optimisation Biological
Physics education Complex systems
Materials quantum Astrophysics
Particle quantum Mathematical physics
Year Year
Biological
Complex systems
Astrophysics
Mathematical physics
Year
Physics education Complex systems
Materials quantum Astrophysics
Particle quantum Mathematical physics
Year Year
Complex systems
Astrophysics
Mathematical physics
Year
Materials quantum Astrophysics
Particle quantum Mathematical physics
Year Year
Astrophysics
Mathematical physics
Year
Particle quantum Mathematical physics
Year Year
Mathematical physics
Year
2005 2010 2015 2005 2010 2015
20
0
20
10
0
10
0
10
0
10
0
10
0
Not AI
AI

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
14
Structural change
Recent years have not just seen a quantitative expansion in the levels of AI activity, but
also changes in its composition with a revival of interest in neural networks since the early
2010s (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). 2012 in particular was a watershed moment for the
field when a deep neural network significantly outperformed alternative methods in the
ImageNet image classification competition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). Do we
see this change in the data?
We begin to explore this question by calculating year-on-year semantic similarities in the
composition of the field using the topic vectors we created through topic modelling.8 In
short, this involves aggregating, for each year, the topic vectors of all papers in the year
and standardising them to control for secular increases in total levels of activity. We then
calculate the pairwise cosine similarity between vectors in different years. Figure 4 presents
results in the top panel.
Figure 4: Structural change in AI research
The colour of each cell represents the similarity between a year and those after it. Darker
reds imply similar topic compositions and darker blues dissimilar compositions.
We see that each year is identical to itself (the diagonal). In the earlier period, each year
tends to be quite similar to the years after, suggesting incremental, gradual changes in the
evolution of the field.
Year on year
similarity
(rolling mean)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
0.8
0.6
0.4
Inter-year cosine similarity
-0.75 0.75 1.00-0.50 -0.25 0.25 0.500.00

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
15
Between 2010 and 2014 we detect a sudden discontinuity in the semantic composition of
the field, in line with the idea of a ‘revolutionary event’: 2011 is not very similar to 2012 or
2013. This break in the evolution of the field is also visible in the line chart in the bottom
panel, where we show the three-year rolling average of semantic similarities for every year
(in other words, its average thematic similarity to the years around it). This series drops
around 2012 and then starts to increase, suggesting an inflexion point in the field with the
emergence of a new research trajectory that starts to stabilise and eventually to develop
more incrementally.
What has driven these changes in the composition of AI research?
Figure 5 presents the relative importance of various topic communities amongst all topics in
AI research (that is, how often a topic appears in AI appearances normalised by total topic
presence in the corpus).
Figure 5: Evolution in the composition of AI research (topic distribution)
We see a clear decline in the relative importance of symbolic approaches since the
beginning of the period and of statistical machine learning since the early 2010s.
Meanwhile, computer vision, deep learning, and robotics and agents (which includes topics
related to reinforcement learning) start growing since the early 2010s, consistent with the
narrative of a new paradigm in AI research and the evidence of a discontinuity presented in
Figure 3. We note with interest that the computer language and visions topics already had
some presence the 2000s and only regained importance in the 2010s.
Share of all
topics in corpus
accounted by
topics in
community
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Deep learning sound
Deep learning
Robotics agents
Computer vision
Symbolic
Health
Social
Technology
Statistics
Language

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
16
One potential issue with the figure above is that it does not take into account the secular
increase in the number of topics in AI research or variations in the significance of different
topics. To address that, Figure 6 shows the number of papers where topics in various topic
communities have some significance. The figure confirms the results of figure 5, while
highlighting additional patterns of interest: for example, we see that the computer language
topic field languished during the 2000s and only regained importance in the 2010s.
This coincides with the arrival of deep learning algorithms that have created significant
breakthroughs in text classification, translation, captioning and generation (Young et al.
2018).
Figure 6: Evolution in the composition of AI research (topic presence in papers)
We can also study the evolution of more detailed topics. Figure 7 focuses on some key
topics in what we will refer to as ‘state of the art’ topics in modern AI research. They include
convolutional neural networks that have become the workhorse of modern computer vision
research (Voulodimos et al. 2018), deep learning methods, reinforcement learning algorithms
that have greatly contributed to important milestones in AI game-playing (Arulkumaran et
al. 2017), recurrent networks used in language modelling, translation based on deep learning
(Arulkumaran et al. 2017; Young et al. 2018), and generative adversarial networks that
compete with each other to generate synthetic data with a high degree of verisimilitude
(Goodfellow et al. 2014). We see rapid increases of activity in all these topics since the early
2010s. In the rest of the report, we combine these topics in some cases into a state of the art
category that represents key techniques in modern AI research.
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
Percentage of AI
papers with topic
presence
Computer vision
Language
Statistics
Robotic agents
Deep learning
Symbolic

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
17
Figure 7: Evolution in the composition of AI research (detailed topics)
We can also explore the structure of AI research and its recent evolution by visualising it as
a topic co-occurrence network displaying relations between topics and their centrality. Here,
we are particularly interested in measuring the connectivity between novel and older topics
in order to understand whether the new AI paradigm is building on previous approaches or
disconnected from them.
In Figure 7, each node represents a topic and the edges between nodes are instances where
topics co-occur in papers during the whole period. We have coloured some topics of interest
based on the topic community they belong to. The size of the nodes is proportional to the
number of papers where the topic appears.

Shares of AI
papers with
topic
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
cnn-convolutional_neural_networks-cnns-convolution
training-trained-deep_learning-deep-train
reinforcement_learning-policy-polocies-reward-deep
recurrent-lstm-rnn-recurrent_neural_network-recurr
translation-neural_machine_translation-machine_tra
generator-gan-discriminator-generative_adversarial

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
18
Figure 8: Topic co-occurrence network (whole corpus)
The network seems to be split between a cluster of deep learning related AI research
topics about computer vision, language and deep learning in the left, and topics related to
statistical machine learning and symbolic methods to the right. One interpretation is that
there is limited flow of knowledge and ideas between both communities, consistent with the
idea of a ‘break’ in the evolution of AI research.
In the bottom of the graph we find a cluster of application domains including social media
and technology. Interestingly, some of these are connected to symbolic methods, which
could capture historical use of those methods in practical applications of AI, or perhaps
the fact that some features of those methods – such as explainability – are valuable when
developing real-world AI applications. Health applications are closer to the modern AI
cluster because they often use computer vision algorithms to analyse medical scan data
(Miotto et al. 2017).
Robotics and agents topics appear as bridges between various topic communities. We
believe that this stems in part from this community’s composition, including connectionism-
related methods such as reinforcement learning and more broadly defined robotics topics
that have also been pursued with symbolic and statistical approaches.
Deep learning
Robotics agents
Computer vision
Symbolic
Health
Social
Technology
Statistics
Language
Area

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
19
Figure 9 considers changes in the structure of the topic co-occurrence network between
an initial period involving papers published before 2010 and a later period after 2015. The
network graphs on the left column are interpreted in the same way as Figure 8.
The bar plots in the right column show the eigenvector centrality of the nodes (topics) in the
network, coloured by the topic community they belong to with the same colour scheme as
before. The eigenvector centrality of each node is based on the number of connections it
has with other highly connected nodes and therefore captures its ‘influence’ (which here we
interpret as its importance as a widely-adopted technique or widely-targeted application
domain R&D&I during the period being considered).
Figure 9: Changes in the topic co-occurrence network
Before 2012
Normalised
centrality
Normalised
centrality
After 2015
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
Deep learning
Robotics agents
Computer vision
Symbolic
Health
Social
Technology
Statistics
Language
Deep learning
Robotics agents
Computer vision
Symbolic
Health
Social
Technology
Statistics
Language

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
20
Geographical change
We conclude our analysis of the ‘state of play’ of AI research in arXiv by considering
its geographical evolution: have increases of activity in AI and changes in its thematic
composition been associated to shifts in its geography?
The two 3D maps in Figure 10 show the level of AI research activity in ‘classical’ topics
related to symbolic and statistical methods (in the top) and topics related to deep learning
(in the bottom). Its results are consistent with findings of previous research where we
provided evidence for China’s comparative advantage in AI research. By comparison,
European Union (EU) countries appear relatively specialised in classical and symbolic
methods.
Figure 10: National research activity in various AI topics
Bar depth/colour represents
specialisation in symbolic
and statistics topics
Number of
papers in
deep learning
topics
Number of
papers in
symbolic
and statistics
topics
Bar depth/colour represents
relative specialisation in
deep learning topics
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
21
The results in figure 11 could be partly explained by compositional changes (i.e. the fact
that China joined the AI research field more recently, when the focus of activity had shifted
to deep learning related topics). In Figure 12 we try to account for this by comparing a
country’s share of activity in all of arXiv, all AI research and State of the Art (SotA) AI topics
in the period before 2012 and the period after 2015, focusing on the top ten countries by
total levels of AI activity. We want to measure changes in countries’ importance in each of
these fields and compare volatility across fields.
Figure 11: Changes in shares of activity in AI research for top ten countries
The figure shows that the US is dominant in the three fields. While its relative importance
in the overall arXiv corpus has declined as other countries start publishing more research
there, its importance in AI research and in SotA topics in this area has increased over time.
China has experienced rapid growth in recent years, almost trebling its participation in
AI research – especially in SotA (deep learning) topics. We do not observe a comparable
increase in China’s arXiv general activity, supporting the idea that it has a strategic focus
(or revealed comparative advantage) in AI and especially SotA AI topics.

Percentage of
all activity
with presence
United States
China
United Kingdom
Germany Australia France Canada
Italy Japan
Switzerland
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
All arXiv before 2012
All AI before 2012
All SotA before 2012
All arXiv after 2015
All AI after 2015
All SotA after 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
22
Changes in other countries have been less drastic. AI and SotA topics are slightly
overrepresented in the United Kingdom, Australia and Canada while other EU countries
such as France, Germany and Italy are underrepresented in these. Having said this, both
Germany and France have increased their presence in the AI SoTA topics, suggesting a
thrust to catch up in cutting edge areas of AI research.
We have also measured the geographical volatility of AI research by calculating the
variance in national representation for the ten countries considered above, once again
distinguishing between arXiv activity overall (the baseline), AI research and research in SotA
topics. This analysis reveals higher variance of growth rates in AI and especially SotA topics
compared to the arXiv benchmark (the respective variances and growth rates are 0.48, 0.75
and 0.16).9 This suggests that some of the disruption AI topics that we have documented in
this section are also manifested in changes in its geography. Determining the relationship
between both vectors of change will be an important topic for future research.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
23
4. Conclusions
Implications
Our analysis of AI research trends show a field that is being revolutionised by a revival of
interest in neural network techniques and in particular, deep learning. It is hard to think of
another area of science that has been so thoroughly overturned over such a short period
of time, and where the translation of novel findings into practical application has been
quicker. These shifts underscore the need for Artificial Intelligence (AI) maps that consider
the composition of AI research activity: similar growth rates in levels of AI activity between
two countries could mask significant differences if one of them concentrates on symbolic
methods while another specialises in deep learning approaches.
The transformation that we have evidenced is a consequence of deep learning’s success
in a variety of domains, ranging from computer vision to language modelling and game
playing. However, the dramatic rate of change we observe, the rapid stabilisation of the
field on its new trajectory, and the low levels of overlap between current AI research and
previous statistical and symbolic approaches, could raise concerns about premature lock-in
and a loss of diversity in the field. As more researchers join the new paradigm, it can build
a momentum of its own, driven by network effects as much as scientific and technological
performance. There is still much uncertainty about the limitations and risks of new AI
techniques, so it may be desirable to preserve a plurality of approaches – as Canada did
when it continued supporting research in neural networks in the 1980s, when many other
countries abandoned it, disappointed by its lack of progress. This provided the foundation
for the deep learning revolution that we are witnessing today. Funding programmes to
encourage collaboration between research communities working with connectionist
methods and other techniques that are less data hungry, more explainable and more
robust, could also help build AI systems bringing together the best of both worlds.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
24
Next steps
The analysis that we have presented in this report is descriptive and focused on recent
research trends in AI research. As a next step, we will publish discrete analyses of the drivers
of these trends, including researcher diversity, participation of corporations in AI research,
the regional distribution of AI research and its link with automation, and evolution of activity
in controversial ‘dual-use’ surveillance AI technologies. We will also consider in further detail
the policy implications of our analysis.
Going further, it will be important to consider other data sources in this work beyond arXiv,
including research activity in traditional scientometric databases, as well as patenting,
open source software development and business activity to name a few. Doing this will
allow us to validate findings based on this experimental data source, and to understand
how AI research is diffusing from laboratories into application and impact. We would also
like to further develop our analysis of AI research trajectories, paying more attention to
how over time multiple topics become part of, or splinter from, a trajectory. A longitudinal
analysis that considers how topics co-evolve, merge and branch would provide us with a
richer understanding of AI research trajectories. Here, it would be particularly interesting to
distinguish more robustly between theoretical and applied contributions, perhaps using the
full text of papers and other relevant information such as the data, diagrams and figures
that they use.
Our analysis also fails to consider the actual goals or purposes of research, a critical
component of the analysis of directionality. Although richer, full-text data might give us a
better understanding of the intended goals of a research paper or AI system (e.g. predictive
performance, robustness, explainability, safety, labour automation or labour augmentation
etc), this will have to be complemented with qualitative assessments involving non-technical
experts, who might have to face the systems in real-world situations. This is an example of
the kind of mixed-methods research opportunities made possible by the granular data we
are using here.
As this discussion shows, smarter data about smarter machines offer many opportunities to
advance our understanding of the development and diffusion of novel technologies such as
AI, and to inform policies seeking to ensure that the benefits of those transformations are
widely shared.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
25
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018. ‘ Artificial
Intelligence, Automation and Work.’ National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Aghion, Philippe, Paul A. David, and Dominique Foray.
2009. ‘Science, Technology and Innovation for Economic
Growth: Linking Policy Research and Practice in “STIG
Systems.”’ Research Policy, Special Issue: Emerging
Challenges for Science, Technology and Innovation
Policy Research: A Reflexive Overview, 38 (4): 681–93.
Agrawal, Ajay, John McHale, and Alex Oettl. 2018.
‘Finding Needles in Haystacks: Artificial Intelligence
and Recombinant Growth.’ 24541. National Bureau of
Economic Research. http:/ /www.nber.org/papers/w24541
Amodei, Dario, and Danny Hernandez. 2018. AI and
Compute.
Amodei, Dario, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul
Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan ManÃ©. 2016.
‘Concrete Problems in AI Safety.’ arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1606.06565.
Arthur, W. B. 1999. ‘Complexity and the Economy.’
Science 284 (5411): 107–9.
Arthur, W. Brian. 1994. Increasing Returns and Path
Dependence in the Economy. University of Michigan
Press.
Arulkumaran, Kai, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles
Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. 2017. ‘ A Brief
Survey of Deep Reinforcement Learning.’ arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1708.05866.
Bakhshi, Hasan, and Juan Mateos-Garcia. 2016. ‘New
Data for Innovation Policy.’ Nesta Working Paper Series.
London: Nesta.
Bostrom, Nick. 2017. Superintelligence. Dunod.
Brian Arthur, W. 2014. Complexity and the Economy.
Oxford University Press, USA.
Brundage, Miles. 2016. ‘Modeling Progress in AI.’ In AAAI
Workshop: AI, Ethics, and Society.
Brundage, Miles, Shahar Avin, Jack Clark, Helen
Toner, Peter Eckersley, Ben Garfinkel, Allan Dafoe,
Paul Scharre, Thomas Zeitzoff, and Bobby Filar.
2018. ‘The Malicious Use of Artificial Intelligence:
Forecasting, Prevention, and Mitigation.’ arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1802.07228.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. 2014. The
Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity
in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. W. W. Norton &
Company.
Buolamwini, Joy, and Timnit Gebru. 2018. ‘Gender
Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in
Commercial Gender Classification.’ In Conference on
Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, 77–91.
Burgess, Lucie C., David Crotty, David de Roure, Jeremy
Gibbons, Carole Goble, Paolo Missier, Richard Mortier,
Thomas E. Nichols, and Richard O’Beirne. 2016. ‘ Alan
Turing Institute Symposium on Reproducibility for Data-
Intensive Research–Final Report.’ St. Hugh’s College,
Oxford.
Cantner, Uwe, and Simone Vannuccini. 2018. ‘Elements
of a Schumpeterian Catalytic Research and Innovation
Policy.’ Industrial and Corporate Change 27 (5): 833–50.
Centre, Joint Research. 2018. ‘ Artificial Intelligence: A
European Perspective.’ Seville: JRC.
Cockburn, Iain M., Rebecca Henderson, and Scott
Stern. 2018. ‘The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on
Innovation.’ National Bureau of Economic Research.
David, Paul A. 1985. ‘Clio and the Economics of
QWERTY.’ The American Economic Review 75 (2):
332–37.
Dosi, Giovanni. 1982. ‘Technological Paradigms and
Technological Trajectories: A Suggested Interpretation
of the Determinants and Directions of Technical
Change.’ Research Policy 11 (3): 147–62.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
26
Drexler, K. Eric. 2019. Reframing Superintelligence.
FHI Technical Report, https:/ /www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-
content/uploads/Reframing_Superintelligence_FHI-
TR-2019-1.1-1.pdf
Dyson, George. 2012. Turing’s Cathedral: The Origins of
the Digital Universe. Penguin UK.
Elsevier. 2018. ‘ Artificial Intelligence: How Knowledge Is
Created, Transferred, and Used.’ Elsevier.
Eubanks, Virginia. 2018. Automating Inequality: How
High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor. St.
Martin’s Press.
Ford, Martin. 2015. Rise of the Robots: Technology and
the Threat of a Jobless Future. Basic Books.
Furman, Jason, and Robert Seamans. 2018. ‘ AI and
the Economy.’ ID 3186591. Rochester, NY: Social
Science Research Network. https:/ /papers.ssrn.com/
abstract=3186591
Garud, Raghu, and Peter KarnÃže. 2001. ‘Path Creation
as a Process of Mindful Deviation.’ Path Dependence
and Creation 138.
Gerlach, Martin, Tiago P. Peixoto, and Eduardo G.
Altmann. 2018. ‘ A Network Approach to Topic Models.’
Science Advances 4 (7): eaaq1360.
Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville.
2016. Deep Learning. MIT press.
Goodfellow, Ian, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. ‘Generative Adversarial Nets.’
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2672–80.
Index, A. I. n.d. ‘ AI Index.’ 2018. https:/ /aiindex.org
2017. “The Artificial Intelligence Index: 2017 Annual
Report.” http:/ /cdn.aiindex.org/2017-report.pdf
Intellectual Property Office. n.d. ‘ Artificial Intelligence:
A Worldwide Overview of AI Patents and Patenting by
the UK AI Sector.’ Intellectual Property Office: Newport.
https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/817610/
Artificial_Intelligence_-_A_worldwide_overview_of_AI_
patents.pdf
Jobin, Anna, Marcello Ienca, and Effy Vayena. 2019.
‘The Global Landscape of AI Ethics Guidelines.’ Nature
Machine Intelligence, September, 1–11.
Kattel, Rainer, and Mariana Mazzucato. 2018. Mission-
Oriented Innovation Policy and Dynamic Capabilities in
the Public Sector. Oxford University Press.
Klinger, J., J. Mateos-Garcia, and K. Stathoulopoulos.
2018. ‘Deep Learning, Deep Change? Mapping the
Development of the Artificial Intelligence General
Purpose Technology.’ arXiv Preprint arXiv:1808.06355.
Krizhevsky, Alex, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton.
2012. ‘Imagenet Classification with Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks.’ In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 1097–1105.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 2012. The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions. University of Chicago press.
LeCun, Yann, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015.
‘Deep Learning.’ Nature 521 (7553): 436–44.
Mann, Katja, and Lukas PÃŒttmann. 2017. ‘Benign
Effects of Automation: New Evidence from Patent Texts.’
Marcus, Gary. 2018. ‘Deep Learning: A Critical
Appraisal.’ arXiv Preprint arXiv:1801.00631.
Marcus, Gary, and Ernest Davis. 2019. Rebooting AI:
Building Artificial Intelligence We Can Trust. Pantheon.
Markoff, John. 2016. Machines of Loving Grace: The
Quest for Common Ground between Humans and
Robots. HarperCollins Publishers.
Mateos-Garcia, Juan C. 2018. ‘The Complex Economics
of Artificial Intelligence.’ Available at SSRN 3294552.
Mazzucato, Mariana. 2015. The Entrepreneurial State:
Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths. Anthem
Press.
2018. ‘Mission-Oriented Innovation Policies: Challenges
and Opportunities.’ Industrial and Corporate Change 27
(5): 803–15.
McAfee, Andrew, and Erik Brynjolfsson. 2017. Machine,
Platform, Crowd: Harnessing Our Digital Future. WW
Norton & Company.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
27
Mikolov, Tomas, Wen-Tau Yih, and Geoffrey Zweig.
2013. ‘Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space Word
Representations.’ In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 746–51. Atlanta, Georgia: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Miotto, Riccardo, Fei Wang, Shuang Wang, Xiaoqian
Jiang, and Joel T. Dudley. 2017. ‘Deep Learning for
Healthcare: Review, Opportunities and Challenges.’
Briefings in Bioinformatics 19 (6): 1236–46.
Myers West, Sarah, Meredith Whittaker, and Kate
Crawford. 2019. ‘Discriminating Systems: Gender, Race,
and Power in AI.’ New York: AI Now Institute. https:/ /
ainowinstitute.org/discriminatingsystems.pdf
Nesta. 2019. ‘Innovation Mapping Now.’ London:
Institution. https:/ /media.nesta.org.uk/documents/
Innovation-Mapping-Now-March-2019.pdf
Noble, Safiya Umoja. 2018. Algorithms of Oppression:
How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. nyu Press.
Peng, Roger D. 2011. ‘Reproducible Research in
Computational Science.’ Science 334 (6060): 1226–27.
Prediger, Lukas. 2017. ‘On the Importance of Monitoring
and Directing Progress in AI.” AI Matters. https:/ /doi.
org/10.1145/3137574.3137583
Restrepo, Pascual, and Daron Acemoglu. 2018. “The
Wrong Kind of AI?’
Rolnick, David, Priya L. Donti, Lynn H. Kaack, Kelly
Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran, Andrew
Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic-Dupont, Natasha Jaques,
and Anna Waldman-Brown. 2019. ‘Tackling Climate
Change with Machine Learning.’ arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1906.05433.
Rosenberg, Nathan, and Rosenberg Nathan. 1982. Inside
the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge
University Press.
1994. Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics,
and History. Cambridge University Press.
Russell, Stuart. 2019. Human Compatible: AI and the
Problem of Control. Penguin UK.
Stathoulopoulos, Konstantinos, and Juan C. Mateos-
Garcia. 2019. ‘Gender Diversity in AI Research.’ Available
at SSRN 3428240.
Stirling, Andy. 2009. ‘Direction, Distribution and
Diversity! Pluralising Progress in Innovation,
Sustainability and Development.’
2014. ‘Towards Innovation Democracy? Participation,
Responsibility and Precaution in Innovation
Governance.’ ID 2743136. Rochester, NY: Social
Science Research Network. http:/ /papers.ssrn.com/
abstract=2743136
Teece, David J. 2008. ‘Dosi’s Technological Paradigms
and Trajectories: Insights for Economics and
Management.’ Industrial and Corporate Change 17 (3):
507–12.
Topol, Eric J. 2019. ‘High-Performance Medicine: The
Convergence of Human and Artificial Intelligence.’
Nature Medicine 25 (1): 44.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 2018. ‘ AI as the next GPT: A
Political-Economy Perspective.’ National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Voulodimos, Athanasios, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios
Doulamis, and Eftychios Protopapadakis. 2018.
‘Deep Learning for Computer Vision: A Brief Review.’
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2018.
Young, Tom, Devamanyu Hazarika, Soujanya Poria,
and Erik Cambria. 2018. ‘Recent Trends in Deep
Learning Based Natural Language Processing.’ IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine 13 (3): 55–75.
Zuboff, Shoshana. 2019. The Age of Surveillance
Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New
Frontier of Power. Profile Books.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
28
Endnotes
1. See for example this open database of global
AI initiatives: https:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/data-
visualisation-and-interactive/mapping-ai-
governance
2. https:/ /github.com/nestauk/arxiv_ai
3. https:/ /arxlive.org/
4. https:/ /arxiv.org
5. See https:/ /openai.com/progress/#papers and
https:/ /deepmind.com/research
6. https:/ /jack-clark.net/
7. https:/ /www.grid.ac/
8. This approach has been inspired by an analysis
of about structural change in the biofuel industry
(Parraguez [forthcoming]).
9. When we exclude China from the analysis, the
variances in change rates between AI and arXiv
overall become quite similar, but the geography of
SotA topics remains more volatile, suggesting that
the geography of modern AI methods is being more
strongly disrupted than older topics for AI research.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
A Semantic Analysis of the Recent Evolution of AI Research
29
58 Victoria Embankment
London EC4Y 0DS
+44 (0)20 7438 2500
information@nesta.org.uk
 @nesta_uk
 www.facebook.com/nesta.uk
www.nesta.org.uk
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 58 Victoria Embankment, London, EC4Y 0DS.
About Nesta
Nesta is a global innovation foundation. We back new ideas to tackle the big
challenges of our time.
We use our knowledge, networks, funding and skills – working in partnership with
others, including governments, businesses and charities. We are a UK charity but work
all over the world, supported by a financial endowment.
To find out more visit www.nesta.org.uk
If you’d like this publication in an alternative format such as Braille,
large print, please contact us at: information@nesta.org.uk
