
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
INNOVATION
ANALYTICS
A GUIDE TO
NEW DATA AND
MEASUREMENT
IN INNOVATION
POLICY

April 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Nesta is an innovation charity with a mission to help people and
organisations bring great ideas to life.
We are dedicated to supporting ideas that can help improve all our lives,
with activities ranging from early–stage investment to in–depth research
and practical programmes.
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 1 Plough Place, London, EC4A 1DE.

www.nesta.org.uk ©Nesta 2016
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was collated for Nesta by Theo Bass, with contributions from Stian Westlake, Juan
Mateos-Garcia, Hasan Bakhshi, Louise Marston and Jen Rae.
For further information, please contact us: innovationanalytics@nesta.org.uk

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION 4
A NOVEL WAY TO USE OFFICIAL DATA 5
NOVEL MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 7
CONNECTING, COMMUNICATING AND USING DATA 10
NEXT STEPS 11
CASE STUDIES 12
ENDNOTES 16
SELECTED AND FURTHER WORK BETWEEN NESTA AND PARTNERS 18
INNOVATION
ANALYTICS
A GUIDE TO
NEW DATA AND
MEASUREMENT
IN INNOVATION
POLICY

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
INTRODUCTION
What can new methods, and new sources of data, tell us about
innovation and growth?
Measuring the economy for the purposes of innovation policy poses a number of challenges.
It requires capturing novelty (such as new ideas, technologies, and industries), emerging from
complex networks of people and knowledge. Our tools for making sense of these phenomena
are often adapted from other economic tools: surveys, estimates, and standard industrial
classifications. But traditional tools do not always make it easy to answer questions of interest
to innovation policymakers, such as:
• What is the size and importance of new industries and technologies? Are they growing?
How much investment do they attract?
• Are policymakers talking to the right people in those areas? Which skills are in greatest
demand?
• What do business and knowledge networks look like in innovative parts of the economy?
Are they connected or fragmented; resilient or fragile, and what can the rest of the economy
learn from this?
In recent years, Nesta has been developing new techniques and making use of new sources
of data to supplement what can be learned using traditional tools for measuring innovation.
This short guide summarises some of this work and highlights the context and purpose
behind each of these methods. First, we have developed an approach for using official data
to measure new industries in a more accurate way. Second, we have been examining the
potential of new data sources to measure business innovation. Third, we have been exploring
new ways that policymakers can visualise and interact with data. In what follows we describe
these approaches, and finish by presenting six case studies with more specific detail about
each of the methods.
1

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
A NOVEL WAY TO USE OFFICIAL DATA
I
n order to understand emerging and other relevant sectors for innovation
policy, we need to overcome a number of challenges with using official data.
Administrative data sources such as the Inter-departmental Business Register
(IDBR) and surveys like the Annual Business Survey and Labour Force Survey form
the basis of official economic estimates that innovation policymakers use. In this
section we describe our ‘dynamic mapping’ method, which has been developed to
improve the classification of occupations and industries to more accurately measure
the creative, hi-tech and information economies using official data.
The Standard Industrial (and Occupational) Classification, SIC (and SOC) codes are used
to record and categorise industrial (and employment) sectors on a consistent basis across
countries. They are, however, set irregularly (every ten years or so in the case of the SIC). In
cases where the international consistency of metrics is important, or there is a need to use
official data, this creates an obvious problem for innovation policy. Nesta’s dynamic mapping
aims to optimise the use of SIC and SOC codes in these cases.
We first developed this for creative work and the creative industries. That is, which
occupations and industries should be labelled as ‘creative’ (and which should not) for the
purposes of the government statistics?
Despite the fact that the UK Government had been publishing Creative Industries Economic
Estimates using official data for over a decade, these estimates were based on a top-down
selection of occupational and industrial codes.
2 Due to the absence of systematic criteria for
which codes were selected, there was little basis on which to adapt the codes as the structure
of the UK’s economy changed over time, not least associated with the disruptive impact of
the internet. As such, the statistics lost credibility with users.
Nesta’s report A Dynamic Mapping of the UK’s Creative Industries
3 addressed this problem
by proposing a method whereby individual industry codes are identified as ‘creative’ based
on their ‘creative intensity’: the proportion of total employment within the industry that is
engaged in creative occupations (see Case Study 1). The method is called ‘dynamic’ mapping
because the creative intensity of industries can change over time, meaning that some
industries become ‘more’ or ‘less’ creative. The UK’s Department for Culture, Media and Sport
consulted on the use of this method for producing the Creative Industries Economic Estimates
and adopted it in 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
By making use of official Labour Force Survey data and the SOC and SIC codes, the method
also allowed analysis of the geography and concentration of the UK’s creative industries and
occupations on a basis that is consistent with how other parts of the economy are measured.
So, for example, we have learned that the creative workforce is heavily concentrated in
and around London (approximately 15 per cent of workers or just under three times the
national average). In comparison, STEM workers (where STEM refers to Science, Technology,
Engineering and Maths) are more evenly spread across the UK. The most STEM-intensive
areas are Oxfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Berkshire where approximately 10 per cent work
in STEM occupations, which is around twice the national average (see Figure 1).
4 We have
subsequently adapted this method and applied it to measure other areas, such as a mapping
of the UK’s ‘information economy’, which was used in our 2016 Tech Nation analysis.
5
FIGURE 1: VISUALISING AND COMPARING THE CREATIVE AND STEM
 WORKFORCE
Source: Visualisation by Nesta,6 based on data from the Annual Population Survey (2011 to 2014). Main jobs only. For the complete list
of Creative and STEM occupations see pages 16 and 32 of The Geography of the UK’s Creative and High-Tech Economies.7 Data was
not available for regions in Northern Ireland.
Since the SOC and SIC are international standards and similar labour force surveys are
conducted in other countries too, we have also used the dynamic mapping approach to
produce internationally comparable statistics. For example, we have recently published
mapping studies of the European, US and Canadian creative economies.
8

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
NOVEL MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
I
n this section we describe new types of data collection and analysis that have
become possible with improvements in digital technology and the internet, and
how insights from these techniques can improve our understanding of business
innovation. Specifically, we discuss: the data that can be harvested from websites;
new insights from relational data (about the meetups, networks, and informal
relationships behind innovation); and the ability to combine and interact with new
datasets.
Supplementing official statistics
Notwithstanding the obvious attractions of using official data and international classification
standards, there are cases where they are not fit for purpose. For example, where the
innovative activity in question cannot adequately be captured using the SIC codes at all.
Emerging technologies might be so disruptive to existing industry boundaries that they
give rise to important new industries altogether. In such cases, policymakers do not have
the luxury of waiting for the next round of SIC revisions to capture these activities. While it
may be relatively easy to count firms and measure output using the SIC in a long-established
sector like car making or oil, it is much more difficult to do so in a new field like edtech, health
tech or cybersecurity.
This makes it hard for policymakers to see if innovation policy is working. How can you tell if
your attempts to promote, say, cleantech companies, are working if your data cannot identify
which companies are involved in cleantech? It also makes innovation policymaking more of an
act of faith. The previous government made a number of investments and initiatives in specific
technology areas, from the Graphene Engineering Innovation Centre, to the Catapult Centres,
to the Eight Great Technologies; but there was little quantitative evidence they could rely on
to pick these areas of focus, which is a barrier to good policy. A better approach to innovation
policy would be experimental, where government uses robust and timely data to learn and
inform policy design.
9
Where official datasets have a problem capturing aspects of economic activity that matter
to innovation policy, we can increasingly fill existing innovation gaps by mining new ‘big’ data
sources from the web and using machine learning techniques to develop alternative industrial
classification schema.
10
For example, large-scale data harvesting – or ‘web-scraping’ – of unstructured information
located on company websites allows us to predict the sector where a company operates,
and can help us spot new innovative industries and places as they emerge, even when these
do not respect traditional sectoral boundaries. Examples of this include our mapping of
the videogames industry
11 (Case Studies 2 and 3); or a Nesta-funded study that extracted
information about technologies and products of graphene SMEs from their websites, since
publications and patents do not fully capture these firms’ economic activities.
12, 13
We also believe that datasets constructed from alternative sources should be transparent
if they are to be used by governments for making innovation policy. Otherwise there
is a risk of a proliferation of competing sector estimates whose relationship cannot be
understood. The digital tech economy is a case in point. In two studies we have worked
with big data companies that have developed algorithms for classifying businesses into new

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
sectors.14 However, as the algorithms are proprietary, there are naturally limitations on the
methodological detail which has been made publicly available. In the longer term, short of a
radical reform of the international SIC review process, the statistical authorities may need to
develop a more open industrial classifier for policy use.
Relational data
While most data sources focus on businesses as the ‘innovation unit’, the internet also
captures relational data; the networks or ‘hidden wiring’ underpinning successful innovation.
Although researchers in the field of scientometrics use citations and authorship data in
patents and papers to map some of these innovation networks, this covers only those
(relatively rare) industries that patent and publish.
New insights into innovation networks are, however, possible by extracting data from websites
such as Meetup.com, a website to organise networking events (see Case Study 4); GitHub,
a website where coders collaborate on software projects; or Twitter, a social networking
site.
15 The diffusion of digital know-how also happens when skilled individuals move between
firms – we can look for evidence of this in online labour market data, including from job
advertisement websites (for example Case Study 5). Another potential advantage of these
data is that they can be more timely than official datasets that take a lot of time to collect and
publish.
FIGURE 2: DATA-DRIVEN INSIGHT INTO THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
 CONFERENCES AT CONNECTING PEOPLE
 All new follow connections All new reciprocal connections

Source: Nesta.16 Before and after the LeWeb’12 tech conference held in London, we tracked 702 attendees on Twitter for the
development of new and ‘reciprocal’ follows, the latter suggesting a more meaningful measure of connectivity. The purple nodes are
speakers and the blue nodes are attendees. The size of the nodes represents the in–degree of each node (how many new follows it
gained).

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
Detailed data
If you want to encourage tech clusters, promote new technologies, or understand how high-
growth firms are doing, your data need to be specific. A characteristic of big data is that it
tends to be available at a higher degree of resolution than the traditional sources of data that
policymakers use. This is particularly attractive when disclosure constraints mean that official
data is not accessible, even if it is in principle available, to policy analysts at a sufficiently
granular level.
17
Interactive data
This brings us to a further point: the importance of interactive data. Big data sets can be
matched, republished, and therefore made more readily useable and insightful to users. This
opens up the possibility of using the data for interactive data applications like visualisations or
dashboards. We discuss this in the following section.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
CONNECTING, COMMUNICATING
AND USING DATA
H
aving improved measurement using official data, and mined novel data sources
for new insights, how can we communicate these in helpful and intuitive
ways? In this section we present some of the ways Nesta is bringing datasets
together to help policymakers and other users extract value from data.
Two recent Nesta projects have involved combining and presenting data to map the
conditions for innovation across cities in particular. CITIE, a partnership with Accenture and
OneFineStay, creates an online tool to standardise and compare policy frameworks and
infrastructures for innovation across 40 cities globally. As part of the European Digital Forum,
a Brussels-based think tank we run with the Lisbon Council, we have also constructed a
detailed online scoreboard of Europe’s major cities, where users can see how they are ranked
according to policies conducive to digital entrepreneurship.
18
Questions also arise with how we utilise the web’s connectivity to build new, live measurement
tools. Innovation is a networked phenomenon, spanning industries, geographies and
knowledge. Attempts to understand innovation also requires breaking down data silos,
bringing datasets together, and merging, linking and mashing datasets, often automatically
with Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), the data connectors that allow websites to
talk with each other.
We can use this connectivity to pragmatically fill gaps across datasets – for example, in
partnership with Ukie (a non-profit trading body for the UK games industry), our map
of the video games industry combined economic activity data from official sources with
business counts based on web data to study clusters of video games companies. We can also
benchmark unproven (web) datasets, with quality-assured (official) ones, many of which are
now open or available via APIs.
19
The interactivity of the web also opens up new possibilities. It empowers users to find the
information they are looking for in complex, multi-dimensional datasets, and to explore
questions in ways that the people who originally collected and analysed the data had not
intended. Interactivity also helps to visualise complex innovation datasets in ways that are
easier to understand for non-technical users (see Case Study 6).
We believe there are opportunities here to systematically combine these approaches in ways
of use to innovation policymakers. In particular, this could help them to:
• Identify emerging technology areas and industries when setting policy priorities and
formulating strategies, linking Intellectual Property data, business data and relational data
between individual innovators.
• Find new business communities to consult with during policy design and implementation.
• Locate ‘gaps’ in innovation networks that hinder collaboration.
• Monitor the evolution of innovative industries, and inform the evaluation of the policies to
support them.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
Nesta is experimenting with the development of these tools.20
A final point: policy analysis is only valuable insofar as it is of use.21 Sophisticated research
reports and beautiful data visualisations are of little use if they do not address questions that
policymakers need answering. (And, unfortunately, the early days of the ‘big data for policy’
movement have seen their fair share of impressive but useless outputs.) However, at the same
time, the questions policymakers need answering partly build on what evidence exists. This
means that the process of developing new measurement tools and the process of working out
how policymakers can use them go hand-in-hand. Government will need new capabilities
22 –
and in some cases new organisations23 – to extract value from data.
So, in addition to giving policymakers important insights about innovation, our goal is
that Nesta’s ongoing analytics work also teaches us more generally about how innovation
policymaking needs to change to take full advantage of the opportunities that the big data
era affords.
NEXT STEPS
We are actively looking for partners in this ambitious programme of work. We welcome
potential collaborators to get in touch, including anyone with:
• Interesting datasets that can be analysed to help us better understand innovation.
• Policy-relevant research questions that can be addressed with these methods.
• Research funds to support this work.
• Analytical skills to extract and communicate information from these complex datasets.
innovationanalytics@nesta.org.uk

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
CASE STUDIES
Case Study 1: Dynamic mapping with official statistics
Case Study 2: Mapping the video games industry with big data
We initially developed the dynamic mapping
method for identifying creative industries in a
way that recognises the important creative work
that happens in all sectors of the economy.
24
The approach is made up of three steps: In
step one, judgements are made on which
occupations in the workforce should be
labelled as ‘creative’. In the original dynamic
mapping report we based these judgments on
a subjective, theoretically grounded scoring
of each SOC code in the UK workforce.
25
In another paper, we have used detailed
data on job task descriptions and machine
learning techniques to label (a wider set of)
occupations as creative.
26 Armed with this
list of creative occupations, in step two we
compute the percentage of the workforce that
is in a creative occupation for all industries in
the UK economy (in other words, its ‘creative
intensity’). And in step three, we analyse how
this creative intensity is distributed across
different sectors, and on this basis partition
industries into ‘creative’ and others (creative
industries are those with exceptionally
high creative intensities). We then define
employment in the ‘creative economy’ as
employment in the creative industries plus
those working in creative jobs in sectors
outside of the creative industries.
It turns out that there are a relatively small
number of industries in the UK sharing
the common characteristic of employing
proportionately large numbers of individuals
in creative occupations, of above 30 per
cent. This compares with the vast majority
of other industries in the UK with single-digit
creative intensities. This result is important, as
it suggests there is a strong statistical basis
for considering ‘creative’ sub-sectors with
otherwise very different cultures, business
and operating models as a coherent group for
policy purposes.
The video games industry is recognised as a
highly innovative part of the UK economy, but
it did not have dedicated SIC codes until 2007,
and many of its companies remain hard to
classify using standard codes.
To overcome some of these limitations, we
leveraged the digital footprint of the sector by
scraping information from gaming websites like
MobyGames and review sites like GameSpot,
which contain a wealth of information about
games products and companies. We then
established which of these companies are UK
based, and extracted information about them
(including their postcode and, where available,
financial data) from Companies House. This
allowed us to identify companies through their
creative outputs (revealed by the consumers
and journalists maintaining the websites we use
as data sources) rather than the box they tick
in the business register when they get started.
Official SIC codes covered just over one-third
of our dataset.
It also resulted in a detailed, timely dataset
with interesting information that is not
available from official data sources. For
example, we were able to understand what
platforms are driving the development of
the games industry (we found that iPhones
and iPads were the main growth platforms
for the sector). Linking our data to other
openly available datasets we found further
relationships between the prevalence of local
games clusters and, for example, an area’s
broadband availability (data from Ofcom) or
the delivery of specialist university games
courses (data from the UCAS web portal).
27

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
Case Study 3: Mapping digital clusters with big data
FIGURE 3: INDUSTRIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS BASED ON DIGITAL TAG
 CO-OCCURRENCE
Source: GrowthIntel
In Tech Nation 2016, we worked with partner
GrowthIntel to develop a dataset of the UK’s
digital technology businesses. To do this, we
combined machine learning and web scraping
from company websites to build a more timely
and detailed picture of digital tech than official
data sources allow.
The main data collection process included
an unsupervised text clustering approach,
which extracted a total of 500 ‘tags’ about
businesses’ areas of activity from the text in
their websites. Any business that had been
assigned at least one digital tag was defined as
a ‘digital tech business’ (58,000 were identified
out of a total of 320,000).
28
This data allows us to not only study the sector
in which a business operates (for example,
‘financial services’) but also to determine if
its ‘core capabilities’ are digital (for example,
if it is a ‘fintech’ firm). This distinction is
not easy to make with official data-sources
that lump business into mutually exclusive
categories. Analysing the digital capabilities
of ‘non-digital sectors’, for example, we learn
that the web and online content are not the
only drivers of digitisation in the economy.
Sectors like Science and Aerospace also have
large numbers of digital companies, probably
reflecting the digitisation of their business
processes.
We can also use this high-resolution
information to measure and map the
similarities and differences between digital
tech businesses in interesting and novel ways.
Using the GrowthIntel business tags, it is
possible to explore which specific capabilities
‘co-occur’ within digital businesses. The
diagram below highlights the importance of
data, mobile and software capabilities that
are highly interconnected to many other
capabilities. It also highlights the fact that
Digital Tech Industries are themselves networks
of capabilities that can be recombined to
generate even more innovation.
29

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
Case Study 4: Capturing relational and network data from tech
 meet-up data
Case Study 5: A low-cost approach for tracking innovative jobs in
 real time
Websites like Meetup and EventBrite have
emerged to make it easier for people to create
and manage meetups. When registering, users
express interest on particular topics (like ‘data
science’ or ‘online marketing’) and are shown
information about groups near to them that
focus on those topics (or similar ones). We
have analysed the data generated by these
platforms to help us understand when and
where new technology communities emerge
and evolve, and how they connect to each
other.
We queried the Meetup API for groups in the
‘Tech’ category in UK cities, and extracted
1,391 groups based in 160 unique locations
in the UK, with a gross total of 434,826
members; 2,569 group topics had to be
arranged into a smaller set of ‘tech fields’
containing interrelated topics. To do this, we
followed a ‘data-driven’ approach based on
scientometrics principles (the quantitative
analysis of science and technology metrics,
such as academics papers and patents). We
then used community detection algorithms to
look for densely connected ‘clusters’ of tech
fields and the relationships between them.
30
In another analysis of Meetup data for Tech
Nation, we expanded the method to reveal the
geographical patterns of networking between
tech clusters across the UK. Among findings,
we detected a large amount of informal
networking between tech clusters, particularly
in the North West, and along the M4 corridor.
This challenges the notion that digital tech
clusters operate in geographical silos or that
digital tech clusters in some areas develop at
the expense of others.
31
These are insights of obvious interest for
policymakers, entrepreneurs, businesses and
investors who want to identify where and how
to identify communities of innovators to work
with, and the right technologies to target.
For benchmark information on employment,
researchers and policymakers rely on
government statistics (often released annually)
or they will pay for time-consuming and
expensive surveys, with limited geographical
specificity.
Online help-wanted advertisements (want-
ads) provide an enormous amount of publicly
available employment information, updated
in real time. They also include much more
detailed location and skill content data than
is available from government statistics. We
supported a preliminary study to see if using
wants-ads could produce a low-cost and
flexible way to track innovative employment.
The study built keyword lists to search on
job websites – including Indeed.com and
the Conference Board’s HWOL database
– and then translated want-ad counts into
employment estimates for IT, big data and
medtech occupations.
32
The method shows potential for future work
to aggregate this type of information into a
real-time online too. We have begun work in
this area using Burning Glass labour market
data (see the following case study). Given
the nature of the data, future tools could be
adaptable to the needs of individual local
policymaking bodies looking to assess the
impact of a particular investment or policy
decision on local jobs.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
Case Study 6: Novel ways of interacting with data: data
 visualisations
FIGURE 3: INTERACTIVE DATA VISUALISATION: A TOP 30 SKILLS CHART
Source: Nesta.35
A data visualisation lets users ‘see the data’.
Visualisations can range from simple line
charts to fantastic interactive creations. The
strength of a data visualisation lies in its ability
to show data efficiently. This efficiency takes
two forms. The first is efficient use of our visual
strength, and more specifically our ability to
rapidly detect differences in features such as
colour, size and shape, without the need for
focused attention. These features are called
‘preattentive’ and they form the building
blocks of data visualisation.
33 In contrast, text
is not preattentive and this is the reason it is
often difficult to quickly see patterns in large
tables filled with numbers.
34 Data visualisations
also make efficient use of space. By using
preattentive features, visualisations can contain
much more information than a single page
of text. This allows a visualisation to convey
both micro and macro detail within the same
space. By using variations in features such
as colour and shape, they can comfortably
contain multiple data series, enabling the
viewer to draw a story from the data. The
aforementioned properties make data
visualisation an essential tool in the age of ‘big
data’.
We have used data visualisation in a variety
of projects. The example below summarises
the skills requested in millions of job
advertisements that were collected by Burning
Glass. The dataset contains several million
job advertisements for a single year and over
8,000 distinct skills. The data visualisation
presents the most salient elements of the
dataset, and lets users select and see the
charts change according to highest demand by
employers, as well as uncovering which skills
are growing fastest and those that are most
highly paid.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
ENDNOTES
1. Although the focus here is on our quantitative data work, we believe that the relationship between knowledge,
networks and innovation cannot be understood by quantitative data collection alone; qualitative evidence plays an
important role, which is why Nesta sets so much store by the use of mixed methods. See for example: Nesta/Tech City
UK (2016) ‘Tech Nation 2016: Transforming UK Industries.’ London: Nesta/Tech City UK, p.118.
2. Bakhshi, H., Hargreaves, I. and Mateos-Garcia, J. (2013) ‘A Manifesto for the Creative Economy.’ London: Nesta, Ch.3.
3. Bakhshi, H., Freeman, A. and Higgs, P. (2013) ‘A Dynamic Mapping of the UK’s Creative Industries.’ London: Nesta.
4. See Sleeman, C. (2016) ‘Where do the creatives cluster? [online]. London: Nesta. Available from: http:/ /www.nesta.org.
uk/blog/where-do-creatives-cluster [Accessed 23rd March 2016]; and Bakhshi, H., Davies, J., Freeman, A. and Higgs, P.
(2015) ‘The Geography of the UK’s Creative and Hi-Tech Economies.’ London: Nesta.
5. Spilsbury, M. (2015) ‘Dynamic Mapping of the Information Economy Industries.’ London: Nesta/Tech UK; Nesta/Tech
City UK. op.cit.
6. Sleeman, C. (2016) ‘Where do the creatives cluster?’ op.cit.
7. Bakhshi, H. et al. (2015) ‘The Geography of the UK’s Creative and Hi-Tech Economies.’ op.cit.
8. See Nathan, M., Pratt, A. and Rincon-Aznar, A. (2015) ‘Creative Economy Employment in the EU and the UK: A
Comparative Analysis.’ London: Nesta; and Nathan, M., Kemeny, T., Pratt, A. and Spencer, G. (2016)’ Creative Economy
Employment in the US, Canada and the UK.‘ London: Nesta.
9. Bakhshi, H., Freeman, A. and Potts, J. (2011) ‘State of Uncertainty: Innovation policy through experimentation.’ London:
Nesta.
10. Armstrong, H (2015) ‘Machines that learn in the wild: Machine learning capabilities, limitations and implications.’
London: Nesta.
11. Mateos-Garcia, J., Bakhshi, H. and Lenel, M. (2014) ‘A Map of the UK Games Industry.’ London: Nesta.
12. Shapira, P., Gök, A. and Salehi Yazdi, F. (2015) ‘Graphene Research and Enterprise: Mapping Innovation and Business
Growth in a Strategic Emerging Technology.’ Nesta Working Paper 15/14. London: Nesta.
13. These new techniques should still be regarded as experimental. They require dealing with messy data, which often has
not been created for analytical purposes or quality assured by statisticians. As suggested in our video games study,
it’s important that researchers openly share new techniques and methodologies for using these data so that they can
be replicated, or the results reproduced and scrutinised.
14. Nathan, M., Rosso, A. and Bouet F. (2014) ‘Mapping Information Economy Business with Big Data: Findings from the
UK.’ Nesta Working Paper 14/10. London: Nesta.
15. A current project, working with Endeavour - a New York based non-profit promoting high impact entrepreneurship
- will also combine scraped information from CrunchBase (a store of startup news and information), and AngelList
(a website for angel investors and startup job seekers) with interviews from over 600 tech startup founders and co-
founders in Oxford, Cambridge and London. See Gaillard, E. and Mocker, V. (2016) ‘Connecting the dots in the tech
ecosystem’ [online]. London: Nesta. Available from: http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/connecting-dots-tech-ecosystem
[Accessed 4 April 2016.]
16. Bakhshi, H., Davies, J. and Mateos-Garcia, J (2015) ‘The Net Effect: Using social media data to understand the impact
of a conference on social networks.’ London: Nesta.
17. There are, of course, also a large number of important data ethics issues to be considered. See Windsor, G. (2014)
‘Striking a balance: Data protection vs. Data Driven Innovation’ [online]. London: Nesta. Available from https:/ /www.
nesta.org.uk/blog/striking-balance-data-protection-vs-data-driven-innovation [Accessed 23 March 2016.]

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
18. ‘CITIE’ (2015) [online]. Nesta/Accenture/Future Cities Catapult. Available from: http:/ /citie.org/ [Accessed 23
March 2016.]; ‘European Digital City Index’ (2015) [online]. Nesta/European Digital Forum. Available from: https:/ /
digitalcityindex.eu/ [Accessed 23 March 2016.]
19. See, for example, data.gov.uk [Accessed 23rd March 2016]. Also see Bean, C. (2016) ‘Independent Review of UK
Economic Statistics’ [online]. Available from: https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/publications/independent-review-of-
uk-economic-statistics-final-report [Accessed 5th April 2016.]
20. Mateos-Garcia, J. (2016) ‘Arloesiadur: an innovation analytics experiment’ [online]. London: Nesta. Avaialable from:
http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/arloesiadur-innovation-analytics-experiment [Accessed 23rd March 2016.]
21. Also see http:/ /readie.eu/ [Accessed 23rd March 2016.]
22. See Mateos-Garcia, J., Windsor, G. and Roseveare, S. (2015) ‘Analytic Britain: Securing the right skills for the data-
driven economy.’ London: Nesta; and Mateos-Garcia, J. (2015), ‘Big data, messy data, fast data or simply data: how
do we secure the right skills to create value from it?’ [online.] London: Nesta. Available from: http:/ /www.nesta.org.
uk/blog/big-data-messy-data-fast-data-or-simply-data-how-do-we-secure-right-skills-create-value-it [Accessed 23rd
March 2016.]
23. Bakhshi, H., Dyson, T. and Windsor, G. (2016) ‘The future of economic statistics in the UK’ [online]. London: Nesta.
Available from: https:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/future-economic-statistics-uk [Accessed 5th April 2016.]
24. Bakhshi, H. (2015) ‘A primer on measuring the creative economy’ [online]. London: Nesta. Available from: http:/ /www.
nesta.org.uk/blog/primer-measuring-creative-economy [Accessed 5th April 2016.]
25. Bakhshi, H. et al. ‘A Dynamic Mapping of the UK’s Creative Industries.’ op.cit.
26. Bakhshi, H., Frey, C.B. and Osborne, M. (2015) ‘Creativity vs. Robots: The creative economy and the future of
employment.’ London: Nesta.
27. Mateos-Garcia, J. et al. ‘A Map of the UK Games Industry.’ op.cit.
28. Nesta/Tech City UK. op.cit .
29. Bakhshi, H. and Mateos-Garcia, J. (2016) ‘Tech Nation 2016: much more than disruption’ [online]. London: Nesta.
Available from: http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/tech-nation-2016-findings [Accessed 23rd March 2016.]
30. Mateos-Garcia, J. (2015) ‘Using Meetup data to explore the UK digital tech landscape’ [online]. London: Nesta.
Available from: http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/using-meetup-data-explore-uk-digital-tech-landscape [Accessed 23rd
March 2016.]
31. Nesta/Tech City UK. op.cit; and Bakhshi, H. and Mateos-Garcia, J. (2016) ‘Tech Nation 2016: much more than
disruption.’ op.cit.
32. Mandel, M. and Scherer, J. (2015) ‘A Low-Cost and Flexible Approach for Tracking Jobs and Economic Activity Related
to Innovative Technologies.’ Nesta Working Paper 15/11. London: Nesta.
33. See http:/ /www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/healey/PP/#Preattentive [Accessed 23rd March 2016.]
34. This point is neatly illustrated by Anscombe’s Quartet. See https:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anscombe%27s_quartet
[Accessed 23rd March 2016.]
35. Sleeman, C. (2016) ‘A Top 30 Skills Chart’ [online]. London: Nesta. Available from: http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/top-
30-skills-chart [Accessed 23rd March 2016.]

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
SELECTED AND FURTHER WORK
BETWEEN NESTA AND PARTNERS
A Dynamic Mapping of the UK’s
Creative Industries (2012)
Our ‘dynamic mapping’ of the creative
economy including an initial explanation of
the methodology.
A Map of the UK Games Industry (2014)
Using a ‘big data’ approach to measure and
map the UK games industry and track its
evolution over time.
Creative Economy Employment in the
US, Canada and the UK: A comparative
analysis (2016)
An extension of the dynamic mapping
methodology to provide a basis for
international comparison of US, Canadian
and UK creative economies.
Tech Nation 2016: Transforming UK
Industries (2016)
Combining a range of techniques and new
data, including dynamic mapping, job
advertisement data, and Meetup and Github
data, to map, analyse and understand the
UK’s digital tech businesses.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
INNOVATION ANALYTICS A GUIDE TO NEW DATA AND MEASUREMENT IN INNOVATION POLICY
European Digital City Index
(2015)
An interactive tool that
combines a range of data to
map the conditions for digital
entrepreneurship across European
cities.
‘Full STEAM Ahead’ (2015)
An interactive data visualisation
showing the popularity of Science,
Technology, Engineering, Arts and
Mathematics (STEAM) subjects
and other subject combinations
among Scottish Highers students.
Further work
City Initiatives for Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship (2015)
Creativity vs. Robots: The creative economy and the future of employment (2015)
Creative Economy Employment in the EU and the UK: A Comparative Analysis (2015)
State of Uncertainty: Innovation policy through experimentation (2011)
The Geography of the UK’s Creative and Hi-Tech Economies (2015)
‘Who hires the creatives?’ [data visualisation] (2015)
Working papers
A Low-Cost and Flexible Approach for Tracking Jobs and Economic Activity Related to
Innovative Technologies (2015)
Graphene Research and Enterprise: Mapping Innovation and Business Growth in a Strategic
Emerging Technology (2015)
Mapping Information Economy Business with Big Data: Findings from the UK (2014)

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
1 Plough Place
London EC4A 1DE
research@nesta.org.uk
 @nesta_uk
 www.facebook.com/nesta.uk
www.nesta.org.uk
April 2016
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 1 Plough Place, London, EC4A 1DE.
