
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
HOW
INNOVATION
AGENCIES
WORK:
International lessons
to inspire and inform
national strategies
Alex Glennie and Kirsten Bound
MAY 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Nesta is an innovation charity with a mission to help people and
organisations bring great ideas to life.
We are dedicated to supporting ideas that can help improve all our lives,
with activities ranging from early–stage investment to in–depth research
and practical programmes.
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 1 Plough Place, London, EC4A 1DE.

www.nesta.org.uk ©Nesta 2016
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First and foremost, we would like to express our gratitude to Dan Breznitz for helping to
inspire and shape the intellectual development of this work over the past few years. The
analytical and practical framework that underpins our thinking on innovation agencies has
been greatly enriched by his advice and his written contributions, and we look forward to
continuing our collaboration as this agenda advances in the future.
Thank you to our expert advisory group (Tera Allas, Kieron Flanagan, Justin Hill, Dan
Hodges, Paul Nightingale and Tim Vorley), who took time from their busy schedules in the
summer of 2015 to help brainstorm the development of this project. Special thanks to Tera
Allas and Kieron Flanagan, who provided invaluable feedback on earlier iterations of this
report.
At Nesta, particular thanks to Florence Engasser and Irina Ulcica for their outstanding
research support on the innovation agency case studies. Thanks also to Albert Bravo-
Biosca, Louise Marston, Jen Rae and Stian Westlake for their thoughtful advice and
feedback throughout the research, and to Helen Durham for her support in the production
process.
Finally, we would like to thank all the interviewees and experts who spoke to us throughout
this project. Without their insights and their candour, this research would not have been
possible.
All errors and omissions remain the authors’ own.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
CONTENTS
FOREWORD 4
SUMMARY 6
INTRODUCTION 9
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES 11
 1.1 Innovation agencies in the landscape of innovation support 11
 1.2 Our case studies 13
 1.3 What we have learned about how innovation agencies support businesses 15
 1.4 What we have learned about how innovation agencies work - and the 18
 challenges they face
Part 2: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN INNOVATION AGENCY 22
 Market and System Fixers 22
 Industry Builders 23
 Mission Drivers 24
 System Optimisers 25
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY 27
 Mission 29
 Management 31
 Methods 32
 Measurement 34
CONCLUSIONS 37
CONSULTEES AND CONTRIBUTORS 39
CASE STUDIES 41
ENDNOTES 92
HOW INNOVATION
AGENCIES WORK:
International lessons to inspire
and inform national strategies

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
FOREWORD
FOREWORD
P
oliticians around the world can often be found announcing the launch of new
innovation policies that are touted as being essential to the creation of a
more prosperous and sustainable future. These are often accompanied by the
establishment of ‘novel’ programmes that promise to do quite similar – and familiar –
things: strengthening intellectual property rights, increasing the pool of risk financing,
pushing universities to collaborate more with industry, or building new incubators,
science-parks and accelerators.
Despite similarities in the methods that they use, some countries seem to be able to stimulate
their economies toward a knowledge-economy growth path, while others do not. A great deal
has been written about the causes of these national variations. However, very few studies have
looked in detail at the organisations that are often leading these efforts – national innovation
agencies.
This is why we embarked on the research that sits behind this report. Our aim is to help
policymakers think more systematically and clearly about the choices they have as they go
about building, restructuring and managing their innovation agencies. In doing so we have not
identified any ‘silver bullet’ solutions or even a set of best practices which we urge policymakers
in all countries to follow. Indeed our core finding is that there is no one-size-fits-all model for an
agency of this kind, since the nature of what they are trying to do is inherently uncertain and
complex and depends on differing national contexts and priorities.
At their heart, innovation policies aim to stimulate the creation and adoption of technologies and
services that do not already exist. These policies must therefore create new actors (or imbue old
ones) with the capabilities to create products and technologies that are not yet imaginable, to fill
markets that do not exist, using business models that have yet to be developed. They must also
stimulate these actors to use these new capabilities in a way that will positively affect economic
growth.
Consequently, we are not talking about a process of long-term planning, but a process of
continuous experimentation. Policymakers need systems and organisations that can rapidly
develop new initiatives, drop those that do not work, scale up those that do, and then, as
new industries emerge, work with them in a ‘co-evolutionary’ process to develop the support
mechanisms that will help their future development, rather than respond to past needs. They
also need policies and organisations that reflect their country’s particular level of development
and current economic structure, and that are capable of identifying which practices will best suit
their context.
To help inform this debate, the following report has three ambitions. First, it offers a broad
typology of four different kinds of innovation agency, each of which represents a different
national mission that can be better achieved using different methods and approaches to
management and measurement. Using our case studies, we also examine the broad spectrum of
programmes and instruments that are available to innovation agencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
FOREWORD
Building on this, our second aim is to start a vibrant debate around the development of an
innovation agency ‘playbook’: a repository of innovation policy strategies and tools and an
assessment of their effectiveness in accomplishing particular goals under different conditions.
We think that this will be a much more effective tool for policymakers than an attempt to identify
a single set of ‘perfect’ solutions.
Finally, having found very little good evaluation and evidence on innovation agencies as a whole,
we aim to start a conversation about the development of proper qualitative, longitudinal, and
quantitative metrics that will help to capture the full spectrum of what innovation agencies can
and should be expected to achieve. In doing so, we do not underestimate the great difficulties
involved in designing metrics that will help innovation agencies to understand their impact,
without pushing them to work in ways that are detrimental to their long-term ambitions.
We view this report as a first step, and hope that you, the readers, will both find it useful and join
us in devising and implementing a future policy research agenda on a subject which is essential
to our continuous prosperity.
Dan Breznitz, Professor and Munk Chair of Innovation Studies, and Co-Director of the
Innovation Policy Lab, University of Toronto
16 May 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
SUMMARY
SUMMARY
G
overnments around the world are looking for ways to nurture innovative
businesses, as a way of solving some of their most urgent economic and societal
challenges. This paper outlines the findings of an international comparative study
of national innovation agencies, which we define as: government-funded or managed
institutions that provide financial and other support to catalyse or drive private sector
innovation.
Our aim was to investigate what best practice looks like in terms of designing and running
an innovation agency and what mix of policies and programmes will be most effective in a
given national context. To do this, we selected ten different innovation agencies to review that
represented a cross section of geographies, approaches and levels of development:
 ★ Austria’s Research Promotion Agency (FFG)
 ★ Brazil’s Funding Authority for Studies and Projects (FINEP)
 ★ Chile’s Economic Development Agency (CORFO)
 ★ Finland’s Funding Agency for Innovation (Tekes)
 ★ Israel’s Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS)
 ★ Sweden’s Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems (VINNOVA)
 ★ Switzerland’s Commission for Technology and Innovation (CTI)
 ★ Taiwan’s Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI)
 ★ The United Kingdom’s Innovate UK
 ★ The United States’ Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
For each organisation, we gathered data and stories about why they were set up and how
they have changed over time, their organisational management structures, the methods and
instruments that they have used to support innovation, and the impact their interventions have
had.
Key insights from our research:
1. There is no single model for a ‘successful’ innovation agency
The diversity found even in our small group of case study innovation agencies suggests that
determining the approach that will be best in a given country will only be possible after
a detailed mapping of the national innovation system. There is much to learn from other
countries about what works, in terms of designing and running an innovation agency and the
programmes it implements. But attempts to directly replicate an organisation that operates in
a very different political and economic context and that has a very different mission or a much
larger budget are likely to fail.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
SUMMARY
2. Instead, there are a variety of roles that innovation agencies can perform
Although there is no one-size-fits-all approach, there are a number of models that can help to
guide the choices made by policymakers about the type of innovation agency that will best
suit their national context, resources and ambitions. From our case studies we have identified
three roles that existing innovation agencies around the world play, with each having different
implications in terms of the way the organisation is managed, the methods and tools that are
used, and the metrics that might indicate success:
Market and System Fixers: seek to address failures in markets and networks that
impede business innovation and investment in R&D, often without preference for
specific technologies or sectors.
Industry Builders: focus on transforming an economy or creating new sources of
economic competiveness by investing in the development of a set of new sectors
or technologies.
Mission Drivers: aim to induce innovations that address major societal and
economic challenges, often in policy areas of significant traditional R&D spending
such as defence, energy, the environment or health.
To this we propose the addition of a fourth, more experimental type of agency.
System Optimisers: work towards ensuring continuous global competitiveness
and creating more effective and enabling innovation systems by experimenting
with different policy and programme mixes.
3. Innovation agencies should not pursue too many roles simultaneously but should be capable
of adapting to respond to new needs and opportunities
An innovation agency that is working towards many different objectives at the same time will
find it difficult to establish a clear sense of purpose and a coherent portfolio of programmes.
Mission creep may also lead the agency to spread its resources too thinly and fail to deliver
on any of its objectives. However, having a long-term vision of what success looks like should
not prevent an innovation agency from experimenting with new approaches and quickly
responding to new needs and opportunities within the innovation system.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
SUMMARY
4. Assessment should involve both quantitative and qualitative judgements of an innovation
agency’s impact
Understanding and attributing impact to innovation agencies is particularly difficult, since
they operate in uncertain and changing systems, make complex interventions, and aim to
achieve outcomes that are inherently unpredictable. As such, measuring their impact needs to
include quantitative assessments of their portfolios, but also involve judgements of the quality
of their management, their ability to take (and learn from) strategic risks, and the skill with
which they design and implement their programmes.
5. Governments should be both ambitious and realistic about what they want an innovation
agency to achieve
As our case studies show, innovation agencies can have a significant impact – whether this
is funding the development of technologies that will help solve a national challenge, seeding
new industries, or filling funding gaps that would otherwise prevent the commercialisation
of scientific research findings. Yet they are just one of a number of innovation policy levers
that governments can pull, and will inevitably evolve and change along with government
priorities. Understanding their role in the political process, and setting ambitious but realistic
expectations for what these agencies can accomplish with the resources they possess, is
one of the most important things that a government can do to help ensure that whatever
innovation agency they design is able to fulfil its potential.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
I
nnovative businesses create more jobs and grow faster. Governments around the
world are recognising that innovation is one of the most important drivers of sustained
economic growth and prosperity, and a route to solving some of their most pressing
societal challenges.
The role of government has been in part to create the conditions for innovation to flourish – from
ensuring access to education, to encouraging an entrepreneurial culture or designing effective
regulation. Beyond this, government innovation agencies can play a direct role as funder,
purchaser, convenor, and navigator for new opportunities.
Examples of their impact span decades:
Take Elscint, which became the first Israeli business to be listed on NASDAQ in 1972, and
developed a series of innovative medical imaging products before becoming a pioneer of
the CT (computerised tomography) scanner in 1977. Elscint was transformed from a PhD
dissertation into a multi-million dollar company with 2,000 employees, and became the model
that Israeli high-tech companies followed for decades afterwards. Yet this success might never
have happened without a series of conditionally repayable loans and grants provided by the
government’s Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS) throughout the 1970s, as part of a policy
designed to increase research and development activities within Israeli businesses.
1
Consider the Taiwanese semiconductor industry, with annual sales exceeding $70 billion.2 Today
it is vital to the country’s electronics sector, which accounts for about 40 per cent of exports.
Yet it might not have developed in this way if the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI),
a government-funded agency, had not incubated and spun-off companies such as the United
Microelectronics Corporation (UMC) and Taiwan Semiconductors Manufacturing Company
(TSMC). Those two companies became global leaders, employing tens of thousands of people
with annual turnovers of multiple billions, and also pioneered a new way to organise IC chip
production.
3 In doing so, they transformed the global semiconductor industry into what it is
today, succeeding where many other efforts have failed.4
Beyond particular companies or industries, the GPS technology that underpins geolocation
software and many other industrial applications would not have emerged in 1995 without the
sustained grants, contracts and collaborative programmes of the US Advanced Research Projects
Agency, known today as DARPA. This autonomous agency of the US Department of Defense is
now said to be working on a next generation alternative.
Stories of commercial success can take decades to emerge, and as innovation is not a linear or
straightforward process, in some cases it is difficult to disentangle the role of the innovation
agency in the narrative. In other cases it can be more straightforward. For example, the founders
of Swiftkey, which incorporates predictive language capabilities into the keyboards of mobile
phones, acknowledge the role of early injections of finance (£15,000 of seed funding followed by
a further £50,000 grant for prototyping) from Innovate UK, the UK’s national innovation agency,
in the company’s success. In six years Swiftkey went from London-based startup to global player,
with the app downloaded and installed on more than 300 million devices.
5 It was finally bought
by Microsoft in 2016 in a deal thought to be worth around US$250 million. According to Swiftkey
founder Jon Reynolds, “The prototype we built with grant funding from Innovate UK helped us
prove the technology worked. It was a critical step towards accessing venture capital investment
and getting the app to market.”
6

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
INTRODUCTION
For every story of success we can expect many more examples of failure. Innovation agencies
operate in a context of ‘radical uncertainty’,7 attempting to support the development of
breakthrough technologies, entirely new industries and markets. This has led experts to argue
that the best approaches to innovation policy should be adaptive and experimental.
8 Yet
organisations are needed to develop, store and share this craft knowledge. Alongside design,
implementation is critical.
Policymakers around the world aiming to emulate these successes still struggle to understand
what best practice looks like in terms of designing and running an innovation agency and what
mix of policies and programmes will be most effective in a given national context. The search for
applicable, practical lessons has been hindered by three main things:
 ★ A failure to recognise the diversity of organisational models, and a tendency to replicate
institutions or programmes that are not the most appropriate match for ambitions,
resources and context.
 ★ The difficulties involved in measuring and understanding what works when it comes to
innovation policy, and being able to attribute success to specific interventions.
 ★ A poor understanding of the ways in which successful agencies adapt, experiment and
evolve over time, and how to build this flexibility into their structure from the start.
Over the past year, Nesta has set out to address this gap in knowledge by looking in detail at
the approaches of ten innovation agencies around the world. Our aim has been to improve
understanding of the range of institutional models and to learn more about their design,
evolution and effectiveness. The agencies chosen represent a cross section of geographies,
approaches and levels of development. This report divides our analysis into three parts:
In Part 1, we explore how innovation agencies work, drawing on the latest literature and
evaluations, a series of in-depth interviews (a full list of interviewees and contributors can be
found at the end of this report) and ten detailed case studies. We explore the core characteristics
shared by diverse innovation agency models, the programmes and tools they use as well as the
challenges that they face in achieving and demonstrating impact.
In Part 2, we synthesise the various approaches to outline four different roles that an innovation
agency might play, to help demonstrate the range of choices and implications at stake.
In Part 3, we look at how these insights can be applied to inform practical decision-making
by governments. In particular, we set out key strategic design questions and choices involved
for those who want to set up a new organisation or optimise the effectiveness of an existing
innovation agency.
We end with a set of Conclusions drawn from our research, and full Case Studies of the ten
organisations we have looked at in depth, providing the most comprehensive qualitative
comparative review of innovation agency approaches that we know of to date.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
Part 1
UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION
AGENCIES
No two innovation agencies are exactly alike. The case studies in this report are striking
in their diversity. They are structured differently and use a variety of programmes and
instruments to achieve their goals. Some focus on delivering the priorities of their sponsoring
governments, while others are more autonomous and experimental in their approach. They
also operate in very different economic and political contexts. However, they share a number
of core characteristics – in the ways they operate and the challenges they face – that allow
us to draw generally applicable insights for those involved in setting up and running an
innovation agency.
In this chapter we first clarify what an innovation agency is, and the unique role it plays
within the landscape of public support for innovation. We then introduce our ten case study
organisations – drawn from both advanced and rapidly emerging economies around the
world. Using these examples we highlight the range of policy and programme tools used by
innovation agencies. Finally we turn to the crucial issue of understanding the value added by
innovation agencies, and why this is so challenging to measure.
1.1 Innovation agencies in the landscape of innovation support
Innovation policy refers to a large and growing range of public interventions (see Table 1) that
seek to support the generation and diffusion of innovation – the ability to generate and adopt
new knowledge and ideas. It involves increasing the supply of resources for innovation through
grants, subsidies and skills, as well as creating demand to pull innovation through the system
and influence markets through regulation, standards and using the huge purchasing power of
governments.
Table 1: A goal-based categorisation of innovation policy interventions9
Goal Examples
Increasing inputs to innovation R&D tax credits, grants for R&D, public support for venture
 capital
Increasing non-financial capabilities Support for exploiting IP, technical support services,
(e.g. access to skills and expertise) skilled migration and mobility schemes
Enhancing connections and Cluster policy, support for networks, collaborative R&D
complementarities programmes, support for intermediaries
Enhancing demand for innovation Public procurement policies, pre-commercial procurement of
 R&D, standards, regulation
Improving framework conditions for Support for the business environment
innovation
Improving discourse and preparedness Foresight and horizon scanning, technology roadmapping
 exercises

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
There is a complex landscape of institutions that support innovation, including:
 ★ Research and Technology Organisations (RTOs): generally defined as public or private
non-profit organisations that build links between different players in the innovation
system and provide a range of research, development and technology services, primarily
to business and governments.
10 An example of an RTO is the VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland, which has a national mandate, but works with a range of clients both in
Finland and abroad, to develop science and technology solutions and networks.
 ★ Incubators and Accelerators: publically-funded organisations that give different
mixes of support to very early-stage companies, from subsidised dedicated spaces, to
mentorship, pooled administrative support, or modest seed financing. An example of this
is the technology incubators programme of the Office of the Chief Scientist, which has
established and funded private-public incubators across Israel since 1993.
 ★ Technology Transfer Offices (TTOs): sometimes described as knowledge transfer centres,
these are institutions designed to bridge the gap between research and innovation by
supporting the practical transfer of knowledge within the economy.
11 While they are
generally attached to a public research organisation, such as a university, they often have
quite autonomous organisational structures. An example is Imperial Innovations plc, a unit
attached to Imperial College London in the UK, which creates and invests in technology
companies and licensing opportunities developed from scientific research discoveries.
 ★ Research funding councils: bodies that provide public funding for scientific research and
training. These organisations often work with businesses and may support projects with
potential commercial benefits, but their primary purpose is to fund discovery-oriented
research that will advance knowledge and generate new ideas.
12 An example of this is the
network of UK Research Councils, seven organisations which collectively invest more than
£3 billion a year in UK research across the full spectrum of academic disciplines.
 ★ Research and innovation advisory bodies: groups of experts which have responsibilities
ranging from providing advice to governments and others on their innovation strategies
through to directly coordinating strategy and allocating budget in key areas of innovation
policy. An example of this is the National Council for Innovation and Quality in the Public
Sector in Sweden, which was established in 2014 to drive innovation and change in public
services.
 ★ Innovation investment funds or business banks: institutions that finance R&D conducted
by businesses or business-research partnerships alongside other business activities.
An example of this is Bpifrance, a public investment bank that uses a mix of financial
instruments (including loans, equity investments and guarantees) to help French
companies grow and internationalise.
 ★ Public sector innovation teams or ‘i-Teams’: units, teams or funds set up to transform
the way that governments innovate.
13 These can operate at national, regional or local
levels, and tackle a broad range of economic and societal challenges. An example of
an innovation team is the Mayor’s Office of New Urban Mechanics in Boston, which is
designed to develop and pilot new ways of engaging citizens, civil servants, academia
and others in solving civic innovation problems.
Although there are examples of innovation agencies that perform some of these roles, the
institutions we have looked at in this project do not fit neatly into any of these categories. We
therefore propose the following definition of national innovation agencies as: government-
funded or managed institutions that provide financial and other support to catalyse or drive
private sector innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
1.2 Our case studies
To understand what this means in practical terms, we selected ten different innovation agencies
to review, gathering data and insights on their missions, their organisational management
structures, and the methods and instruments that they have used to support innovation.
Map 1 shows the location of these agencies, alongside a selection of comparable organisations
from other countries.
Map 1: Innovation agencies
10
616
8
20
11
13
18
15
19
4
5
3
2
14
12
17
17
9
1. Austrian Research
Promotion Agency
AUSTRIA
2. Funding Authority
for Studies and
Projects
BRAZIL
3. Chilean Economic
Development Agency
CHILE
4. Tekes
FINLAND
5. Office of the
Chief Scientist
ISRAEL
6. VINNOVA
SWEDEN
7. Commission for
Technology and
Innovation
SWITZERLAND
8. Industrial Technology
Research Institute
TAIWAN
9. Innovate UK
UNITED KINGDOM
10. Defense Advanced
Research Projects
Agency
UNITED STATES
11. Japan Science and
Technology Agency
JAPAN
12. Luxinnovation
LUXEMBOURG
13. National Innovation
Agency Malaysia
MALAYSIA
14. Netherlands
Enterprise Agency
NETHERLANDS
15. Callaghan Innovation
NEW ZEALAND
16. Innovation Norway
NORWAY
17. Polish Agency
for Enterprise
Development
POLAND
18. Agency for Science,
Technology and
Research
SINGAPORE
19. Technology
Innovation Agency
SOUTH AFRICA
20. Korea Institute for
Advancement of
Technology
SOUTH KOREA
Case study innovation agencies Other innovation agencies

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
We chose these organisations both for their similarities and their differences (Table 2 below
provides a snapshot comparison).* All are institutions that show promise or have been successful
in the past. Most provide some kind of direct financial support to companies, and do so primarily
- although not exclusively - to stimulate economic growth, rather than social innovation. They
have also been running for long enough to make some informed judgements about their
performance to date, and to track how their strategy and operations have evolved over time.
Table 2: Snapshot comparison of case study agencies

Notes:
All spending figures in the table have been converted to US$ (using current exchange rates) and rounded to the closest 5
i) Figures for the same calendar year are not available, so the proportion of the budget spent on companies should be
treated as an estimate
ii) The CTI does not fund businesses directly, but does provide funding for research-led projects that involve
businesses. The figure for direct spending on innovation support for companies includes the small budget set aside for
entrepreneurship and coaching support for Swiss companies.
iii) ITRI does not directly fund businesses, but runs R&D projects in-house that can lead to the development and spin out
of new ventures.
iv) This does not include the amount spent on not-for-profit private companies, which are not disaggregated in Innovate
UK’s accounts.
v) DARPA spends a significant proportion of its budget on private sector R&D contracts, although it is difficult to find
a single figure from publically-available information. One relevant programme to flag in the context of this table is the
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programme, which was set up by DARPA in 1982. This marked the start of
the agency’s direct provision of R&D commercialisation grants to small businesses. In 2014 (the year for which the most
recent data is available), the budget for this programme was $80 million.
31
*We recognise that there are many other organisations that could be categorised as innovation agencies that are not
described in this report. Their omission does not indicate any judgement on our part regarding their effectiveness, but
instead reflects our aim to produce a short and accessible report that can open a dialogue with policymakers worldwide.
Agency Established Started Current Total annual Proportion of
 directly staff budget (US$) budget spent
 supporting numbers on direct
 companies support for
 companies
FFG, Austria 2004 2000s 275 660 million (2015)14 56%15
FINEP, Brazil 1967 2000s 740 2.1 billion (2014)16 37%17, i
CORFO, Chile 1939 1980s 685 345 million18 26%19
Tekes, Finland 1983 1980s 400 660 million (2014)20 64%21
OCS, Israel 1974 1970s 100 450 million (2015)22 95%
VINNOVA, 2001 2000s 205 355 million (2015)23 30%24
Sweden
CTI, 1943 2000s 35 165 million (2014)25 17%26, ii
Switzerland
ITRI, Taiwan 1973 N/A
iii 5,650 625 million (2014)27 N/A
Innovate UK, 2007 2000s 300 870 million (2014/15)28 84%29, iv
United
Kingdom
DARPA, 1958 1960s 220 2.9 billion (2016)30 N/Av
United States

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
Agency Direct financial Non-financial Support for Connecting In-house
 support assistance intermediaries and institution research and
 -building development
 projects Grants Loans Other
FFG, Austria x x x x x x
FINEP, Brazil x x x x x
CORFO, Chile x x x x x
Tekes, Finland x x x x x x
OCS, Israel x x x x x
VINNOVA, x x x x
Sweden
CTI, x x x x
Switzerland
ITRI, Taiwan x x x x
Innovate UK, x x x
United
Kingdom
DARPA, x x x x x
United States
1.3 What we have learned about how innovation agencies support
 businesses
Our research looked in detail at the methods and tools used by our case study agencies to
support innovative activities within businesses. Across these ten organisations we observed four
main types of assistance:
 ★ Direct financial support for businesses (such as grants or loans).
 ★ Non-financial assistance for businesses (such as advisory or matchmaking services).
 ★ Support for intermediaries (such as support for business incubators or accelerators).
 ★ Connecting and institution-building activities (such as knowledge transfer programmes).
A fifth way in which innovation agencies can stimulate innovation is by running in-house research
and development projects. This has been the approach of ITRI in Taiwan, which is made up
of several units and centres that test, pilot and prototype new technologies to help reduce
the risks associated with market transfer. DARPA in the US has a similar function, in that their
programme managers play a very active role in designing and managing portfolios of grants for
technological R&D projects. However, most of the agencies we looked at act more as funders
than direct creators of innovation, as Table 3 shows.
Table 3: Comparison of main support methods used by our case study agencies

Notes:
Data gathered from our background research and interviews with individual innovation agencies

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
In Table 4 below we outline some of the main instruments used by innovation agencies,
illustrated by examples from our research. Further information can be found in the detailed case
studies.
Table 4: Support instruments commonly administered by innovation agencies
Instrument Description Example
Direct financial support for businesses
R&D grants Non-repayable transfers of money. These VINNOVA invests 10 per cent of its budget
 are often linked to a specific project and in grants for technology projects that
 may be stage-gated in connection with develop cross-sectoral responses to
 the recipients meeting certain terms and major societal challenges in Sweden.
 conditions.
Convertible Grants that may convert into full or The OCS offers partial grant funding of up
grants partial loans, contingent on the to 50 or 60 per cent of project costs
 achievement of defined milestones. (depending on the size of the organisation
 and the specific programme). If sales occur
 as result of the project, royalties are used
 to repay the grant to the OCS.
Loans Money lent to be repaid (usually with Tekes offers low-interest loans to help
 interest, although often set at very low businesses test out new products, services,
 levels) over the course of a project. production methods and business models.
 For product development and piloting
 projects that are close to
 commercialisation, Tekes will typically
 make loans covering 50 or 70 per cent of
 the project’s total costs.
Equity Loans or investments offering revenue FINEP makes direct investments in
investments participation rights, or ownership rights strategic innovative projects in Brazil.
 of the company. It also invests in innovation through
 funds, corporate venture and venture
 forums. Just over $1billion Brazilian reais
 (the equivalent of around US$290 million)
 was put towards this in 2014.
Government- Government financing of VC investors or In 2013, the Finnish government set up
backed funds. Tekes Venture Capital Ltd, a state-owned
venture capital company steered by Tekes that invests in
funds venture capital funds administered by
 private management companies. The
 focus of its investments is high-risk
 R&D projects conducted by early-stage
 Finnish companies.
R&D tax Tax incentives designed to increase the The FFG runs a programme to select
credits levels of resource that businesses commit Austrian companies eligible to recieve a 12
 to R&D (often targeted at young per cent tax premium for R&D activities.
 innovative companies).
Challenge or Commitments of funding linked to DARPA administers a series of prizes to
inducement evidence of ability to solve a novel encourage the development of new
prizes problem. solutions to ‘grand challenges’ (for
 example, a prize was run in 2004 to fund
 the development of ‘driverless’ cars). Prize
 money is only paid out if a successful
 solution is found.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
Research and Government acts as lead customer, Innovate UK manages the Small Business
development undertaking pre-commercial Research Initiative (SBRI), which connects
(R&D) procurement of R&D from firms (often public sector challenges to innovative
contracts small businesses) to provide an ideas from industry, advertising R&D
 alternative route to market for contracts to solve specific challenges
 innovations and stage-gated access to through an open platform.
 major public R&D contracts.
Non-financial assistance for businesses
Knowledge Support to help businesses develop the The CTI in Switzerland devotes 10 per cent
services knowledge and skills that will help them of its budget (but nearly 100 per cent of
 innovate more effectively. the staff time of its small secretariat) to
 programmes that deliver mentoring and
 coaching to high growth potential
 businesses.
Business Provision of resources that help overcome Since 2005, ITRI’s ‘Open Labs’ have
development practical barriers to engaging in provided facilities, utilities, business
support innovation, such as access to physical services and research support to startups
services space. to help reduce the barriers to
 development, testing and piloting of new
 ideas or products.
Matchmaking Assistance for businesses in finding The FFG is Austria’s contact point for a
services additional sources of funding for R&D range of European funding programmes
 activities, domestically or internationally. (such as the Horizon 2020 scheme), and
 offers assistance to businesses in finding
 partners and preparing applications.
Innovation Support for the development of R&D and Tekes has run many workshops educating
management innovation management knowledge and executives of established, non-innovating
education skills. companies about both the benefits and the
 practical management of innovation and
 R&D. These activities are widely
 acknowledged as having been crucial in
 stimulating innovation within Finland’s
 private sector.
Support for intermediaries
Intermediary Funding of third party institutions which CORFO subsidises innovation and
funding invest in or support business innovation business incubators operating across Chile.
 (such as incubators or accelerators). For example, between 2003 and 2008 it
 invested around US$11 million to fund the
 creation of 27 business incubators.
Connecting and institution-building activities
Knowledge and Programmes designed to promote Innovate UK now manages a long-running
technology transfer of knowledge and technologies and widely-respected Knowledge
transfer between research and industry. Transfer Partnership scheme that places
activities recently qualified graduates in businesses
 to conduct strategic innovation projects.
Competence Domain-focused physical centres Tekes was invoved in establishing a
centres designed to facilitate collaborative R&D number of Strategic Centres for Science,
 projects between research institutions, Technology and Innovation that bring
 businesses, public sector bodies and together research organisations and
 others. companies to conduct R&D projects in
 key thematic areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
Research Support for research consortia that Both ITRI and the OCS have sponsored
consortia involve several companies and/or research consortia across a wide array of
 research organisations. technological and industrial areas.
International- Support for the development of The BIRD foundation (Bi-National R&D
isation of international collaborative R&D projects USA-Israel) offers financial support and
innovation or exchanges. conducts matchmaking between Israeli
collaboration and US firms around projects to jointly
 develop and sell novel products.
Notes:
This table draws on observations from our case study agencies, as well as a review of the wider literature around support
for business innovation. Two particularly relevant papers can be accessed at: https:/ /innovationpolicyplatform.org/sites/
default/files/rdf_imported_documents/Financing%20business%20innovation%20TOT.pdf and http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/
blog/landscape-funding-tools.
1.4 What we have learned about how innovation agencies work -
 and the challenges they face
Our research also looked at the way that innovation agencies are designed and managed. From
our case studies, we highlight four key observations about the opportunities and challenges
associated with the way that they operate:
Innovation agencies often operate with considerable autonomy
While governance arrangements vary, innovation agencies tend to have a considerable degree
of strategic and operational independence from their sponsoring governments. This has been
particularly true of pioneering bodies such as the OCS and DARPA. Israel’s agency was a
marginal player when it started out – both in terms of resources and political cache - operating
on the periphery of the public sector. However, this relative obscurity gave it the space to
experiment with new support models and instruments without much interference, which allowed
it to build ‘high walls’ between the agency and central government.
32 While DARPA is much
bigger and pursues a more specific national mission, it has been similarly free to test out radically
innovative ideas. The agency’s programme managers create portfolios of projects, critique each
other’s ideas and progress, and actively manage the contractors on each project, with little direct
management from the Department of Defense.
Autonomy manifests itself differently in agencies with a greater business support role. For
example, VINNOVA uses its strong connections with industry to influence government innovation
policy. Each industry brings together relevant players (including large and small companies,
academic research institutes, the public sector and civil society) to develop a roadmap and a
set of key concerns. VINNOVA then decides which of these competing innovation agendas to
develop programmes around, and feeds this into the design of the Swedish government’s four
year innovation strategy. While government earmarks a certain amount of money for issues that
it thinks the agency should work on (around a fifth of VINNOVA’s budget currently), these are
“brushstrokes rather than detailed instructions”.
33
The autonomous nature of innovation agencies is frequently reinforced by the skills and expertise
that they possess – whether this is held in-house or sourced from outside. Innovate UK’s
recruitment strategy has been designed to bring in people who have worked in industry or have
particular technological expertise, rather than policy generalists seconded from the civil service.
Most of ITRI’s 5,500-plus employees have an engineering background, and manage programmes

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
designed to directly result in innovative products or processes. Meanwhile, the CTI in Switzerland
and the OCS in Israel have both taken a ‘commissioning’ approach, drawing on the knowledge
and skills of a panel of experts from industry, academia and civil society to make decisions about
which project applications will receive funding.
Innovation agencies cannot be entirely separate from political processes
While many of the agencies we have looked at are committed to investing in long-term or high-
risk business innovations, they often find this difficult to balance with the needs and timelines
of politicians and policymakers, especially if they have a high profile and a large budget. This
problem has become more acute since innovation has emerged as a salient political issue, with
senior political leaders frequently mentioning it as part of their national vision. For example, FINEP
in Brazil has developed a number of innovation-support initiatives that have been scaled up into
government-wide programmes, such as INOVAR, a widely respected scheme that has increased
the levels of venture capital available to technology-based Brazilian startups. However, the agency
continues to have its budget set by the Secretariat of State for Science, Technology and Higher
Education on a year-by-year basis, limiting its ability to make longer-term investments.
For CORFO in Chile, changing political priorities have had a direct impact on the agency’s
internal structure, which has had to set up, abolish and then recreate a ‘productive cluster’
committee over the past eight years in response to the policy reversals of three consecutive
governments. And in the United Kingdom, Innovate UK is currently facing a major change in
its funding model (with around a third of its current spending due to be converted from non-
repayable grants into repayable forms of finance by 2020) as a result of a government-driven
effort to capture a larger share of the return from successful projects that it funds.
34
These observations highlight some trade-offs that policymakers should be aware of. In particular,
the ability of an innovation agency to experiment and take risks may diminish if it does well and
attracts high levels of political attention. This has led some scholars to suggest that ‘successful’
innovation agencies may need to embrace ‘the politics of partial success’ and set more modest
goals for themselves, both in terms of what they do (for example, focusing on effective
upgrading of the economy rather than complete structural transformation) and the rate at which
they do it.
35
Alternatively, policymakers that set high ambitions for their innovation agencies need to be
realistic about what they expect them to achieve, and recognise that more complex and high-risk
interventions may take longer to come to fruition than political cycles demand, or indeed, might
fail entirely.
Measuring and evidencing the long-term or systemic impact of their portfolio is
challenging for innovation agencies
All of the innovation agencies studied in this research have experienced difficulties in evaluating
and articulating the value created by their interventions. Some agencies have used a range of
econometric tools to estimate the quantitative impact of their support for business innovation.
For example, the FFG in Austria reckons that every euro it has invested in research between
2004 and 2013 has resulted in an additional 12 euros worth of long-term additional turnover for
companies. Innovate UK’s evaluation of its largest funding programmes have led it to claim that
its activities have supported projects estimated to have created 55,000 extra new jobs. And in
Finland, a longitudinal economic database of business R&D has indicated that more than 60 per
cent of well-known Finnish innovations have received funding from Tekes.
36

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
However, the more systemic changes thought to have been brought about by some innovation
agencies (such as the OCS’s success in fostering a culture of business innovation in Israel) are
very difficult to evaluate quantitatively over a short time period. This has created challenges for
agencies that often need to demonstrate some kind of return on public investment, but that are
also involved in supporting high-risk projects that are not guaranteed to succeed, or where much
longer time frames are needed to achieve impact.
It is hard to identify a single model of a ‘successful’ innovation agency
To remain on the cutting edge of innovation support, innovation agencies have to be responsive
to the changing needs of government and industry, and capable of shifting their approach
and their methods accordingly. Looking across our case studies we find that very few existing
innovation agencies have retained their original structure and focus, especially if they have been
running for many years.
For example, Tekes in Finland started out with a programme of investments designed
to stimulate specific industries, but now devotes nearly half of its budget to ‘responsive’
investments – funding companies with good ideas across a wide range of domains. Brazil’s
FINEP underwent a major shift in 2004 when it started offering direct financing to firms, after
three decades spent delivering government funding programmes for research and academic
institutions. And in less than a decade, Innovate UK evolved from a small government advisory
panel that took on responsibility for a set of pre-existing R&D support programmes to an
organisation of more than 300 people that spends some £600 million annually on a range of
technology funding competitions.
This inherent adaptability makes it difficult to identify a single ideal model for an innovation
agency. This has not stopped governments from trying to copy other models, with DARPA being
a particular inspiration. But DARPA’s approach and legacy is the product of a set of unique
political and military conditions in the United States that would be hard to reproduce almost
anywhere else in the world (see Box 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 1: UNDERSTANDING INNOVATION AGENCIES
Box 1: The ‘DARPA effect’
DARPA looms large in the political imagination of politicians and innovation policymakers
worldwide. In 2013, Japan announced the establishment of a new agency that would research,
develop and adapt cutting edge technologies for possible military use.
37 In late 2015, the
British government confirmed that it would be investing £165 million a year in a new Defence
and Cyber Innovation Fund designed to support innovative procurement – a DARPA for cyber
security.
38 And China is also reportedly planning to create a DARPA-style agency to invest
billions of dollars in defence modernisation and R&D projects.39
Yet DARPA is particularly anomalous among innovation agencies, for three key reasons:
 ★ It was set up to make highly risky investments in breakthrough technologies that would
enhance national security and give the US a decisive strategic advantage. While its
investments have resulted in innovations with major commercial and social significance
(such as the Internet and GPS technologies), most of these have been useful ‘spillovers’,
rather than the result of projects designed to create new commercial products or
services.
 ★ Its budget is immense. The agency spends nearly $3 billion a year on the projects it
supports – more than four times the budget of Innovate UK or similar organisations in
other rich countries. It has access to an even larger US defence procurement budget,
which at $600 billion is nearly equal to the annual spend of the entire UK public sector.
And it sits alongside a constellation of other funding bodies, such as the Office of Naval
Research. With this scale of resource, DARPA can make large and risky bets in the
knowledge that while most of them are unlikely to succeed – and we know very little
about DARPA’s failure rate – the few that do will pay off spectacularly.
 ★ It has enjoyed strong and consistent backing at the highest political levels, and been
given a huge amount of freedom to test out radical ideas.
DARPA’s emergence and historical legacy is the product of very specific circumstances that
would be extremely hard to replicate now in almost any other country. As such, while aspects
of its approach are very deserving of further study, there is a clear need to shift the perception
among many policymakers that being ‘more like DARPA’ is the only route to success.
Our case studies suggest that the most effective innovation agencies adapt in line with the
needs and opportunities of the system they operate within. This makes it challenging to develop
an ‘off the shelf’ model that will suit countries at quite different stages of economic and political
development. Nevertheless, it is possible to identify a number of core ‘missions’ that innovation
agencies tend to pursue, which have a variety of implications for the way they are designed, the
methods they use, and their metrics for what ‘success’ might look like. We turn to this in the next
section.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 2: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Part 2
DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN
INNOVATION AGENCY
Every innovation agency is a product of a unique political, economic and historical context,
is likely to regularly evolve its institutional structure, and to combine a range of different
approaches to supporting innovation. However, we believe it is possible, and useful, to
draw out a set of general innovation agency ‘roles’ from these examples which expose the
contrasting set of agendas, capabilities and possible outcomes in play.
From our research, we have identified three relatively clear existing ‘types’ of innovation agency,
which we describe as:
 ★ Market and System Fixers
 ★ Industry Builders
 ★ Mission Drivers
This list is not comprehensive, and in practice there is a fair amount of overlap in the methods
used by different types of innovation agency (particularly in terms of direct grants for R&D).
Agencies may also shift between roles over time. However, we believe it is a helpful way to start
distinguishing between different approaches, and thinking about the kinds of management
structures, methods and metrics of success that might be associated with each.
Market and System Fixers
Mission:
Market and System Fixers deliver programmes that address market and system failures
and seek to increase levels of business investment in innovation. They provide funding and
other support to lower the risk of R&D projects, often without any preference to specific
technologies or sectors.
Management:
 ★ Core expertise in delivering competitive programmes for innovation support.
 ★ Highly networked, they are likely to work with several government departments and other
parts of the innovation system by nature of their ‘horizontal’ programmes.
 ★ Likely to utilise large external expert networks to evaluate projects in a varied array of
technology and market sectors.
 ★ Aim to be responsive to and integrated with the needs and interests of the business
community as well as to drive new behaviours around innovation investments. This
might be achieved by recruiting staff from industry (an approach that has explicitly
been taken by Innovate UK), by using an extensive network of industry consultants to

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 2: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN INNOVATION AGENCY
evaluate project proposals (an approach used widely by the OCS), or by undertaking
comprehensive business consultation activities (as Tekes does).
 ★ Likely to be semi-autonomous, as delivery agencies closely linked to a host department
of government.
Methods:
Market and System Fixers are likely to operate a range of programmes - often as competitive,
open funding, including:
 ★ Direct subsidies and grants for R&D in businesses and universities (with an emphasis on
non-repayable or conditionally repayable grants).
 ★ Non-financial support for businesses, such as coaching and mentoring.
 ★ Support for intermediary bodies and the wider innovation support ecosystem.
 ★ Connecting and institution-building activities to bridge systemic gaps.
Metrics of success:
Market and System Fixers are likely to measure the results of their interventions using
both quantitative and qualitative metrics, including: the numbers of businesses supported;
relevant productivity and employment data (such as numbers of jobs created); intellectual
property developed as a result of supported projects; co-investments leveraged by grantees;
repayment rates (on conditional forms of financing); increased levels of business investment
in R&D; the number of sustainable collaborations that result from funding; and perception
data (such as whether attitudes and behaviours around innovation have changed as a result of
support).
40
Industry Builders
Mission:
Industry Builders focus on transforming an economy by developing a specific set of new
sectors or technologies, for example in green-tech, biotech, or nanotech industries.
Management:
 ★ Likely to be closely linked to government and the delivery of industrial strategy goals and
regional and cluster policies.
 ★ Staff require deep technical expertise in the relevant industry or sector and the ability to
conduct R&D in-house or in collaboration with other public agencies, thus employing a
higher proportion of engineers and scientists than other innovation agencies.
Methods:
Industry Builders will focus on activities that encourage the creation of clusters of innovative
businesses in specified industries. Their methods may include:
 ★ Direct investments or funding for companies in selected sectors or industries.
 ★ In-house development and spin-out of new ventures.
 ★ Investment in the wider support ‘ecosystem’ for innovative businesses (such as
investments in incubators or accelerators).
 ★ Activities designed to commercialise and internationalise business innovations.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 2: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Metrics of success:
The primary indication of success for an Industry Builder would be the emergence of a new
industry that creates a national competitive advantage. Interim indications of success for this
might include the creation of a set of new businesses, the development of new patents, and
higher levels of global or regional market share for targeted industries. ITRI’s development of
the technologies that helped Taiwan’s semiconductor industry grow to produce 40 per cent of
the country’s exports is a good example of this.
Mission Drivers
Mission:
Mission Drivers induce innovations that address major societal and economic challenges. They
often operate in policy areas of significant traditional R&D spending such as defence, energy,
the environment or health, and aim for a step-change in outcomes, rather than incremental
improvements.
Management:
 ★ Likely to involve a combination of in-house development or applied research activity with
significant external funding as part of technological or societal missions.
 ★ Expertise in problem selection and articulation, possibly gained through time-bound
expert contracts for the duration of projects rather than permanent positions.
 ★ Likely to network basic, applied research and commercial R&D activities in a specific
challenge area.
 ★ Likely to operate with significant operational autonomy.
Methods:
Rather than commercialisation programmes or support for existing commercial R&D projects,
methods are likely to focus on stimulating new markets for technologies and providing a
pathway to future commercial opportunities that respond to a specific national challenge.
Methods could include:
 ★ Acting as a lead customer - using procurement budgets and public contracts to ‘pull’
innovative solutions to challenges from the market.
 ★ Direct funding of business innovation in key thematic areas
 ★ Inducement prizes or challenges with significant public outreach programmes designed
to stimulate novel solutions to complex problems from new constituencies (such as the
‘grand challenges’ run by DARPA).
 ★ Time-bound programmes that bring together unusual combinations or partnerships in
service of a particular problem.
Metrics of success:
Programmes tend to target radical transformation rather than incremental improvements.
Possible outcomes include general purpose technologies which seed whole fields of
commercial activity, with an example of this being DARPA’s contribution to the development
of GPS technologies.
41

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
25
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 2: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN INNOVATION AGENCY
While the case studies we have looked at for this research can be mapped broadly onto the
three agency types outlined above, we suggest that there is a fourth potential model that can
be added to this emerging typology, drawing on elements of the approach taken by Market
and System Fixers but with much greater scope for policy and programme experimentation,
a more flexible and adaptable structure, and an explicit mandate to test out new ways of
supporting innovation. We describe these as System Optimisers.
System Optimisers
Mission:
While the previous three models could be envisaged at several different stages of economic
development, this final model represents an agency whose goal is to ensure continuous global
competitiveness for an advanced innovative economy. The role of this agency would be to
experiment with different policy and programme mixes to improve strategy and create more
effective and enabling innovation systems.
Management:
 ★ They are unlikely to be responsible for large-scale programme delivery, instead testing
and piloting models to be scaled by other delivery agencies.
 ★ System Optimisers likely to have the freedom to experiment with new ways of supporting
innovation and growth – this could come either from a peripheral position in the
innovation system, shielded from day to day political scrutiny, or it could come from a
powerful mandate from leaders at the national level (if operating across the economy) or
departmental level (if operating in a particular policy domain).
 ★ The staffing mix is likely to emphasise analysis and evaluation of what is and isn’t
working, as well as focus on the constant infusion of new programmes and ideas. Given
the need to both evaluate the activities of the agency and analyse the national system’s
current situation and future trajectory, staff would likely be a mix of recruited industry
leaders on secondment as well as highly-trained scientists, engineers and social scientists.
Methods:
System Optimisers may be able to orchestrate a combination of supply side (grants, subsidies,
loans, skills development programmes and demand side (market shaping, regulatory)
interventions. Other potential features of this approach:
 ★ Activities would tend to be direct and tailored versus indirect and general (e.g. grants and
loans, rather than tax incentives).
 ★ An ability to quickly create partnerships with new actors and in new industrial sectors
would be required, reinforcing the need to recruit key members of staff from industry or
academia when and if needed.
 ★ The agency would likely need to coordinate across political and policy domains, for
example, bringing together finance and education ministries.
 ★ A rich network of domestic and international experts would be required to help
understand future technological and market trajectories, induce collaborative R&D
ventures, and to generate new policy ideas.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 2: DIFFERENT ROLES FOR AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Metrics of success:
Longer time frames and more qualitative indicators may be required to assess the success of
a System Optimiser, if its aim is to increase the scale as well as the rate of innovation activities
across the private sector. An example of this approach comes from the OCS in Israel, which
sought to overcome bottlenecks in the Israeli innovation system through successive waves of
policy experimentation. In the 1970s, this included developing a programme of conditionally-
repayable loans to increase the level of R&D across the economy and setting up the BIRD
Foundation to develop joint R&D projects between Israeli and American companies. In the
1980s and 1990s, following a 1984 law that greatly expanded the OCS’ funding capabilities,
the focus shifted to developing programmes and incubators that could help address identified
issues relating to collaboration, and increase access to financing and mentorship in both the
very early and rapid scale-up phases.
42
In setting out these models, we are not proposing that they are a set of exact templates to
follow, or making value judgements about which approaches are ‘best’, since this will depend
very much on context. Instead, we hope that our description of some of the dominant
characteristics of existing innovation agency ‘roles’ will help governments to think about the
kind of approach they most closely identify with, or would like to adopt. In the next section,
we turn to some of the practical questions involved in designing an organisation capable of
meeting these goals.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
27
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Part 3
HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION
AGENCY
Our review of government innovation agencies around the world has demonstrated the
different ways in which these bodies can promote and induce business innovation and growth.
But how can policymakers draw on these experiences and models to make choices about
appropriate innovation agency design in their own contexts?
From our case study research, we observe that there are four key steps involved in the design
and management of an innovation agency:
 ★ Identifying the right organisational mission.
 ★ Choosing effective management structures and skills.
 ★ Selecting the most appropriate set of methods and tools.
 ★ Establishing a set of metrics and measurements that will help the agency to understand
and achieve impact.
However, before embarking on this process, it is vital that governments start by assessing
and mapping the challenges and opportunities of their particular national innovation system.
Questions to be investigated in this kind of mapping might include:
 ★ How developed is the country’s innovation economy? Is it nascent, emerging, established,
at risk of decline, or in need of intensive support to help sustain global competitiveness?
 ★ Where do national industries sit within global production networks?
 ★ How will the nature of the political system affect the choices that are made about
innovation priorities and programmes?
 ★ What resources and capabilities are available to support the delivery of these
programmes?

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
We do not investigate these issues in detail in this paper, but draw on the wider literature for an
example of some of the indicators and factors that should be considered during the mapping
process:
Notes: Adapted from Allas, T. (2014) ‘Insights from benchmarking the UK’s science and innovation system.’ BIS Analysis
Paper 03, available at: https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277090/bis-14-
544-insights-from-international-benchmarking-of-the-UK-science-and-innovation-system-bis-analysis-paper-03.pdf
After a mapping of the underlying innovation system has been undertaken, the process of
designing an innovation agency that can help to create opportunities and overcome challenges
becomes more straightforward. Drawing on our analysis of the literature and the case studies, we
turn now to propose a set of practical questions that policymakers should consider during this
process.
Mission
1. What is the specific problem that needs to be solved?
2. Which types of beneficiary should the agency support to further its mission?
Management
3. How much autonomy does the agency require to design and deliver its mission?
4. What resources does the agency need to deliver on its objectives?
Methods
5. What kind of support should the agency provide?
6. What geographic level should the agency work at?
Metrics
7. What systems and processes should be put in place to understand outcomes?
8. How can the agency’s overall value be judged?
Knowledge assets
Intermediary outputs of the
innovation system that provide
an indicator of its quality and
potential, such as the quality of
its research base
Talent
The human capital available to
demand, develop, share and
exploit new and existing
knowledge
Money
The funds available to invest in
infrastructure, new knowledge,
absorptive capacity and
innovation
Innovation outputs
Measurable outputs that can be
used as proxies for the ultimate
outcomes sought, such as
particular economic and societal
benefits
Broader environment
The economic and societal
context with which the science
and innovation system interacts,
and the position of national
domestic industries within global
production networks
Structures and incentives
The institutions and networks
that determine how effectively
the actors in the system work
together to generate outcomes

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
29
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Rather than producing a set of ‘right’ answers, we have drawn on examples from our case studies
to illustrate the range of choices and options available to them depending on their specific
mission. The following questions are intended more as a tool to guide national debates and
decision-making processes than a step-by-step guide for all governments to follow. Our aim is to
develop and refine them further through discussion with experts and governments around the
world.
Mission
1. What is the specific problem that needs to be solved?
Innovation policymakers are often keen to emulate examples of institutions and programmes
that have been successful in other countries. But before setting up a national innovation
agency, they must be clear about the specific problem they are trying to address and design
an organisation that will fit this purpose.
43
The decision to set up an innovation agency may be prompted by a variety of challenges.
From our case studies, common reasons include:
 ★ Low levels of investment in innovation in the business sector
For example, in Israel, the rationale for establishing the OCS was to overcome an
extremely low R&D to GDP ratio and to increase the small number (less than 1,000) of
R&D workers with an academic education throughout the civilian sector. Accordingly, the
mission of the OCS was initially defined as ‘maximisation of R&D activities in the national
economy’.
44 Addressing this type of challenge would require an agency operating as a
Market and System Fixer.
 ★ A desire to generate new sources of economic competitiveness
For example, ITRI emerged from a government desire to drive Taiwan’s economic
modernisation through the creation of specific new industries. Addressing this type of
challenge would require an agency operating as an Industry Builder.
 ★ Addressing major societal issues through the development of technological solutions
In the US, DARPA was created to give the country a decisive strategic edge by helping
to develop new technology-based military innovations. Addressing this type of challenge
would require an agency operating as a Mission Driver.
While the establishment of an innovation agency may be part of the solution to each of these
problems, different missions will prompt the creation of quite different types of institution in
terms of the criteria for success, beneficiaries, budget, management structures, the types of
expertise held within the organisation and the methods and instruments used.
45
This suggests the need to be focused in selecting the agency’s mission. As discussed in
earlier sections, an innovation agency will often adapt and evolve over time in response to
different needs and opportunities. But an agency that is trying to pursue too many different
objectives at once will find it difficult to establish a clear sense of purpose and a portfolio of
programmes that combine to form more than the sum of its parts. It also risks spreading its
resources too thinly and failing to deliver on any of its objectives.
2. Which types of beneficiary should the agency support to further its mission?
Innovation agencies need to determine whose capabilities they are aiming to transform in
order to achieve their mission, and where their investments can generate the greatest public
and private returns.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
From the case studies, we observe that innovation agencies around the world support
different types of beneficiary, and that success is more likely to occur when these partners
are matched with the agency’s overall mission and existing levels of development within
supported industries. For example, after a stage in which ITRI’s official strategy was to spin-
off new anchor companies and develop the semiconductor industry, it changed its mode of
cooperation with industry, preferring to organise research consortia and work with many
different chip design companies instead of focusing on grand projects. This occurred both in
response to the growing maturity of the industry, and the changing priorities of successive
leaders within ITRI.
Common beneficiaries of innovation agency support include:
 ★ Private sector intermediaries that support innovation, such as business incubators or
accelerators
 ★ Public sector intermediaries, such as ‘competence centres’ that promote innovation
collaboration between businesses, researchers and public bodies
 ★ Individual entrepreneurs or startups that do not have well-developed networks or access
to private sources of investment
 ★ Small businesses that are more likely to be financially constrained, could benefit directly
from relatively small injections of resource and whose activities could have an indirect
impact on bigger firms by creating new sources of innovation and competition
 ★ Large businesses that can use public subsidies to increase the scale of R&D or innovation
activities currently underway, or to work in partnership with research organisations or
other businesses
 ★ Research organisations and academic institutes developing new ideas or technologies
which may have commercial or wider societal benefit
Across our ten case studies, we have observed a trend towards innovation agencies increasing
the proportion of spending on startups and small businesses. For example, while CORFO in Chile
supports all types of business, in recent years its focus has been on high-growth-potential SMEs,
which were revealed to be particularly vulnerable during the Asian financial crisis at the end of
the 1990s. Innovate UK, VINNOVA and Tekes also now direct more than half of the budget they
spend on companies towards SMEs. For Innovate UK, this represents a considerable shift from its
first few years of operation, when big companies were the focus of its funding schemes.
The challenge here is working out where an innovation agency’s support can have the greatest
impact. Some scholars have argued that the greatest economic benefits occur during the
scale-up phase, when high-growth firms rapidly increase both employment and revenue.
46 This
suggests that while start-ups and small companies are important, they should not necessarily be
the only beneficiaries.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
31
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Management
3. How much autonomy does the agency require to design and deliver its mission?
Evidence from our case studies suggest that agencies engaging in longer-term or higher-risk
forms of innovation support tend to benefit from having more freedom from government to
set strategy, design programmes and allocate budget, while agencies designed to implement
specific government programmes will likely need closer relationships with their government
sponsors.
Analysis by academic experts suggests that the most ‘radical’ development agencies tend to
sit on the periphery of the public sector, with considerable freedom to test out new ways of
supporting innovation and relatively little direct control from government.
47 This model seems
to have worked well in the past for agencies experimenting with riskier policies or investing in
breakthrough technologies, such as the OCS and DARPA. Uri Gabai, Director of Strategy and
Economic Research at the OCS, claims that the organisation’s independence and the ‘ethos of
success’ that emerged around its early investments allowed it to build up ‘high walls’ between
itself and its sponsoring Ministry and gave it the authority to play a shaping rather than an
implementing role in the development of Israel’s innovation strategy.
48
However, this approach will not necessarily be appropriate for an innovation agency that
is responsible for delivering a specific government programme, where there is a clear
expectation of high returns on investment, or where innovation has become a salient public
and political issue.
49 A good example of the former is CORFO in Chile, which was established
in 1939 to improve national energy supply and to establish a domestic steel industry. Its
mission has shifted many times over the years in response to changing government initiatives,
but it has remained generally focused on the design and implementation of instruments and
programmes, while other Ministries set the direction of policy.
There are ‘hybrid’ options between these two extremes. For instance, Austria’s FFG is a
private company ‘co-owned’ by two government ministries - the Federal Ministry of Transport,
Innovation and Technology (BMVIT) and the Federal Ministry of Science, Research and
Economy (BMWFW) – and its work falls under two ‘pillars’. Programmes funded by the
BMWFW and other Ministries tend to be directed towards particular government policy
objectives, while FFG’s management have more control over strategy and spending for
programmes funded by the BMVIT. Meanwhile, some agencies such as FINEP and ITRI are able
to generate their own revenue in addition to the budget they receive from government, which
gives them more capacity for discretionary spending. Revenue generation can be a double-
edged sword though, as it can tempt government to reduce overall budgets.
4. What resources does the agency need to deliver on its objectives?
Different types of organisational mission require different types of resources, both in terms
of budget and skills. While organisations with larger budgets can invest in more projects, it
is most important that an innovation agency has the resources it requires to deliver on its
specific objectives, and the expertise to be able to manage these programmes effectively.
Our case studies suggest that there is no ‘ideal’ size of budget for an innovation agency.
DARPA is a clear outlier in terms of the amount it spends annually; with a budget of nearly $3
billion (and individual projects up to $100million), it has the ability to support very large-scale
projects that aim to develop new and breakthrough technologies. Yet having a smaller budget
is not necessarily a barrier to delivering on organisational objectives. At the other end of the
scale is the CTI in Switzerland, which spends around $165 million a year. Yet the agency can
point to a number of clear success stories in terms of the companies it has helped through
activities such as mentoring and coaching.
50

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
Related to this, innovation agencies need to think carefully about the capabilities and skills that
will allow them to administer programmes effectively. For instance, agencies that provide more
responsive funding need to be able to assess the technological and commercial feasibility of
projects presented to them in many different sectors. These skills may be held in-house. For
example, Innovate UK primarily employs technical specialists or those with industry experience
who can judge the commercial potential of R&D projects in different sectors. However, expertise
can also be sourced externally. For example, the CTI in Switzerland and OCS in Israel both use
a panel of external experts drawn from academia and industry to make decisions about which
projects will receive funding.
Agencies wishing to develop new industries are more likely to need deep knowledge of specific
subjects, and sometimes even the capacity to conduct commercial R&D activities themselves;
even if just to be able to judge whether this technological specialism is likely to enhance national
competitiveness. A good example of this is Taiwan’s ITRI, which primarily employs engineers and
technical experts to conduct applied research projects and spin out new companies that can
commercialise the findings.
Methods
5. What kind of support should the agency provide?
As we have found in our case studies, innovation agencies generally stimulate business
innovation in the following ways: lowering uncertainty and risk by providing them with direct
R&D funding; giving them access to new skills and knowledge; investing in the intermediaries
that support businesses; or helping to build networks that encourage collaboration
and knowledge-transfer. The specific mechanisms for delivering this support should be
determined by the kind of innovation that is desired, where it makes sense for an innovation
agency to intervene in the process, and what kind of return is expected.
Some of the key considerations in identifying the most appropriate methods and tools for an
innovation agency include:
 ★ Whether support will primarily be targeted at specific challenges or responsive to
industry needs
Innovation agencies that aim to solve a particular challenge or stimulate the emergence
of new industries or capabilities (Mission Drivers or Industry Builders) are more likely to
target specific types of innovation. Sometimes these are ‘pushed’ from the top down. For
example, ITRI in Taiwan spent its first few decades of existence investing in activities to build
an indigenous semiconductor industry. Later, under different presidents who held PhDs in
material science and biology, more effort was focused on these areas. Alternatively, innovation
agency funding can be used to ‘pull’ demand, whether through challenge-driven programmes
(an approach that VINNOVA has pioneered) or through pre-commercial procurement
schemes (like the Small Business Research Initiative managed by Innovate UK,
51 modelled on
the US SBIR programme).
In comparison, innovation agencies that play more of a Market and System Fixer role will
often take a more responsive approach to funding. For example, in its early years, the main
objective of the OCS in Israel was purely to increase the intensity of business R&D. As such,
the agency did not concern itself with specific sectors or technologies, as long as its funding
resulted in the creation of new science-based products that could be exported. Tekes in
Finland currently reserves around 40 per cent of its budget for ‘reactive’ funding, supporting
projects that are judged to have merit but do not fit into a particular thematic programme.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
33
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
 ★ The balance between early-stage support and late-stage interventions.
Looking across our case studies, we see that most existing innovation agencies focus their
efforts on funding or support that will help businesses to develop, prototype, trial and start to
scale-up ideas or technologies with commercial promise. In doing so, they fill the gap between
pure ‘discovery oriented’ funding often provided by science or research funding agencies, and
very late-stage commercial funding that will often be provided by private investors.
However, some agencies offer support for activities that are much earlier or later in the
innovation process. An example of this is the FFG in Austria, which funds activities across
the entire ‘Technology Readiness Level’ spectrum (encompassing very early-stage idea
generation, through the development, testing and piloting of new innovations, right up to
the point where commercialisation is imminent).
52 For example, its BRIDGE Early Stage
programme53 focuses on giving non-refundable financing to cooperative projects that
combine high-level scientific research with a commercialisation perspective, while its Markt.
Start programme
54 gives low-interest loans to SMEs to help them launch new products and
service innovations into the market.
 ★ The public return on investment that is desired
An ongoing debate relates to whether government should expect to receive a share of
the profits generated by businesses as a result of the support they receive. This issue is
particularly acute in countries where public finances are limited and there are high levels of
political scrutiny of what is being spent. Some existing innovation agencies, including Innovate
UK and VINNOVA, currently distribute most of their funding in the form of non-repayable
grants. But in these countries and elsewhere, there is increasing interest in the approach taken
by innovation agencies with a more diverse portfolio.
For example, in 2012 the French government established a new body to provide financial
support to entrepreneurs for R&D, commercialisation and export activities. Bpifrance, which
describes itself as a ‘public investment bank’, uses a wide range of financial instruments,
including low and zero interest loans, reimbursable and non-reimbursable grants for
innovation, subsidies, tax credits, long-term loans, bank guarantees, equity, convertible
bonds and co-investment alongside national and regional private funds.
55 However, caution
is advisable, since taking equity stakes in companies carries the risk of changing the way the
agency is evaluated (both internally and externally) and shifting it away from innovation-
inducing to profit maximising behaviour.
56
Tekes provides low-interest development and piloting loans (often in combination with initial
and follow-on grants) to help companies test new products or services, production methods
and business models. Loans are typically used in projects where the commercialisation of the
product is imminent, although as noted by Petri Lehto in Finland’s Ministry of Economy and
Employment, “if we’d like Tekes as an agency that is promoting radical innovation it would
need to emphasise the importance of grants…when you’re close to the market you know
what to expect. There’s less risk. But with grants you’re able to see a bit more towards the
distance”.
57
The OCS takes a different approach. Typically the agency will provide up to half of the
project’s costs for established companies (and a higher proportion for startups), with a royalty
fee to be paid back only if the project results in actual sales. This revenue model has been
successful in raising funds that are then put back into the organisation. However, there is no
set target for the return expected on this investment.
It is important to note that repayable forms of support tend to be directed towards lower-risk
projects that have a high chance of being commercialised. Yet as discussed above, innovation
agencies need to think carefully about how they can provide support that is not forthcoming

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
from other sources. This point was made powerfully by the current Director of Israel’s OCS,
who stated that if 70 per cent of the organisation’s grants were fully repaid, he would view
this as an institutional failure, since it would indicate a lack of risk-taking and crowding out of
private sector investment.
58
6. What geographic level should the agency work at?
An innovation agency’s mission will shape where it positions itself within the national
innovation system, geographically as well as politically.
Different missions require different ways of working. For innovation agencies that aim to
develop solutions to major economic or societal challenges, a more centralised approach
may be most effective. This has been the approach of DARPA, which works primarily at the
national level with government and the US military to deliver its programmes. In comparison,
innovation agencies that seek to play the role of a Market and System Fixer, or to create
clusters of innovative businesses, may find it more useful to have a regional presence. For
example, both Tekes and ITRI have branch offices or campuses in different parts of the
country that help them to address local needs and develop regional ‘clusters’ of research and
innovation intensity.
Some innovation agencies also get involved in connecting national businesses to international
partners or investors. For example, Innovate UK, Tekes and the CTI all run overseas ‘missions’
for entrepreneurs and high-growth-potential businesses to help them find opportunities
for joint projects or investment. Some agencies have even set up dedicated offices to
encourage R&D collaboration in key target markets. This has been a consistent strand of ITRI’s
work, which invested a lot of time and resources during its early years in creating strategic
partnerships with US companies and researchers that would give it access to expertise and
help with building up Taiwan’s indigenous semiconductor industry.
Measurement
7. What systems and processes should be put in place to understand outcomes?
It is relatively straightforward for innovation agencies to collect data on inputs and outputs,
but much harder to demonstrate the long-term outcomes and impacts of their programmes.
A priority is therefore designing a set of evaluation metrics and tools that will allow it to make
ongoing assessments about the effectiveness of interventions that may not lead to immediate
results.
Monitoring and evaluation has been growing in importance for all innovation agencies,
although for many this is an area of significant under-investment in the past. One of the main
challenges that all agencies face is designing an evaluation system that helps to steer the
course of programmes and enable ‘course corrections’ along the way, rather than waiting
until they are complete. This has recently been a priority for Innovate UK – their Evidence and
Economics team is looking for ways to link to other national datasets, and better understand
the impact of the agency’s interventions.
A number of agencies, including Innovate UK and Tekes, have also come together into a new
global collaboration (the Innovation Growth Lab) to explore how they can become more
experimental with their programmes and use tools such as randomised trials to find out what
actually works, when and for whom.
59
There are different indicators that innovation agencies can use to help understand the impact
of their interventions. These generally fall under two categories:

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
35
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
 ★ Outputs - including the numbers of businesses supported, the number of new jobs
created as a direct or indirect result of the innovation agency’s funding, IP or patents
developed as a result of business R&D projects, or the creation of new partnerships and
collaborations.
 ★ Outcomes - including longer-term assessments of changes in the economy or society
as a result of the agency’s interventions, the emergence of new industries of clusters
of businesses, higher levels of business investment in R&D, and changing attitudes and
behaviours around innovation. Tekes is a leader in this type of evaluation, assessing the
projects it supports at the point when funding is applied for, at the end of the project,
and a few years after completion to identify follow on impacts. This has enabled it to
assess the contribution that the agency’s funding has made to the development of
particular innovations. However, there remains a desire to improve the way that Tekes
measures the broader social impacts of its work. As we were told by Christopher
Palmberg, Program Development Manager at Tekes, though the agency believes that
they are creating a lot of societal spill overs, “these are extremely hard to validate… that’s
one of those challenges for agencies - how to make such activities impactful and also
measurable”.
60
It is inherently difficult for innovation agencies to assess the extent to which they can attribute
successes directly to their activities, especially for complex programmes that are often
delivered with a range of other stakeholders. This is a challenge facing most organisations
or actors charged with stimulating innovation, and should be taken into account when
judgements are made about the overall performance of an innovation agency.
8. How can the agency’s overall value be judged?
Innovation agencies are often judged quantitatively, in terms of the returns generated by their
investments, but this is only part of the potential value that they add. Equal effort should be
put into assessing more qualitative factors linked to how well an agency is managed its ability
to take (and learn from) risks, and the skill with which it implements programmes.
When asked to assess the systemic influence that their organisation has had, innovation
agencies tend to draw on two types of evidence: individual success stories or quantitative
programme assessments. Some point to very clear outcomes of specific interventions, such as
DARPA’s involvement in the development of GPS and the Internet, or early investments made
by innovation agencies in businesses that went on to be very successful, such as Tekes’ long-
term support for the Nokia corporation. Others use econometric tools to estimate the impact
generated by individual programmes or a portfolio of activities, even if the analysis is not
always very rigorous and doesn’t lead to robust conclusions. However, these two indicators
cannot always give the whole picture of an agency’s impact, or serve as a useful guide for
others to follow.
In assessing the overall contribution that an innovation agency is making within the innovation
ecosystem, there are a number of factors that our case study research suggest it would be
useful to take into account:
 ★ What is distinctive about the innovation agency’s offer. Depending on the role that an
innovation agency is performing – whether it is a Market and System Fixer, an Industry
Builder, a Mission Driver or a System Optimiser – a useful way of thinking about impact
is to look at whether it is supporting domains and projects for which there are very
low levels of private investment. Otherwise, it might be the case that even successful
programmes (in terms of company growth or profits) are channelling resources to
projects that would have access to them without public support. Since innovation
agencies aim to increase innovation in areas that otherwise would have been neglected,
the right evaluation methods should be used to measure this appropriately.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Part 3: HOW TO DESIGN AN INNOVATION AGENCY
 ★ How much risk the agency is taking. Since much of what innovation agencies do is
experimental, we should expect a high rate of failure, not only in terms of individual
projects that are supported, but also in terms of entire programmes. Indeed, an important
part of the evaluation process should be to gauge whether the agency takes enough risk,
and if is it quick enough to both recognise failed initiatives and close them down, while
scaling-up those that have proved their worth.
 ★ The innovation agency’s influence and leadership with respect to innovation policy
and programmes. The interviews we conducted with experts and representatives of our
case study agencies suggest that much greater effort needs to be put into judging the
effectiveness of the agency as a whole. This depends greatly on fluid factors such as the
political prestige associated with an innovation agency, the quality of its management
teams and processes, the success with which it executes its programmes and how is
perceived by the beneficiaries of its support.
All of these factors are hard to measure, and there is no one set of metrics that will apply
to every organisation. But without greater investment in this kind of qualitative evaluation,
innovation agencies will continue to find it hard to articulate the unique value that they add to
the mix of other policy instruments used by government to support business innovation, and get
better at performing this role.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
37
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CONCLUSIONS
CONCLUSIONS
A
t the time of publishing this report, many existing innovation agencies are
undergoing significant strategic and structural changes.
In January 2016, a law was passed in Israel that approved the transformation of the OCS into a
National Authority for Technological Innovation. When it is fully established, this body will have
more freedom than its predecessor to launch creative funding tracks and set guidelines that
will determine the licensing and transfer of any resulting technology, as well as the freedom to
tackle societal issues.61 The CTI in Switzerland is facing a similar shift, with laws currently being
enacted that will allow it to operate on a much more equal footing with the Swiss National
Science Foundation (SNSF) - the scientific research funding agency mandated by the Swiss
Federal Government.
Other innovation agencies are thinking about new ways they could provide support to
businesses (for example, Innovate UK is set to start providing more loans and other repayable
forms of financing over the next few years as a result of shifts in political expectations about
the return the agency should deliver), while some are thinking about how to make do with
considerably reduced budgets (for example, Tekes is starting to divest itself of responsibility
for the management of its SHOK Competence Centres, following substantial cuts in its annual
allocation from government for the 2016 financial year).
These developments reinforce one of the most important findings of our research: that there is
no single picture of what a ‘successful’ innovation agency looks like. In our case studies we have
not been comparing like with like, which suggests that determining what model will be best in a
given country can only result from a detailed mapping of the specific context. There is much to
learn from other countries about what works in terms of management, methods and approaches
to measurement. But attempts to directly replicate an innovation agency that has a very different
mission or operates in a different political or economic context are likely to fail.
If there is no one ideal type of innovation agency, there are a number of models that can help
to guide policymakers when they are determining what kind of approach and structure will fit
their national context, resources and ambitions. From our case studies we have identified four
potential models to use as the starting point for a broad typology:
 ★ Market and System Fixers;
 ★ Industry Builders;
 ★ Mission Drivers; and
 ★ System Optimisers
Whatever approach an innovation agency takes, it is vital that they define their mission very
clearly from the outset, and do not try to pursue lots of different objectives at one time. This is
vital if the agency is to develop a distinctive identity and a clear ‘offer’ to both government and
the beneficiaries of its support. It also enables it to develop a vision of what long-term success
looks like, and how it can adapt and change course to respond to new needs and opportunities
without deviating too much from a desired end-result. Otherwise, innovation agencies run the
risk of constantly changing both their programmes and their vision, increasing uncertainty for
entrepreneurs and companies instead of reducing it.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CONCLUSIONS
To manage these strategic transitions well, innovation agencies need a considerable amount
of autonomy and an ability to follow through on longer-term interventions. They also need to
be judged both quantitatively and qualitatively, with metrics that capture not only the value
for public money that their activities represent, but also the quality of their management,
their ability to take (and learn from) strategic risks, and the skill with which they design and
implement their programmes.
This kind of evaluation is not easy, but crucial for organisations whose purpose is to invest in
high-risk and potentially long term ventures. As our case studies show, successful innovation
policies, even those that culminated in a rapid transformation of the economy as in Taiwan,
Finland and Israel, were developed and perfected over the course two decades or more, before
the tipping point that caught the public imagination occurred.
A final point to be made is that innovation agencies are not a panacea for all the problems a
country faces in terms of encouraging business innovation and growth. As our case studies
show, they can be extraordinarily successful in terms of achieving particular goals – whether
this is funding the development of entirely new technologies, seeding new industries, or filling
funding gaps that would otherwise prevent the commercialisation of scientific research findings.
Yet they are just one among a number of innovation policy levers, and they evolve and change
along with government priorities, even as they have the simultaneous capacity to shape them.
Understanding this process of ‘co-evolution’, and setting realistic expectations for what these
agencies can accomplish with the resources they possess, is one of the most important things
that a government can do to help ensure that whatever innovation agency they design is able to
fulfil its potential.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
39
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CONSULTEES AND CONTRIBUTORS
CONSULTEES AND CONTRIBUTORS
We would like to thank the following people for participating in interviews and contributing
valuable advice and support to the research:
 ★ Agnes Estibals, Deputy Director -
Technology and innovation economics,
Department of Business, Innovation and
Skills, United Kingdom
 ★ Alger Lee, Associate Research Fellow,
Taiwan Institute of Economic Research
 ★ Brian McCarthy, Strategic Relationship
Manager, Innovate UK
 ★ Chintay Shih, Former President of ITRI
 ★ Chris Walker, Policy Advisor for
Enterprise and Innovation, Federation
of Small Businesses
 ★ Christopher Palmberg, Programme
Development Manager, Tekes
 ★ Dan Hodges, Head of Economics and
Evidence, Innovate UK
 ★ David Golding, Head of European and
International Policy and Coordinator
Enterprise Europe Network, Innovate
UK
 ★ David Wilkes, Head of Strategic
Partnerships, Innovate UK
 ★ Fernanda Stiebler, MA student in
Economics, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro
 ★ Glauco Arbix, Full Professor, University
of São Paulo and former President,
FINEP
 ★ Göran Marklund, Deputy Director for
General External Matters, VINNOVA
 ★ Jakob Edler, Executive Director,
Manchester Institute of Innovation
Research, University of Manchester
 ★ James Wang, Director of the Office of
Strategy and R&D Planning, ITRI
 ★ Joakim Appelquist, Director and Head
of International Division, VINNOVA
 ★ Justin Hill, Senior Development
Specialist, World Bank
 ★ Kate Yarrington, International
Relationship Manager, Innovate UK
 ★ Keith Hodgkinson, Deputy Director -
Innovation Technology, Department of
Business, Innovation and Skills, United
Kingdom
 ★ Kieron Flanagan, Senior Lecturer
in Science and Technology Policy,
University of Manchester
 ★ Lutz-Peter Berg, Head of Science &
Innovation, Embassy of Switzerland in
the United Kingdom
 ★ Manuel Cartes Palma, Deputy Director
Business Innovation, CORFO
 ★ Marcia Varela Arriagada, Assistant
Manager Technology Transfer, CORFO
 ★ Michael Binder, Strategy Unit, FFG
 ★ Mike Biddle, Deputy Director –
Innovation Programmes, Innovate UK
 ★ Newton Kenji Hamatsu, Energy and
Green Technologies Analyst , FINEP
 ★ Paul Nightingale, Professor Of Strategy,
Science Policy Research Unit, University
of Sussex
 ★ Peggy Chou, Deputy Director,
Department of Industrial Development,
Taiwan Institute of Economic Research
 ★ Pei-Zen Chang, Professor, Institute of
Applied Mechanics, National Taiwan
University
 ★ Peter Nõu, ICT Division - Programme
Manager, VINNOVA
 ★ Petri Lehto, Director, Policy and
Communication, Ministry of Economy
and Employment, Finland

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CONSULTEES AND CONTRIBUTORS
 ★ Pirjo Kylakoski, Foresight Manager,
Tekes
 ★ Sabine Mayer, Strategy Unit, FFG
 ★ Sampo Ahonen, CEO, Beneq
 ★ Stephen Browning, Head of SBRI,
Innovate UK
 ★ Tera Allas, Visiting Fellow, McKinsey
Global Institute and Board Member,
Innovate UK
 ★ Tim Vorley, Professor of
Entrepreneurship, University of
Sheffield
 ★ Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and
Economic Research Unit, Office of the
Chief Scientist
 ★ Vital Meyer, Head of Start-up
Promotion and Entrepreneurship, CTI
 ★ Vitor Monteiro, Manager, Juridical
Department of the Innovation Directory,
FINEP
 ★ Zil Miranda, PhD student in Sociology,
University of São Paulo

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
41
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
Page vv Page vv
Page vv Page vv
CASE STUDIES
The United Kingdom’s
Innovate UK
Page 82
Sweden’s
Governmental
Agency for
Innovation Systems
(VINNOVA)
Page 67
Switzerland’s
Commission for
Technology and
Innovation
(CTI)
Page vvPage 72
Taiwan’s
Industrial
Technology
Research Institute
(ITRI)
Page 77
The United States’
Defense Advanced
Research Projects
Agency
(DARPA)
Page 87
Finland’s
Funding Agency
for Innovation
(Tekes)
Page 57
Austria’s
Research Promotion
Agency
(FFG)
Page 42
Brazil’s
Funding Authority
for Studies and
Projects
(FINEP)
Page vvPage 47
Chile’s
Economic
Development
Agency
(CORFO)
Page 52
Israel’s
Office of the
Chief Scientist
(OCS)
Page 62

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES AUSTRIA: FFG
 Austria
FFG
SUMMARY
The Research Promotion Agency (FFG) is the national funding agency for industrial research
and development in Austria, offering a diverse portfolio of support programmes to Austrian
businesses and public or private research organisations. Every year, FFG supports around
3,200 projects, involving over 5,500 partners.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Vienna 2004 €592 million 275
 (2015)
GOVERNANCE
Private limited company owned by the Austrian Federal
Government, with shared ownership from the Federal Ministry
of Transport, Innovation and Technology (BMVIT) and the
Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy (BMWFW).
AIMS
To promote research, technology, development and innovation
for the benefit of Austria, make a lasting contribution to the
strength of the Austrian economy and help Austria’s business
and science sectors to remain competitive both nationally and
internationally.

WHAT MAKES FFG STAND OUT?
 ★ Bridge between national and federal innovation support. Before FFG was created, the
Austrian innovation funding system was very fragmented. One of FFG’s key aims is to
improve the links between regional and national innovation policies and funding, and it
now helps to coordinate the innovation activities of Austria’s federal governments.
 ★ Substantial international portfolio. The FFG has recently engaged in an increasing
number of international activities, from coordinating EU initiatives to developing a new
fund to encourage and multiply R&D collaboration between Austrian organisations and
non-EU countries.
 ★ Dual role in designing and delivering strategy. The FFG is organised around two main
pillars. One encompasses relatively autonomous programmes, partly funded by BMVIT,
where FFG plays a strategic role. The other consists of programmes conducted on behalf
of other ministries, in which FFG plays more of a delivery than a design role.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$436.3 billion (2014)62
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
1.09 per cent of GDP
(2013)63
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
1.98 per cent of GDP
(2012)64
VIENNA

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
43
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES AUSTRIA: FFG
MISSION AND HISTORY
FFG was created in September 2004 to act as the national funding agency for industrial
research and development in Austria. It was formed from the merger of four pre-existing
institutions: the Industrial Research Promotion Funds (FFF), the Technology Impulse Agency
(TIG), the Bureau for International Research and Technology Cooperation (BIT) and the
Austrian Space Agency (ASA). This consolidation was designed to create one large player in
the field of applied research and innovation funding in Austria that would act as a single point
of contact for funding target groups, as well as serving as a governmental advisory body for
international and EU research programmes.
As a result of regular strategic reviews (which take place every three years) FFG has
evolved from being primarily a funding agency to being more of an enabling agency. Its
portfolio now includes more advisory services, and it has developed a set of thematic and
structural programmes to target specific innovation areas. It has also sought to play more
of a connecting role within the Austrian innovation system and build links with the state
governments. FFG’s budget has grown since it was created, but not steadily across the period.
While the budget increased consistently between 2004 and 2008, rising from €316 million to
€652 million, it then dropped back to €429 million in 2010, only to increase again in 2015 to
€592 million.
Austrian National Council
resolution establishes
the FFG. Dr Henrietta
Egerth and Dr Klaus
Pseiner appointed joint
Directors
Contractual
framework with
FFG owners
New multi-annual
strategy developed
COMET
programme
launched
FFG chairs Taftie
network of European
innovation agencies
Planned
evaluation of
FFG
Evaluation of
R&D premium
tax scheme
Internationalisation initiative
‘Beyond Europe’ launched
Cooperation and
Innovation Networks
(COIN-Net) launched
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
FFG
EVENTS
Austrian Council
for Research and
Development
established
System evaluation of
Austrian research, technology
development and innovation
funding on the federal level
Parliamentary
elections (coalition
SPÖ-ÖVP
Government formed)
 National
Research and
Innovation
Plan
 Federal Strategy
for Research,
Technology and
Innovation
20022000 2009 2011 20132004 2006 20082007 2015 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES AUSTRIA: FFG
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
FFG is owned equally by two government ministries: the Federal Ministry for
Transport, Innovation and Technology and the Federal Ministry of Science,
Research and Economy. The model of a private limited company was chosen
as it was felt that this would encourage the development of more professional
management structures. FFG has two main organisational pillars. The first is a
relatively autonomous set of funding and support programmes (including the
General Programmes). This pillar is ‘managed’ by the BMVIT, but FFG’s Managing
Directors make decisions about strategy and budget. The second pillar consists
of projects and programmes conducted on behalf of different ministries (varying
across sectors) or of other organisations in the Austrian system: for these
initiatives, the relevant Ministry will decide on the allocation of budget.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
FFG’s main tasks are to manage projects and promote collaborations that
will increase Austria’s competitiveness. As such, the agency’s most important
institutional relationships have tended to be located within government,
although there have been some shifts over the past few years. Austria’s länder
(states) have historically had quite different innovation strategies and have not
communicated or coordinated these very effectively. FFG has explicitly sought
to address this challenge, and several of the organisation’s programmes now
include direct cooperation between government levels and a mix of federal and
state funding. In the last two years, FFG has also started running entirely regional
programmes, directly commissioned by the state governments. According to
Michael Binder, who sits within the FFG Strategy Unit, the agency now aims to
act as a “service agency for the länder.”
65
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
FFG has nearly doubled in size since it was set up, from around 150 people in
2004 to around 275 currently. Its operating structure is closely connected to
the programmes it runs, with most of its internal capacity directed towards
the General Programmes, Structural Programmes, Thematic Programmes and
European and International Programmes. These units have between 40 to 55
members of staff each. FFG also has its own small, internal, strategic think tank,
tasked with developing new policies for the organisation and interfacing between
management and the programmes.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
FFG members of staff have a range of backgrounds, including individuals with
knowledge of the thematic areas that the organisation focuses on, technical
specialists, and those with expertise in finance or economics. The agency’s
recruitment strategy generally aims to bring in people with some experience of
working in industry (apart from in the European and International Programme,
where staff are more likely to have purely academic backgrounds). There is no
dominant ‘type’ within FFG, although there are very few employees with a civil
service background.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
45
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES AUSTRIA: FFG
METHODS
APPROACH
FFG currently offers 30 different support programmes, divided into five broad categories:
General Programmes, Structural Programmes, Thematic Programmes, European and
International Programmes and the Aeronautics and Space Agency. FFG-supported projects
cover a broad range of the Technology-Readiness Level (TRL) scale, from discovery-oriented
projects (Levels 1-2) up to projects closer to commercialisation (Levels 7-8). About 30 per
cent of FFG’s funding is allocated via thematic priority calls, 50 per cent through bottom-up
open calls and 20 per cent through structural programmes. Support programmes fall under
an array of themes, including life sciences, information technology, energy and environment,
mobility, space, safety and security, and human resources.
BENEFICIARIES
Beneficiaries of FFG support include Austrian companies, not-for-profit organisations,
research institutions, universities and individual researchers. FFG support requires
organisations to commit match-funding. Around 70 per cent of FFG’s total funding is directed
to R&D projects run by companies (three-quarters of which take the form of grants). FFG
focuses particularly on SMEs: these receive 80 per cent of the funding FFG makes available
for companies.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
General Programme: FFG’s flagship open call programme uses a mix of
grants, loans and guarantees to support the R&D and entrepreneurship
activities of Austrian companies.
66
Innovation Voucher scheme: grants of up to €5,000 or €10,000 for Austrian
SMEs to buy in R&D knowledge or support.
Research and Development Premium: a 12 per cent R&D tax premium for
companies selected by FFG.
FFG Academy: permanent training scheme to enhance the participation of
Austrian actors in European funding programmes.
FFG is the Austrian contact point for several European initiatives (including
EUREKA, ERA-NET, and the Enterprise Europe Network).
AplusB programme: funds centres that offer professional support for
scientists in turning their ideas into commercially viable businesses.
COIN:
67 networks designed to encourage technology transfer within
entrepreneurial cooperation schemes.
COMET Competence Centers: network of 21 centres that develop research
competencies in the field of science-industry cooperation.
Beyond Europe: a €5 million call for R&D projects conducted with partners
in non-EU countries, launched in 2015.
FinancialNon-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES AUSTRIA: FFG
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
For each new programme, FFG is required to set out target groups and programme goals, and
to develop an evaluation plan that sets out common measures for success. There is no cross-
organisational model for these evaluations but, depending on the duration of the programme,
there are usually interim and ex-post or end evaluations. Evaluations have generally been
used to optimise existing programmes, rather than as a tool to set budgets and decide which
programmes should be scaled up or down. However, FFG is currently carrying out an internal
portfolio review, analysing the support it provides and trying to judge whether its programme
and instrument mix is appropriate for Austria’s challenges and the priorities set by the
Austrian government.
For the last 40 years, the Austrian Institute for SME Research
68 has conducted an annual impact
monitoring of funding given out by FFG (and its main predecessor organisation FFF). Impact is
measured through a survey of previous programmes’ beneficiaries, four years after completion
of the project, in which companies are asked a series of questions on topics like turnover,
employment, partnerships or research activities. Since 1968, FFF/FFG’s General Programmes
have funded 27,000 research projects. External and internal evaluation reports have shown the
generally positive impact FFG has had on Austria’s business and innovation systems:
 ★ FFG estimates that for every €1 invested in research, companies have recorded a long-
term additional turnover of €12, leading to the creation of more than 10,000 jobs between
2004 and 2013.
69
 ★ FFG’s European and International programmes provide information and support to more
than 30,000 individuals (of which 40 per cent are from industry, 29 per cent are from
universities, 11 per cent are from non-university research units and 20 per cent are from
other types of organisations).
 ★ Around 2,000 projects in the 7th European Union Framework Programme included
Austrian companies, representing research funding of about €800 million.70
INFLUENCE IN AUSTRIA’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
FFG is generally thought to have had a positive impact on the Austrian business support
landscape, although it is acknowledged internally that there is more work to do to improve
the organisation’s portfolio and to increase its focus on the innovation system as a whole,
rather than individual programmes. Over the last few years the organisation has aimed
to professionalise its processes, making it a more effective ‘one stop shop’ for companies
and researchers looking for support for applied research projects. For example, FFG now
has harmonised application forms through an electronic submission system. This drive has
also enabled FFG to improve communication and coordination in the field of innovation
and applied research between federal and state organisations and government, which has
historically been very fragmented.
71
Its role as an informal consultant to the Austrian government on science, technology and
innovation policy has expanded over time, even though this is not formally part of its mission.
FFG provides supporting data and information via its EU performance monitoring portal and
reports on thematic priorities. FFG was involved in the development of the federal research,
technology and innovation strategy that was launched in 2011, and is involved in strategy
processes around themes like open innovation, open access, open data and intellectual
property.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
47
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES BRAZIL: FINEP
 Brazil
FINEP
SUMMARY
The Financiadora de Estudios e Projetos (FINEP) is Brazil’s national innovation agency. It
is a government-owned institution that sits under the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Innovation (MCTI) and aims to transform Brazil through innovation.
72
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Rio de Janeiro 1967 US$2.1 billion 740
 (2014)
GOVERNANCE
Public company managed by the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Innovation (MCTI).
AIMS
To promote the economic and social development of Brazil
through public support for science, technology and innovation
in companies, universities and technological institutes.

WHAT MAKES FINEP STAND OUT?
 ★ Coordination role within the Brazilian innovation system. FINEP led the design of Plano
Inova Empresa, Brazil’s ambitious innovation and technology strategy. Launched in 2013,
it aims to increase R&D in strategic sectors and is the result of cooperation between 12
ministries, four federal regulatory agencies and the Brazilian Development Bank.
 ★ Revenue-generation capacity. FINEP was established as a public company under the
ownership of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. While FINEP is not
autonomous from the government, it has started developing programmes that will enable
it to achieve greater financial independence, and it has the capacity to generate its own
profits through returns on investment.
 ★ A focus on internal capacity-building. In addition to supporting staff undertaking Masters
or PhD degrees, FINEP launched an internal training programme in 2013 covering topics
such as innovation policy and economic affairs. FINEP aims to tailor these training
offerings further and open them up to external partners, including companies and the
civil service.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$2.35 trillion (2014)73
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.63 per cent of GDP
(2010)74
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
0.56 per cent of GDP
(2010)75
RIO DE
JANEIRO

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES BRAZIL: FINEP
MISSION AND HISTORY
FINEP was set up in 1967 as a public company, institutionalising a pre-existing trust fund for
research projects and programmes created in 1965. In 1969, FINEP became the managing
agency for FNDCT, the National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development.
76 It
was initially created to work with the Ministry of Planning and during its first three decades,
FINEP’s funding was particularly focused on academic institutes and research centres. In 1985,
FINEP was linked to the newly-created Ministry of Science and Technology. This coincided
with the start of a decade of adjustments and budget constraints in Brazil. The 1980s were
nicknamed the ‘lost decade’, with a stagnant GDP (no increase between 1984 and 1989) and
inflation rates reaching almost 3,000 per cent by 1990.
77
Efforts to improve the innovation ecosystem started during the 2000s, when FINEP
established the INOVAR project to help build a Brazilian VC ecosystem.
78 The 2004 Innovation
Law and 2005 Lei do Bem (Good Law) made direct public funding to firms possible for the
first time, while the 2007-2010 PACTI plan under President Lula incorporated the concept
of innovation fully into science and technology policy.
79 Brazil’s 2011 Industrial Policy plan
encouraged a greater focus on sectoral strategies. The launch of the 2013 Plano Inova
Empresa
80 (jointly developed by FINEP and BNDES) marked the point at which FINEP began
operating integrated support instruments for firms (including credits, grants, and equity). Its
current priority sectors include energy, biofuels, cleantech, health and welfare, agriculture and
space.
FINEP
established
EMBRAPA is
created with
FINEP’s
support
First call for
non-refundable
funding for
companies
through the
Economic Grant
programme
Plano Inova
Empresa
(Innovation
Company
Plan)
launched
National
Knowledge
Platforms
programme
launched
Creation of
sectoral funds
(administered in
partnership
between FINEP
and CNPq)
FINEP brought under
the newly created
Ministry of Science
and Technology
INOVAR
programme
established
FINEP starts offering credit
lines for engineering compa-
nies and non-refundable grants
for universities and research
centres
FINEP
becomes
managing
agency for
FNDCT
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
FINEP
EVENTS
Establishment of
CNPq (Brazil’s
national science
foundation)
National Plan for
Economic
Development
Resumption of
industrial policy in
Brazil
Ciência sem fronteiras
(‘science without borders’
mobility programme)
Good Law passed
(creating fiscal
incentives for
technological
innovation)
National Council
of Science and
Technology
established
PACTI Science,
Technology and
Innovation Plan
Plano Brasil
Maior (new
industrial
policy)
Presidential elections
(Workers’ Party elected)
Innovation
Law passed
1951 1996 2003 2004 2005 20102007 201119721967 1969 1971 1985 1998 2000 2006 2013 2014

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
49
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES BRAZIL: FINEP
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
FINEP is a public company owned by the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Innovation. This status gives it considerable freedom to set its own strategy and
determine how its budget is spent. It is also able to generate its own profits
through returns on its investments (including the loans it makes to companies).
However, FINEP is not entirely autonomous. Although there is an aspiration to
become more financially independent from government in the future, FINEP
currently receives most of its budget from the Secretariat of State for Science,
Technology and Higher Education (SETI). This budget is set annually, which
makes it difficult to engage in longer-term planning.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
FINEP sits at the intersection of government, academia and industry, delivering
its programmes in partnership with actors including the national science funding
agency, regional development banks, and the powerful BNDES bank.
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
FINEP has an extremely hierarchical structure, with many different teams and
units sitting under three strategic directorates (Innovation, Strategic Projects
and Scientific Development), and two corporate directorates.
81 The innovation
and strategy directorates lead on different areas of industrial or sectoral support
while the scientific development directorate provides support for university
infrastructure. FINEP has regional offices in São Paulo and Brasília, and a few
cooperation agreements (although no overseas offices) with research institutes
and innovation agencies in Europe.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
FINEP staff have a mix of backgrounds, including economists, engineers, lawyers,
and individuals with experience of working in the private sector or the civil
service. Those with graduate or post-graduate level degrees (representing just
under 90 per cent of the workforce) enter FINEP at ‘Analyst’ level, while those
with secondary or college level education join as ‘Technical Assistants’. FINEP
provides support to staff interested in doing Masters or PhD degrees, and
recently launched an internal ‘FINEP university’. This makes training available to
all staff on a range of issues, including innovation policy, economic or industrial
affairs, intellectual property, and FINEP evaluation procedures. At present these
courses are fairly general, but there is an ambition to make them more tailored to
the needs of different people or teams within the organisation, and to open them
up to external partners including companies and the civil service.
82

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES BRAZIL: FINEP
METHODS
APPROACH
FINEP supports all stages of the scientific, technological and innovation process, from
research to commercialisation. To do this, it uses a range of (primarily financial) support
instruments. Organisations receiving FINEP’s support are generally required to provide match-
funding, whether through capital or in-kind contributions (such as access to laboratories or
salary contributions).
BENEFICIARIES
FINEP works with research organisations and companies of all types and sizes, although the
emphasis has shifted over time, depending on the priorities of FINEP’s management. For
example, under the presidency of Glauco Arbix (2011-2015), there was a focus on supporting
bigger businesses (whilst encouraging them to bring SMEs into their R&D initiatives). The
current President, Luis Fernandes, is more interested in targeting support towards SMEs.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
FINEP combines various financial instruments in most of its programmes.
Refundable and non-refundable forms of support are available, including:
 ★ Grants to public and private research institutes and universities.
 ★ R&D grants for companies.
 ★ Loans and credits for R&D and innovation projects in businesses (with
negative interest rates and repayment periods of up to 12 years).
 ★ Equity, venture and seed capital to support creation and growth of
high-tech companies.
INOVAR: support for skills development within the VC industry83
InovaCred: decentralised loans operated by FINEP to public state or local
banks (in charge of selecting projects) in order to support SMEs.84
National Program for Business Incubators and Technology Parks: support
for the creation and consolidation of incubators and technology parks for
innovative businesses.
National Knowledge Platforms: structures that bring together industry and
academia around a technological focus or problem, and support public
procurement of technology and innovation.
EMBRAPII: a network of thematic industrial research centres, funded jointly
by the private and public sectors.
FinancialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
51
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES BRAZIL: FINEP
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
FINEP has a number of internal tools to measure organisational performance, including
the Executive Indicator Panel (which tracks indicators such as financial performance, new
business development and company productivity) and the ‘30 Days’ system, which provides
data on the technological and credit rating of applicants to a project. The process also
provides information on enterprise innovation activities and expenditures, and measures the
total amount financed by FINEP. After two years of operation, FINEP is starting to use this
information more strategically to review and improve its programmes. However, while FINEP
analyses the results of individual projects, it has done less to evaluate programmes or the
organisation as a whole.
FINEP has carried out a number of post-hoc programme evaluations showing a positive
impact on company R&D investment.
85 A study of sectoral funds investment (FINEP’s main
instrument) shows a 1.5 increase in R&D for every R$1 invested, with the greatest positive
impact on very small and very large firms.
86 However, critics suggest that government
spending supports R&D investments that would have taken place anyway.87
 ★ Inova Empresa has been evaluated with ‘robust’ results to date, but has impacted less
than one-third of companies that regularly invest in R&D.
88
 ★ The INOVAR programme has been described as a model for government efforts to
stimulate a VC ecosystem.89 As of 2012, the programme had cost around US$13 million in
operations but facilitated over US$1 billion worth of investment in private equity funds.
INFLUENCE IN BRAZIL’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
As a large and well-resourced agency, FINEP has been an important player in the Brazilian
innovation system for many decades. Its budget has increased eight-fold over the decade
2000-2010, alongside demand for its support.
90 It has only very recently started providing
direct support to businesses, so it remains too early to conclusively determine the impact of
these activities. However, the impact of its systemic interventions is well-documented, both in
terms of the development of specific industries, and in other forms of business support (such
as its Inovar programme, which increased the levels of venture capital for technology-based
startup firms through public assistance and co-financing of technology-oriented VC funds).
91
FINEP has had a more fluctuating role with respect to policy formulation. Although it is not
formally tasked with strategic policy work, in practice it has helped the Brazilian government
to develop new ways of increasing science and technology-focused R&D. For example,
the Plano Inova Empresa and National Knowledge Platforms were both programmes that
originated within FINEP, and were later scaled-up into major government initiatives. FINEP’s
political and policy influence is seen as depending heavily on politics, and the strength of the
relationship between specific leaders within government and the agency.
92 FINEP’s president
is a political appointee (nominated by the MCTI, approved by the Brazilian president) and can
change rapidly following election results. Budgets are also set annually, which reduces FINEP’s
ability to set longer time-frames on its programmes.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES CHILE: CORFO
 Chile
CORFO
SUMMARY
The Economic Development Agency (CORFO) is Chile’s national innovation funding agency,
with beneficiaries that include individuals, entrepreneurs and businesses, other financial
organisations and funds. CORFO’s goal is to modernise the Chilean economy through efforts to both
develop non-traditional sectors and increase the competitiveness of traditional sectors like mining.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Santiago 1939 US$345 million 685
 de Chile (2015)
GOVERNANCE
National State agency sitting under the Ministry of Economy,
Development and Tourism.
AIMS
To improve the competitiveness and productive diversification
of the country by encouraging investment, innovation and
entrepreneurship, strengthening in addition the human capital
and capabilities to achieve a sustainable and territorially-
balanced development.

WHAT MAKES CORFO STAND OUT?
 ★ Adaptive organisational model. CORFO has undergone many institutional and directional
changes since its establishment in 1939, reflecting the country’s socio-political instability
through the 1970s to the 90s. As a result, CORFO has developed the ability to quickly
adapt to external events.
 ★ Focus on developing new industries. CORFO was created as Chile’s development
agency and has always taken a very sectoral approach, developing new strategic sectors
and reinforcing traditional ones. More recently, this focus has been reflected nationally
through the implementation of ‘cluster’ policies.
 ★ A leader in its region. Chile is one of the first Latin American countries to develop and
implement entrepreneurship policies and support programmes. The Start-Up Chile
programme exemplifies CORFO’s leading regional role, having supported more than 400
entrepreneurs from 37 countries since its launch in 2010.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$258.1 billion (2014)93
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.17 per cent of GDP
(2014)94
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
0.13 per cent of GDP
(2014)95
SANTIAGO

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
53
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES CHILE: CORFO
MISSION AND HISTORY
CORFO was created in 1939 following a devastating earthquake, with an initial mandate
to improve Chile’s energy supply and establish a national steel industry. Since then it has
undergone many transformations in response to political changes and crises. During the
Pinochet regime, CORFO led a new movement of privatisation. After Pinochet stepped down
as President in 1990, CORFO rapidly shifted its policy and focus towards greater economic
development, promoting the competitiveness of Chilean companies in domestic and foreign
markets, while supporting the development of small businesses. New goals were developed
for the agency, including the promotion of business partnerships for competitiveness, the
modernisation of management, the increase in financial support for early-stage businesses
and the promotion of balanced development between regions. Today, CORFO is slowly
shifting from more standard interventions and instruments to initiatives gaining in complexity,
as knowledge and experience of processes is accumulated.
96
Production
Promotion
Corporation
(CORFO)
established
PROFO
programme
launched
SAE becomes
the CORFO
Sistema de
Empresas
(SEP)
Committee
CORFO
divided into
seven
sectoral
committees
InnovaChile Committee
created to foster
innovation and
entrepreneurship
Start-Up
Chile
launched
CORFO rolls out
a productive
cluster policy
CORFO office
opened in New
York (now closed)
CORFO manages
processes of selling
state assets and
privatising public
enterprises
CORFO divided into
sectorally-focused
committees
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
CORFO
EVENTS
Creation of new
government
businesses to
stimulate growth
in strategic
sectors, including
electricity, mining,
oil extraction and
agriculture
Fundación Chile
jointly established
by government
and the ITT
Corporation
End of the
Pinochet
regime
Asian
financial
crisis
New innovation
strategy
launched by
Council for
Innovation and
Competitiveness
(CNIC)
Innovation for
Competitiveness
Fund (FIC)
launched
Productive
cluster
policy
abolished
Productive
cluster policy
reinstated by
the new Chilean
government
Presidential
elections
(New
Majority
coalition
elected)
Management
of public
enterprises
transferred to
the Sistema
Administrador
de Empresas
(SAE) agency
1997 1998 2008 20131976 1990s1970s 1980s 2006 2010
1939 1940s 2005 201220011992
2014

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES CHILE: CORFO
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
CORFO sits under the Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism, and
receives funding from the Innovation for Competitiveness Fund (FIC). The
Ministry of Economy and the National Innovation Council for Competitiveness
(CNIC) set policy directions and interventions, while CORFO concentrates on
the design and implementation of instruments and programmes. The agency
outsources the delivery of many of their support programmes to Chilean
public agencies, regional governments, industry associations or public and
private research institutes. CORFO also manages the delivery of some regional
innovation programmes, through their network of local offices.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
CORFO’s strategy has traditionally been to build a network of external partners
instead of recruiting large numbers of staff.
97 One of these partners is CONICYT,
the National Commission for Scientific and Technological Research, sitting under
the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Economy and the Ministry of Education
have very different approaches and processes around common themes between
CORFO and CONICYT, which has impeded coordination at the agency level.
98
Following a review by the Ministry of Economy on role overlaps, a few CORFO
instruments for applied R&D were cut and transferred to CONICYT. CORFO also
works with other grant-administering bodies in Chile. For example, in 2015 CLP1.9
billion (€2.5 million) was transferred from its budget to Fundación Chile (a non-
profit corporation designed to support Chilean business and industry growth
through technological innovation).
99
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
Since the 1990s, CORFO has been developing new areas of work through the
establishment of internal committees. These committees arise from noticeable
needs or gaps, and are closed down when they are no longer required. CORFO
has a complex internal organisation currently made up of ten divisions: five in
charge of staff and corporate services, and five that deliver thematically-focused
entrepreneurship and growth support programmes. In 2014, CORFO reinstated
a policy of clusters, defining seven strategic sectors: mining, tourism, agro-
food, construction, the creative economy, agriculture and fishing, and advanced
manufacturing.
100 Divisions are in charge of preparing roadmaps to plan work
within these strategic clusters. Roadmaps and solutions or instruments to bridge
the gaps in firm support are discussed during regular meetings and roundtables,
with a focus on private sector participation.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
CORFO’s employees come from a variety of backgrounds, including research,
engineering and the private sector. However, its most senior employees tend to
come from the civil service, reflecting the close relationship with government.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
55
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES CHILE: CORFO
METHODS
APPROACH
CORFO’s programmes are mostly responsive and demand-driven, and always require co-
financing from eligible beneficiaries. CORFO currently focuses its support within selected
strategic sectors: mining, tourism, agro-food, construction, creative economy, agriculture
and fishing, and advanced manufacturing.
101 Support includes funding (predominantly grants,
loans, credit lines, venture capital and seed-fund), technology and innovation capacity-
building activities and network-building, and lasts on average for two to three years.
BENEFICIARIES
CORFO’s beneficiaries include micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), entrepreneurs,
students, financial institutions and stakeholders in specific industries. All types of firms
are supported but there has been a focus on high-growth-potential SMEs in recent years
(stimulated by the Asian financial crisis at the end of the 1990s, which revealed their
vulnerabilities).
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
InnovaChile: increasing competitiveness and promoting an entrepreneurial
culture and strategic investments in Chile.
Concurso Go To Market:
102 challenge-driven programme to help universities
and companies move their ideas from development to commercialisation.
Crédito CORFO Micro y Pequeña Empresa:
103 loans for SMEs to finance
investment and support firm productivity.
Business Incubator Operation programme:104 subsidises innovation and
business incubators.
Global Connection programme:105 global network of service providers,
through which scalable Chilean businesses and entrepreneurs apply for
incubation.
Networks of Angel Investors:106 support for the creation of business angel
networks.
CORFO makes equity investments and opens long-term credit lines for risk
capital fund managers to invest in R&D by SMEs.
Attraction of Centres of International Excellence for Competitiveness
programme:
107 centres to promote R&D in technology-driven, high impact-
potential sectors.
Start-Up Chile: 24-week-long seed accelerator programme, created to
attract high-potential, early-stage Chilean and international entrepreneurs
to set up their business in Chile.
FinancialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES CHILE: CORFO
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
In-house monitoring and evaluation processes are relatively new to CORFO. An evaluation unit
(currently five people) was set up internally in 2012, tasked with establishing more systematic
evaluation systems. Before this, external consultants conducted programme evaluations on an
ad-hoc basis. However, with the rise of the global economic crisis, greater attention has been
paid to the way CORFO assigns its budget and there has been a push for more accountability
and the development of useable organisational metrics.
Specific CORFO programmes have been evaluated by a number of organisations, including
the University of Chile, the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the
OECD, using methods like control and treatment groups to measure the effects of its support
programmes. In general, programme evaluations have found that participation in the support
programme led to improvements in short and medium-term outcomes, but results on longer-
term impact were less clear.
 ★ Between 1991 and 2001, the investment programme FONTEC (which became InnovaChile
in 2001) supported more than 1,700 innovation projects, valued at around US$250 million,
involving over 6,000 firms (around 85 per cent of which were SMEs).
108
 ★ The PROFO programme was launched in 1992 to promote R&D cooperation between
groups of SMEs. While earlier studies indicated that the programme had had a positive
impact on annual sales and salary increases, a 2011 study reporting on the 2002 to 2008
period found that although participants had a positive perception of the programme
benefits, the impact was in reality small and limited to firms in the manufacturing sector.
109
 ★ Since its creation in 2010 (funded by CORFO), Start-Up Chile has received over 18,000
applications and has supported nearly 400 entrepreneurs from 37 countries. Graduating
tech ventures have raised over US$100 million.
110
INFLUENCE IN CHILE’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
CORFO has played a changing role in Chile’s economic development over many decades.
In its early years it was directly involved in the development of new sectors, and used as
a mechanism for nurturing state-owned businesses in a variety of industries, including
electricity, telecommunications, fishing, sugar, and coal, among many others. After the
turbulence of the Pinochet years, its position shifted to more of a funding and management
role. It now funds successful agencies and programmes, like Fundacion Chile and Start Up
Chile, but does not do as much direct implementation work.
CORFO has played a relatively limited role in the development of government strategy. It
has also had limited autonomy to develop and implement its own programmes. This likely
stems from political scars and a fear of ‘government overactivity’ inherited from the Chilean
government crises that began in the 1970s.
111 There is less overt political volatility currently, but
government strategy with respect to innovation and business growth has also been subject
to frequent changes, making it hard for CORFO to administer long-term plans and build up a
strong organisational story of impact.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
57
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES FINLAND: TEKES
 Finland
Tekes
SUMMARY
Tekes is the Finnish Funding Agency for Innovation. Steered and funded by the Ministry of
Employment and Economy, it provides financing for R&D and innovation projects and works
with innovative companies and research units across Finland.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Helsinki 1983 €550 million 400
 (2014)
GOVERNANCE
Funding agency for technology and innovation, managed and
funded by the Ministry of Employment and Economy (TEM).
AIMS
To promote the development of Finnish industry and services
by means of technology and innovations.

WHAT MAKES TEKES STAND OUT?
 ★ High levels of institutional adaptability. Tekes’ initial mandate was to directly stimulate
particular industries, with a focus on IT and telecoms. However, it has evolved substantially
to take on a much broader coordination role in recent years, both in response to economic
developments (notably the declining fortune of the Nokia corporation) and to business
needs (through a practice of extensive consultation with industry).
 ★ Experimentation with different types of innovation support instruments. Tekes has
experimented with both grant and loan funding for companies, manages a state-owned
venture capital fund, facilitates government procurement of innovative products and services
from SMEs, and is involved in the operation of a number of large public-private partnerships
designed to generate the rapid development of innovations in strategically significant industries.
 ★ Thorough monitoring and evaluation processes. Projects supported by Tekes are
evaluated at the outset when funding is applied for, when the project is finished, and
three years after completion in order to identify any longer-term impacts. Tekes has also
commissioned comprehensive external evaluations of the way the agency works as a
whole, as well as the specific programmes it runs.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$272.2 billion (2014)112
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.3 per cent of GDP
(2014)113
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
2.29 per cent of GDP
(2014)114
HELSINKI

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES FINLAND: TEKES
MISSION AND HISTORY
Tekes was established in 1983 in response to the recommendations of a government-
appointed Technology Committee of political decision-makers and expert representatives
from government, the business community and academia. It was created to serve as the
key planner and executor of a new technology-oriented policy approach, which aimed to
rapidly develop Finland’s information technology sector as a way of stimulating industrial
competitiveness. It built on Finland’s existing infrastructure, taking on responsibility for a
range of activities that had previously been carried out by the Ministry of Trade and Industry,
including R&D loans and grants and appropriations for technical research. Over the next few
decades, its responsibilities expanded to include a more direct role in planning, funding and
steering R&D projects (as opposed to simply allocating funds assigned by the government).
Since the mid-1990s, it has also played a significant role in technology and innovation policy
planning processes.
115
Tekes’ mission has shifted from sectoral to systemic innovation and from technological to non-
technological innovation. In the early 1980s, virtually all Tekes programmes were sectorally-
focused, mostly linked to manufacturing and R&D-intensive technologies. The ICT sector
became particularly dominant, driven by the rapid growth of the Nokia corporation in the
1980s and 1990s. However, this approach changed from the early 2000s on, as the Finnish
government became more focused on customer-oriented, networked and open innovation
systems. Currently, around 60 per cent of Tekes programmes relate to systemic open
innovation issues, including ‘smart cities’, logistics and services.
Tekes founded
under leadership
of Dr Juhani
Kuusi
Technology
transfer and
promotion of
international
cooperation
law
Tekes given new
responsibilities to
assist the Ministry
in EU issues
relating to R&D
and technology
development
Regional activities
transferred to Tekes
from VTT, the
Technical Research
Centre of Finland
Dr Martti
Mäenpää
appointed
Director
General
Veli-Pekka
Saarnivaara
appointed
Director General
of Tekes
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
TEKES
EVENTS
Emergence and
rise of the Nokia
corporation
Finland joins the EU
Regional
Employment and
Economic
Development
(ELY) Centres
start operating
Nokia’s share of
GDP and R&D at
its peak
National
Innovation
Strategy
Beginning of
Nokia’s decline
Government
adoption of a
new ecosystem
approach to
innovation
Startup boom related
to Aalto University
Strong growth of Finnish
gaming and healthcare sectors
1980s 1997 2007/8 2010/2010s 20151995 20001983 1984 1992 1999 2006 2009 2012
SHOK
Centres
launched
VIGO
accelerator
programme
launched
Pekka Soini
appointed
Director
General

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
59
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES FINLAND: TEKES
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
Tekes is overseen by and funded through Finland’s Ministry of Employment
and Economy (which was created in 2008 following a merger of the Ministry of
Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Employment, and some units of the Ministry
of the Interior). Tekes has a close relationship with TEM, and there is a team
based in the Ministry that interacts with Tekes very regularly. Given the cross-
cutting nature of Tekes’ work, the organisation also engages with a range of
other government ministries. According to Petri Lehto at TEM, the Ministry gives
Tekes guidance in the broad strategic areas it should cover, but then freedom to
act within these guidelines.
116 Tekes’ external Board only decides on R&D project
funding if the amount contributed by Tekes will exceed €3 million.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
Tekes places a premium on its relationship with business. Tekes’ Christopher
Palmberg suggests that the organisation’s ‘guiding light’ has been to respond
to demand from industry, and to create a funding environment where broad
thematic areas may be set, but that is then very open to competition and new
ideas. Tekes also aims to involve industry partners in the development of the
organisation’s strategy, which is renewed every three years. According to Pirjo
Kylakoski, Foresight Manager at Tekes, strategy is developed as an open process
as far as possible, involving companies and others in the innovation environment
as ‘collaborators and authors’. Around 1,000 strategy discussions take place with
companies every year.
117
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
Tekes has grown rapidly as its portfolio has expanded, from 20 members of staff
at the outset to more than 400 employees now working in Finland or abroad.
The current organisational structure includes separate divisions that work with
startups and SMEs, a team that focuses on ‘networking businesses and research’
and divisions that lead on strategic, corporate and business development
activities.
118 Tekes also has an internal research and foresight capacity, and
invests €5 million a year to ‘understand how the Finnish society and economy
is renewing itself.’
119 Tekes works both regionally (through the 90 members
of staff based in local Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the
Environment), and internationally, including through joint research projects and
exchange programmes with VINNOVA and other innovation agencies. Tekes is
also part of Team Finland, a network offering joined-up, state-funded services for
companies looking to grow and internationalise.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
Over time, there has been an increasing emphasis on recruiting staff with
experience of working in industry. The current Director General, Pekka Soini, has
more than 20 years of experience working in senior management roles for Nokia
Siemens. Currently, around half of Tekes’ staff have a research background and
around half have a business background, although it has been suggested that
Tekes could benefit from developing more specialist expertise in certain areas.
There is some business training for staff, although much of this comes from the
‘on the job’ experience of processing applications for funding.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES FINLAND: TEKES
METHODS
APPROACH
Tekes has experimented with a broad range of innovation support instruments, including
grants and loans, equity investments, the facilitation of government procurement of
innovative products from SMEs, and the management of large public-private partnerships to
generate innovations in key industries. Almost 90 per cent of Tekes support goes to ‘high-
risk’ R&D projects.
120 Around 40 per cent of Tekes funding is ‘reactive’, where companies can
approach Tekes with an innovative idea or R&D project proposal that is not necessarily linked
to specific thematic programmes. A further 20 per cent is dedicated to research carried out in
the Strategic Centres for Science, Technology and Innovation (SHOK). Twenty-five per cent is
spent on Tekes programme focus areas, and the final 15 per cent is reserved for other strategic
priorities.
121
BENEFICIARIES
Tekes funds companies, research organisations and public service providers. Over time there
has been a shift towards supporting newer and smaller businesses. Larger companies are also
eligible to receive funding, but usually have to provide a higher proportion of match funding.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
Young Innovative Companies: mixed grant and loan funding packages (of
up to €1.25 million) for high-growth-potential young businesses.
Development and piloting loans: low-interest loans to help companies test
new products or services, production methods and business models.
Tekes Venture Capital Ltd.: Tekes steers the management of this state-
owned company, which invests in VC funds, which then invest in early-stage
companies in Finland.
Horizon 2020 Preparation Programme: assistance with European funding
bids for Finnish applicants.
Vigo Accelerator programme: funding and support from successful
entrepreneurs for high potential startups (scheme co-funded by Tekes).
SHOK Centres: six Strategic Centres for Science, Technology and Innovation
that bring together research organisations and companies to conduct R&D
projects in specific thematic areas.
Finland Distinguished Professor Programme (FiDiPro): offers grants to
global academics to engage in long-term research at Finnish academic
institutions (scheme co-funded by Tekes).
Global Market Access Program: funds MBA students from overseas
universities (in the US, China and Singapore) to help Finnish businesses
develop international growth plans.
FinancialNon-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
61
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES FINLAND: TEKES
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
Tekes is one of the most comprehensively assessed innovation agencies. Most of this is done
externally rather than in-house. For example the whole organisation was evaluated in 2012 by
the Technopolis consulting group.
122 Individual programmes are evaluated using a variety of
econometric techniques and Tekes also assesses the impact of its main support methods and
instruments.
123 Tekes-supported projects are evaluated regularly, at the outset when funding
is applied for, when the project is finished and a few years after completion to identify longer-
term impacts. As such, the organisation has built up a good bank of evidence on the impact
of its activities, and can point to a number of clear success stories. For example, recent data
suggest that:
 ★ For every euro invested by Tekes, companies increase their investment in R&D by two
euros
 ★ Over 80 per cent of customers that have succeeded in their innovation activities report
that Tekes funding has played a key role
 ★ Between 2010-2013, Tekes-funded SMEs saw job increases of 20 per cent more than
other SMEs, and annual turnover growth of 24 per cent more than other SMEs.
124
Tekes’ focus on impact measurement is driven in part by “constant pressure from the media…
that our taxpayer’s money should generate turnover, employment and so on”, although there
is an awareness that the broader societal spillovers and impacts that the organisation aims to
achieve are very hard to measure quantitatively.
125
INFLUENCE IN FINLAND’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
Finland has historically done well on comparative international rankings of innovation
performance, sitting in the top five of several global indexes. Tekes’ support for business is
part of a broad set of public sector innovation interventions, alongside the activities of various
government departments, Sitra (a public funding agency that reports directly to Parliament),
and the Academy of Finland (an agency sitting under the Finnish Ministry of Education,
Science and Culture that funds basic scientific research).
While this complicates efforts to draw out its specific contribution to Finland’s overall
innovation performance, it is clear that Tekes has been instrumental in facilitating the
country’s economic transformation into a producer and exporter of hi-tech products and
services.
126 For instance, a longitudinal information database (known as SFINNO127) has shown
that 62 per cent of Finland’s generally-known innovations have received funding from Tekes.
In 83 per cent of these cases, Tekes support was considered significant for the inception and
progress of the innovation process.
128 This database also shows that Tekes support has been
particularly important in supporting totally new innovations (as opposed to those which make
incremental improvements) and those which are more complex and take longer to reach
market. Overall, Tekes beneficiaries report that support has made them increasingly willing to
take risks and develop longer-term R&D strategies.
129

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES ISRAEL: OCS
 Israel
OCS
SUMMARY
The Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS) is the government agency in Israel responsible for
executing policy relating to support for industrial research and development. The OCS spends
around US$450 million annually on nearly 50 programmes designed to make Israel a centre
for high-tech entrepreneurship. It supports hundreds of projects a year, from early-stage, pre-
seed development through to pre-competitive and long-term R&D projects.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR BUDGET SIZE
 ESTABLISHED
 Jerusalem 1974 US$450 million 100
 (2015)
GOVERNANCE
Industrial agency of the Ministry of Economy, overseeing all
Israeli Government-sponsored support for R&D.
AIMS
To ensure economic prosperity via technological innovation.

WHAT MAKES OCS STAND OUT?
 ★ Independence from government. The OCS is accountable to the Ministry of the Economy
but operates very autonomously. Its freedom to experiment and the successes that have
resulted from this approach have enabled it to build ‘high walls’ between itself and the
Ministry.
133 The OCS also has the ability to generate its own revenue through royalties on
successful projects, complementing the budget allocated by the Ministry.
 ★ A reactive approach to innovation support. The OCS has traditionally been hands off in
its approach to setting funding priorities. Until recently, the R&D Fund (the OCS’s main
funding instrument), acted as a ‘horizontal’ scheme, with no particular thematic priority,
thus letting business priorities drive the development of new industrial niches.
 ★ Conditionally-repayable grants. The OCS’s financial support primarily takes the form
of conditionally repayable grants. It provides up to 50 per cent of project costs (or 66
per cent for startups), but only collects royalty fees from projects achieving commercial
sustainability and defined levels of success.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$304.2 billion (2014)130
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.52 per cent of GDP,
excluding defence
expenditure (2013)131
BUSINESS SPENDING ON R&D
3.49 per cent of GDP,
excluding defence
expenditure (2013)132
JERUSALEM

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
63
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES ISRAEL: OCS
MISSION AND HISTORY
The position of Chief Scientist was officially established in 1968, attached to what was then
known as the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (now the Ministry of Economy). This was
driven by the recommendations of an influential independent report on the management of
government research that advocated creating Chief Scientist roles in every major Ministry, and
by the need to generate more investment in private sector R&D.
134 However, it was not until 1974
that the OCS became an active state development agency.
In 1974, Itzhak Yaakov was appointed as the first Chief Scientist. He had previously held senior
leadership roles in the Israeli military’s R&D department, and was given a great deal of political
and operational leeway to develop the organisation’s strategy. Under his management,
and with buy-in from political leaders, the main objective guiding the OCS’s activities in its
early years was to get businesses doing any kind of R&D at all. As such, the agency was not
prescriptive about the type of innovation that firms pursued, as long as it resulted in the
creation of new science-based products that could be exported.
These two principles – of neutrality on the part of the state with regard to the sector and
technologies it supports, and a belief that private companies should be the main drivers of
technological R&D – have continued to underpin the OCS’ activities and strategy. Over time
though, its general support for businesses across the economy has inevitably resulted in the
development of some sectors or industrial niches more than others. The OCS has also created
new programmes (including the Technological Incubators, Yozma and MAGNET initiatives) to
provide more tightly-focused support than the general R&D Fund, either for different stages
of R&D or for different types of beneficiary.
Launch of
Israel’s first
Annual
Innovation
Report
Law for the
Encouragement of
Industrial Research
and Development
passed
Israel accepted as
associate member
of EU R&D
programme
Office of the
Chief Scientist
legally
established
Itzhak Yaakov
appointed as the
first Chief Scientist
MAGNET
Program
launched
Israeli
Directorate
for the
European
Framework
Programme
for Research
and
Development
(ISERD)
established
Avi Hasson
appointed as
the eighth
Chief
Scientist
Technological
Incubators
Program
launched
Yozma
Program
launched
MATIMOP
established
Establishment of an
bi-national
Israeli-American
cooperative industrial
R&D fund (which
started operating as
the BIRD Foundation
in 1976)
Report of the
Katchalski
Committee on
government
Updated Industrial R&D
law passed, consolidating
the legal framework for
the OCS
First successful
Israeli IPO (Elscint)
on the NASDAQ
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
OCS
EVENTS
1972 1984 20152005
1974 1979 1991 1992 1993 20111968 1996

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES ISRAEL: OCS
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
Although the OCS is formally accountable to the Ministry of the Economy, it
operates as a highly autonomous agency.135 The OCS’ funding model has also
played a role in this. While it receives a large proportion of its budget via the
Ministry of Economy, the organisation also generates its own revenue through
royalties paid back from the successful projects that it supports. This money is
then reinvested in the organisation’s programmes. The proportion of revenue
from royalties has increased over time - from 7 per cent of the OCS budget in
1988 to more than 30 per cent by the late 1990s. Within government, the Office
of the Chief Scientist has a monopoly on setting strategy and delivering funding
for applied business innovation. Wider governmental priorities are often taken
into account by the OCS. For example, in 2013-14 the government set out a new
target for Israel to reduce its dependency on oil, which subsequently fed into
some of the OCS’s grant funding streams. However, the government’s innovation
‘strategy’ is very general, and the OCS does not receive much of a top-down
steer. Its actions have therefore had a considerable impact on the development
of the Israeli economy, especially during the 1980s and 90s.
136
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
Although it is very autonomous the OCS works in partnership with departments
across government to deliver a number of specific thematic programmes. For
example, the OCS is working with the Ministry of Science and Technology on a
programme to develop new space technologies, and with the Ministry of Defense
on programmes designed to develop new products and services with civilian and
military applications.
137
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
The OCS has grown slowly but steadily over time, from a single position based
within the Ministry of Economy to an institutionalised body of around 100
people managing a large number of programmes. The Research Committee,
chaired by the Chief Scientist, makes decisions about which projects will receive
support. While the committee is staffed by government officials and public
representatives, a large number of external experts are brought in to review
the applications. Following a lengthy review of its operations and programmes
by an internal strategy team, the OCS is about to undertake a major reform
process that will redefine the goals and structure of the organisation. The Office
of the Chief Scientist is due to be replaced in 2016 by a National Authority for
Technological Innovation, consisting of a set of innovation centres with different
remits and target audiences.
138
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
The background of OCS staff varies depending on level of seniority and their
specific role within the organisation. Most of the team working on processing
project applications and administering grants have a civil service background.
However, senior members of staff usually have experience of working in industry.
For example, the current Chief Scientist, Avi Hasson, previously worked for one
of Israel’s largest venture capital funds, and for a number of telecommunications
companies. The OCS also leverages the expertise of a group of external
‘examiners’ who assess funding applications received by the agency. These
individuals are experts in different fields relevant to the work of the OCS, and
tend to have experience of working in academia, industry, or both.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
65
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES ISRAEL: OCS
METHODS
APPROACH
The OCS primarily takes a bottom-up approach to funding. Unlike many other innovation
agencies, it is almost entirely driven by the priorities and needs of private companies, and the
government has not historically been involved in setting thematic priorities for its funding
calls. However, the OCS now runs a number of more specific funding calls for particular
industries or linked to thematic challenges.
BENEFICIARIES
Private companies have consistently been the main beneficiaries of OCS programmes. The
organisation gives grants to both large and small companies, but a larger proportion of its
spending is on SMEs and startups. Financial support primarily takes the form of conditionally
repayable grants: the agency provides up to 50 or 60 per cent of the project’s costs
(depending on the size of the company), with a royalty fee to be paid back only if the project
achieves a certain level of success, although this varies between programmes.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
R&D Fund: provides partial grant financing for innovative medium-term
projects.
139
Traditional Industries and KIDMA programmes: support innovation projects
in specific industrial sectors, ranging from textiles and plastics to cyber
security solutions.
TNUFA: assists inventors and nascent startups on topics like filing for
a patent, building a prototype, drafting a business plan and business
development.
Young Entrepreneurs scheme: training and incubation services for young
entrepreneurs.
Technological Incubator Program:
140 underwrites lending made by
incubators to transform innovative technological ideas in their early, high-
risk stages into viable high-potential startups.
Yozma Program: offers attractive tax incentives to inwards foreign VC
investments.
MAGNET Program: encourages industry and business-university
collaborations by promoting technology transfer from academia to industry.
Telem Forum: voluntary partnership between the OCS and other
government bodies, aiming to establish a national infrastructure for R&D in
common interest areas.
Basic and Applied Nanotechnology Research Centres: building capabilities
in the design and fabrication of nanodevices and strengthening the
industry.
FinancialNon-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
66
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES ISRAEL: OCS
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
Until recently, statistics and data on the OCS’s programmes (and the organisation as a whole)
were fairly patchy. External consultants conducted some specific programme evaluations,
but monitoring and evaluation was not done in a systematic way. However, in 2011 an internal
Strategy and Economic Research Unit was established to improve data on organisational
impact. This small team uses various quantitative and qualitative techniques to assess
programmes, including surveys, discontinuity analysis, regressions and client consultations.
Although some of the longer standing OCS programmes have been running for many
years (including the R&D Fund, Yozma and the Technological Incubator Program), it can
still be difficult to assess their long-term impact because the goals and activities of these
programmes often change over time.
141
In 2008, the government commissioned an external evaluation designed to quantify the
impact of government support to industrial R&D on the Israeli economy.
142 The main findings
of this study were that:
 ★ Government support for industrial R&D (the responsibility of the OCS) has increased the
rate of private investment to 1.28 million, meaning that for every NIS 1 million invested
by the government, industry has invested an additional NIS 1.28 million that it would not
have otherwise.
 ★ Positive R&D spillover effects have been generated particularly for medium-sized and
very large firms.
Other studies have suggested that government-funded R&D in Israel appears to be
significantly more productive than privately-financed R&D, and that R&D subsidies granted by
the OCS have succeeded in stimulating long-run, company-financed R&D expenditures.
143
INFLUENCE IN ISRAEL’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
The OCS has played a critical role in increasing the scale of industrial R&D in Israel. Through
its investments and its ethos of supporting any kind of innovative activity, the OCS sent a
clear signal to businesses that government would be supportive of R&D outside of the realm
of basic research.
144 This, in turn, encouraged higher levels of private investment in industrial
innovation, and higher levels of R&D activity within businesses. Between 1969 (just after the
organisation’s establishment) and 1987, industrial R&D expenditure grew at an annual rate of
14 per cent, while high-tech exports increased from US$422 million to $3,316 million (in 1987
dollars).
145
The 1990s are regarded as a particular high point in the OCS’ influence, following the 1985 law
that clarified their legal role and responsibilities. During this period, the cumulative impact of
their ongoing grant funding and efforts to build an indigenous VC sector in Israel encouraged
the rapid development of the high-tech sector, turning the country into a key player in global
IT technology and producing a disproportionately high number of Israeli IT companies listed
on the NASDAQ.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the OCS filled a genuine gap in the provision of finance for
industrial R&D. The need for their input has lessened as the Israeli VC industry has matured
(although foreign investors provide a much larger share of investment in Israeli startups and
established companies) and the OCS has seen a declining number of total and first time
applications for funding since the mid-1990s. Its challenge going forward will be to develop a
new strategy allowing it to catch up with current needs of the Israeli economy. This has been
the focus of the recent strategic review and forthcoming organisational restructuring.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
67
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWEDEN: VINNOVA
 Sweden
VINNOVA
SUMMARY
VINNOVA is Sweden’s national innovation agency. It works to promote sustainable growth
by improving the conditions for innovation and funding needs-driven research. VINNOVA
works on facilitating collaboration between the private sector, the public sector and
academia, encouraging greater use and transferability of research, building a strong research
and innovation environment through long-term investments and increasing international
cooperation in innovation.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Stockholm 2001 €355 million 205
 (2015)
GOVERNANCE
Government agency working under the Ministry of Enterprise,
Energy and Communications.
AIMS
To develop Sweden’s innovation capacity for sustainable growth
and to benefit society.

WHAT MAKES VINNOVA STAND OUT?
 ★ Challenge-driven approach. VINNOVA has led on developing the concept of ‘challenge-
driven innovation’: an approach which funds technology projects that develop cross-
sectoral responses to major societal challenges (such as in the areas of healthcare,
education or climate change).
 ★ Driven by industry priorities. VINNOVA’s strategy is largely demand-driven. When developing
new programmes, funding streams, or instruments, VINNOVA takes into account the
roadmaps and innovation agendas collaboratively developed by relevant players in each
industry, including research institutes, public and private sector actors and civil society.
 ★ Cross-disciplinary ambitions. VINNOVA’s work is highly collaborative. Although the
organisation is structured under a set of distinct strategic themes, around 80 per cent of
its funding aims to be cross-sectoral and cross-disciplinary.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$570.6 billion (2014)146
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.93 per cent of GDP
(2013)147
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
2.28 per cent of GDP
(2013)148
STOCKHOLM

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
68
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWEDEN: VINNOVA
MISSION AND HISTORY
VINNOVA was established in 2001 following a merger of three pre-existing agencies: the
technology division of the Swedish Agency for Industrial and Technical Development
(NUTEK), the Swedish Agency for Transport Research and part of the Agency for Work
Organisation. It built particularly on the activities of NUTEK, but also took inspiration from
Finland’s Tekes in its design and in the types of programmes it set up. The primary purpose of
this new organisation was to promote sustainable economic growth by financing needs-driven
R&D and developing new innovation systems.
In the early years, VINNOVA focused on strengthening innovation cooperation between
government, businesses and academia. This mission has not changed drastically over time,
but VINNOVA has become more focused on increasing the public’s capabilities to innovate,
as well as putting users and customers at the centre of their work. There has also been a shift
from individual industry sector-focused programmes, to cross-sector and actor initiatives
linked to big challenges facing Sweden.
VINNOVA created
under the leadership
of Per Eriksson
VINNVÄXT
regional growth
programme
launched
Four VINN
Excellence
Centres
established
Innovation Bridge
programme
launched
Charlotte
Brogren
appointed
Director
Challenge
Driven
Innovation
programme
launched
National
Incubation
programme
launched
Research
and Grow
programme
launched
Organisational
structure
reformed to
reflect 11 new
strategic
activity areas
Strategic
Innovation
Area
programme
launched
Creation of the
Swedish Agency
for Industrial and
Technical
Development
(NUTEK)
Swedish presidency of
the EU (Lund Declaration
published)
Swedish
Presidency of
EUREKA network
Swedish Innovation
Strategy published
Joint launch of
28 Competence
Centres by
NUTEK and the
Swedish Energy
Agency
Innovative
Sweden –
A Strategy for
Growth through
Renewal
published
Competence
Platforms
established by
Regional
Development
Agencies
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
VINNOVA
EVENTS
2001 2003 2005
1991 1995 2002 2004
20112006 2009 2010 2012 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
69
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWEDEN: VINNOVA
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
VINNOVA has an arm’s length relationship with its sponsoring Ministry of
Enterprise, Energy and Communications. The organisation operates on a four-
year budget (set out in the government’s multi-annual Research and Innovation
Bill, which VINNOVA feeds advice into) and designs its own programmes and
targets, which are then presented to government. The government earmarks
a certain amount of money for issues that it thinks the agency should work on
(around 20 per cent of its budget currently), but these are “brushstrokes rather
than detailed instructions.”
149 It can, however, influence the focus of VINNOVA’s
attention at times, in response to specific events or challenges. For example, in
2008-2009, when the Swedish automotive industry was in crisis, VINNOVA was
directed to use its programmes to encourage more R&D in this industry.
150
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
VINNOVA funds universities and other research institutes to improve their
capacity to create new knowledge and networks that will be useful for industry
and society. It also works closely with businesses and has a strategy that is “very
driven by industry priorities.”
151 Each industry brings together relevant players
(including large and small companies, academic research institutes, the public
sector and civil society) to develop a roadmap and a set of priorities. VINNOVA
then makes decisions about which among these competing innovation agendas
to support through its programmes, and the instruments that will be most
appropriate to deliver them.
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
VINNOVA’s organisational structure has been linked closely to the broad
thematic priority areas it works in: currently health and healthcare,
transportation, environment, services, ICT and manufacturing, and innovation
management. Although it has separate divisions for each of these areas, the
aim is for 80 per cent of its funding to be cross-sectoral and cross-disciplinary.
VINNOVA does some in-house analytical work to help set its strategy, although
primary responsibility for foresight and research sits with other Swedish policy
institutions. This has created some challenges linking up external research on the
state of the art and VINNOVA’s programmes.
152 VINNOVA does not have any local
offices, but it does have an overseas presence in Brussels and Silicon Valley, and
it is the primary agency responsible for helping Swedish businesses and others
seeking European funding for R&D and bilateral research agreements in non-EU
countries (particularly Brazil, China and India).
153
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
When VINNOVA was set up, there was a strong focus on recruiting individuals
with an academic or research background (including a substantial number of
PhDs). The majority of VINNOVA’s employees still come from academia or the
public sector, but there has been an increased push in recent years to hire people
with experience of working in industry: these now make up around 30 per cent of
the agency’s workforce. This includes the organisation’s current CEO, Charlotte
Brogren, who worked for ABB (a prominent electrical company) for 15 years
before joining VINNOVA. This mirrors recent strategic shifts with the agency,
and particularly its efforts to be more cross-sectoral and cross-disciplinary in its
approach.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
70
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWEDEN: VINNOVA
METHODS
APPROACH
Each year, VINNOVA invests in than 2,400 research and innovation projects, primarily in the
form of grant funding (for which match funding must be raised). These grants are currently
channelled through around 50 different programmes, although there are plans to decrease
this number further to focus on a smaller number of larger and longer-term initiatives.
154
BENEFICIARIES
VINNOVA currently allocates the largest share of its support to academic institutions. In 2013,
44 per cent of VINNOVA’s funds were spent on universities, 28 per cent on private companies,
and 15 per cent on research institutes.
155 Within its support for companies, there has been a
shift in the past five years towards supporting smaller businesses, in recognition of the fact
that it may be more impactful than granting money to large companies already investing in
R&D. Nearly 60 per cent of VINNOVA’s funding for companies now goes to SMEs.
156
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
Challenge-driven innovation: 10 per cent of VINNOVA’s budget is spent on
technology projects that develop cross-sectoral responses to major societal
challenges.
Innovation Checks: vouchers (of up to around €10,500) to support SMEs
that need access to new knowledge or technologies to test out innovative
ideas (this scheme is subcontracted by VINNOVA).
EU Framework programme hub: provides information and support to
Swedish actors seeking finance or partnerships from EU schemes.
Access to coaching and mentoring is provided through some VINNOVA
programmes, but is not a standalone sevice offered by the agency.
National Incubator Programme: network of incubators for high-potential,
high-technology and research-based startups.
Mobility for Growth: mobility scheme for experienced (PhD level)
researchers, implemented by VINNOVA in partnership with universities and
businesses worldwide.
VINNVÄXT: funding for regions to develop competitive clusters (with up
to around €1 million available per year for a period of ten years for winning
regions).
VINN Excellence Centres: institutions to promote collaboration between the
private and public sectors, universities, and research institutes.
FinancialNon-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
71
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWEDEN: VINNOVA
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
VINNOVA is a leader in terms of its approach to monitoring and evaluation. It commissions
external consultancy firms to conduct interim and final evaluations of its programmes,157 and
runs follow up studies on its investments (working on the assumption that economic and
systemic impact is best measured about five to seven years after completion of a specific
project). It has also started making a greater effort to understand the value of its support
to the recipients of funding, and now conducts regular customer enquiry surveys which are
used internally as monitoring tools (although not published externally). VINNOVA uses these
evaluations to make decisions about which programmes should be dropped. For example, it
has stopped funding a small number of its VINN Excellence Centres that were judged to be
underperforming.
Since its establishment, VINNOVA has supported more than 2,400 projects across a wide
range of industries, investing just under €300 million a year in a range of strategic initiatives.
There are signs that these investments are having a positive impact. For example, VINNOVA
recieved 60 per cent more applications to its programmes in 2014 than 2012,
158 suggesting an
increased interest in Swedish businesses and researchers in doing innovative projects.
INFLUENCE IN SWEDEN’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
There are many different actors in the Swedish innovation support system, and VINNOVA
often works in partnership with other organisations to co-deliver specific programmes. As
such, it can be difficult to draw out its specific influence on Sweden’s innovation performance,
particularly since it does not have a formal set of organisational metrics or performance
indicators. Nevertheless, the agency is widely regarded as an example of good practice with
respect to the implementation and evaluation of innovation programmes. A 2012 OECD review
highlighted its broad and ambitious agenda and its ability to be self-reflective and adaptive
as two of its key strengths, although it also noted that its relatively small budget limited its
ability to achieve some of its more ambitious strategic objectives.
159
Through an aggregation of its programme results, VINNOVA judges that it has had a
significant impact on the Swedish innovation system through the role that it (and its
predecessor organisations) has played in supporting the development of new competence
fields, including in the microelectronics, transport and biotechnology sectors.
160 VINNOVA
has also had international influence, developing the concept of challenge-driven innovation.
During the Swedish presidency of the Council of the European Union in 2009, the Lund
Declaration was approved, calling for European research and funding to focus on the ‘grand
challenges’ facing the global community.
161 Since 2011, VINNOVA has increasingly directed its
programmes towards cross-sectoral activities designed to address big societal challenges
(such as healthcare and sustainability), which has inspired the strategies of other innovation
agencies, including Innovate UK and Tekes.

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
72
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWITZERLAND: CTI
 Switzerland
CTI
SUMMARY
The Commission for Technology and Innovation (CTI) is Switzerland’s national innovation promotion
agency, with a mandate to support applied research and development projects and encourage
entrepreneurship and the growth of new Swiss businesses. It invests resources in research-led
innovation projects, and provides a range of consultancy services to startups and small businesses.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Bern 1943 US$165 million 35
 (2014)
GOVERNANCE
Independent federal commission affiliated with the Federal
Department of Economic Affairs, Education and Research
(EAER).
AIMS
To help companies and individuals translate scientific research
into successful business ideas for a strong Swiss economy.

WHAT MAKES THE CTI STAND OUT?
 ★ A lean structure. The CTI is a very small organisation in comparison to some of its
international counterparts. Its core secretariat comprises 35 members of staff with
generalist backgrounds, charged with programme management and delivery. Programme
funding decisions are currently taken by an external panel of commissioned experts,
appointed by the Federal Council.
 ★ No direct financial support to businesses. The CTI does not provide direct financial
support to businesses working without research partners, because of a political view
that private businesses should be funded privately. Most of the direct support it provides
therefore takes the form of coaching and mentoring services.
 ★ A focus on high-potential startups. As part of its coaching programme, the CTI runs an
accreditation scheme called the Start-up Label. It gives entrepreneurs that have been coached
by the CTI the opportunity to apply for a certificate of excellence, helping them to gain
recognition for the quality of their work and to make connections with potential investors.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$685.4 billion (2013)162
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.75 per cent of GDP
(2012)163
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
2.05 per cent of GDP
(2012)164
BERN

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
73
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWITZERLAND: CTI
MISSION AND HISTORY
The Commission to Promote Scientific Research was established by the Swiss Federal
Council in the early 1940s to help prevent the emergence of a post-war recession through the
stimulation of science and technology-driven employment. Until 2006, this body (which was
renamed the Commission for Technology and Innovation in 1996) was an extra-parliamentary
advisory commission without any decision-making powers. However, following a revision
of the Federal Constitution which specified that the Swiss Confederation would promote
innovation in addition to scientific research, the CTI was made an Executive Commission. It
became part of the decentralised Federal Administration at this point, and was given greater
autonomy to make decisions in its areas of activity, although it has remained highly directed
by government priorities.
The CTI’s mission today is to provide financing, professional advice and network-building
services to support innovation projects that would not otherwise be possible due to market
failures or lack of private funding. The focus is on research that has the potential to produce
concrete and marketable products. In order to deliver more effectively on this mission,
the organisation has successfully lobbied for a change in status to become an institution
governed by public law. When this change takes place (currently set for 2016-2017), the CTI’s
status will more closely resemble that of the Swiss National Science Foundation (Switzerland’s
scientific research council), with the aim of increasing the impact of funding going towards
commercialisation activities.
KTT technology
transfer
consortiums
launched
CTI starts operating
as an independent
federal commission
with its own
secretariat
Launch of
CTI Market
Entry Camp
in London
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
CTI
EVENTS
Establishment of the
Commission to
Promote Scientific
Research
Rebranding of the
organisation as the
Commission for
Technology and
Innovation
Establishment
of the Swiss
National
Science
Foundation
Foundation of the
Science Park (PSE)
and Innovation
Square
National Centres
of Competence
on Research
launched by the
SNSF
Switzerland
ranked first in
Global Innovation
Index
Research and
Innovation
Promotion Act
(RIPA)
Federal innovation
promotion was established
in the Federal Act on the
Preparation of Crisis
Management and Job
Creation
Swissnex network of
‘science diplomacy’
offices launched
(current active offices
are located in the US,
India, China and Brazil)
Launch of
CTI Invest as
a private
non-profit
association
CTI Startup
programme
launched
CTI’s status
changed from
an advisory
committee to
an executive
commission
with decision-
making powers
Innovation
Mentor scheme
launched Federal Act on
the Swiss
Innovation
Promotion
Agency
(Innosuisse Act)
referred to
Parliament
Eight National
Thematic
Networks
(NTNs)
launched
1952 1954 1991 2000 2001 2003 2011 20141943 1996 2006 2008 2013 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
74
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWITZERLAND: CTI
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
At present, the CTI sits underneath the Federal Department of Economic Affairs,
Education and Research (EAER), charged with implementing the ‘industry-
focused’ side of its science and technology strategy. Its structure and status as
an Executive Commission has made it more of a delivery organisation than a
policy development and strategy-setting body. The CTI receives its financing
via ‘block credits’ which are granted by the Federal Parliament for a period
of four years. This multi-year budget is drawn up by the State Secretariat of
Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) following consultation with all
relevant parties (including the CTI), and then submitted to the Parliament to
be revised (if necessary) and then passed. Broader economic conditions may
affect this budget once it has been set though, in line with the Swiss practice of
immediately cutting public budgets by a certain percentage if the economy is
not performing as well as predicted.
165
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
Although the CTI’s overall strategy is largely directed by government priorities,
its key institutional relationships are with the external Commission of experts that
make decisions on project funding, and with the startups and small businesses it
supports through its coaching schemes. It also cooperates closely with the Swiss
science funding agency (SNSF), which provides different but complementary
services. For example, the SNSF establishes National Research Programmes
to fund discovery-oriented research in a variety of thematic areas; these often
have a strong industrial or applied focus, and projects and funding streams are
transferred to the CTI if there is clear evidence of commercial potential.
166
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
The CTI is smaller and more decentralised than many other national innovation
agencies. Its Management Board consists of a President and six Vice-Presidents,
each with responsibility for a different area of CTI funding. Alongside the Board
is a Commission of external experts appointed by the Federal Council (of which
there are currently 70), which makes decisions on the funding applications
submitted to the CTI. A small secretariat (of around 35 members of staff) manages
the administrative and delivery aspects of the main funding programmes run by
the Commission. Organisational capacity is very much focused on the coaching
and entrepreneurship programmes. This accounts for around 80 per cent of the
Secretariat’s work, even though the Start Up and Entrepreneurship programme
only represents 7 per cent of the CTI’s overall budget.
167 The CTI Secretariat also
manages a network of regional coaches and trainers.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
The CTI’s Board and members of the Commission are experts in the thematic
domains that the CTI covers, drawn primarily from academia and industry. The
Commission has been described by the CTI as a ‘militia-style organisation’, in the
sense that they provide their services and expertise to the CTI on a part-time
basis, but do not represent particular pressure groups. This is seen as giving
them considerable freedom to make independent decisions.
168 Secretariat staff
tend to be generalists and programme managers rather than policy or technical
experts, while CTI coaches are required to have a strong track record in business
and management and an extensive network of business contacts in Switzerland
and abroad.
169

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
75
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWITZERLAND: CTI
METHODS
APPROACH
Around 90 per cent of the CTI’s budget is spent on research-led partnerships with SMEs
that aim to develop science-based innovations within seven thematic domains: life sciences,
medical technology, knowledge and technology transfer, engineering, enabling science,
energy research, startups and entrepreneurship. These domains are broad and determined
largely from the bottom-up. The CTI targets its support towards applicants operating
primarily in Switzerland, focusing on science-based innovations and with projects likely to
generate innovations with multidisciplinary applications.
BENEFICIARIES
Historically, the CTI has not provided direct support to businesses working without a
research partner. As of 2016, the CTI’s only mechanisms for directly funding businesses are its
mentoring and entrepreneurship coaching schemes, and the networking platforms it supports
to help bring together innovative startups and investors.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
R&D Funding programme: grants to academic or other research institutions
working with companies on applied R&D projects across a range of
domains (the CTI typically provides grants of between CHF 1-2 million and
match funding must be found).
Innovation Cheques: financial support for Swiss SMEs partnering with Swiss
research institutes to develop new ideas.
CTI Entrepreneurship scheme: courses for young entrepreneurs to help
them develop ideas and take the first steps towards setting up a company.
Startup Coaching programme: individually-tailored support packages for
high-growth potential businesses.
Innovation Mentor Scheme: brokers connections between Swiss companies,
research organisations and experienced entrepreneurs.
Business Angel Platforms: funding for business or trade associations willing
to increase the number of business angels in Switzerland.
CTI Invest: CTI part-funds this non-profit public-private network of
investors helping innovative Swiss startups to find early-stage financing
from business angels and others.
Knowledge and Technology Transfer (KTT) Support: builds networks
between entrepreneurs and investors in Switzerland, providing partial
funding for specific networking events and mapping innovation activities
and funding opportunities.
Swiss Competence Centres for Energy Research (SCCERs): CTI funds
and co-manages (with the SNSF) academic research networks producing
technology and innovation roadmaps and conducting applied research
to develop solutions to a range of different energy-related social and
technological challenges.
FinancialNon-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
76
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES SWITZERLAND: CTI
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
The CTI does not have a regular process to evaluate the performance of the organisation as a
whole, although it underwent a significant external review in 2002, and has been developing
new impact assessment measures since 2011. However, data from its annual activity reports do
suggest that the CTI’s current programmes are having a positive impact on levels of business
R&D and the performance of Swiss startups:
 ★ Federal funding for the main CTI R&D funding programme has increased over the past
half-decade from just over CHF 100 million in 2010, to nearly CHF 120 million in 2014.
170
Application success rates have also increased.
 ★ The number of businesses admitted into the CTI’s coaching programme has increased
over the past few years (from 179 in 2013 to 218 in 2014) and there has been a small
increase in the proportion of start-ups granted the CTI Label (from 40 to 42 per cent
over the same time period).
 ★ In 2013, 77 per cent of the top 100 (and all of the top ten) companies in the Swiss Top
100 Startup Awards
171 were CTI-coached startups.
The CTI also tracks the performance of startups through a database it funds (known as
the Start Up Monitor).
172 Through representative panel surveys, this database collates self-
reported information about Swiss startups and the ecosystem they operate in, including data
on: the background and leadership capabilities of startup founders; legal forms, shares, and
investments; financial development and employment; the effects of startup labels; startup
hotspots in Switzerland (cities, cantons, sectors); and the success factors of promotion
activities and single agencies. The Start-up Monitor is still relatively new – it was created as
an online platform in 2012 until being transformed into an independent foundation in mid-
2015. Over time it aims to provide comprehensive data on the financing, performance and
development of entrepreneurs and their startups in Switzerland.
INFLUENCE IN SWITZERLAND’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
In 2002, the CTI was evaluated (both internally and by peer review) to assess whether it
was fulfilling its mandate and objectives.
173 The main conclusions of this exercise were that
the CTI was helping Swiss businesses to improve their capacity to innovate, and that it was
generally providing a well-coordinated package of business support initiatives. Areas for
improvement were identified as being around developing more productive links with the SNSF
– Switzerland’s basic research promotion agency – and increasing the professionalisation of
the CTI organisation as a whole. These are both issues that have been prioritised over the last
decade. The CTI has established more ‘bridge’ projects with the SNSF during this time. It has
also doubled the size of its Secretariat, and increased the capacity for supporting businesses
through its various coaching and entrepreneurship schemes.
Switzerland consistently tops global innovation rankings. This is largely due to the country’s
strong focus on knowledge-intensive industries and scientific R&D; for example, in the
2015 Global Innovation Index it ranked first in PCT resident patent applications (per billion
PPP$ GDP).
174 Despite this stellar performance in terms of knowledge creation, the federal
government prides itself on its ‘lean’ model of innovation support and sometimes claims to
have no top-down innovation policy. This can complicate efforts to distinguish the specific
role that organisations like the CTI are having in stimulating the development of science-
based innovations. However, planned organisational changes and the shift to becoming a
public institution will give the CTI more control over its budget and strategy, and therefore
more pressure to demonstrate the results of its activities and overall economic impact.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
77
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES TAIWAN: ITRI
 TAIWAN
ITRI
SUMMARY
The Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI) is a non-profit R&D organisation that
engages in applied technology research and technical services to develop Taiwan’s high-tech
industries. It also provides more than 15,000 ‘industry services’ per year (including consultancy
work, training, technology transfer activities, R&D collaboration and support for incubators).
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Hsinchu 1973 US$343 million 5,650
 (2015)
GOVERNANCE
Non-profit R&D organisation, partly funded and administered by
the Department of Industrial Technology (DOIT) of the Ministry
of Economic Affairs (MOEA).

AIMS
To drive economic growth and help industries stay competitive
and sustainable through ‘researching and developing industrial
technology’, the results of which are then transferred to
domestic industries.

WHAT MAKES ITRI STAND OUT?
 ★ Deep ecosystem integration. ITRI has had a significant influence on the country’s
economic development, leading research and investment in strategic industries. ITRI
is also deeply intertwined with the Taiwanese business community, with many of the
country’s SMEs having originated from ITRI projects.
 ★ Internal R&D capabilities. ITRI differs from other national innovation agencies in its remit
and capacity to directly conduct applied technology R&D activities, and to create or
incubate firms that are later spun-out to operate independently.
 ★ Public and private funding model. While ITRI’s budget allocation from government
is directly linked to its annual performance, the organisation is also able to generate
revenue from the services it provides to the private sector. This enables it to balance a
results-driven agenda with the capacity to engage in riskier R&D projects.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$529.6 billion
(2014 est.)175
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.4 per cent of GDP
(2013)176
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
2.26 per cent of GDP
(2013)177
HSINCHU

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
78
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES TAIWAN: ITRI
MISSION AND HISTORY
ITRI was established in 1973 as part of a government strategy to rapidly move Taiwan’s
economy from a reliance on labour-intensive production of consumer goods to a focus on
technology-driven high-value industries.
178 The global oil crisis in the early 1970s acted as an
additional impetus to facilitate Taiwan’s economic upgrading. ITRI was therefore created from
a merger of three existing organisations – the Union Industrial Research Laboratories, Mining
Research & Service Organization, and Metal Industrial Research Institute – and charged with
helping to drive this economic transformation.
ITRI’s strategic evolution since then can broadly be divided into three phases. From the early
1970s until the mid-1990s, the focus was on technological development and production, aided
by partnerships inside and outside Taiwan (particularly with the American RCA Corporation,
which trained numerous ITRI employees and provided direct technological expertise with
respect to integrated circuit technology). During this period, ITRI developed and spun out
a number of companies which became the leaders in Taiwan’s semiconductor industry. A
second phase started around 1995, involving training and technology transfer to domestic
companies engaging in R&D, and the building of partnerships with international firms. Since
the early 2000s, as Taiwan’s electronics and associated industries have matured, ITRI’s role
has shifted more towards the commercialisation of business R&D, alongside continued applied
research activities.
ITRI
established
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
ITRI
EVENTS
Guidelines for
the Long-Range
Development of
Science
published
1959 1970 1977 1993 1999 2002 20071979 1980 19961973 1975 1987 2000 2005 2009 2014
Partnership
formed with
RCA
Corporation in
the United
States
Foundation of
the Electronics
Research and
Service
Organization
(ERSO)
Establishment
of the
Industrial
Technology
Investment
Corporation
(ITIC)
Spin off of UMC
(Taiwan’s first
mainstream
semiconductor
company)
First overseas
office opened
in Tokyo
(offices have
subsequently
been set up in
Moscow,
Berlin, San
Jose, and
Eindhoven)
Open Lab and
Incubation
Center
launched
Industrial
Economics and
Knowledge
Center launched
(ITRI’s internal
think tank)
ITRI
Southern
Campus
opened
Commercialization
and Industry
Service Centre
(CIS) launched
ITRI Central
Region
Campus
opened
Industrial
Development
Bureau
established
First IC
Demonstration
Foundry
established in
Taiwan
Science-based
Industrial Park
established in
Hsinchu
First direct
Presidential
election in
Taiwan
Central Taiwan
Science Park
set up
Science and
Technology
White Paper
Fundamental
Science and
Technology
Act (setting
out legal
framework for
government
promotion of
science and
technology)
Science and
Technology Advisors
Office restructured
and renamed the
Department of
Industrial Technology
(DoIT), responsible
for administering
Technology
Development
Programs (TDPs)

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
79
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES TAIWAN: ITRI
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
ITRI is the largest of a number of science and technology research institutes
that receive funding from the Taiwanese government. Half of its budget comes
from the Ministry of Economic Affairs. The other half comes from the industrial
services it offers to businesses. The government directly influences part of ITRI’s
research agenda. Government officials sit on the organisation’s board, and more
than 60 per cent of the funding it provides to ITRI is earmarked for specific
programmes (although the targets that are set are jointly negotiated by ITRI
and the government). However, ITRI is free to direct the rest of its budget to
projects and programmes developed internally, giving it the flexibility to do more
responsive work that is less tied to long-term government priorities.
179
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
ITRI has a particularly extensive and direct relationship with the private sector
in Taiwan, resulting from its historical and current activities. Many companies in
Taiwan’s industrial parks are spin offs from ITRI, and around half of manufacturers
have some kind of collaborative relationship with ITRI, either to conduct joint
projects, or linked to technology transfer and services.
180 Since its establishment,
ITRI has incubated or supported more than 260 companies, and been
instrumental in the professional development of more than 140 CEOs of local
high-tech businesses.
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
ITRI operates as a set of networked centres. Most of its staff are located in the
headquarters campus, which is home to the Core Labs and research centres
that develop new technologies, the ITRI College, ITRI’s in-house think tank and
the technology transfer office. ITRI has two other large campuses in different
parts of the country, which aim to be both physically and intellectually close
to local businesses. ITRI has built up a significant portfolio of international
activities, encouraging inwards investment and R&D collaboration within Taiwan,
and promoting Taiwanese technologies and companies abroad. There are five
small ITRI offices in strategic areas: (Silicon Valley, Berlin, Eindhoven, Moscow,
and Tokyo), developing long-term, two-way relationships between Taiwanese
startups, researchers and international partners.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
Given its mandate to conduct applied research and development, ITRI’s
permanent members of staff are primarily recruited for their technical
expertise. Most have an engineering background, and nearly a quarter hold PhD
qualifications. This has increasingly applied to the top levels of management as
well. While the first few presidents of ITRI came from a government or academic
background, there has been a shift towards internal promotions to this role.
181 For
example, the current President, Jonq-Min Liu, joined ITRI in 1984 as an engineer
in the Materials Research Laboratories, and subsequently rose through the
organisational management structure.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
80
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES TAIWAN: ITRI
METHODS
APPROACH
ITRI is atypical compared to many other national innovation agencies in that it directly
conducts technology R&D and helps to create or incubate companies that are then spun out
to operate independently. Its primary focus is on creating new products, services or practical
technologies with industrial applications, within a core set of thematic areas. Testing, piloting
and prototyping work is conducted to help validate new technologies and minimise risks
involved in market transfer. The other services it provides are described below.
BENEFICIARIES
ITRI does not provide grants or loans to businesses to engage in research and development.
However, it does support technology transfer and business R&D in a number of other ways,
including through incubation support, industrial and consultancy services. It works with
companies of all sizes, but with a particular focus on startups.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
Commercialization and Industry Service Center: consultancy and
industrial services to companies to facilitate the commercialisation of new
technologies.
182
ITRI College: provides technology/management training and courses for
government, academics and research institutes.
183
Industrial Technology Investment Corporation (ITIC): ITRI’s venture capital
subsidiary, which provides long-term capital to Taiwanese firms in strategic
sectors.
184
Open Lab: supports new companies working on specific projects with ITRI
that would benefit from close cooperation or co-location.
185
Incubation Center: provides consultancy services (for up to three years) to
high-tech Taiwanese and international startups.
Open Innovation Platforms: physical labs hosted by ITRI that facilitate
university-business R&D collaboration.
TechVenture Club: matchmaking services to create networks between
companies, NGOs and VC funds.
186
Joint academic R&D centres: currently seven centres based at six
Taiwanese universities, focused on the development of future technologies.
Non-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
81
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES TAIWAN: ITRI
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
ITRI’s status as a government-funded research organisation means that it undergoes an
annual official external evaluation in which it is scored against a set of objectives, based
on the review of reported results and statistics, case studies and site visits. It is measured
against four main organisational performance indicators: its assigned tasks, the R&D results
it produces (including the number of new patents and high-value IP transferred to industry);
fiscal responsibility and revenue generation; and the industrial benefits of its activities (such
as the number of spin-offs it creates). If ITRI achieves all of its objectives, it receives 90 per
cent of its budget for the following year. The other 10 per cent is granted for ‘exceptional
performance’, loosely defined, but particularly including evidence of successful technology
transfer to industry, or help for companies to increase their international competitiveness in
some way. With little scope for increasing ITRI’s funding envelope, this financial model helps
to focus decisions about which programmes are underperforming and should be dropped.
ITRI’s focus on commercialisation leads it to measure its impact through quantitative outputs,
including number of patents issued, number of companies spun off, income generated
through industrial and research contract services or amount of induced investment through
incubation. There is strong evidence to indicate the direct impact it has had on Taiwan’s R&D
performance:
 ★ ITRI holds more than 23,100 patents, and has been involved in the creation of 260
startups and spinoffs.
 ★ In 2014 alone, ITRI launched 14 startups in the fields of healthcare, system service and
advanced materials and manufacturing.
 ★ Also in 2014, ITRI was responsible for 626 technology transfers to various businesses, and
provided more than 15,000 consultancy services to industry.
187
INFLUENCE IN TAIWAN’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
ITRI has played a direct and impactful role in Taiwan’s recent economic development. As a
result of its research activities, Taiwan has become a world leader in the development and
manufacture of semiconductors and associated hardware applications. The organisation is
deeply entwined with the Taiwanese business community, with many of Taiwan’s SMEs having
originated in, or worked with, ITRI projects. It has played an ‘environment-building’ role, creating
the conditions for industry to develop and engage in R&D.
188 ITRI has also benefitted from a
close and cooperative relationship with government, and it is generally regarded as being one
of the most, if not the most, influential government-funded research organisations. ITRI’s senior
management are extremely well-networked both within government and industry, which has
created a situation where the organisation has essentially become “too big to fail”.
189
ITRI’s reputation and the central position it occupies within Taiwan’s innovation system has
created challenges as well as opportunities. As global economic conditions have worsened
over the past decade, Taiwan’s government has become more risk-averse. They are keen to
see ITRI’s work result in very successful projects, and have linked the maintenance of their
annual budget to a very high rate of achievement. Yet this target-based approach may inhibit
ITRI from conducting or supporting more experimental projects with unpredictable outcomes.
ITRI has sought to address this problem by investing some of the revenue it generates from
the private sector into riskier initiatives.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
82
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED KINGDOM: INNOVATE UK
 UNITED KINGDOM
Innovate UK
SUMMARY
Innovate UK is the UK’s national innovation agency. Its purpose is to increase economic
growth by supporting business-led innovation. It does this through programmes that bring
together business, research and the public sector to accelerate the development of innovative
products and services to meet market needs, and tackle major social challenges.
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Swindon 2007 £615 million 300
 (2014/15)
GOVERNANCE
Executive non-departmental public body, sponsored and
funded by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills
(BIS).
AIMS
To accelerate economic growth by stimulating and supporting
business-led innovation.

WHAT MAKES INNOVATE UK STAND OUT?
 ★ Business-facing character. In its aim to be a trusted partner for business, Innovate UK has
deliberately recruited individuals with experience of working in industry or with technical
expertise in its priority funding areas. This flows from the top down, with both of Innovate
UK’s Chief Executives to date having been recruited from an industry background rather
than the civil service.
 ★ Efforts to drive innovation within government. Innovate UK has used its position to
encourage more innovation within government procurement processes. Since 2007, it
has helped more than 70 government bodies to run competitions to procure innovative
solutions to public sector challenges, resulting in 2,000 contracts with a value of more
than £270 million.
 ★ Ambitions to better connect the UK’s innovation system. Ensuring the translation of
scientific research into commercial success is the underlying goal of many of Innovate
UK’s flagship programmes, and there is quantitative evidence suggesting that these
schemes are both generating economic value and making connections between
researchers and industry that would not otherwise have existed.
COUNTRY PROFILE
GDP
US$2,988.9 billion
(2014)190
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.12 per cent of GDP
(2014)191
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
1.05 per cent of GDP
(2014)192
SWINDON

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
83
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED KINGDOM: INNOVATE UK
MISSION AND HISTORY
Innovate UK began as an advisory panel of leading industrialists and civil servants (initially
named the Technology Strategy Board), established in 2004 to make recommendations to
government on priorities for a three to ten year technology strategy for the UK’s long-term
economic development. It gained a reputation as an effective mechanism for transferring
knowledge on emerging technologies between UK industries and universities, and was
subsequently made an arm’s length executive agency in July 2007.
Since then it has grown in both size (from an organisation of 30 people to one of more than
300) and ambition. While it initially took on responsibility for a small number of existing
programmes that had been managed by other bodies, its portfolio subsequently expanded
to include small voucher schemes, major scaling-up programmes, multi-million pound
demonstrator projects, institution-building initiatives and a programme of European and
international activities. Its budget has also grown consistently. For the 2011-2015 period it was
allocated just over £1 billion (resulting in £2.5 billion worth of investment when combined with
funding from business, the UK’s Research Councils and other sources), with an additional £185
million allocated for 2015-2016 when Innovate UK took over responsibility for a number of
funding programmes that had previously been managed by regional development bodies.
Formation of
Technology
Strategy Board
(TSB) government
advisory panel
Comprehensive Spending Review
(new priorities set for Innovate UK
around management structures
and funding mechanisms)
Transformation of
the TSB into an
Executive
Non-Departmental
Public Body, under
the leadership of
Iain Gray
Launch of the
reformed Small
Business Research
Initiative (SBRI)
under TSB
management
‘Concept to
Commercialisation’
strategy
Launch of four
thematic Catalyst
programmes
(co-funded by the
Research Councils)
Ruth McKernan
appointed new
Chief Executive of
Innovate UK
Innovate UK
strategic ‘five
point plan’
Launch of the Smart
grant scheme
Launch of the Catapult Network
Creation of Innovate
UK Economics and
Evidence team
TSB assumes
management of
Collaborative R&D
grant scheme,
Knowledge Transfer
Partnerships and
Knowledge Transfer
Networks
‘Eight great
technologies’
speech
Department of
Business, Innovation
and Skills Triennial
Review of the TSB
General Election (Lib
Dem/Conservative
Coalition Government
elected)
Abolition of the
Regional
Development
Agencies
Nurse Review of
the UK Research
Councils
General Election
(Conservative
Government elected)
Lambert Review of
Business-University
Collaboration
Sainsbury Review
of Science and
Innovation
Rebranding
of the TSB as
Innovate UK
‘Connect and
Catalyse’
strategy
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
INNOVATE UK
EVENTS
2004
2007
20092008 2011
2012 2013
2014
2015 2016
2003
General Election
(Labour Government
re-elected)
2005 2010
New delivery
plan launched

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
84
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED KINGDOM: INNOVATE UK
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
As an executive non-departmental public body, Innovate UK’s primary source
of funds is grant-in-aid allocated by its sponsoring department (BIS), and it is
ultimately accountable to Ministers for the way in which it delivers its strategy
and spends its money. Innovate UK works closely with BIS at both the strategic
and the operational levels, including through Ministerial meetings with Innovate
UK’s CEO and Chair, regular meetings between BIS and Innovate UK senior
officials, and consultation processes on the development of Innovate UK
strategies and delivery plans. Innovate UK also works with other government
departments on a programme basis, particularly through the Small Business
Research Initiative public procurement scheme. With UKTI, it runs annual themed
overseas missions for selected UK businesses, and is involved in the management
of joint R&D collaborative projects with a number of priority partners, including
China, India and Brazil.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
Innovate UK is highly business-facing. Its internal sector groups (formed from
a recent restructuring of programme teams) make decisions about the broad
thematic areas that Innovate UK will run funding competitions in, but only
after extensive consultation with industry and other experts. Innovate UK also
collaborates closely with the UK Research Councils, co-funding specific projects
that aim to move scientific research into a commercialisation stage. In future, this
relationship will be strengthened by an organisational integration of Innovate UK
with these bodies.
193
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
Around three-quarters of Innovate UK’s internal capacity is currently focused on
strategy and programme delivery work, with the rest dedicated to operational
functions, evaluation and business development. It does not currently have
regional offices, although there are plans to establish a presence in Scotland
and potentially other parts of the UK.
194 Innovate UK increasingly operates
internationally as well as nationally. It opened a small office in Brussels in 2014,
and it works with European and international partners through initiatives like
Horizon 2020 and the TAFTIE innovation agency network.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
Innovate UK has deliberately recruited individuals with experience of working
in business or who have specific technological expertise, rather than policy
generalists seconded from the civil service. This cascades from the top down,
with both of Innovate UK’s Chief Executives to date having had long careers in
business and industry. Innovate UK also has a small non-executive Board, made
up of representatives of industry, academia and the civil service. Board Members
are recruited openly, and their main function is to hold the Chief Executive
accountable for decisions made about strategy, spending and personnel. While
they have limited day-to-day involvement in the way the organisation’s budget is
spent, they are involved in decisions made about the annual portfolio.
195

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
85
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED KINGDOM: INNOVATE UK
METHODS
APPROACH
To date, Innovate UK’s support for business has primarily taken the form of non-repayable
grant schemes that companies and other organisations bid into. Until recently, around two
thirds of this spending was more open and responsive to need, with the rest being directed
towards thematic challenge-driven areas. Following an organisational restructuring in 2016,
Innovate UK has created four ‘sector groups’ that will channel funding to business innovation
in key areas: emerging and enabling technologies; health and life sciences; infrastructure
systems; and manufacturing and materials. Just over 85 per cent of its funding in 2016/17 will
be spent on funding competitions in these areas. The rest will be spent on ‘open’ competitions
that will offer funding for innovation in any sector.
196
BENEFICIARIES
Innovate UK funding is primarily spent on private sector R&D. In 2014/2015, 84 per cent of its
grant funding went to private sector organisations, 14 per cent to universities and the not-
for-profit private sector, and 2 per cent to public sector organisations. When Innovate UK was
established, its main grantees were big businesses. However, SMEs and startups now receive
about 60 per cent of the organisation’s support.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
Following a consolidation of its distinct funding schemes, Innovate UK now
has a single funding mechanism that allow businesses to bid for grants
and pre-commercial contracts (and potentially other types of innovation
financing in the future). A range of activities are supported, including:
development and prototyping of new technologies and services; proof of
concept and proof of market testing; the buying in of specific expertise
to help businesses overcome specific challenges; and collaborative R&D
projects between businesses and other research or public sector partners.
Innovate UK offers access to coaching, mentoring, training and networking
opportunities for the businesses it funds.
Through its EU and International programmes, it also helps UK businesses
to access funding through the Horizon 2020 programme and to build
partnerships in other countries, including through offering UK businesses
the opportunity to take part in overseas entrepreneur missions.
Knowledge Transfer Partnerships: scheme to place recently qualified
graduates in a business to conduct specific strategic projects.
Catapult Centres: network of thematic centres designed to promote
collaboration between UK businesses, scientists and engineers on solving
technical challenges and joint late-stage R&D projects.
Knowledge Transfer Network: teams working to connect sectors, disciplines
and skills with the right collaborations and approaches in specific sectors.
Innovation and Knowledge Centres: academic centres of excellence
accelerating and promoting the exploitation of emerging research and
technology fields, co-managed with the UK Research Councils.
FinancialNon-financialConnecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
86
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED KINGDOM: INNOVATE UK
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
Over time, Innovate UK has sought to be more systematic in its approach to monitoring and
evaluation. In 2013 it created a small internal team to bring the management of evaluation
processes more in-house. Its initial activities have included surveying businesses for specific
programme evaluations, and using other econometric methods to assess the organisation’s
portfolio. There is an ambition to evaluate Innovate UK as a whole in the future and to better
understand the impact of its thematic interventions, although it has been difficult to develop a
comprehensive set of key performance indicators and metrics.
Aggregated quantitative data from six of Innovate UK’s major programmes suggests that
Innovate UK’s co-investments since 2007 have supported more than 7,500 businesses and
are estimated to add £7.5 billion to the UK economy and create 55,000 extra new jobs. Other
programme evaluations show evidence of positive economic or collaboration impacts that
would not otherwise have been achieved.
197 The returns on many of Innovate UK’s investments
have been uneven. For example, 87 per cent of the benefits generated by the Collaborative
R&D programme are thought to have come from just 5 cent of the projects it has supported.
198
However, the agency has consciously tried to take informed chances on areas and projects
that look promising, but need support in order to develop, rather than investing in low-risk
areas where there is a high probability of success.
199
INFLUENCE IN UK’S INNOVATION SYSTEM
Although Innovate UK is still a relatively new innovation agency, there are already signs that it
is having a positive impact on the capacity of UK businesses to innovate. A 2013 review by BIS
concluded that the agency was providing support to businesses in areas where the market
offer was weak or non-existent and should be maintained as an independent body.
200 Similar
conclusions were reached by a House of Commons Science and Technology Committee
investigation on improving the commercialisation of research in the UK, which recommended
increasing Innovate UK’s budget in order to meet demand from business.
201
Innovate UK is currently undergoing significant strategic shifts, both in terms of how it funds
businesses and the way it works with the UK’s scientific research funding infrastructure. Its
approach to building on its existing achievements and continuing to provide effective support
for business innovation while adapting to these changes will determine its influence in the UK
innovation system in the years ahead.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
87
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED STATES: DARPA
 United States
DARPA
SUMMARY
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is an R&D funding agency
that sits within the United States Department of Defense. With a budget of nearly US$3
billion, its primary purpose is to invest in the development of new technologies that will
enhance national security and give the US a globally-decisive strategic military advantage.
DARPA does not have its own R&D facilities, but instead it supports the research of other
organisations through technology challenges, research management, funding, thought
leadership and other cultural and infrastructural support elements that help transition
transformative ideas into reality.
202
AGENCY PROFILE
HEADQUARTERS YEAR ESTABLISHED BUDGET SIZE
 Arlington, 1958 US$2.87 billion 240
 Virginia (2016)
GOVERNANCE
Agency of the U.S. Department of Defense
AIMS
To make pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies for
national security.
WHAT MAKES DARPA STAND OUT?
 ★ Risk-taking organisational culture. DARPA’s approach is marked by an extreme
willingness to take calculated risks and a high tolerance of failure, as long as the potential
breakthroughs generated by successful projects are significant enough. DARPA’s processes
also ensure that lessons are learned from failure, so that unsuccessful programmes and
projects can have a potential impact on the development of new technologies.
 ★ Finite programmes and employment postings. All DARPA programmes are of finite
duration to focus resources and intellectual effort and ensure delivery of outputs.
DARPA’s programme managers and office directors are employed on a two to five year
fixed-term basis, giving staff strong incentives to deliver impact within their limited posting.
 ★ Autonomy from government. Despite being an agency of the US Department of Defence,
DARPA has significant autonomy and independence to take risks in revolutionary
research, and its budget is ‘ring-fenced’ with very little interference from Congress.
COUNTRY PROFILE
ARLINGTON
GDP
US$17.419 trillion (2014)203
GOVERNMENT SPENDING
ON R&D
0.31 per cent of GDP
(2013)204
BUSINESS SPENDING ON
R&D
1.94 per cent of GDP
(2013)205

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
88
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED STATES: DARPA
MISSION AND HISTORY
Unlike many other innovation agencies, DARPA’s primary mission – to maintain the
technological superiority of the US military and invest in breakthrough technologies
for national security – has held constant for more than half a century, even though the
technologies it invests in have changed.
The agency was created in 1958 in response to the Soviet Union’s launch of the world’s first
satellite in 1957, Sputnik 1. This technological surprise caught the US off-guard and pushed
them to create DARPA, initially with the shorter name Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA). By setting up this agency, the US aimed to ensure that from that point forward, it
would be the initiator and leader of revolutionary technologies.
206
DARPA’s initial focus was to conduct research on national strategic priorities such as space,
nuclear and ballistic missile defence. After transferring this work to the individual military
Service agencies (the Army, Navy and Airforce) and to NASA in the 1960s, the organisation
opened up and started working across a much broader technological spectrum. During the
1970s and 1980s, DARPA (having been renamed in 1972) then focused on energy issues,
information processing, tactical technologies and aircraft-related programmes.
207 Currently,
its main (broad) areas of thematic focus are the development of complex military systems,
exploitation of the information revolution, biological technologies and expanding what is
technologically possible in terms of physics and quantum engineering.DARPA
established
the Defense
Sciences
Office (DSO)
DARPA funded
work to
miniaturise GPS
receivers
(leading to a
much broader
adoption of
GPS capability)
Arati Prabhakar
appointed head
of DARPA
High-Productivity
Computing Systems
(HPCS) programme
launched
ARPA was
created through
authorization
from President
Dwight D.
Eisenhower,
under the
directorship of
Roy W. Johnson
ARPA’s
Information
Processing
Techniques
Office (IPTO)
was established
ARPA was
renamed
DARPA
ARPA-funded projects
led to the establishment
of ARPANET (precursor
to the internet)
ARPA’s TIROS
program placed the
first dedicated
weather satellite
(TIROS 1) in orbit
ARPA funded Interdisciplinary
Laboratories (IDLs) at a dozen
universities (helping to create a new
research field known as materials
science and engineering)
EXTERNAL
EVENTS
DARPA
EVENTS
National Science
Foundation
established
White House
Office of Science
and Technology
Policy established
Small Business
Innovation
Research (SBIR)
Program
established by
Congress
American
Competitiveness
Initiative (ACI)
launched
First Strategy for
American
Innovation
launched
Department of
Defense Inspector
General review of
DARPA’s process of
awarding contracts
President Obama
announced the BRAIN
initiative (supported by
DARPA through a number
of programmes)
1950 1976 1982 2006 2009 201320121958 1960s 1962 1969 1970s 1972 1980 1983 2002

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
89
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED STATES: DARPA
MANAGEMENT
RELATIONSHIP WITH GOVERNMENT
DARPA reports directly to the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD)’s Assistant
Secretary of Defence for Research and Engineering. Its annual (ring-fenced)
budget is approximately US$3 billion, which is around 25 per cent of the total
DoD science and technology spend. DARPA’s budget becomes law as part
of the annual Defense Authorization Bill, but there is very little Congressional
interference with the organisation’s budget and programmes, and the agency
has a significant degree of autonomy from other areas of the DoD. DARPA has
special exemptions from many federal regulations and uses mechanisms such as
contractor staff to ensure that they can react quickly and change priorities when
required.
INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK
DARPA works within an innovation ecosystem that includes universities, industry,
small businesses, and government partners. It is highly focused on the US
military Services, which work with DARPA to create new strategic opportunities
and novel tactical options.
208 DARPA also works closely with partners across the
DoD’s Science and Technology community in order to accelerate the adoption of
its technologies.
209
ORGANISATIONAL DESIGN
DARPA has a flat and flexible organisational structure, operating at only two
management levels to ensure a rapid flow of information and ideas and swift
decision-making.
210 The agency is staffed by approximately 220 government
employees in six technical offices, including around 100 programme managers,
who together oversee about 250 research and development programs. The
programme managers report to DARPA’s office directors and their deputies,
who are responsible for charting their offices’ technical directions, hiring staff
and overseeing programme delivery. Technical staff are also supported by
experts in security, legal and contracting issues, finance, human resources and
communications.
SKILLS AND EXPERTISE
DARPA is known for recruiting extremely high calibre programme managers for
fixed-term appointments, drawn from academia, industry, government agencies,
military and private laboratories. Multidisciplinary teams are created to deliver
programmes. The agency looks for individuals with both technical expertise
and programme management skills, and who can operate very autonomously.
Programme managers are given the freedom to conduct high-risk, cutting-
edge research. There is a strong sense of identity within the organisation and
its historic reputation has enabled it to attract attracting very high quality
applicants.

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
90
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED STATES: DARPA
METHODS
APPROACH
DARPA does not own laboratories or research facilities, and all research is contracted to other
organisations that are judged to be highly competent. DARPA’s focus is on funding potentially
revolutionary research that bridges the gap between fundamental discoveries and ultimate
military use. Therefore programme managers fund organisations to carry out research
that might otherwise be too risky for research agencies to back. These managers have the
freedom to enter new areas quickly, but also to pull funding if the research does not look like
it will produce successful outcomes within an appropriate timeframe.
BENEFICIARIES
DARPA’s main beneficiary is the military, who utilise the technologies resulting from successful
projects. However, the agency also aims for the results of its projects to find commercial
applications, and so also works with universities, businesses and government agencies.
TYPE OF SUPPORT KEY PROGRAMMES
Some of the main investment methods used by the organisation include:
 ★ Prize Challenges: financial incentives to find solutions to urgent
technological challenges
 ★ Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program: provides
opportunities for small businesses to participate in federal
government-sponsored research and development
 ★ Calls for proposals: used by DARPA to award grants and cooperative
agreements
ENGAGE Program: enables the development of education and training
systems that are better, faster, continuously optimised and scalable.
Young Faculty Award (YFA) program: identifies and ‘matchmakes’
rising academic researchers with DoD/DARPA needs and programme
development processes
Service Chiefs Fellows Program: three-month fellowship programme
involving outstanding military officers and government civilians
Proposers Days: conferences that provide information on recently
released or soon-to-be released Broad Agency Announcements (BAAs)
FinancialNon-financialSupport for
intermediaries
Connecting and
institution-building

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
91
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
CASE STUDIES UNITED STATES: DARPA
EVIDENCE OF IMPACT
DARPA has 2,000 contracts, grants and other agreements with companies, universities, the
DoD and other laboratories.211 The agency maintains a portfolio-level database that identifies
outcomes by programme. However, the agency’s process for tracking technology transition
outcomes is not designed to capture transitions that occur after a programme completes and
does not provide DARPA with an effective means for updating its database. As a result, the
agency’s database is unreliable for assessing transition rates and outcomes since 2010.
212
These measurement challenges aside, DARPA can tell a clear success story, with its funding
having led to major developments across a range of military spheres. Over the past 50
years, DARPA’s investments have produced globally transformative technologies with both
military and civilian applications, including precision weapons, the Internet, automated voice
recognition and language translation, and Global Positioning System receivers. Concurrently,
the enabling technologies behind these military capabilities-new materials, navigation and
timing devices, specialised microelectronics, advanced networking and artificial intelligence,
among others – have helped lay a foundation for private-sector investments which create
products and services that have changed how people live and work. Completing the loop,
these technologies have subsequently been used by DARPA and other DoD agencies to
respond to national security challenges.
213
INFLUENCE IN US’ INNOVATION SYSTEM
Now in its sixth decade, DARPA remains at the forefront of efforts to maintain the United
States’ lead in military technology. Over this period it has been genuinely innovative in its
approach, including by:
 ★ Investing in disruptive and high-risk technologies and ideas.
 ★ Opening up the defence establishment, and bringing new ideas to an otherwise often
closed sector.
 ★ Creating both supply and demand for new innovations with a range of military and
commercial applications.
 ★ Testing and proving the efficacy of new innovation support methods, such as challenge
prizes.
Its successes over this period are unquestionably linked to the scale of its investments.
With an annual budget of around US$3 billion and access to a procurement budget of close
to US$600 billion, it can marshal resources that are well beyond the reach of most other
countries. Without details of the projects that DARPA has supported that have failed, it
is hard to get an accurate sense of its ‘hit rate’. However, its pioneering methods and the
breakthroughs they have led to have made it an innovation leader both within the US science
and technology system, and globally.

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
92
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
ENDNOTES
ENDNOTES
1. Ireland.’ New Haven: Yale University Press; Pyka, A. and Burghof, H. (2013) ‘Innovation and Finance.’ Lisbon:
Routledge.
2. http:/ /www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f49958fc-8f32-11e5-8be4-3506bf20cc2b.html
3. Breznitz, D. (2007) ‘Innovation and the State’; Mathews, J. A., and Cho, D.-S. (2000) ‘Tiger Technologies: The
Creation of a Semiconductor Industry in East Asia.’ Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
4. http:/ /www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/how-to-compete-and-grow
5. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/news/keyboard-app-developer-swiftkey-bought-by-microsoft
6. https:/ /interact.innovateuk.org/-/the-swiftkey-to-business-success
7. http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/state_of_uncertainty.pdf
8. Breznitz, D. and Ornston, D. (2013) The Revolutionary Power of Peripheral Agencies: Schumpeterian Development
Agencies and Policy Innovation in Finland and Israel. ‘Comparative Political Studies.’ Vol. 46 (10):1219-1245.
9. Reference: Nesta Innovation Policy Toolkit, available at http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/publications/innovation-policy-
toolkit-introduction-innovation-policy-and-collaboration
10. http:/ /www.earto.eu/about-rtos.html
11. https:/ /www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/sites/default/files/rdf_imported_documents/TechnologyTransferOffices.pdf
12. http:/ /www.vinnova.se/upload/EPiStorePDF/va_15_07_T.pdf
13. http:/ /www.theiteams.org/
14. https:/ /www.ffg.at/sites/default/files/images/Presse/ffg-jahresbericht_2015.pdf
15. Data provided by Michael Binder, Strategy Unit, FFG
16. Data provided by Glauco Arbix, Full Professor, University of São Paulo and former President of FINEP
17. http:/ /www.brazilchamber.no/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/frokostm%C3%83%C2%B8te-26.05.15-Innovasjon-
NOrge.pdf
18. Data provided by Manuel Cartes Palma, Deputy Director, Business Innovation, CORFO.
19. Ibid.
20. https:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/evaluation_of_tekes_activities.pdf
21. Ibid.
22. Data provided by Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and Economic Research Unit, OCS.
23. Data provided by Peter Nou, ICT Division - Programme Manager, VINNOVA.
24. Ibid.
25. https:/ /www.kti.admin.ch/kti/en/home/erfolgsgeschichten-und-publikationen/taetigkeitsberichte.html
26. Ibid.
27. https:/ /www.itri.org.tw/eng/Content/Publications/Book_abstract.aspx?&SiteID=1&MmmID=617731525164776565&MS
ID=617756021324725754
28. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/446302/FINAL_-_Innovate_UK_
Accounts_2014-15_.pdf
29. Ibid.
30. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/about-us/budget
31. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/attachments/(2G1)%20Global%20Nav%20-%20About%20Us%20-%20Budget%20-%20
Budget%20Entries%20-%20FY2016%20(Approved).pdf
32. Breznitz, D. and Ornston, D. (2013) The Revolutionary Power of Peripheral Agencies: Schumpeterian Development
Agencies and Policy Innovation in Finland and Israel. ‘Comparative Political Studies.’ Vol. 46 (10):1219-1245.
33. Nesta interview with Joakim Appelquist, Director and Head of International Division, VINNOVA (2 July 2015).
34. http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/where_next_for_innovate_uk_final_0.pdf
35. Breznitz, D. and Ornston, D. (2016) ‘The Politics of Partial Success: Schumpeterian Developmental Agencies in the
Age of Innovation’, Working Paper, Under Review at the Socio-Economic Review
36. http:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/funder_activator_networker_investor.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
93
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
ENDNOTES
37. http:/ /www.theregister.co.uk/2013/11/14/abe_darpa_japan_military_tech/
38. http:/ /www.itproportal.com/2015/11/18/uk-will-have-a-darpa-of-its-own/
39. http:/ /www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/03/china-create-its-own-darpa
40. A useful benchmarking exercise of indicators of success for different types of R&D and innovation interventions was
carried out by the TAFTIE network of European innovation agencies in 2015. The final report can be accessed here:
http:/ /www.taftie.org/sites/default/files/Common%20Indicator%20Framework%20for%20publication.pdf
41. http:/ /marianamazzucato.com/innovate-uk.pdf
42. Breznitz, D. (2007) ‘Innovation and the State: Political Choice and Strategy for Growth in Israel, Taiwan, and Ireland.’
New Haven: Yale University Press.
43. Breznitz, D. (2014) Why Silicon Valley Shouldn’t Be the Model for Innovation. ‘Harvard Business Review.’ 18 November
2014.
44. Katchalski, E. (1968) ‘The Report of the Committee to Inquire into the Organization of Governmental Research and
Its Management.’ Jerusalem: Office of the Prime Minister (in Hebrew).
45. Breznitz, D. (2014) The Cardinal Sins of Innovation Policy. ‘Harvard Business Review.’ 28 July 2014.
46. http:/ /www.scaleupreport.org/
47. Breznitz, D. and Ornston, D. (2013) The Revolutionary Power of Peripheral Agencies: Schumpeterian Development
Agencies and Policy Innovation in Finland and Israel. ‘Comparative Political Studies.’ Vol. 46 (10):1219-1245.
48. Nesta interview with Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and Economic Research Unit, Office of the Chief Scientist (4
November 2015).
49. Breznitz, D. and Ornston, D. (2016) ‘The Politics of Partial Success: Schumpeterian Developmental Agencies in the
Age of Innovation.’ Working Paper, Under Review at the Socio-Economic Review.
50. http:/ /www.mba.unisg.ch/files/FinaleVersion_Druckausgabequalit%C3%A4t.pdf
51. https:/ /sbri.innovateuk.org/
52. http:/ /www.innovationseeds.eu/Virtual_Library/Knowledge/TLR_Scale.kl
53. https:/ /www.ffg.at/en/bridge
54. https:/ /www.ffg.at/en/marktstart
55. For an overview of different funding instruments, see: http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/landscape-funding-tools
56. Breznitz, D. (2012) Ideas, Structure, State Action and Economic Growth: Rethinking the Irish Miracle. ‘Review of
International Political Economy.’ Vol. 19(1):87-113
57. Nesta interview with Petri Lehto, Head of Division, Finnish Ministry of Economy and Employment (3 September
2014).
58. http:/ /www.ft.com/cms/s/0/babcfd3e-98b0-11e3-a32f-00144feab7de.html
59. http:/ /www.innovationgrowthlab.org/
60. Nesta interview with Christopher Palmberg, Program Development Manager, Tekes (3 September 2014).
61. http:/ /law.co.il/en/news/israeli_internet_law_update/2016/01/05/israel-r-d-law-establishes-new-authority-for-
innovation/
62. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.C
63. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
64. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
65. Nesta interview with Michael Binder, Strategy Unit, FFG (15 October 2015).
66. The General Programme includes a number of specific open funding calls. More details are available here: https:/ /
www.ffg.at/en/general-programme-overview
67. https:/ /www.ffg.at/coin-cooperation-innovation
68. http:/ /www.fteval.at/en/evaluation_studies/institutions/2014/1661/ (in German)
69. https:/ /www.ffg.at/sites/default/files/allgemeine_downloads/ffg_infoblatt_englisch_2013_web.pdf
70. https:/ /www.ffg.at/sites/default/files/allgemeine_downloads/ffg_infoblatt_englisch_2013_web.pdf
71. Nesta interview with Sabine Mayer, Strategy Unit, FFG (15 October 2015).
72. We are grateful for the assistance of Glauco Arbix (former President of FINEP), Fernanda Stiebler (Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro) and Zil Miranda (University of São Paulo) in compiling the background information for this case
study.
73. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/country/brazil
74. https:/ /books.google.com.sg/books?isbn=9264222286

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
94
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
ENDNOTES
75. https:/ /books.google.com.sg/books?isbn=9264222286
76. http:/ /erawatch.jrc.ec.europa.eu/erawatch/opencms/information/country_pages/br/supportmeasure/support_0010
77. http:/ /www.nber.org/chapters/c7663.pdf
78. http:/ /hbswk.hbs.edu/item/7018.html
79. http:/ /www.access4.eu/_media/Action_Plan_ST_Brazil.pdf
80. http:/ /www.finep.gov.br/apoio-e-financiamento-externa/programas-e-linhas/programas-inova/o-que-e-o-programa-inova
81. http:/ /www.finep.gov.br/organograma
82. Nesta interview with Vitor Monteiro and Newton Kenji Hamatsu, FINEP (15 October 2015).
83. http:/ /hbswk.hbs.edu/item/7018.html
84. http:/ /www.finep.gov.br/apoio-e-financiamento-externa/programas-e-linhas/descentralizacao/inovacred/inovacred-
empresa-e-ict-s
85. Araujo et al (2013) Impacts of the Brazilian science and technology sectoral funds on the industrial firms’ R&D inputs
and outputs, IPEA, www.merit.unu.edu/MEIDE/papers/2010/Araujo_et_al.pdf
86. http:/ /www.anpec.org.br/encontro/2012/inscricao/files_I/i8-5fe1cb9e5d777ea40cd1a965ecfba0b8.pdf
87. http:/ /ocs.ige.unicamp.br/ojs/rbi/article/view/1134/691
88. Joao de Negri Presentation to World Bank OECD Workshop (2015) (unpublished)
89. http:/ /hbswk.hbs.edu/item/7018?item=7018.html
90. http:/ /www.anpec.org.br/encontro/2012/inscricao/files_I/i8-5fe1cb9e5d777ea40cd1a965ecfba0b8.pdf
91. Balbachevsky E and Botelho A (2011) Science and Innovation policies in Brazil: a framework for the analysis of
change and continuity, Paper presented to the IPSA-ECPR Joint Conference: Whatever Happened to North-South?,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, February 2011.
92. Nesta e-mail correspondence with Glauco Arbix, former President of Fineo.
93. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/country/chile
94. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
95. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
96. http:/ /publicaciones.caf.com/media/17638/caf_libro_corfo_web.pdf (in Spanish)
97. http:/ /publicaciones.caf.com/media/17638/caf_libro_corfo_web.pdf (in Spanish)
98. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/sala-de-prensa/noticias/2013/mayo-2013/comision-asesora-en-ciencia-tecnologia-e-innovacion-
entrega-informe-al-presidente
99. http:/ /www.fch.cl/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/CONVENIOTRANSFERENCIAFCH2015tomaderazon.pdf (in Spanish)
100. http:/ /www.miningpress.cl/nota/278285/corfo-los-siete-sectores-estrategicos-para-clusters-en-chile
101. http:/ /www.miningpress.cl/nota/278285/corfo-los-siete-sectores-estrategicos-para-clusters-en-chile
102. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/programas-y-concursos/programas/concurso-go-to-market--de-la-idea-al-mercado (in Spanish)
103. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/programas-y-concursos/programas/credito-corfo-micro-y-pequena-empresa
104. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/programas-y-concursos/programas/operacion-de-incubadoras-de-negocios (in Spanish)
105. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/programas-y-concursos/programas/aceleracion-internacional-de-emprendimientos-
tecnologicos--global-connection (in Spanish)
106. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/programas-y-concursos/programas/redes-de-inversionistas-angeles (in Spanish)
107. http:/ /www.corfo.cl/programas-y-concursos/programas/atraccion-de-centros-de-excelencia-internacional-en-id (in
Spanish)
108. http:/ /siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLACREGTOPPOVANA/Resources/Impact_Evaluation_SME_Programs_ENG_
Final.pdf
109. https:/ /www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/sites/default/files/rdf_imported_documents/Case%20Study-PROFO.pdf
110. http:/ /www.brookings.edu/blogs/techtank/posts/2015/08/19-startup-chile-chilecon-valley
111. http:/ /stanford.edu/~wtroppe/CORFO.pdf
112. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
113. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
114. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
115. http:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/funder_activator_networker_investor.pdf
116. Nesta interview with Petri Lehto, Finnish Ministry of Economy and Employment (3 September 2014).
117. Nesta interview with Pirjo Kylakoski, Tekes, 3 September 2014.
118. https:/ /www.tekes.fi/en/tekes/how-we-operate/

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
95
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
ENDNOTES
119. Nesta interview with Christopher Palmberg, Tekes (3 September 2014).
120. http:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/funder_activator_networker_investor.pdf
121. https:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/tekes_strategy_engl_2011.pdf
122. http:/ /www.technopolis-group.com/?report=evaluation-tekes
123. https:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/evaluation_of_tekes_activities.pdf
124. All impact data from: http:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/vaikuttavuusraportti_2015_eng.pdf
125. Nesta interview with Christopher Palmberg, Tekes (3 September 2014).
126. https:/ /www.tem.fi/files/33176/TEMjul_22_2012_web.pdf
127. http:/ /www.vtt.fi/sites/sfinno/en
128. http:/ /www.tekes.fi/globalassets/julkaisut/funder_activator_networker_investor.pdf
129. https:/ /www.tem.fi/files/33176/TEMjul_22_2012_web.pdf
130. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
131. http:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
132. http:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
133. Nesta interview with Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and Economic Research Unit, Office of the Chief Scientist (4
November 2015).
134. Breznitz D (2007) Innovation and the State: Political Choice and Strategies for Growth in Israel, Taiwan, and Ireland,
London: Yale University Press.
135. Nesta interview with Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and Economic Research Unit, Office of the Chief Scientist (4
November 2015).
136. http:/ /www.tau.ac.il/~manuel/pdfs/R%26D%20Policy%20Israel.pdf
137. http:/ /economy.gov.il/Publications/Publications/DocLib/RnD_IncentivePrograms_English.pdf
138. http:/ /www.matimop.org.il/innovation_report2015.html
139. http:/ /economy.gov.il/English/RnD/Pages/RnD.aspx
140. http:/ /www.incubators.org.il/article.aspx?id=1703
141. Nesta interview with Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and Economic Research Unit, Office of the Chief Scientist (4
November 2015).
142. http:/ /www.tamas.gov.il/NR/rdonlyres/04D3E45C-A94D-408D-8813-5C65869162C4/0/
RDGovSupportEnglish2011821.pdf
143. http:/ /www.tau.ac.il/~manuel/pdfs/R%26D%20Policy%20Israel.pdf
144. Nesta interview with Uri Gabai, Director, Strategy and Economic Research Unit, Office of the Chief Scientist (4
November 2015).
145. http:/ /www.tau.ac.il/~manuel/pdfs/R%26D%20Policy%20Israel.pdf
146. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
147. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
148. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
149. Nesta interview with Joakim Appelquist, Director and Head of International Division, VINNOVA (2 July 2015).
150. Nesta interview with Jan Edling, former senior Analyst at VINNOVA (10 July 2015).
151. Nesta interview with Göran Marklund, Deputy Director General External Matters, VINNOVA (21 October 2015).
152. Nesta interview with Peter Nou, ICT Division - Programme Manager, VINNOVA (25 June 2015).
153. Nesta interview with Joakim Appelquist, Director and Head of International Division, VINNOVA (2 July 2015).
154. More information on VINNOVA’s current funding programmes can be accessed here: http:/ /www.vinnova.se/en/Our-
acitivities/
155. http:/ /www.vinnova.se/upload/EPiStorePDF/vi_14_10.pdf
156. http:/ /www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/science-and-technology/oecd-reviews-of-innovation-
policy-sweden-2012_9789264184893-en#page30
157. A selection of VINNOVA evaluation reports are available here: http:/ /www.vinnova.se/en/Results/
158. http:/ /www.vinnova.se/upload/EPiStorePDF/vi_15_05.pdf (in Swedish)
159. http:/ /www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/science-and-technology/oecd-reviews-of-innovation-
policy-sweden-2012_9789264184893-en#page1
160. http:/ /www.vinnova.se/upload/EPiStorePDF/va-12-01.pdf
161. http:/ /era.gv.at/object/document/130/attach/1lund_declaration_final_version_9_july.pdf
162. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/country/switzerland

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
96
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
ENDNOTES
163. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
164. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
165. http:/ /www.efv.admin.ch/e/downloads/publikationen/arbeiten_oekonomenteam/workingpapers/Working_
Paper_15_e.pdf
166. www.snf.ch/SiteCollectionDocuments/Dossiers/dos_kti_broschuere_e.pdf
167. Meeting with Vital Meyer, Head of Start-up Promotion and Entrepreneurship, CTI (6 May 2015)
168. http:/ /www.econ.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-4d95-c13b-ffff-ffffc45ba416/KTI_Selbstevaluation_2002_engl.pdf
169. https:/ /www.kti.admin.ch/kti/en/home/unsere-foerderangebote/aktiv-fuer-die-kti/coach-werden.html
170. https:/ /www.kti.admin.ch/kti/en/home/erfolgsgeschichten-und-publikationen/taetigkeitsberichte.html
171. http:/ /www.startup.ch/
172. https:/ /startupmonitor.ch/
173. http:/ /www.econ.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:00000000-4d95-c13b-ffff-ffffc45ba416/KTI_Selbstevaluation_2002_engl.pdf
174. https:/ /www.globalinnovationindex.org/content/page/GII-Home
175. https:/ /www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2195.html
176. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
177. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
178. http:/ /iis-db.stanford.edu/evnts/4097/KWang_The_ITRI_Experience.pdf
179. Nesta interview with James Wang, Director of the Office of Strategy and R&D Planning, ITRI (2 September 2015).
180. http:/ /iis-db.stanford.edu/evnts/4097/KWang_The_ITRI_Experience.pdf
181. Nesta interview with Chintay Shih, Former President of ITRI (2 September 2015)
182. https:/ /www.itri.org.tw/eng/Content/Messagess/contents.aspx?SiteID=1&MmmID=617755772462724736
183. https:/ /college.itri.org.tw/eng/
184. http:/ /www.itic.com.tw/HTMLENGLISHSITE/overview.htm
185. https:/ /www.itri.org.tw/eng/Content/Messagess/contents.aspx?SiteID=1&MmmID=617755772433266023
186. http:/ /techventure.itri.org.tw/
187. https:/ /www.itri.org.tw/eng/Content/Publications/book_abstract.aspx?&SiteID=1&MmmID=617731525164776565&Cat
ID=617756020516072343
188. Nesta interview with Pei-Zen Chang, Professor, Institute of Applied Mechanics, National Taiwan University (3
September 2015).
189. Nesta interview with Alger Lee, Associate Research Fellow, Taiwan Institute of Economic Research (1 September
2015).
190. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
191. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
192. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
193. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/523546/bis-16-265-success-as-a-
knowledge-economy-web.pdf
194. http:/ /www.scotsman.com/business/markets-economy/uk-s-innovation-agency-to-set-up-base-in-scotland-1-4023141
195. Nesta interview with Guy Rickett, Secretary to the Innovate UK Board & Head of Strategic Engagement (23 October
2015).
196. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/514838/CO300_Innovate_UK_
Delivery_Plan_2016_2017_WEB.pdf
197. See for example: Evaluation of Grant for R&D and Smart (2009); Bound and Puttick (2010); Knowledge Transfer
Partnerships Strategic Review (2010); Evaluation of Collaborative R&D (2011); Key attributes for successful Knowledge
Transfer Partnerships (2012); TSB Feasibility Studies Evaluation Findings (2013); and Low Carbon Vehicles Innovation
Platform: How the programme is forecast to boost economic activity and growth (2013).
198. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/253593/bis-13-1073-triennial-
review-of-the-technology-strategy-board.pdf
199. Nesta interview with Dan Hodges, Head of Economics and Evidence, Innovate UK (26 March 2015).

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
97
HOW INNOVATION AGENCIES WORK: International lessons to inspire and inform national strategies
ENDNOTES
200. https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/253593/bis-13-1073-triennial-review-
of-the-technology-strategy-board.pdf
201. http:/ /www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmsctech/348/348.pdf
202. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/about-us/timeline/where-the-future-becomes-now
203. http:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD
204. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
205. https:/ /stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB
206. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/about-us/about-darpa
207. http:/ /www.bibliotecapleyades.net/sociopolitica/sociopol_DARPA01.htm
208. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/work-with-us/for-universities
209. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/work-with-us/for-government-and-military
210. http:/ /www.bibliotecapleyades.net/sociopolitica/sociopol_DARPA01.htm
211. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/attachments/DARPA2015FINAL.pdf
212. http:/ /www.gao.gov/assets/680/673746.pdf
213. http:/ /www.darpa.mil/attachments/DARPA2015FINAL.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
1 Plough Place
London EC4A 1DE
research@nesta.org.uk
 @nesta_uk
 www.facebook.com/nesta.uk
www.nesta.org.uk
MAY 2016
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 1 Plough Place, London, EC4A 1DE.
