
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Innovating UK Innovation

Policy

Making the Advanced Research Projects

Agency model work here and now

Harry Farmer, Madeleine Gabriel, Chris Gorst, Jen Rae, Olivier Usher

 
 
 

January 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Innovating UK innovation policy

An Advanced Research Projects Agency-inspired funding body could make a

valuable contribution to the UK’s innovation system if it takes a mission-led

approach, genuinely reaches a wide pool of innovators and helps to rebalance

the spread of innovation across the UK.

The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was set up by the US government in
 
1958, a product of the race between superpowers. ARPA (which became DARPA when
 
‘defense’ was added to the name in 1972) played an important role in many of the great
 
innovations of the last 50 years, from the Internet and the graphical user interface to GPS
 
and self-driving cars. It makes big bets on breakthrough technologies
 
 
– high-risk, high-payoff opportunities.
 
 
1
 
ARPA looms large in the imagination of politicians and innovation policymakers worldwide,
 
with several countries having aspirations to copy the model.
 We’ve ​
previously argued​
 that
 
2
despite its apparent successes, its large budget – DARPA spends nearly $3 billion a year on
 
the projects it supports and has access to an even larger US defence procurement budget –
 
and specific context make it very hard to replicate. The US Cold War model can't be
 
transplanted wholesale to the UK in 2020​
.
 
 
 
But with the UK government gearing up to put a large injection of public money into
 
research and development (R&D), there are ways in which an entity that takes some
 
inspiration from DARPA – and its more recently established (and lower-budget) clones
 
Advanced Research Projects Agency – Energy (ARPA-E) and Intelligence Advanced
 
Research Projects Activity (IARPA) – could be of value to the UK’s innovation system.
 
 
1. An ARPA-inspired funding body in the UK should take a mission-based
 
approach
 
 
In the US, the three ARPA siblings each focus on a specific field – defence (DARPA), energy
 
(ARPA-E) and intelligence (IARPA). With a deep understanding of their respective
 
‘customers’, the agencies envision technological breakthroughs that would help move these
 
fields forward, then work backwards to find and support emerging technologies that might
 
have potential to deliver these breakthroughs and make large-scale impact. In this sense
 
they’re mission-led – not just looking broadly for the next big thing, but trying to make great
 
leaps forward in specific areas that the US deems important.
 
 
1
 DARPA’s focus on impact, rather than risk, is a key element of its model. However, its failure rate
 
isn’t clear - one study estimated that up to 85% of DARPA projects fail (Roland, A. (2010). Forum:
 
‘Cloning DARPA’ Vol. 26(2). Issues in Science and Technology Policy. National Academies of
 
Sciences: Washington, DC)
 
2
 In 2013, for example, Japan announced the establishment of a new agency that would research,
 
develop and adapt cutting edge technologies for possible military use.
 
 
https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/how_innovation_agencies_work.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
The UK government has ​
committed to mission-oriented innovation​
 and has also set some
 
challenging targets that will require innovation – for example, achieving net-zero carbon
 
emissions by 2050. But ​
we don’t have an adequate way of funding missions​
 at the moment.
 
The main ‘mission-oriented’ funding stream, Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund, is arguably
 
spread too thinly over too many challenge areas and uses conventional R&D grant funding
 
to pursue its goals. An ARPA-inspired entity would be valuable if it filled this gap.
 
 
A mission-based approach would also help with a UK-ARPA’s political viability,
 
demonstrating to the public that a large increase in R&D spending is being directed towards
 
the solution of tangible problems and is conducive to the public good. Forthcoming Nesta
 
research shows that the public are keen to see innovation tackling challenges like climate
 
change and making people healthier.
 
 
In delivering its mission, a UK ARPA should learn from the US versions’ approaches to
 
building markets. DARPA has a ready-made first customer for the technologies it supports
 
in the Department of Defense. But ARPA-E, without this advantage, has focused heavily on
 
identifying and building first markets. Its Tech to Market team focuses full time on promoting
 
implementation and commercial applications of ARPA-E technologies.
 A UK ARPA
 
3
shouldn’t just focus on tech push but on creating market demand. Indeed in an area like
 
energy, many working in the field comment that the real need is to commercialise and scale
 
existing technologies, particularly if the UK is to meet (or even better, exceed) its targets on
 
carbon reduction.
 
 
 
A UK ARPA should avoid the narrow focus on ‘hard’ technology that the US entities have
 
taken. Both to deliver on societally-focused missions, and ensure new technological
 
solutions can reach scale, it should be willing to support all forms of innovation that could
 
help achieve the breakthroughs required, including business model innovation and
 
innovations to change social behaviours. Tackling ​
climate change​
, for example, requires
 
investment both in technology and in new ways of organising society.
 
 
Coming up with a vision for the ‘breakthroughs’ that a UK ARPA will work towards
 
shouldn’t just be a technocratic or expert-led process. The public should be meaningfully
 
involved. Nesta launched the ​
Longitude Prize​
 in partnership with BBC Horizon, giving the
 
public an opportunity to vote for the prize theme from six options, each championed by a
 
celebrity expert. This experience shows that getting the public to take part in selecting
 
missions can create momentum, excitement and visibility, and that public engagement can
 
be combined with expert judgement to define missions. We have recently researched
 
‘​
participatory futures​
’ exercises, a method of systematically imagining alternative,
 
sustainable futures, another promising means of engaging the public on such questions.
 
 
 
 
 
3
 Bonvillian (2018) DARPA and its ARPA-E and IARPA clones: a unique innovation organization
 
model. Industrial and Corporate Change, 2018, Vol. 27, No. 5.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
2. An ARPA-inspired funding body in the UK must reach a wider pool of
 
innovators than existing funding mechanisms
 
 
The emergence of new, genuinely disruptive ideas and technologies would be aided by a
 
greater diversity of innovators and, in particular, a greater number of smaller companies
 
working to commercialise new technologies.
 
 
Currently, Innovate UK allocates funding for cutting-edge technological research and
 
development with commercial applications. However, the relatively large amounts of money
 
allocated and the conditions attached to their allocation make it unsuited for smaller firms
 
with very disruptive, high-risk ideas.
 
 
 
One way a UK-ARPA could help to address this issue would be to make use of smaller
 
grants, with fewer strings attached, alongside larger pots of money. Challenge prizes are a
 
particularly good mechanism for this. In addition to this, challenge prizes provide a good
 
way of managing the risks inherent in funding speculative R&D with public money – helping
 
to resolve the tension between the need for a UK-ARPA to foster high-risk research and the
 
need to use public money responsibly. DARPA uses challenge prizes, while IARPA uses a
 
‘tournaments’ model – funding multiple teams working on the same challenge, with an
 
element of competition between them.
 
 
With a challenge prize, it is possible to engage a greater variety of early-stage solutions to a
 
specified problem without committing a large amount of money to any of them. Rather than
 
picking one team and providing a subsidy based on the most credible proposal (the
 
traditional R&D grants model), challenge prizes incentivise multiple teams to compete to
 
provide the most impactful solution. The result is a greater number and variety of innovators
 
working on a topic, and hence an ability to support more radical or unproven technologies as
 
well as the safe bets typically funded through grant mechanisms. Nesta’s ​
Demand Driven
 
Challenge​
 brought forward, among others, a new firm, Upside Energy, that was formed by a
 
geophysicist in order to take part in the challenge. A company with no track record would
 
have been unlikely to receive funding through traditional grantmaking processes. It's since
 
gained £10m in investment and now has 35 staff.
 
 
 
To genuinely reach a wider pool of innovators, a UK ARPA will need to employ different
 
kinds of people. Much is made of DARPA’s relatively small team (around 220 staff), flat
 
structure and empowered programme managers, who are brought in on short term
 
contracts (incentivising them to make a difference in a short space of time), and work
 
together in multidisciplinary teams. Reaching a more unusual set of innovators will require
 
people with a wide range of backgrounds. And they will need to spot innovation from
 
unusual places, too - more on which below.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
3. A UK ARPA must help stimulate innovative economic activity outside of
 
London and the South East
 
 
The new UK government has made a welcome commitment to ‘level up’ economic
 
performance across different parts of the country. A UK ARPA could contribute to this
 
ambition through an explicit aim to support the creation of clusters of innovative activity in
 
particular regions.
 While this ambition will require various complementary policy
 
4
interventions, one means of encouraging the development of innovative clusters is through
 
setting up real-world innovation testbeds. A UK ARPA could fund and support these.
 
 
In order to establish their scientific, business and regulatory viability, innovative new
 
technologies and business models need to be tested in environments closely resembling
 
those in which they will be deployed. Real-world testbeds
 offer companies and innovators
 
5
the opportunity to do just this within spatially bounded and controlled domain – and are
 
likely to become increasingly important in developing and bringing to market transformative
 
technologies and ideas.
 
 
As ​
Nesta research shows​
, the presence of such an initiative in a particular place encourages
 
companies, innovators and researchers to cluster around it, developing a competitive
 
advantage as the place where the innovation could be best developed, tested and iterated.
 
 
 
To have maximum impact, testbeds should be placed in regions where there is already some
 
degree of untapped innovative potential. ​
Innovation mapping​
 uses data science to give
 
policymakers much more precise and timely data about innovation. Nesta’s work has shown
 
how innovation mapping can be used to identify emerging industries (such as the ​
immersive
 
economy​
) and their geographical spread. This is a powerful method to identify potential
 
locations for testbeds.
 

4
 For example, Richard Jones of Sheffield University advances ​
arguments​
 around regional hubs of
 
translational research and innovation, or ‘industrial commons’.
 
5
 We define real-world testbeds as “as controlled or bounded environments for testing innovation in
 
real-world, or close to real-world, conditions in the manner (or close to the manner) in which they will
 
be used or operated.” See out report, ​
Testing Innovation in the Real World​
.
