
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
The AI
Powered State:
China's approach to
public sector innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
02
Nesta is an innovation foundation.
For us, innovation means turning bold ideas into reality and changing lives for the better.
We use our expertise, skills and funding in areas where there are big challenges facing
society.
Nesta is based in the UK and supported by a financial endowment. We work with partners
around the globe to bring bold ideas to life to change the world for good.
www.nesta.org.uk
If you’d like this publication in an alternative format such as Braille, large print or audio,
please contact us at: information@nesta.org.uk

May 2020
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 58 Victoria Embankment, London, EC4Y 0DS.
About Nesta
This project has been a real team effort and there are lots of people who
have dedicated their time and energy to make this essay collection possible.
A first set of thanks goes to each of the authors for sharing their expertise and for
working with such enthusiasm and commitment in spite of the extraordinary and
difficult circumstances of the past few months.
A huge thank you to Michelle Pauli for her excellent editorial advice and support,
and to Joana Pereira for her imaginative work on the collection’s design.
At Nesta, Tom Symons has worked tirelessly to bring this project to life and I am deeply
grateful for his constant support and guidance. Special thanks also go to Nyangala Zolho
for her fantastic input and advice throughout the process of curating this collection.
Many thanks to Wayne Holmes for offering his expertise and editorial support, and to
Anna Cleary, Wallis Grant, Ella White and Georgina Roberts for their help on production
and communications. Thank you to all the other Nesta colleagues who offered advice and
support along the way: Geoff Muglan, Jonathan Bone, Aleks Berditchevskaia, Madeleine
Gabriel, Laurie Smith, Juan Mateos-Garcia and Jen Rae.
The essays in this collection represent the views of each author and do not necessarily
represent the views of Nesta. Nesta’s views are reflected in the introduction and conclusion
to the collection.
Hessy Elliott
Acknowledgements
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
01

Contents
Introduction 02
The dynamics of China’s AI strategy 09
01. Promoting Nationally, Acting Locally:
China’s next generation AI approach — by Jeffrey Ding 11
AI in action: China’s use of AI in public services 17
02. Breaking the Iron Triangle:
AI in China’s healthcare system — by Andy Chun 19
03. The Future of the Classroom?
China’s experience of AI in education — by Yi-Ling Liu 27
04. From Traffic Management to Smart Courts:
China’s approach to smart cities — by Eugeniu Han 35
05. Separating Myth From Reality: How China’s Social Credit System
uses public data for social governance — by Dev Lewis 43
The ethics and ideology of China’s approach to AI 51
06. China’s Approach to AI Ethics — by Danit Gal 53
07. The Ideology Behind China’s AI Strategy — by Rogier Creemers 63
Conclusion 70
Contributors 72
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
02
What can we learn from China’s
use of artificial intelligence in
public services?
China is striding ahead of the rest of the
world in terms of its investment in artificial
intelligence (AI), rate of experimentation and
adoption, and breadth of applications.1 In
2017, China announced its aim of becoming
the world leader in AI technology by 2030.2
AI innovation is now a key national priority,
with central and local government spending
on AI estimated to be in the tens of billions
of dollars.3
While Europe and the US are also following
AI strategies designed to transform the
public sector,4 there has been surprisingly
little analysis of what practical lessons can
be learnt from China’s use of AI in public
services. Given China’s rapid progress in this
area, it is important for the rest of the world
to pay attention to developments in China
if it wants to keep pace.
This essay collection finds that examining
China’s experience of public sector innovation
offers valuable insights for policymakers.
Not everything is applicable to a western
context – there are social, political and
ethical concerns that arise from China’s use
of new technologies in public services and
governance – but there is still much that
can be learnt from its experience while also
acknowledging what should be criticised
and avoided.
Taking a closer look at China’s
use of AI in public services
A central theme of China’s 2017 AI
development strategy is that AI can help
improve public services and governance,5 and
this has created significant opportunities for
public sector innovation. Local governments
and authorities, research institutions and
tech companies are making rapid progress
in pursuing AI projects that address real-
world problems, from medical imaging for
disease diagnosis to smart city applications
for the improvement of transport and urban
infrastructure.6 Such applications have
tended to be overlooked by analysts outside
China, who too often default to narratives
about authoritarianism or the foreign policy
implications of a global AI arms race.
This essay collection aims to offer
policymakers new ideas that may inform
their own practice, by tapping into China’s
experience of AI in public services. The
essays – written by experts on AI innovation
in China – offer detailed analyses of China’s
development and use of AI technologies,
examining the impact on public service
delivery and society, and considering
what can be learnt.
While each essay represents the views of
the author and does not necessarily reflect
the position of Nesta, we hope that the
collection as a whole will offer a nuanced
understanding of public sector AI innovation
in China – challenging misconceptions,
highlighting promising approaches and
applications, and cautioning against
problematic uses.

Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
03
research. The urgency of health challenges
such as an ageing population are universally
applicable and there are major gains to be
had for governments that can move quickly
and find new and effective approaches
to tackle such challenges. The regulatory
environment in Europe may not allow us
to replicate China’s fast-paced approach
to experimentation and implementation
(and there are reasons why we wouldn’t
want it to),9 but it is worth considering how
experimentation methods like regulatory
sandboxes and innovation testbeds could
be used to adapt this approach for a western
context. This resonates with Nesta’s work on
‘anticipatory regulation’ which has explored
the role these methods can play in allowing
new products and services to be safely tested
and brought to market more quickly,10 and is
an approach that has also been called for by
NHS Digital in the UK.11
03. Innovation isn’t always the result
of cutting-edge tech
China’s AI innovation successes are not
always due to cutting-edge technologies.
Instead, success in China is often down to
rapid deployment and scaling of existing
AI technologies. China’s innovation model,
which prioritises ‘fusion and speed’ over
breakthrough technologies,12 demonstrates
that an AI strategy doesn’t have to focus
solely on the most advanced technologies in
order to be successful. While conversations
about innovation in the UK often focus on
R&D for new, advanced technologies, equally
important is ensuring better adoption of
existing technologies13 – yet the uptake of
available AI technologies among UK councils,
for example, remains strikingly low.14 There is
clear scope for dedicated efforts to be made
in the UK and other European countries
to consider how existing AI technologies
can be adopted and scaled to improve
public services.
Learning from China’s experience
Through the essays, we discover what’s
good, bad and unexpected about China’s
public sector AI innovation. There are six
key lessons that emerge:
01. Rapid AI development is driven
by local innovation
China is experiencing rapid innovation
in many AI fields, thanks to its strategy
of actively cultivating local innovation
ecosystems. Local governments in China
are empowered to drive forward with
experimentation and implementation, and
are establishing cross-sector partnerships
with industry and academia. In light of the
UK government’s regional ‘levelling-up’
ambitions to address geographic economic
imbalances by, among other things, boosting
research and innovation throughout the
UK,7 China’s innovation ecosystem is
instructive. China’s increased R&D spending,
combined with devolved local governments
that have the power and authority to drive
collaboration with technology and research
partners, highlights how flourishing innovation
ecosystems can be fostered outside of capital
cities. There are echoes here of previous calls
from Nesta and others for more of the UK’s
R&D budget to be devolved to cities and
regions to spread the impact and benefits
of innovation across the UK.8 China’s
experience would suggest there is merit
in pursuing this approach.
02. ‘Experiment first and regulate later’
leads to quick progress
China has made swift progress in practical AI
applications because it experiments first and
regulates later. China’s agile and pragmatic
approach to innovation is resulting in the
fast-paced development of AI applications,
especially in the field of healthcare, with
promising results in areas such as medical
image processing and pharmaceutical

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
04
Most disturbingly, reports and leaked
documents have revealed the government’s
use of facial recognition technologies to
enable the surveillance and detention of
Muslim ethnic minorities in Xinjiang province.18
China is a global leader in AI surveillance
and facial recognition technologies. But
companies in the US, France, Germany
and elsewhere are also active in developing
and supplying surveillance technologies
worldwide,19 and governments in Europe
and the US have been criticised by rights
groups for their use of facial recognition.20
The relationship between AI and surveillance
deserves deep consideration by policymakers
and technologists the world over. The ethical
tensions highlighted in this essay collection
may focus on China but should give us cause
to reflect on fundamental questions about
the use of AI wherever it is being deployed.
06. AI is not a panacea
China’s experience also demonstrates
that AI is not a silver bullet – challenging
the techno-optimism of Silicon Valley. In
areas with clearly defined and generally
accepted outcomes, such as smart city traffic
optimisation, AI is a promising tool to improve
the efficiency and reach of services. However,
in areas of social life that are complex,
unpredictable or subject to debate – such as
education or the judiciary – AI may not be a
well-placed or desirable tool. In these areas,
fundamentally human qualities such as
flexibility, emotional intelligence, contextual
awareness and moral judgement remain
vital.21 Here AI may be able to play a useful
role as a decision support tool but should
not replace humans.
04. Good-quality services shouldn’t come
at the expense of widening inequalities
While AI has the potential to widen access
to good-quality services, it could also end
up reinforcing inequalities. China provides
a useful lesson of what should be avoided.
Developments driven by private sector tech
companies and then not universalised by
the public sector risk widening inequalities
and the marginalisation of certain groups.
This is the case with China’s adoption of
AI educational tools. With development
led by private sector ed tech companies,
these tools are often only accessible to
wealthier families. Nesta has highlighted
the importance of ensuring that innovation
tackles inequality rather than increases it,15
and has called for improved understanding
among policymakers about how innovation
– and innovation policies – impact different
social groups, and for interventions that
serve the needs of those who are particularly
marginalised.16
05. The issue of AI ethics in China
is complicated
Contrary to dominant western media
narratives, China is talking about AI
ethics. Various multi-stakeholder expert
committees have been established and
have released documents outlining AI
ethics principles, many of which align with
existing global standards. The international
community could do more to engage with
China on these issues, and foster greater
global co-operation on key conversations
about AI ethics and safety. Europe has the
opportunity to draw on its strengths and be
a co-operation partner on matters such as
data protection and AI ethics.17
Yet China’s discussions around AI ethics
don’t detract from the fact that, as an
authoritarian state, there are elements of
the Chinese government’s use of AI which are
profoundly alarming and violate civil liberties.
Privacy laws that protect consumers from
tech companies do not limit the government’s
access to and use of private data. There are
many instances where citizens’ privacy is
being infringed, or where the operation
of AI systems lacks transparency.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
05

We are sure that readers will learn something
new and encounter ideas that challenge their
thinking. Understanding and learning from
China’s experience offers us the opportunity
to reflect on some of the fundamental
questions that the use of AI in public services
raises. This collection provides a fresh
perspective and adds a new dimension
to this debate.

Hessy Elliott
Government Innovation Research, Nesta
Conclusion
We hope this collection gives people
a deeper understanding of how China
is innovating with AI in public services,
challenging current misconceptions and
illuminating nuances in the debate. Taken
together, the essays demonstrate the broad
spectrum of activity and innovation in China.
The collection offers both new ideas and
insights to policymakers and innovators
about how AI can be used to benefit public
services, as well as highlighting the social,
political and ethical issues that arise from
China’s applications.
Consistent
(inflexible)
performance
Scale and
speed
Can
interpret high-
dimensional
data
Can learn
from (many)
examples)
Not vulnerable
to social bias
Moral and ethical
judgement
Emotional
intelligence
Flexible
(inconsistent)
performance
Can learn from
(few examples)
Contextual
awareness
reasoning
Curiosity and
intent
Machine intelligence
Human intelligence
Infographic from The Future of Minds and Machines. Visual asset created by Margherita Cardoso of Soapbox.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
06
Yi-Ling Liu examines the emergence of AI
educational tools and adaptive learning
systems, and the potential benefits that
these innovations are said to offer. However,
with development led in large part by private
sector ed tech startups, it remains to be seen
whether these tools can translate to the
public education system and help balance
the rural-urban educational divide, as touted,
or whether in fact they are likely to entrench
existing socioeconomic inequalities. Moreover,
there are fundamental questions around
whether AI educational tools are beneficial
in a pedagogical sense, capable of teaching
students beyond mere rote learning, as
well as serious concerns about the ethical
implications of collecting student data.
Learning from China’s experiences of AI in
education becomes of vital importance as the
world looks to online learning as a potential
solution to the global disruption to schools
due to the coronavirus pandemic.22
Eugeniu Han examines the use of AI in smart
cities in China, exploring two illuminating
case studies: ‘City Brain’, an intelligent urban
management system designed in Hangzhou,
which has now been rolled out to 23 cities
across Asia, and Shanghai’s Smart Court
system. While the judicial system is not often
analysed alongside urban management
and transport services in typical smart city
case studies, this original perspective reflects
two key drivers behind the development of
China’s smart cities: the growing demand
for improved services in the context of
urbanisation, and the desire to strengthen
China’s main governing institutions – this
latter theme is also explored in the essays
by Dev Lewis and Rogier Creemers. The topic
of smart cities in China is complex: some
applications have great potential to benefit
cities and citizens and make urban services
more efficient, yet other elements are
problematic, especially regarding issues
of privacy, bias and political interference.
More about the essays in
this collection
The collection begins with Jeffrey Ding’s
essay on China’s AI innovation ecosystem.
Contrary to western perceptions that China’s
AI development is driven by a centrally
planned industrial strategy, it is at the local
level that real innovation is happening. Cities
are creating successful ‘hybridised industrial
ecosystems’ by connecting the public sector,
leading tech companies, research institutes
and networks of SMEs to drive technological
advances and implementation. Increased
R&D spending is only part of the equation:
for such ecosystems to develop successfully,
cities also need a strong local technology
base, an elite university, a co-operative local
government, a good skill supply and inter-
regional or international linkages.
Andy Chun is optimistic about AI’s potentially
revolutionary impact on healthcare in China,
which faces the dual challenges of an ageing
population and a scarcity of medical services
in rural areas. AI is being developed and
deployed in several key areas: improving
diagnostic accuracy; assisting with treatment
decisions; predicting potential health
problems through analysis of patient data
generated by wearables; automating certain
tasks to reduce physician workload and
increase remote access; and reducing R&D
timeframes for new pharmaceuticals using
AI modelling and simulations. Following the
outbreak of COVID-19 in Wuhan, these key
AI applications are being deployed in China
to tackle the pandemic and contribute to
vaccine research efforts. China’s ‘experiment
first, regulate later’ approach is aiding its rapid
advances in healthcare AI – in a European
context, regulatory innovations such as
sandboxes could help boost the pace
of progress.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
07
Yet it is worth remembering that governments
in Europe and the US are also using facial
recognition in problematic and concerning
ways. The scope and extent of China’s
deployment of AI in public services may be
beyond anything occurring elsewhere, but the
ethical considerations it raises are universally
relevant, and examining China’s experience
helps us reflect on shared ethical issues that
must be tackled collectively.
Finally, Rogier Creemers offers a critical
reflection on why China is seeking to deploy
AI in public services. China’s drive to deploy
technology in social governance stems from
the Communist Party’s ideological view that
social order is governed by an objective
and intelligible set of ‘laws’, and that big
data and AI can both help to understand
these laws and ‘engineer’ society to solve
social problems. The development of this
ideological position is particular to Chinese
intellectual history, yet there is an interesting
parallel to be drawn between this ideological
position and Silicon Valley ‘solutionism’, where
technology and data are seen as a panacea
for social problems. Strikingly, China’s State
Council explicitly identifies AI as a tool to
assist with both sides of ‘social governance’:
providing better public services as well as
preventing and controlling social unrest.
Understanding this helps us see that the
smart courts in Eugeniu Han’s essay and the
Social Credit System in Dev Lewis’ essay are
part of the same story as the other public
service AI applications that are intended
to improve the lives of citizens.
Dev Lewis examines the development of
China’s Social Credit System (SCS). The SCS
has gained notoriety outside China and,
while critics raise legitimate concerns, there is
much misunderstanding about the system’s
functioning, aims and reach. The SCS forms
part of the Chinese government’s attempt to
strengthen its weak institutions and boost
trust between governments, firms and
individuals by improving and harnessing its
public data platforms. Rather than being
a single overarching system, the SCS is
a cluster of different emerging initiatives.
These include the national Blacklist-Redlist
Joint Sanctions and Rewards regimes, that
attempt to remedy the judicial system’s failure
to enforce laws, and municipal-level Citizen
Score experiments being developed in some
cities, that offer benefits to individuals with
‘good credit’. Western narratives tend to
conflate SCS with other types of surveillance
in China, obscuring what is distinctive about
the system and the motivations behind it.
Of course, there are causes for concern too
– particularly over fairness, accountability
and the lack of transparency around what is
deemed to constitute ‘trustworthy’ behaviour.
Danit Gal explores China’s approach to
AI ethics, dispelling a common assumption
that these issues are not being considered
in China. China has established various
expert committees and published several
documents outlining AI ethics principles.
In some areas, especially around privacy,
China’s approach aligns with universal
ethical principles adopted globally, and the
international community could do more
to include China in global AI governance
discussions. But China also has its own
unique ethical and cultural foundations,
and questions around how to apply these
distinct philosophical concepts to AI are
still being debated in China. Applying AI in
public services, as explored in the collection’s
other essays, carries with it a host of ethical
considerations and implications, including
privacy, bias, accessibility, accountability
and transparency. While China has
implemented robust consumer privacy laws,
the government’s use of private data for
surveillance is a cause for serious concern.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
08
1  Daniel Castro, Michael McLaughlin, and Eline Chivot,
'Who is Winning the AI Race: China, the EU or the United
States?', Center for Data Innovation, 19 August 2019,
https:/ /www.datainnovation.org/2019/08/who-is-winning-
the-ai-race-china-the-eu-or-the-united-states/.
2  Graham Webster et al., ‘Full Translation: China’s “New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan”,
DigiChina, 1 August 2017, New America, https:/ /www.
newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-
translation-chinas-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-
development-plan-2017/.
3  Gregory C. Allen, ‘Understanding China’s AI Strategy’,
Center for a New American Security, 6 February 2019,
https:/ /www.cnas.org/publications/reports/understanding-
chinas-ai-strategy.
4  ‘AI for the Public Sector’, European Commission,
https:/ /ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/ai-watch/topic/ai-
public-sector_en.
5  Paul Triolo and Graham Webster, ‘Visions of Leadership
for China in AI, and for Tech in Chinese Politics’, in ‘China’s
Plan to “Lead” in AI: Purpose, Prospects, and Problems’,
New America, 1 August 2017, https:/ /www.newamerica.org/
cybersecurity-initiative/blog/chinas-plan-lead-ai-purpose-
prospects-and-problems/.
6  Paul Triolo and Jimmy Goodrich, ‘From Riding a Wave
to Full Steam Ahead’, New America, 28 February 2018,
https:/ /www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
digichina/blog/riding-wave-full-steam-ahead/.
7  Chris Skidmore, ‘Levelling up Research and Innovation
Right Across the United Kingdom’, speech delivered on 24
January 2020, https:/ /www.gov.uk/government/speeches/
levelling-up-research-and-innovation-right-across-the-
united-kingdom.
8  Nesta and BritainThinks, Is the UK Getting Innovation
Right? (London: Nesta, February 2020), https:/ /media.
nesta.org.uk/documents/Is_the_UK_Getting_Innovation_
Right.pdf.
9  ‘Why is Regulating Artificial Intelligence Important
in Europe?’, European Parliament, 20 February 2020,
https:/ /www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/
society/20200213STO72575/why-is-regulating-artificial-
intelligence-important-in-europe.
10  Harry Armstrong, Chris Gorst, and Jen Rae, Renewing
Regulation: ‘Anticipatory Regulation’ in an Age of Disruption,
(London: Nesta, March 2019), https:/ /media.nesta.org.uk/
documents/Renewing_regulation_v3.pdf.
11  Andrea Downey, ‘Regulatory Sandbox for AI Needed
to Test and Build Systems, NHSX Says’, Digital Health, 12
February 2020, https:/ /www.digitalhealth.net/2020/02/
regulatory-sandbox-for-ai-needed-to-test-and-build-
systems-nhsx-says/.
12  Kai-Fu Lee, ‘Dr Kai Fu Lee: AI Superpowers: China,
Silicon Valley, and the New World Order’, speech filmed
28 September 2018 at Asia Society Northern California
Center, introduction plus video, https:/ /asiasociety.org/
northern-california/dr-kai-fu-lee-ai-superpowers.
13  ‘Driving the Adoption of Digital Technology’, CBI,
https:/ /www.cbi.org.uk/our-campaigns/driving-the-
adoption-of-digital-technology/.
14  William Eichler, ‘“Shockingly Small” Number of Councils
Embrace Automation, Study Reveals’, LocalGov,
https:/ /www.localgov.co.uk/Shockingly-small-number-of-
councils-embrace-automation-study-reveals/47387.
15  Nesta & BritainThinks, Is the UK getting innovation
right?, 5.
16  Isaac Stanley, Alex Glennie and Madeleine Gabriel, How
Inclusive is Innovation Policy? Insights from an International
Comparison (London: Nesta, November 2018), 21,
https:/ /media.nesta.org.uk/documents/How_inclusive_
is_innovation_policy__Insights_from_an_international_
comparison_v3.pdf.
17  Kai von Carnap, Kristin Shi-Kupfer, ‘Values as a
Quality Seal: Germany Should be More Active in Shaping
Cooperation with China’, MERICS blog: European Voices
on China, 4 September 2019, Mercator Institute for China
Studies (MERICS), https:/ /www.merics.org/en/blog/values-
quality-seal-germany-should-be-more-active-shaping-
cooperation-china.
18  Human Rights Watch, China’s Algorithms of Repression:
Reverse Engineering a Xinjiang Police Mass Surveillance App
(New York: Human Rights Watch, 1 May 2019),
https:/ /www.hrw.org/report/2019/05/01/chinas-algorithms-
repression/reverse-engineering-xinjiang-police-mass-
surveillance.
Paul Mozur, ‘One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China
Is Using AI to Profile a Minority’, The New York Times, 14 April
2019, https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/technology/
china-surveillance-artificial-intelligence-racial-profiling.html.
Catherine Shu, ‘Leaked Chinese Government Documents
Detail How Tech is Used to Escalate the Persecution
of Uighurs’, TechCrunch, 25 November 2019,
https:/ /techcrunch.com/2019/11/24/leaked-chinese-
government-documents-detail-how-tech-is-used-to-
escalate-the-persecution-of-uighurs/.
19  Steven Feldstein, The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance
(Washington DC: Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, 17 September 2019), https:/ /carnegieendowment.
org/2019/09/17/global-expansion-of-ai-surveillance-
pub-79847.
20  Janosch Delcker and Cristiano Lima, ‘Fight Against
Facial Recognition Hits Wall Across the West’, Politico,
27 December 2019, https:/ /www.politico.eu/article/fight-
against-facial-recognition-hits-wall-across-the-west/.
21  Aleks Berditchevskaia and Peter Baeck, The Future of
minds and machines, (London: Nesta, March 2020), 16,
https:/ /media.nesta.org.uk/documents/FINAL_The_future_
of_minds_and_machines.pdf.
22  UNESCO, ‘1.37 Billion Students Now Home as COVID-19
School Closures Expand, Ministers Scale up Multimedia
Approaches to Ensure Learning Continuity’, UNESCO, 24
March 2020, https:/ /en.unesco.org/news/137-billion-
students-now-home-covid-19-school-closures-expand-
ministers-scale-multimedia.
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
09
The dynamics
of China’s AI strategy

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
010

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
011
The importance of local AI policy
Provincial and local governments play
an outsized role – one only increasing in
significance – in implementing innovation
policy. Their proportion of China’s overall
fiscal expenditures on science and technology
rose from 48 per cent during 2007–2011 to
59 per cent in 2015–2016.4 With respect to
implementing China’s national science and
technology initiatives, provinces and localities
have significant autonomy in experimenting
with different approaches.5
China’s AI approach does not deviate
from this trend. In one sense, the central
government’s release of the AIDP served
as a ‘lead geese effect’ (头雁效应) of sorts,
spurring more than 20 provinces to issue
at least 30 specific policies to support
AI development by the end of 2018.6 In
another sense, many forward-thinking local
governments implemented AI-related policies
that preceded national government action,
such as Hangzhou and Hefei – the two cases
covered in detail in this essay.
Irrespective of the order, when the targeted
benchmarks from the subnational plans that
outline specific figures are aggregated, the
combined target – a core AI industry worth
429 billion RMB by 2020 – far exceeds the
AIDP’s target of 150 billion RMB.7 On their
own, these figures are difficult to interpret
as the line between core AI and AI-related
industries is fuzzy. However, the ratio reveals
the scale of local ambition.
When China’s State Council published
its Next Generation Artificial Intelligence
Development Plan (AIDP) in July 2017, many
interpreted the move as China planning
its way to AI supremacy from the top
down. ‘There’s a tendency to place this AI
mobilisation within China’s longstanding
tradition of centrally planned engineering
achievements that have wowed the world,’
writes Matt Sheehan.1 However, that China’s
approach to AI is defined by its top-down
and monolithic nature was one of the myths
I sought to debunk in an earlier report on
China’s AI landscape.2
In this essay, I underscore the importance
of provincial and local governments in
implementing AI policy in China. Specifically,
to spur advances in AI, subnational
governments are connecting leading firms,
research institutes and networks of small
and medium enterprises in order to build
‘hybridised industrial ecosystems’.3 The AI
ecosystems with the most potential are those
that are adapted to local conditions. But,
while provinces and cities are taking bold
action on AI, it is important not to overstate
the scale and success of local activity.
Additionally, some aspects of China’s locally
driven approach to AI development may be
counterproductive. Finally, I suggest some
lessons that European governments can
take from the Chinese experience, including
shifting focus to potential clusters beyond
major capital cities and the opportunities that
lie in specialising in particular AI subdomains.
01.
Promoting Nationally,
Acting Locally: China’s
next-generation AI approach
By Jeffrey Ding
DPhil researcher and China lead at the Centre for the Governance of AI,
University of Oxford’s Future of Humanity Institute

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
012
The Hangzhou AI Town
Eleven days before the AIDP was released,
on 9 July 2017, the Hangzhou AI Town (杭
州人工智能小镇) opened for business, with
the mission to link together e-commerce
company Alibaba, Zhejiang University,
graduates returning from overseas and local
businesses in an AI cluster. This AI park does
not exist in a vacuum. It is housed within the
Hangzhou Future Sci-Tech City (HFSTC) which
itself is connected to a larger infrastructure
of science and technology (S&T) parks in
Hangzhou. Initiated after visits by Zhejiang
provincial leaders to Silicon Valley, the driving
force behind HFSTC is to cultivate knowledge
spillovers and agglomeration benefits similar
to those that flow to Silicon Valley.11
The Hangzhou AI Town’s 2019 audit report,
which provides a breakdown of funding
allocations, offers some preliminary
indications of the town’s progress.12
It disbursed 43 million RMB in funding
in 2019, separated into research and
development (R&D) funds, subsidies for
office fees and cloud services funds.
Across the three categories, the 123
accepted project proposals spanned an
extensive range of subdomains (from sign
language translation using computer vision
to predictive analytics of smart city data)
and parts of the AI stack (from open source
software to end devices).13 Moreover, the
very existence of transparent, budget-
line disclosures of how much funding was
allocated to which companies is refreshing in
that it demonstrates that there is something
substantive happening.
One concern is whether Hangzhou AI Town
can sustain development beyond Alibaba,
whose influence dominates much of the
funding breakdown. For instance, a project
to industrialise the use of big data to discern
risks to public safety received the most
funding in both the R&D and office fees
category. The company, Chengying Shuju
(杭州橙鹰数据), is a subsidiary of Alibaba.
Alibaba Cloud was the sole supplier or
co-supplier for 25 of the 27 projects in
the cloud services category.
Hybridised industrial ecosystems
The first-tier cities, especially Beijing,
Shanghai and Shenzhen, have drawn
most of the attention in analyses of local
government incentives for China’s AI
development. According to one estimate,
these three cities are home to more than
70 per cent of Chinese AI firms, with Beijing
at 43 per cent, Shanghai at 15 per cent
and Shenzhen at 12 per cent.8 Given such
an unbalanced distribution in their favour,
it is no surprise that these cities have also
established strong and robust hybridised
industrial ecosystems for AI.
For instance, Beijing’s National New-
Generation AI Innovation and Development
Pilot Zone, announced in February 2019,
has provided a supportive environment for
corporate and academic joint AI labs. These
include research centres, such as the Center
for Open Data Research, which works on
establishing open data standards, as well
institutes such as the Beijing Academy of
Artificial Intelligence, which explores issues
related to AI ethics and safety. Described
by one observer as a ‘first of its kind’ pilot
project, Beijing’s AI pilot zone model is
being replicated in other municipalities, with
Shanghai opening its AI pilot zone in May 2019
and 18 other pilot zones expected by 2023.9
Whether other cities and regions can also
support competitive ecosystems for AI
development will be a crucial factor in the
widespread diffusion of AI advances across
China. This essay examines local efforts
to build robust AI industrial ecosystems in
Hangzhou, in Zhejiang province, as well
as Hefei, in Anhui province. Both have the
potential to achieve this goal. One ranking
of Chinese cities by their development of
computing power placed both within the first
tier, with Beijing, Shenzhen and Shanghai
sandwiched between Hangzhou (ranked first)
and Hefei (ranked fifth).10

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
013
Hefei’s China Speech Valley
The history of China Speech Valley (中国声谷),
in Hefei, the capital of Anhui province, dates
back to 2012 when the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology and Anhui
province signed an agreement to establish
China’s first national-level AI industrial
area.16 In the wake of the AIDP, the Anhui
provincial government and Hefei’s municipal
government released a flurry of guidelines
to support AI development in China Speech
Valley, aiming to spend 3.2 billion RMB on
intelligent speech technology by 2020.17
Initial indicators are promising. From 2017-
2018 more patent applications came from
Hefei than Shanghai or Guangzhou. As of
January 2019, China Speech Valley hosted
more than 300 companies, including iFlytek,
Huami and Tencent’s Youtu lab.18
While the benefits of S&T parks are often
viewed through the lens of local spillover
effects, extra-regional and international
linkages may be even more significant. For
HFSTC, one connection that is particularly
meaningful is to Silicon Valley, which
inspired the creation of the S&T park. The
Bay Area Council has an office in HFSTC
that helps Californian companies register
new enterprises. In addition, HFSTC
issued guidelines to attract domestic and
international talents to accelerate the
development of the AI industry in July 2017,
offering 3 million RMB in settling expenses
and 15 million RMB in subsidies for office
space costs.14 Overall, Hangzhou boasted
the highest growth in attracting returning
graduates from international universities
from 2017 to 2018, according to a report
by recruitment site Boss Zhipin.15

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
014
How effective is local action?
While the initiatives in Hangzhou and Hefei
are an extensive front of subnational action
in China’s AI development, it is important not
to overstate the scale and success of local
activity. Consider the over-hyping of Tianjin’s
$15 billion AI fund, highlighted in a 2020
report by the Institute for Defense Analyses.
Upon deeper investigation, the unfavourable
comparisons to US federal government
expenditures on AI R&D were misleading
because ‘the announced expenditure from
the Tianjin government does not appear to
be annualised, focused on R&D, come from
the central government, or consist of an
actual outlay of money.’22
Sometimes local government targets for
AI development are simply infeasible. For
instance, Sichuan province’s target for the
scale of its core AI industry is 1000, double
that of Beijing’s target even though Beijing
is home to more than 20 times the number
of AI firms as Sichuan.23 Similar tendencies
have informed other Chinese S&T policies.
As one analysis of financing schemes to
implement ‘Made in China 2025’ concludes,
‘local authorities clearly tend to overstate
the size of collected funds in order to signal
compliance with central government policies,
and funds pledged are often much higher
than those eventually deployed.’24 Another
danger is that overeager intervention by local
governments distorts the market, as was the
case with the overinvestment in the solar
photovoltaics industry.25
As with Hangzhou AI Town, Hefei’s
China Speech Valley contains many of the
ingredients needed for successful hybridised
industrial ecosystems. Designated as the
‘national team’ member (see Eugeniu
Han’s essay on smart cities for more on the
‘national team’ concept) on intelligent speech,
iFlytek could play a role similar to Alibaba
in Hangzhou, circulating research from
local universities such as the University of
Science and Technology of China (USTC)
and knowledge spillovers to local companies.
To that end, iFlytek has built an open
platform (iFLYOS) to make it easier for
developers to build speech recognition
applications.19 USTC, like Zhejiang University,
is a member of the elite C9 group of Chinese
universities. In fact, of the top 10 Chinese
universities in terms of publication output
from 2003–2012, the University of Science
and Technology of China has the highest
average citation impact.20
There are reasons to doubt the fitness of
Hefei’s AI ecosystem, at least relative to
that of Hangzhou and the first-tier cities.
Compared to Hangzhou, China Speech
Valley’s international linkages are not
as strong and there is less appeal for
graduate returnees to work in Hefei.
The entrepreneurial spirit of Hefei’s AI
ecosystem still drastically trails that of
the leading cities. From 2013 to November
2018, only 20 AI startups emerged from
Hefei; this comprised 2 per cent of Beijing’s
total.21 While Hefei’s specialisation in speech
recognition is a rational adaptation to
local conditions, a more diverse base of
AI capabilities may be required to better
sustain the ecosystem.
'Both Hangzhou and Hefei have a key ‘anchor
tenant’ tech company and an elite university
that glue the ecosystem together...Global and
extra-regional linkages are also necessary
to build competitive clusters in a world of
globalised innovation'

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
015
With an eye towards attracting the
global and extra-regional linkages that
are necessary to build competitive clusters
in a world of globalised innovation, ambitious
policymakers could provide increased access
to capital and other policy supports to AI
ecosystems in the making in cities such as
Amsterdam, Barcelona and Stockholm.29
In the United Kingdom, outside of London,
other important clusters are forming in
Cambridge, Manchester, Oxford and
elsewhere. Already a leading hub for
advanced materials, Manchester could
have the ingredients to build a dark horse
AI ecosystem around the University
of Manchester and the establishment
of a government communications
headquarters as anchors.30
Finally, in line with Hefei’s approach,
European governments should better
assess opportunities to specialise in specific
AI subdomains or parts of the value chain.
There is no need to reinvent the wheel.
Manchester, for instance, has adapted
the national Artificial Intelligence and Data
Grand Challenge, which is focused on health
care applications, toward local advantages
in smart manufacturing and cybersecurity.
The European Commission’s Key Enabling
Technologies strategy has examined
European comparative advantages in
six technology groups: micro and
nanoelectronics, nanotechnology, industrial
biotechnology, advanced materials, photonics,
and advanced manufacturing technologies.31
Given its potential to enable all six of these
enabling technologies, incorporating AI into
the Key Enabling Technologies framework
could help sustain the competitiveness of
Europe’s industrial base.
As the brief studies above of Hangzhou’s
AI Town and Hefei’s China Speech Valley
demonstrate, a better understanding of local
industrial ecosystems is a first step to getting
empirical evidence on the effect of local
implementation of China’s AI strategy.
Conclusion and lessons for Europe
Are there any lessons that Europe and the
UK could adapt from China’s approach to
developing industrial AI ecosystems? After
all, Chinese provinces are governed like large
socioeconomic entities with populations
and economic outputs that surpass some
European countries, and ‘it is often said
that a province is to China what a country
is to Europe.’26
One starting point is to shift the focus toward
clusters outside of Berlin, London and Paris,
in order to find the dark horse AI ecosystems
that could facilitate Europe-wide diffusion
of AI technologies. These ecosystems
cannot be conjured from thin air. One PhD
dissertation on S&T parks found that parks
built in areas with a weak local technological
base resulted in a glorified real estate project
that was disconnected from the local
economy.27 The ecosystems in Hangzhou
and Hefei provide some additional guidance.
In both cases, there is a key ‘anchor tenant’
(iFlytek for Hefei and Alibaba for Hangzhou)
and elite university (USTC for Hefei and
Zhejiang University for Alibaba) that glue
the ecosystem together. Empirical analysis
has shown that the presence of a large
technology firm can enhance the productivity
of local innovation systems by enabling local
university research.28

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
016
1  Matt Sheehan, 'How China’s Massive AI Plan Actually
Works', Macro Polo, 12 February 2018, https:/ /macropolo.org/
analysis/how-chinas-massive-ai-plan-actually-works/.
2  Jeffrey Ding, 'Deciphering China’s AI Dream',
Future of Humanity Institute Technical Report, March 2018, 3-4.
3  The concept of 'hybridised industrial ecosystems' comes
from Kim 2019. Sung-Young Kim, 'Hybridized Industrial
Ecosystems and the Makings of a New Developmental
Infrastructure in East Asia’s Green Energy Sector', Review
of International Political Economy 26, no. 1 (2019): 158-182.
4  Loren Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski, 'Policy, Regulation,
and Innovation in China’s Electricity and Telecom Industries',
in Policy, Regulation and Innovation in China’s Electricity and
Telecom Industries (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2019), 1-51, 13.
5  Dan Breznitz and Michael Murphree, Run of the red queen:
Government, innovation, globalization, and economic growth in
China. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011).
6  Economic Reference News, 'From “Looking Up at the
Stars” to “Landing at Scale”: More Than 20 Chinese Provinces
Issue AI Policies', [从“仰望星空”到“规模化落地” 中国逾20省发
布人工智能政策], Economic Reference News [经济参考报],
27 February 2019,
http:/ /www.sinovision.net/finance/201902/00459048.htm.
7  Jeffrey Ding, 'ChinAI Newsletter no. 4: 2018 is the Year of
AI Policy at the Local Level', ChinAI Newsletter, 2 April 2018,
https:/ /chinai.substack.com/p/chinai-newsletter-4-2018-is-the-
year-of-ai-policy-at-the-local-level.
8  Yue Hu et al., Research on the Impact of AI and Rig Data on
the Trade Between China and other Countries along the Belt: Take
the Application of Medical Economy as an Example (Changchun:
SSER 2019, 2019), https:/ /webofproceedings.org/proceedings_
series/ESSP/SSER%202019/SSER30212.pdf.
9  Thomas Lehmann, 'AI Politics is Local', DigiChina
Special Report: AI Policy and China, 23 January 2020,
https:/ /www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
digichina/blog/ai-politics-local/.
10  One proxy was demand for AI servers. Jeffrey Ding,
'ChinAI No. 28: Chips and Compute: Alternative Perspectives
and City Rankings', ChinAI Newsletter, 17 September 2018,
https:/ /chinai.substack.com/p/chinai-newsletter-28-chips-
and-compute-alternative-perspectives-and-city-rankings.
11  Julie T. Miao et al., 'The Trials of China’s Technoburbia:
The Case of the Future Sci-tech City Corridor in Hangzhou',
Urban Geography 40, no. 10 (2019): 1443-1466.
12  'Announcement on the First Batch of Subsidy Funds
Allocated for the Government Subsidy Project of Artificial
Intelligence Towns in 2019', [关于拨付人工智能小镇政府补
助项目2019年第一批补助资金的公示], Hangzhou Future
Sci-Tech City, 2 December 2019, http:/ /www.yuhang.gov.cn/
art/2019/12/2/art_1601762_40715127.html.
13  Some companies showed up multiple times.
14  'Policy Analysis: Summary of AI Policies', Deqing Makerspace
[政策解读 I 人工智能政策汇总], 31 January 2019,
https:/ /www.sohu.com/a/292560106_100179411.
15  ECNS, 'Hangzhou Leads Nation in Attracting Overseas
Returnees',ECNS Wire, 28 June 2018, http:/ /www.ecns.cn/news/
cns-wire/2018-06-28/detail-ifyvrptq6363759.shtml.
16  Fan Nana, 'Known as "China’s Speech Valley", How Strong
is Hefei’s AI Technology Foundation?', The Beijing News Smart
City Institute [新京智库], 11 January 2019, https:/ /mp.weixin.
qq.com/s/hLKc1gBk63N5yRKl-sPQGw?fbclid=IwAR1mcf0zN
ZHkhDWxMqADldK4_3PabgvHspX8lFEQeGNf4nxN2II5eAP
FnNA.
17  Jaqueline Ives and Anna Holzmann, 'Local Governments
Power Up to Advance China’s National AI Agenda', MERICS
blog: European Voices on China, 24 April 2018, Mercator
Institute for China Studies (MERICS), https:/ /www.merics.
org/en/blog/local-governments-power-advance-chinas-
national-ai-agenda.
18  Nana, 'China's Speech Valley'.
19  Jeffrey Ding, 'ChinAI no. 51: China’s AI “National Team"',
ChinAI Newsletter, 20 May 2019, https:/ /chinai.substack.com/p/
chinai-51-chinas-ai-national-team.
20  Kristen Bound et al., China’s Absorptive State, (London:
Nesta, October 2013), 45.
21  Nana, 'China's Speech Valley'.
22  Thomas J. Colvin et al., A Brief Examination of Chinese
Government Expenditures on Artificial Intelligence R&D,
(Washington DC: The Institute for Defense Analyses,
February 2020), https:/ /www.ida.org/-/media/feature/
publications/a/ab/a-brief-examination-of-chinese-
government-expenditures-on-artificial-intelligence-r-and-
d/d-12068.ashx.
23  'An Article That Takes You Through the Latest Policies
for the AI Industry Throughout the Country in 2018', Forward
Looking Industry Research Institute [前瞻产业], 30 March 2018,
http:/ /www.qianjia.com/html/2018-03/30_288481.html.
24  Max J. Zenglein and Anna Holzmann, 'Evolving Made in
China 2025', Mercator Institute for China Studies, 2019, 12.
25  Xiaolan Fu, Wing Thye Woo, and Jun Hou, 'Technological
Innovation Policy in China: The Lessons, and the Necessary
Changes Ahead', Economic Change and Restructuring 49, no.
2-3 (2016): 139-157.
26  Cheng Li, 'Political Localism Versus Institutional Restraints:
Elite Recruitment in the Jiang Era', in Holding China Together,
ed. Dali L. Yang and Barry J. Naughton (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004), 29-69, 34.
27  Achilleas Tsamis, 'Science and Technology Parks in the
Less Favoured Regions of Europe: An Evaluation of Their
Performance and the Parameters of Success' (PhD diss.,
London School of Economics, 2009), 389.
etheses.lse.ac.uk/2543/1/U615492.pdf.
28  Ajay Agrawal and Iain M. Cockburn, University Research,
Industrial R&D, and the Anchor Tenant Hypothesis (Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2002).
29  James Manyika, 10 imperatives for Europe in the age of AI
and automation (McKinsey Global Institute, October 2017),
https:/ /www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/europe/ten-
imperatives-for-europe-in-the-age-of-ai-and-automation.
30  There are few large technology giants based in
Manchester, though Microsoft has established an office in
the city. 'Greater Manchester Local Industrial Strategy', HM
Government, June 2019, https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/808579/greater-manchester-local-industrial-strategy-
single-page.pdf.
31  'Key enabling technologies policy', European Commission,
https:/ /ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/advanced-
technologies_en.
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
017
AI in action:
China’s use of AI
in public services

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
018

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
019
Over the past decade China has shifted
rapidly from a manufacturing-based
economy to a knowledge-based economy,
with technology and innovation a major
policy focus. It is becoming a leading country
in the application of artificial intelligence (AI)
across key industries. AI relies heavily on data
for machine learning and predictive analytics,
and China has no shortage of data with its
1.4 billion population constantly generating
massive amounts of it in real time. The
Chinese people have also shown themselves
to be eager users of technology and early
adopters of AI.
In healthcare, China, like many other countries,
is facing the formidable challenge of providing
easy access to affordable and high-quality
services for its ageing population. With its
use of AI combined with readily available
medical and biometric data, China is on its
way to providing personalised healthcare to
more people at a lower cost, while keeping
them healthier in the first place through
continuous monitoring and alerts. It is also
using AI to assist medical professionals in
decision-making, track patient outcomes,
reduce physician workload and speed up
drug development. China’s investment in
AI and healthcare over the past few years is
now helping it deal with the coronavirus crisis,
explored further in a case study in this essay.
While privacy around medical data is a clear
issue that requires appropriate regulation,
there are lessons for European policymakers
in China’s ‘experiment and innovate first’
approach to AI and its appreciation that
time to market is crucial if medical
innovation is not to be stifled.
AI for healthcare
Countries around the world are turning to
digital technology and AI to provide more
cost-effective and highly scalable means to
deliver services. This is particularly important
for China with its ageing population and
shortage of medical staff. Medical services
can be scarce in China’s rural areas, while
in urban areas services are highly strained
due to large patient volumes. According to
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD), China has
two practicing doctors per 1,000 persons,
compared with 2.9 for UK and 4.3 for
Germany.1 It also has only 2.7 nurses per 1,000
persons, compared with 7.8 for UK and 12.9
for Germany.2 In addition, China is ageing
more rapidly than almost any country in the
world, due mainly to its previous one-child
policy. By 2050, China will have around 330
million people over 65 with nearly a third of
its population over 60.3
AI offers the potential to break out of the
‘iron triangle’ dependencies of healthcare
priorities: access, cost and quality. These
inherent trade-offs traditionally mean
we cannot improve one priority without
sacrificing another. However, AI could
democratise health care and boost
access for underserved communities
while lowering costs and maintaining, if
not also improving, quality. According to
the consultancy firm Frost and Sullivan, AI
has the potential to improve the outcomes
of medical treatment by 30–40 per cent and
reduce costs by as much as 50 per cent.4
02.
Breaking the Iron Triangle:
AI in China’s healthcare system
By Dr Andy Chun
Adjunct professor at City University of Hong Kong
Council member and convenor of the AI Specialist Group, Hong Kong Computer Society

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
020
In 2017, when China’s State Council laid out its
AI strategic plan, it called for the development
of a whole gamut of AI and AI-related
healthcare technologies, such as intelligent
diagnosis, wearables, AI health monitoring,
robot-assisted surgeries, intelligent medical
image recognition and medical genomics,
with a strong emphasis on elderly care. In
terms of AI research, a study by the Allen
Institute for Artificial Intelligence predicts that
China will overtake the US in total number of
top 10 per cent AI research papers by 2020,
and top 1 per cent papers by 2025.5

Ways AI can help healthcare
AI captures medical knowledge
Medical professionals must learn, recall and
apply vast amounts of medical textbook
knowledge while keeping up to date with
the newest medical research/journals and
pharmaceutical products. This is exactly
what AI and cognitive computing are best
at. AI can use natural language processing
(NLP) and machine learning to read and
understand millions of online documents
and data points to help diagnose and
recommend treatments. An example of
AI cognitive computing is IBM Watson for
Oncology, which has been shown to offer
cancer treatment recommendations that
are on par with human doctors. It has
been reported that IBM Watson is already
in use at 65 large hospitals in 39 cities in
China,6 the ethical implications of which
Danit Gal explores.
Researchers in China are also using AI to
capture general medical knowledge.
For example, in 2017, iFlytek and Tsinghua
University successfully created an AI system
that not only passed the Chinese medical
licensing exam but scored better than over
96 per cent of people taking the exam.7
This is an important AI accomplishment
as the exam not only tested breadth of
knowledge but also the ability to understand
intricate connections between facts and use
them to reason and make decisions.
In 2018, the Guangzhou Women and
Children’s Medical Center created an
AI prototype that can diagnose
common childhood diseases with accuracy
comparable to experienced paediatricians.
It uses NLP and deep learning to extract
clinically relevant information from 1.4 million
electronic health records (EHR) in paediatric
patients.8 Applications like this can help
streamline frontline patient care, such as
triaging patients.
Deep learning for medical
image processing
The use of AI deep learning for medical
image processing has been one of the most
promising applications of AI in the medical
field. Artificial neural networks (ANN) and
deep learning have been used to process
various medical images such as MRI scans,
CT scans and X-ray images. With a large
enough database of medical images, AI
deep learning can learn to recognise visual
symptoms of potential diseases and illnesses.
For example, using deep learning on retinal
images can provide early detection of
diabetic retinopathy with accuracy similar
to that of experts. The same retina scanning
technique has been used to predict heart
disease. In China, researchers have been
using AI on eye scans to diagnose congenital
cataracts as accurately as human doctors;
an estimated 200,000 children are bilaterally
blind from cataracts annually.9 Besides retina
scans, radiology departments at top Chinese
hospitals routinely handle tens of thousands
of scanned images per day. AI deep learning
is already used to relieve workload by
automatically analysing and highlighting
abnormalities. Big tech players, such as
Alibaba and Tencent, are investing heavily in
this area. Alibaba uses AI to help interpret CT
scans, while Tencent’s Miying uses AI to help
detect early signs of cancer.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
021
In a competition designed by the Stanford
Machine Learning group to compare AI to
human experts in interpreting chest X-rays,
a Chinese startup, JF Healthcare, became
the first to beat Stanford University
radiologists in July 2019.10 JF Healthcare
provides remote diagnostic services, focusing
on chest X-rays, for rural township hospitals
in China where certified radiologists are
often not available. It also provides mobile
screening trucks to screen for tuberculosis in
more than 10 provinces in China. By the end
of 2019, it expects to have offered half a
million people the possibility of early
detection while preventing the spread
of disease to broader populations.
AI helps drug design
AI is also changing how drugs are discovered,
making research for new pharmaceuticals
quicker, cheaper and more effective.
Traditional drug development may take over
a decade to complete, costing hundreds of
millions to billions of USD. AI greatly reduces
the time and money needed by using machine
learning to generate candidates automatically
from existing drugs. 11 12
AI helps people to stay healthy
More affordable healthcare wearables that
track activities and heart rate mean that
consumers are actively taking responsibility
in monitoring their own health. According to
a Mintel 2017 report, 52 per cent of Chinese
consumers own a smart wristband and 42
per cent own a smartwatch,13 making China
the largest market for wearables globally.14
Big data and AI predictive analytics can
continuously monitor and alert users if there
are any abnormalities and before the outset
of more major medical problems. Insurance
companies, such as China’s Ping An Health,
are starting to integrate wearables into
their offerings, providing customers who live
healthier lifestyles with discounts and rewards.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
022
AI also automatically processes claims and
reads medical records. Fraud is prevented
by AI verifying authenticity of hospital
documents through image recognition of
official seals from more than 10,000 hospitals
in China. Blockchain technology further
ensures trust in data stored in the system.19
Case study: Using AI to
control COVID-19
There is no greater challenge to the public
health system than a pandemic, such as the
novel coronavirus outbreak that emerged
in Wuhan, China. For a fast-spreading virus
like COVID-19, time is of the essence and
China’s experience in quickly converting AI
technology into practical applications has
proved useful. AI-powered applications are
being used to combat the virus by speeding
up screening, diagnosis and new drug
development.
Screening
AI is used in infrared cameras to scan and
screen people en masse for high temperature
at airports and railway stations across
China. Together with facial recognition
cameras, the cameras can identify the
person with a high temperature, even
when wearing a surgical mask.20
Sequencing
AI was used soon after the outbreak was
discovered to help sequence the new
coronavirus genome, so that research on
a vaccine could get started. In the previous
SARS outbreak in late 2002, scientists had
to wait months before they knew what the
germ looked like. With COVID-19, it only took
Chinese scientists using AI a few weeks to
sequence the virus’s genome before sharing
it online with researchers around the world.21
AI doctors fill a gap
China, with its shortage of doctors,
has turned to AI chatbot technology
and cognitive computing to make getting
medical advice more accessible. For example,
China’s Ping A Good Doctor has an AI Doctor
chatbot that uses AI to gather medical
history and generate a diagnosis plan before
passing it to a specialist consultant via
telemedicine.1516
The AI Doctor is also used in unstaffed
booths, called One-Minute Clinics, helping
people in rural areas to get 24/7 medical
consultations from doctors in other cities.
About 1,000 of these booths were to be
installed across eight provinces and cities
in China in 2019 to service more than
three million patients. The booths also fill
prescriptions and dispense up to 100 common
medications.17 Tencent has a similar service
called WeDoctor, which village doctors in
rural areas use to support their work. Doctors
simply input a patient’s symptoms and the AI
system suggests diagnoses and treatments,
based on knowledge of more than 5,000
symptoms and 2,000 diseases. WeDoctor
claims an accuracy rate of 90 per cent and
serves more than 90,000 patients daily.18
AI makes health protection affordable
Creating affordable medical protection
is another way to reduce strain on public
sector health services. One example is Ant
Financial’s Xiang Hu Bao, an online mutual
aid platform targeting China’s poor who
cannot afford traditional commercial medical
insurance. More than 100 million people
signed up in the first year, mostly migrant
workers or people living in rural areas. It is
free to sign up with no premiums or upfront
payments and the monthly fee is based
on actual payouts, with risks and expenses
shared equally across all members. For 2019,
this fee averaged a few US dollars, while
covering 100 critical illnesses. The monthly
contribution is low because AI automates
processing without needing humans.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
023
Historical data on drug R&D efforts for
coronaviruses, such as SARS and MERS,
allows AI prediction models to provide
insights on how existing drugs might be
repurposed for COVID-19 and thus improve
the efficiency of new drug screening.26
Advice
AI chatbot technology is used to help reduce
pressure on hospital and government frontline
personnel by automatically answering
inquiries from the public. AI chatbots also
provide advice to individuals on whether
they need to go to a hospital for screening
or stay at home for the 14-day quarantine.
In Shanghai and other cities, AI chatbots
automatically call high-risk patients to
assess their condition.27 Physical AI robots
are also used in segregated wards in
Shanghai hospitals to disinfect those wards,
as well as deliver food and medications and
check body temperatures.
Quarantine
Facial recognition is used to ensure
affected citizens are following the 14-day
self-quarantine requirement. According to
reports28, people who violated the quarantine
and did not stay at home were automatically
detected by facial recognition cameras and
contacted by the police as well as employers.
A Chinese company created an AI system
that allows users to check if they have
recently travelled with someone who has
contracted the new coronavirus. The system
uses public data and other information
sources to correlate with an individual’s travel
itinerary. It was reported29 that more than
21 million people used the service within
two days of its launch.
Testing
Knowing the genome sequence allows
researchers to design lab tests to identify
the presence of the virus. Unfortunately, the
new COVID-19, like SARS and MERS, is also
a single-stranded RNA virus, which means
it is susceptible to mutation and harder to
test. Using AI, Alibaba was able to counter
this problem and reduce lab test time to
diagnosis coronavirus infection from hours
to only 30 minutes, with a new ‘whole
genome detection’ approach.22
Scanning
Besides lab tests, a CT scan of the lungs is
also an effective way of detecting signs of
coronavirus infection. During an epidemic,
radiologists are overwhelmed with thousands
of scans to inspect each day. China turned
to AI to automate this process. Alibaba
trained an AI deep learning system using
thousands of CT scans from confirmed cases.
The resulting AI model was then able to
analyse a CT scan within 20 seconds with 96
per cent accuracy of detecting COVID-19.23 24
R&D
AI companies in China, such as Alibaba
and Baidu, have been offering free and
open source AI technology, datasets and AI
compute power to public research institutions
around the world to help shorten R&D
time in combating the disease. Baidu also
open-sourced its AI LinearFold algorithm
that predicts RNA virus 3D structures
and behaviours and allows scientists to
understand better how the virus invades
our cells so that matching vaccines can be
created. Using LinearFold, prediction time
can be reduced from 55 minutes to 27
seconds.25 Alibaba also made its AI drug
discovery platform available to researchers.
'China’s experience in quickly converting AI
technology into practical applications has
proved useful in tackling COVID-19'

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
024
It is less than three years since China
announced its AI strategy yet it has achieved
widespread use of AI across all industry
sectors, benefiting all aspects of daily life
in China, and at a pace unseen elsewhere.
For Europe and North America, there are
some lessons to be learned. China’s approach
to AI and other new technologies is to
experiment and innovate first, while putting
in place supporting policies and regulations
as it goes. Time to market is crucial. This
is in stark contrast to western economies,
where lengthy policies and regulations
usually precede innovation use. There may
be a place for a middle ground where
new technologies can be tried out within
regulatory sandbox environments so as not
to stifle innovation growth. In addition, China
has a unique edge on AI development – the
vast amounts of data constantly produced
by its 1.4 billion population are the fuel for
AI’s machine learning. Chinese citizens are
also more willing to share data in exchange
for convenience and low-cost services. To
mitigate the data disadvantage, western
countries may need to find ways to share
their datasets while maintaining data privacy,
such as using new federated approaches to
machine learning. Finally, the stark reality of
a global pandemic has highlighted where
China’s investment in AI is yielding results in
speeding up some of the processes involved
in combating the coronavirus. While there
may be social and democratic implications
in some elements of this approach, it offers
a path that other countries might learn from.
Potential issues with using AI
As in other countries, the use of AI has
raised some concerns about ethics and data
privacy, particularly AI applications that
involve facial recognition and surveillance.
However, individuals’ privacy need not be
sacrificed if technology is implemented
properly30 and related regulations are put
into place. Towards this end, last year China
introduced its Governance Principles for the
New Generation Artificial Intelligence31 to
provide guidelines for legal and ethical use
of AI. These Principles are considered further
in Danit Gal’s essay. When used for public
health and social good, such as analysing
CT scans, AI algorithms may not need to
consider personal information. In other cases,
where facial recognition and surveillance of
quarantined individuals is involved, balancing
privacy with the pressing needs of the health
of a vast population might be challenging.
This is particularly so in the dire situation
of a pandemic, where potentially hundreds
of thousands, if not millions, of lives are at
stake. Achieving a greater good for humanity
might be more urgent. For example, countries
including China, South Korea, Israel and Iran
all track citizens’ smartphones to enforce
quarantine and to check the movements
of people tested positive for the virus.

Conclusion
With its 2017 AI Strategic Plan, it is evident
that China sees AI as a crucial component
for future economic growth. However,
advances in AI not only benefit businesses
and industries but can also solve many of
China’s deep-rooted social challenges, such
as the uneven distribution of resources in
health care. The use cases described in this
essay are examples of how AI, with its ability
to learn from massive data, can reduce
inefficiencies as well as stepping in when
human professionals are scarce. AI, together
with other digital technologies, can transform
vital public services to be highly scalable and
readily available at a very low cost, even to
rural areas of China.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
025
1  ‘Doctors’, OECD Data, accessed March 12, 2020,
https:/ /data.oecd.org/healthres/doctors.htm.
2  ‘Nurses’, OECD Data, accessed March 12, 2020,
https:/ /data.oecd.org/healthres/nurses.htm.
3  Yanzhong Huang, ‘Population Aging in China: A Mixed
Blessing’, Council on Foreign Relations, 4 November 2013, https:/ /
www.cfr.org/blog/population-aging-china-mixed-blessing.
4  ‘From $600 M to $6 Billion, Artificial Intelligence Systems
Poised for Dramatic Market Expansion in Healthcare’, Frost
& Sullivan, 5 January 2016, https:/ /ww2.frost.com/news/
press-releases/600-m-6-billion-artificial-intelligence-systems-
poised-dramatic-market-expansion-healthcare/.
5  Field Cady and Oren Etzioni, ‘China May Overtake US in
AI Research’, AI2 Blog, 13 March 2019, Medium,
https:/ /medium.comai2-blog/china-to-overtake-us-in-ai
research-8b6b1fe30595.
6  Wang Xiaodong, ‘Merger of IT, Medical Care to be Fostered’,
China Daily, updated 7 May 2018, http:/ /www.chinadaily.com.
cn/a/201805/07/WS5aef9beea3105cdcf651c45a.html.
7  Ma Si and Cheng Yu, ‘Chinese Robot Becomes World’s
First Machine to Pass Medical Exam’, China Daily, updated
10 November 2017, https:/ /www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/
tech/2017-11/10/content_34362656.htm.
8  Huiying Liang et al., ‘Evaluation and Accurate Diagnoses
of Pediatric Diseases Using Artificial Intelligence’, Nat Med 25,
433–438 (2019), https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0335-9.
9  Charles Q. Choi, ‘Computer Diagnoses Cataracts As Well
As Eye Doctors Can’, Live Science, 31 January 2017,
https:/ /www.livescience.com/57696-artificial-intelligence-
cataract-diagnosis.html.
10  Jasmine Pennic, ‘AI vs Humans: AI Solution Beats Stanford
Radiologists in Chest X-ray Diagnostics Competition’,
HIT Consultant, 22 August 2019, https:/ /hitconsultant.
net/2019/08/22/ai-tech-beats-radiologists-in-stanford-chest-x-
ray-diagnostic-competition/#.XmrDrqhKjb1.
11  Zachary Hendrickson, ‘New research Shows an AI-Powered
System Can Develop Potential New Drugs in Just Three
Weeks’, Business Insider, 4 September 2019,
https:/ /www.businessinsider.com/insilico-medicine-ai-system-
develops-drugs-in-three-weeks-2019-9.
12  ‘Faster, Cheaper, Better: How China and AI are Helping
Pharmaceutical Development’, technode, 24 April 2018, https:/ /
technode.com/2018/04/24/better-drugs-through-chinese-ai/.
13  ‘43% of Chinese Consumers Would Buy Wearable Devices
for Themselves’, Mintel, 13 February 2017, https:/ /www.mintel.
com/press-centre/technology-press-centre/43-percent-
chinese-consumers-would-buy-wearable-devices.
14  IDC, ‘New Product Launches Drive Double-Digit Growth
in the Wearables Market, Says IDC’, IDC, 3 December 2018,
https:/ /www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS44500418.
15 Telemedicine allows health care professionals to evaluate,
diagnose and treat patients in remote locations using
telecommunications technology, such as smartphones and
video chat.
16  Tim Hornyak, ‘What America can learn from China’s use of
robots and telemedicine to combat the coronavirus’, CNBC,
18 March 2020, https:/ /www.cnbc.com/2020/03/18/how-china-
is-using-robots-and-telemedicine-to-combat-the-coronavirus.
html.
17  Dean Koh, ‘Ping An Good Doctor Launches Commercial
Operation of One-Minute Clinics in China’, MobiHealthNews,
7 January 2019, https:/ /www.mobihealthnews.com/news/asia-
pacific/ping-good-doctor-launches-commercial-operation-
one-minute-clinics-china.
18  Amy Hawkins, ‘How Elderly, Sickly Farmers are Quenching
China’s Thirst for Data’, Wired, 12 April 2019,
https:/ /www.wired.co.uk/article/china-ai-healthcare.
19  Alipay, ‘Alipay’s Xiang Hu Bao Online Mutual Aid Platform
Attracts 100 Million Participants in One Year’, Business Wire,
27 November 2019, https:/ /www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20191126005952/en/Alipay%E2%80%99s-Xiang-Hu-
Bao-Online-Mutual-Aid.
20  Isaac Scher, ‘Chinese Subways are Using Artificial
Intelligence Facial Recognition Scanners to Help Detect
Whether People Have Coronavirus’, Business Insider, 11 February
2020, https:/ /www.insider.com/chinese-tech-companies-
artificial-intelligence-surveillance-coronavirus-2020-2.
21  ‘Novel Coronavirus – China’, World Health Organization,
12 January 2020, https:/ /www.who.int/csr/don/12-january-
2020-novel-coronavirus-china/en/.
22  Alibaba Clouder, ‘How Is Alibaba DAMO Academy
Helping to Fight the Outbreak of the Novel Coronavirus?’,
Alibaba Cloud, 6 March 2020, https:/ /www.alibabacloud.com/
blog/how-is-alibabadamo-academy-helping-to-fight-the-
outbreak-of-the-novelcoronavirus_595954.
23  Sun Henan, ‘Alibaba Says AI Can Identify Coronavirus
Infections With 96% Accuracy’, Nikkei Asian Review, 19 February
2020, https:/ /asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Coronavirus/Alibaba-
says-AI-can-identify-coronavirus-infections-with-96-accuracy.
24  Tom Simonite, ‘Chinese Hospitals Deploy AI to Help
Diagnose Covid-19’, Wired, 26 February 2020, https:/ /www.
wired.com/story/chinese-hospitals-deploy-ai-help-diagnose-
covid-19/.
25  David Aikman and Alan Chan, ‘Five Ways Chinese
Companies are Responding to Coronavirus’, World Economic
Forum, 20 February 2020, https:/ /www.weforum.org/
agenda/2020/02/coronavirus-chinese-companies-response/.
26  Sun Henan, ‘Chinese Tech Giants Open Cloud Computing
Technology to Researchers Amid Coronavirus Emergency’,
KrAsia, 31 January 2020, https:/ /kr-asia.com/chinese-tech-
giants-open-cloud-computing-technology-to-researchers-to-
help-fight-coronavirus-outbreak.
27  Sarah Dai, ‘AI Applications Surge as China Battles to
Contain New Coronavirus Epidemic’, Tech in Asia, 4 February
2020, https:/ /www.techinasia.com/ai-surge-china-coronavirus.
28  Shawn Yuan, ‘How China is Using AI and Big Data to Fight
the Coronavirus’, Aljazeera, 1 March 2020, https:/ /www.aljazeera.
com/news/2020/03/china-ai-big-data-combat-coronavirus-
outbreak-200301063901951.html.
29  Zen Soo, ‘Worried You Were on a Train With Someone
Infected With the Wuhan Coronavirus? This AI-Backed
Platform Lets You Find Out’, South China Morning Post, 30
January 2020, https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/apps-social/
article/3048232/worried-you-were-train-someone-infected-
wuhan-coronavirus-ai.
30  One example of technology implemented properly is
‘privacy-preserving’ approaches, such as: https:/ /www.apple.
com/covid19/contacttracing.
31  One example of technology implemented properly is
‘privacy-preserving’ approaches, such as: https:/ /www.apple.
com/covid19/contacttracing.
‘Governance Principles for the New Generation Artificial
Intelligence: Developing Responsible Artificial Intelligence’,
China Daily, updated 17 June 2020, https:/ /www.chinadaily.
com.cn/a/201906/17/WS5d07486ba3103dbf14328ab7.html.
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
026

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
027
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic,
China’s education system has been forced
to adapt. Public schools have suspended all
spring term classes and 260 million students
have taken their studies online. In this climate
of uncertainty, students, educators and
policymakers have increasingly realised that
they must turn to technological solutions – 
in particular, the use of artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies – to overhaul the existing
education system.
But the push for AI education in China began
earlier, before the crisis hit. Three years
ago, in July 2017, the Chinese government
published an ambitious master plan1 to
build the nation into a powerhouse of AI
innovation, particularly in education.
The government’s mandate, fuelled by
the massive quantities of student data
available to drive new technologies and
funded by the significant spending power
of Chinese parents in a highly competitive
academic culture, laid the foundations for
the country’s AI education boom. Education
technology startups in the private sector,
with their access to large datasets, ample
venture capital funding and flexibility to
experiment with new technologies, have
been spearheading the development of
AI education.
On one hand, purveyors of intelligent
technologies – such as smart schools and
adaptive learning systems – believe that
the development of AI education holds
great potential to address teacher scarcity,
offer alternative models of schooling and
reshape the traditional learning paradigm.
On the other hand, these developments face
significant limitations and risks. Can new
innovations be implemented and made widely
accessible in existing public school systems
or will they deepen existing educational
inequities? Are AI technologies capable of
meaningfully teaching students the complex
skills of creativity, collaboration and critical
thinking, or will they simply magnify outmoded
pedagogical practices? How will schools
address and regulate the ethical and privacy
concerns around the mass collection and
use of student data? These are all questions
that apply not only to the Chinese education
system but should also be of concern to
educators and policymakers in Europe as AI
begins to make rapid inroads into education
to fill a gap in these uncertain times.
Factors driving China’s AI
education boom
Three key factors have laid the unique
conditions for China’s current AI education
boom: the government’s national push to
develop AI technologies, Chinese parents’
willingness to pay for their children’s
education and the vast quantities of
student data available to fuel new algorithms.
The government’s AI innovation plan2 served
as a symbolic mandate, sending a signal to
educators, schools and enterprises that both
implementing AI education technologies and
teaching the skills3 necessary to develop AI in
the nation’s schools and universities would be
a top priority.
03.
The Future of the Classroom?
China’s experience
of AI in education
By Yi-Ling Liu
Visiting scholar at the NYU Arthur L Carter Journalism Institute

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
028
AI applications in Chinese education
AI technologies are being implemented in
China’s education system in two key ways:
firstly, through the creation of educational
tools that require basic automation
technology, such as test grading and
homework correction, and secondly, through
the introduction of adaptive learning systems
– a form of AI-driven educational technology
that responds to a student’s interactions in
real time and automatically tailors support
to their individual needs. VIPKid, for example,
will automatically pair students with teachers
according to their preferred learning styles
and needs; the online platform 17zuoye10
uses AI algorithms to streamline the
homework distribution and grading process;
and Liulishuo,11 an English-language learning
app similar to the American Duolingo,
offers an intelligent tutor equipped with
real-time personalised feedback systems
and automatic grammar correction.
Squirrel AI12 combines physical and
digital schooling, where students can
learn remotely online or go to one of the
company’s bricks-and-mortar learning
centres. Through a combination of a human
coach and virtual, AI-driven tutor, they
receive a personalised lesson plan tailored
to learning needs and gaps in their
knowledge. Each course is subdivided into
the smallest possible conceptual pieces,
such that the algorithm can diagnose
student gaps in understanding as precisely as
possible, adjusting learning pathways in real
time. Middle school maths, for example, is
broken into 10,000 ‘knowledge points’ such as
rational numbers, the properties of a triangle
and the Pythagorean theorem. By tailoring
educational experiences to the individual
student and optimising for their abilities,
adaptive learning technologies can reshape
the paradigm of learning, says Richard
Tong, Squirrel AI’s chief technology officer.13
He compares Squirrel’s transformation of
the public education system to the way
ride-sharing companies such as Uber and
Didi changed public transportation systems
– providing the same service through a more
convenient and personalised pathway.
Government rhetoric, paired with tax breaks
and incentives4 for AI ventures improving
student learning, have encouraged investors
to pour money5 into education technology
and for schools and parents to be open to
new models of online learning.
Indeed, the openness of the average Chinese
parent to pay for their child’s education has
been crucial in funding the development
of new technologies. In China’s highly
competitive academic environment, where
the national college entrance examination
– the gaokao – is a key determinant of a
student’s success in life, Chinese parents
are willing to spend up to half their monthly
salary on their children’s education, according
to venture capitalist and AI expert Kai-Fu Lee.
This is in stark contrast to the United States
and Europe where parents are much less
willing to pay for afterschool education.
Total annual spending by households on
preschool and primary education reached 
1.9 trillion RMB (296 billion USD) in the 2016-
2017 school year, comprising some 2.5 per
cent of China’s GDP in 2016, according to
a survey6 conducted by the China Institute
for Education.
Funded by parents and driven by tech
entrepreneurs, the Chinese education
industry has invited a greater culture of
experimentation.7 Underpinning the growth
of the sector is China’s large population, which
translates into a vast quantity of student data.
According to Zhang Yingqian, a professor
of computer science teaching a course on
AI applications at Xiamen University, ‘with
more data, new technologies are able to
extract more important information and
sort students, teachers and learning content
much with greater precision, at a more
granular scale.’8 With a larger database
to draw from, companies can grow more
quickly and refine their machine learning
models. For example, a Chinese online
tutoring company such as VIPKid,9 which
began as a video conferencing app
connecting American teachers with
Chinese students, can accumulate more
user interactions, make more precise
student-teacher pairings and, in turn, make
more complex adjustments to its technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
029
mobile phones, the smart learning partner is
used like a dating app, but one that matches
students and tutors according to student
queries, tutor expertise, availability and
ratings. In contrast to the previous examples,
the system may ‘put students more in control
of their own learning’.15
Another argument advanced for adaptive
learning systems is that they have the
potential to reshape the role of the traditional
teacher. According to Tong, Squirrel AI’s
technologies can, for example, replace
tasks such as face-to-face instruction with
video tutorials, and automate the delivery
of student diagnosis and feedback with
adaptive learning systems. Freed from the
rote tasks of homework correction and test-
grading, teachers are able to dedicate more
of their time and effort to more complex tasks
such as motivating students and facilitating
interpersonal collaboration. Their role might
shift from that of the instructor, standing in
front of the classroom giving lectures, to that
of the motivator, focused on the emotional
and interpersonal lives of their students.
But this claim is based on the assumption
that the most efficient form of education
is also the most effective. Like an Uber
cab or a GPS navigation device, adaptive
learning systems can ‘get a user from point
A to point B the most efficient way possible,’
says Professor Yong Zhao, who specialises in
global and online education at the University
of Kansas. ‘But they do not show the user
how to choose their own path, navigate the
roads and familiarise themselves with the
fabric of the city.’14 In other words, students
taught through intelligent learning systems
are not necessarily active decision-makers
in their own learning experience. If designed
with the goal of efficiency and scalability
alone, intelligent learning systems not only
overlook but could also strip away one of the
most fundamental skills that students need to
survive in the 21st century – self-actualisation.
An example of a simpler AI technology that
allows for greater student agency is the
Smart Learning Partner, a collaboration
between Beijing Normal University’s
Advanced Innovation Center for Future
Education and Tongzhou district of Beijing.
An AI-driven platform that enables students
to connect with a human tutor via their

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
030
Promises and limitations of AI
applications in Chinese education
Given that developments in AI education
have been spearheaded by the private
sector, one of the most significant challenges
is whether or not AI technologies can be
widely implemented in the existing Chinese
public school system. To continue the
ride-sharing analogy, although Uber was
able to integrate itself into existing public
transportation systems in some countries,
elsewhere the company’s presence disrupted
the local taxi cab industry. Public school
systems do not operate at the speed of
startups – they are embedded in long-
standing bureaucracies, local authorities
driven by their own interests and teachers
unfamiliar with novel technologies. In order
for new innovations to achieve widespread
impact, public schools will need to
collaborate with private companies
and ensure that these collaborations are
fundamentally driven by student interests,
not maximising the company’s profits.
Despite its promise, it is important to note
that teaching is an integrative process that
cannot be mechanically divided into the
discrete categories of ‘automatable’ and
‘non-automatable’. A good lecture (what
an ed tech company would describe as
‘content delivery’) is a dynamic process that
cannot simply be replaced by standardised
video tutorials. Grading a paper (what might
be described as ‘diagnosis’) is an activity
that familiarises a teacher with a student’s
personality and thought process, and to
automate is to strip away a crucial way in
which a teacher might relate to their student.
The rhetoric of ‘scalability’ overlooks the
fact that good teaching is highly context
dependent – a method of teaching a wealthy
student in urban Shanghai may be totally
inappropriate for a child raised in poverty in
rural Shanxi.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
031
However, as Rogier Creemers highlights in his
essay in this collection, there are limitations
to the ‘engineering' approach when it comes
to those areas of life that are more complex
and unpredictable. If China were to define a
high-quality education as one that cultivates
creative and collaborative critical thinkers,
capable of contributing meaningfully to
society, what role can intelligent technologies
play in teaching the next generation of
students? Can an adaptive learning system
teach students how to cultivate supportive,
interpersonal relationships – crucial to
effective collaboration? Can a robot tutor
teach emotional resilience – a skill critical
to navigating the uncertainty of the 21st
century? Can a video tutorial show students
how to make meaning from their own
experiences and learn from their mistakes?
Even if there existed technology that could
successfully teach these skills (for example,
Squirrel AI is collaborating with Stanford
University to research AI applications in the
teaching of leadership and creativity),19
would it be in the interests of China’s one-
party government to implement such
programmes in the nation’s public schools?
Finally, any implementation of AI technology
raises the question of the ethical use and
collection of data. Students, parents and
educators should be informed of the data
being collected and how it is being used,
companies should articulate transparent best
practices and governments should establish
clear regulations. What data is helpful and
what is harmful to a student’s educational
experience? On one hand, data is a crucial
asset that allows for intelligent technologies
to deliver feedback and address student
needs with much greater precision and
efficacy. An education company might collect
information on the time it took a student to
answer a question to better evaluate their
abilities. On the other hand, data could
be used as a means of maximising a
company’s profit.
Moreover, for these innovations to have
impact, they must be made widely accessible.
China’s education system remains deeply
divided, often between wealthy schools in the
nation’s first-tier cities and poorer schools in
its rural regions. Schools that have the ability
to introduce innovative new pedagogies are
most likely the nation’s elite. A 2019 report by
the Mercator Institute for China Studies on
creativity in Chinese schools points to a
widening gap between China’s poorer and
more prosperous regions. Wealthy schools
‘offer a variety of novel teaching approaches,
like maker spaces, escape rooms and
advanced computer classes … [Their poorer
counterparts] are struggling with limited
resources and are struggling to establish
creativity-fostering environments.’16 Some
companies, such Squirrel AI, have diverted
their attention away from China’s urban
centres, focusing their efforts on opening
over 1700 schools in the nation’s second and
third-tier cities.17 Nonetheless, relying on the
private sector alone may perpetuate rather
than narrow existing inequities within the
education system.
Furthermore, while intelligent technologies
may be capable of teaching skills that are
easily quantifiable, such as middle-school
mathematics, we do not know whether they
can teach more complex, soft skills such as
creativity, critical thinking and collaboration.
‘Intelligent technologies are useful for
the rapid acquisition of knowledge,’ says
Professor Yong Zhao, University of Kansas.
‘But does that amount to a higher quality
of education?’18 China’s current high-school
education system – rigidly standardised,
outcome driven and metrics based – revolves
entirely around preparing students for the
gaokao, its national university entrance exam,
and is criticised for its excessive emphasis
on test scores and rote memorisation. In this
system, students are still prepared for the
workplace of the industrial age, treated as
passive recipients of knowledge transfer, like
minds on a conveyor belt. If tailored for the
current system, intelligent tutoring systems
may simply bolster the existing gaokao
education system and train students to
become better test-takers.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
032
Should colleges have access to a student’s
genetic predisposition for mental illness, when
sorting them into dormitories? If algorithms
can identify pre-existing signs of prodigy
and talent, can schools pre-emptively recruit
them into special programmes? These are all
questions that must be grappled with when
the task of evaluating student potential has
been handed over to an algorithm.
Conclusion
Weeks after China shut down its schools due
to COVID-19, 22 other countries announced
school closures. The coronavirus pandemic
has revealed to us that no nation is immune
to what the United Nations has called an
‘unparalleled’21 disruption to the world’s
education systems. In order to continue
preparing our next generation of students
for the future, our schools must adapt to
the uncertainties and rapidly changing
realities of the 21st century. In the last
few years, China has increasingly turned
to technology as a solution – pumping
money into AI education and fostering the
growth of education startups, which have
introduced new technologies that claim to
revolutionise the future of learning. But, despite
its potential, as China’s development of AI
applications in education accelerates, it is
imperative that students, parents, educators
and policymakers around the world observe
China’s push for AI in education with a critical
eye, think through important questions of
educational equity, effectiveness and ethics
and learn from its missteps.
Personal identifiable information – say, a
student’s sexual orientation or biometric
data – could be used to discriminate or
target a student on the basis of their sexuality
or physical experience. Reports even show
some schools deploying AI-powered gates
and facial recognition cameras to monitor
everything from student concentration levels
to their emotional state.
Although the Chinese government has taken
some steps to ‘curb and regulate’20 the use
of facial recognition and new technologies in
schools, without stringent regulations these
technologies have serious implications for
student privacy, as Danit Gal discusses in
her essay. If schools are capable of tracking
every keystroke, knowledge point and facial
twitch, they are effectively furnishing either
a technology company or the Chinese
state with an eternal ledger of every step
of a child’s development. This is potentially
problematic because, whereas the human
teacher assumes change, AI assumes
continuation. Today, when a kindergarten
student makes a mistake, the human teacher
will try to help the student overcome it and
the mistake will eventually be forgotten.
In contrast, an intelligent tutoring system
could not only store that information and
tailor a personalised pathway for the
student in the first grade, it may extrapolate
that information many years later, when
the student is in high school. These are
fundamentally different approaches to
an individual’s capacity for change and
growth. Should schools use your behaviour
in high school to judge or predict your
trustworthiness as an adult?
'Whereas the human teacher assumes
change, AI assumes continuation. These are
fundamentally different approaches to an
individual's capacity for change and growth'

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
033
Endnotes
1  Arjun Kharpal, ‘China Wants to Be a $150 Billion World
Leader in AI in Less than 15 Years’, CNBC, 21 July 2017,
https:/ /www.cnbc.com/2017/07/21/china-ai-world-leader-
by-2030.html.
2  Kharpal, ‘China Wants to Be World Leader in AI’.
3  Lin Shujuan et al., ‘Students Set Sights on AI Majors’,
China Daily, updated 16 July 2018, accessed 9 April
2020, http:/ /www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201807/16/
WS5b4bdd4ba310796df4df68af_2.html.
4  Karen Hao, ‘China Has Started a Grand Experiment in AI
Education. It Could Reshape How the World Learns’, MIT
Technology Review, 2 August 2019, accessed 2 April 2020,
https:/ /www.technologyreview.com/2019/08/02/131198/
china-squirrel-has-started-a-grand-experiment-in-ai-
education-it-could-reshape-how-the/.
5  Michelle R. Davis, ‘Global Artificial Intelligence Boom
Predicted in Education, Particularly in China’, EdWeek
Market Brief, 4 June 2019, https:/ /marketbrief.edweek.org/
marketplace-k-12/global-artificial-intelligence-boom-
predicted-education-particularly-china/.
6  Yan Dai, ‘Household Education Spending Totals
$296 Billion’, China Daily, 16 January 2018, accessed
9 April 2020, http:/ /www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201801/16/
WS5a5d5e8aa3102c394518f794.html.
7  Richard Tong, CTO, Squirrel AI, said in interview
with author, 18 February 2020, New York City.
8  Said in interview with author, 11 February 2020,
Xiamen, China.
9  ‘Teach English Online’, VIPKid, accessed 9 April 2020,
https:/ /www.vipkid.com/teach.
10  ‘17zuoye’, 一起教育科技_让学习成为美好体验,
accessed 9 April 2020,
https:/ /ucenter.17zuoye.com/login.vpage?returnURL.
11  Liulishuo, accessed 9 April 2020.
https:/ /m.liulishuo.com/en/aboutus.html.
12  ‘1st AI-Powered Adaptive Education Provider in China’,
Squirrel AI Learning, accessed 9 April 2020.
http:/ /squirrelai.com/.
13  Said in interview with author, 18 February 2020,
New York City.
14  Said in interview with author, 14 February 2020,
Lawrence, Kansas.
15  Wayne Holmes and Charles Fadel, ‘The Promises and
Implications for AI Teaching and Learning’ in Artificial
Intelligence in Education, ed. Maya Bialik (Boston,
MA: Center for Curriculum Design, 2019), 149–150.
16  Didi Kirsten Tatlow, ‘Manufacturing Creativity and
Maintaining Control: China’s Schools Struggle to Balance
Innovation and Safeguard Conformity’, China Monitor
Perspectives, 14 February 2019, Mercator Institute for
China Studies (MERICS), https:/ /www.merics.org/en/china-
monitor/manufacturing-creativity-and%20maintaining-
control.
17  Said in interview with author, 18 February 2020,
New York City.
18  Said in interview with author, 14 February 2020,
Lawrence, Kansas.
19  Said in interview with author, 18 February 2020,
New York City.
20  ‘China to Curb Facial Recognition and Apps in Schools’,
BBC News, 6 September 2019, https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/
world-asia-49608459.
21  ‘Coronavirus Update: 290 Million Students Now
Stuck at Home’, UN News, 5 March 2020, accessed
9 April 2020, United Nations, https:/ /news.un.org/en/
story/2020/03/1058791.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
034

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
035
A ‘smart city’ generally refers to a city that
has enhanced the quality of its services
by adopting advanced information and
communications technologies. The need for
better services is usually motivated by two
fundamental drivers: increasing urbanisation
and growing demands for better quality of
life. Added to these factors are economic
considerations, such as the desire to increase
gross domestic product, develop the services
sector and attract innovative people and
firms. In China’s case, the push to develop
smart cities seems to have an additional
critical motive – the desire to strengthen
the country’s main governing institutions.1
Most overarching policy frameworks, such
as the five-year plans, emphasise upholding
leadership by the Communist Party of
China (CPC) as one of the basic principles of
development, while China’s New Generation
of Artificial Intelligence Development Plan
recognises that artificial intelligence (AI)
can improve ‘social governance, and is
indispensable for the effective maintenance
of social stability’.2 Rogier Creemers explores
this motivation in more depth in his essay in
this collection on the ideology behind China’s
AI strategy. Finally, developing and exporting
smart city technologies is part of China’s
international ambitions outlined in the Digital
Silk Road component of its flagship Belt and
Road Initiative.3 For all of these reasons, the
development of smart cities has become a
policy priority in China.
Of China’s more than 500 smart city pilots,
this essay focuses on two flagship projects
– the City Brain system of urban traffic
management and the System 206 smart
court case-handling system. The first is what
we might consider to be a ‘traditional’ smart
city initiative. Smarts courts are rather more
unusual – although they are usually listed
in Chinese planning documents as integral
parts of smart cities – and demonstrate
the complexity of smart projects and
how different AI applications are bundled
together. They also highlight some of the
ethical questions and concerns that emerge
when AI algorithms are used in justice
systems. Both these smart city projects
present possible lessons for the UK and the
EU, including a focus on policy consistency
and competition between different localities
in the Chinese system, skilful deployment
of proven commercial technologies (rather
than necessarily cutting-edge technologies),
and different models of interaction between
government and the private sector.
04.
From Traffic Management to
Smart Courts: China’s approach
to smart cities
By Eugeniu Han
PhD candidate in Policy Analysis at the Pardee RAND Graduate School
Assistant policy researcher at the RAND Corporationi
i Any opinions expressed in this paper belong to the
author and do not necessarily represent the views of the
RAND Corporation or its research clients or sponsors.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
036
AI applications in smart cities
Since China has more than 500 smart city
pilots, we will not attempt a comprehensive
overview of the field. Instead, we will briefly
discuss two flagship projects – traffic
management and smart courts – that
might provide important lessons. The former
example is indicative of more traditional
applications of AI in smart city technologies,
while the latter may offer a glimpse into how
the Chinese government is planning to use
technology to improve the core functions of
the government within the parameters of its
political system. At the same time, we must
caution that these cases describe relatively
successful and well-known flagship projects
and are not necessarily a reliable indicator
of the overall performance of China’s smart
city programme.9
Urban management – City Brain
City Brain is a system of urban traffic
management first launched in Hangzhou
in 2016 with the primary goal of reducing
traffic congestion. It was jointly developed by
13 companies in collaboration with the city
government and is operated from Alibaba’s
cloud service. While City Brain was initially
built around image recognition algorithms
to detect traffic from traffic camera video
feeds, it gradually developed into a data
co-ordination centre that consolidates data
feeds from more than 700 IT systems from
different government agencies. It attempts
to identify and solve an array of problems
ranging from traffic management (including
traffic light optimisation and facilitation of
emergency response for ambulances and
firefighters) to waste collection, parking lot
management and health monitoring of the
city’s aging population. City Brain is available
in several different modifications and has
been implemented in 23 cities across Asia,10
sometimes within the Digital Silk Road
component of the Belt and Road Initiative.11
Institutional and policy framework
The development of smart cities is governed
by a complex mix of institutions and policies.
At the highest policy level, the development
of smart cities has been coded in the 13th
five-year plan, which calls for the development
of ‘a number of exemplary smart cities,
focusing on developing smart infrastructure,
convenient public services, and refined social
governance’.4 This call confirms the pilot
approach where national-level ministries are
involved in the development of technologies
and standards, while local governments
generally retain decision-making on the
specific implementation aspects of smart-city
programmes.5 The choice of pilots does not
follow a particular pattern, with some projects
resulting from a rigid top-down approach
while others appear to be primarily driven by
local initiative. This pattern of public services
innovation diffusion in China has been
documented in earlier studies.6
To accelerate the development of the core
AI technologies, the government developed
a ‘national team’ approach – where different
tech giants are tasked with developing open
innovation platforms in their respective fields,7
as Jeff Ding also describes in his essay in this
collection on local AI policy and hybridised
industrial ecosystems. This approach is
different from the classic ‘national champions’
approach since the members of the national
teams are not shielded from competition,
can partner with foreign firms and appear
to be less dependent on government
financial support.8

'The evolution of City Brain resembles the
growth of a startup, where the focus is on
rapid development with mistakes and bugs
fixed along the way'

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
037
Third, the project is led by a big company
(Alibaba) that provides the core technology
(cloud service platform) and manages the
co-ordination with various government
departments. Notably, the project requires
continuous endorsement from the highest
level of the local government to allow data
integration between different agencies and
departments.
Finally, there is a symbiotic relationship
between the leading firm and the
government, where the government is helping
the firm develop a business product that
can be adopted by other Chinese cities and,
potentially, exported to other countries. The
essence of this process can be described
as ‘special deals’ where local governments
provide opportunities to selected firms on a
non-competitive basis and help them expand
to other domestic and international markets.
There is some evidence that the benefits of
these arrangements outweigh the costs in
the Chinese context.14
The evolution of the City Brain project has
several notable features that are common
to many smart city projects in China. The
first is rapid growth. City Brain started as a
small pilot for traffic management and grew
into a comprehensive large-scale system
that is governing many aspects of urban
management. Its rapid evolution resembles
the growth of a startup, where the focus
is on rapid development with mistakes
and bugs fixed along the way. Since the
project was developed in a short time and
quickly exceeded its initial scope, we can
conclude that it was unhindered by lengthy
deliberations and the participation of civil
society groups and other non-government
stakeholders.12 The second notable feature
is the emphasis on infrastructure and data
collection. City Brain depends on data
from thousands of sensors and dozens of
government agencies. Data is viewed as a
source of knowledge and a valuable resource.
Some of this data can be shared with a pool
of private firms to help develop solutions to
specific urban problems.13

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
038
Other applications, such as ‘assessment
of social harm’ and sentencing references,
even in an advisory capacity, could skew
the decision of the prosecutor or judge to
the detriment of the defendant.20 In addition,
it could be argued that an AI-generated
assessment may appear as a de facto
witness against the defendant, but without
the opportunity to test the quality of the
data and verify the soundness of the
algorithm. Some defendants (and their
defenders) may lack the technical knowledge,
resources and access to challenge AI
processes for generating a sentencing
reference and assess its potential biases.21
The ability to ‘judge the judges’ by focusing
on outliers is also ambivalent since it could
be used to discipline biased judges, but also
target those judges who may appear to be
more lenient in political cases.
System 206 shares a number of remarkable
similarities with City Brain. Both were built in
partnership with tech giants on the ‘national
team’ – iFlytec in the case of System 206 and
Alibaba in the case of City Brain. As with City
Brain, System 206 was developed at startup
speed with the primary goal of creating a
viable prototype that could be perfected
during operation. In the same vein, the
deliberations were mainly limited to different
government agencies where interagency
co-ordination was facilitated by high-level
political support.22 In another similarity with
City Brain, System 206 rapidly scaled up to
handle all criminal cases in Shanghai and is
currently expanding to other jurisdictions.23
Smart courts – System 206
System 206 is the codename for the
Shanghai High People’s Court intelligent
assistive case-handling system for criminal
cases, which aims to improve quality and
reduce ‘false, unjust, or wrong’ charges
and sentences.15 The system has two main
components. The first is a cross-referencing
system that uses speech recognition and
natural language processing to compare
different types of evidence and alert the
judge to any contradictions in the fact
patterns.16 The second is a sentencing
reference tool based on machine learning
algorithms that use the defendant’s basic
information (criminal record, age, ‘social harm’
incurred, etc) to search a large database of
past court records for similar cases and make
sentencing recommendations. The output can
take the form of a scatterplot graph, where
each dot contains the information about
the facts of the case and the corresponding
sentence. Notably, the system can also be
used to judge the judges and prosecutors
by spotting the outliers – judges and
prosecutors whose sentencing pattern is too
far away from the mainstream.17 In addition,
the Shanghai Smart Court features an AI-
powered chatbot for information enquiries,
a blockchain data transmission system that
secures links with other government agencies,
a natural language processing system that
records and transcribes the deliberations of
the collegiate panels, a smart search system
and a quick-access function that uses facial
recognition.18
An analysis of different applications used in
the Shanghai Smart Court reveals a complex
picture. Applications such as chatbots are
used extensively in the private sector and
have been piloted in other countries to
provide basic information and advice, and
may even file a standard contestation of
a parking ticket.19 In the same vein, speech
recognition applications could reduce the
workload of the clerks, legal transcribers
and court reporters and increase the
efficiency of the system, while integrated
mobile payments systems and remote access
to court documents could save time and
reduce congestion.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
039
and accountability are coded in policy,
but appear to be secondary to the
development imperative.
• Individual projects take the form of
public-private partnerships and are led
by big technology companies rather than
SMEs or startups, at least in the case of
flagship initiatives.
• A flagship project may involve many
different applications of AI. Some of these
applications are straightforward and are in
line with global best practices; others raise
significant risks to privacy and may have
built-in biases.
• Some of the issues related to the
development and deployment of AI
pertain to values and moral choices
and could be less amenable to simple
cost-benefit analysis.
Conclusions and further
considerations
Given the novelty of these systems and the
lack of first-hand evidence, more research
is needed to understand how different AI
applications affect the provision of public
services in China. A cursory overview of the
field allows us to make several observations:
• The Chinese government places a heavy
emphasis on the development of AI in
general, and for the provision of public
services in particular. AI is meant to improve
the functioning of the existing institutions,
not replace or reform them.
• National-level policies tend to focus on
technology development, while local
governments (for the most part) can
choose their own pilots.
• Policies play an important role in agenda
setting at national, local and even
company levels. Most policies focus on
speeding up technology development,
data collection and implementing pilots.
Issues like risk management, data privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
040
sufficiently developed in the domestic market,
the government may help domestic firms
export its technologies in foreign markets
through the Digital Silk Road and other
similar initiatives. This approach generally
favours large firms and leaves relatively little
room for SMEs and startups. The benefits
of this approach may include speed of
deployment and economies of scale, possibly
at the cost of increasing the influence of big
tech and suppressing smaller players. This
approach is markedly different from the more
decentralised practices in Europe, and these
differences are likely to persist.
Finally, the issues of data privacy and security
and the real (and perceived) differences
between Europe and China in this respect
have been extensively discussed elsewhere,26
and are addressed by Danit Gal in this
collection. We will only note that learning
from actual data (for example, in the case
of traffic management or, more recently,
epidemic control) may provide unique insights
and capabilities that cannot be acquired
from synthetic data or human observation.
The final decisions about the extent of data
collection will be context specific and should
involve the relevant stakeholders from the
government, industry and civil society.
Given these observations, we can briefly
discuss the implications and possible
lessons for the UK and the EU. From a policy
perspective, the Chinese smart city policy
model has traits of both traditional industrial
policy and open methods of co-ordination.
The industrial policy component is primarily
focused on technology development, while
localities are mostly free to choose their own
pilot projects in line with a softer approach
that resembles the open method of co-
ordination,24 as Jeff Ding explores in his
essay. One important lesson of the Chinese
policy model is its attempt to reduce policy
fragmentation and to nudge (or sometimes
force) local governments to develop smart
city plans that can be later used to assess
progress and induce competition between
different regions and localities. While most
Chinese policies are rather context-specific
and cannot (and should not) be directly
transferred to other countries, the overall
focus on policy consistency and competition
between different localities is an important
element that might render further
examination.
The second consideration refers to specific
technologies and applications. While China
has undoubtedly made very significant
strides in AI and machine learning
technologies over the past few years, most
AI technologies that appear in its flagship
smart city projects probably couldn’t be
described as cutting edge.25 At the same
time, the development of integrated systems
with multiple applications of well-known
technologies and the ability to scale up
rapidly (and cheaply) show that successful
development and deployment of machine
learning technologies need not be conditional
on being at the technological frontier. In fact,
a skilful deployment of proven commercial
technologies could significantly improve the
provision of public service under the right
circumstances.
The third consideration refers to the model of
interaction between the government and the
private sector. The Chinese model features
partnerships between large players and local
governments, usually with political approvals
from the higher level to facilitate interagency
co-ordination. When the technologies are

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
041
1  The primacy of the CCP leadership has been coded in
most planning documents. Most initiatives that deal with
the provision of public services and governance issues are
evaluated not only on their efficiency, but also on their
potential impact on the Party leadership.
2  国务院关于印发新一代人工智能发展规划的通知, 国发
〔2017〕35号.
3  Andrew Kitson and Kenny Liew, ‘China Doubles Down
on Its Digital Silk Road’, Reconnecting Asia, 14 November
2019, accessed 20 February 2020, Center for Strategic and
International Studies, https:/ /reconnectingasia.csis.org/
analysis/entries/china-doubles-down-its-digital-silk-road/.
4  ‘The 13th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social
Development of the People’s Republic of China (2016–
2020)’, State Council, 2016.
5  The role of local governments was outlined in the
State Council’s ‘Several Opinions of Promoting Consumer
Spending on Information Technology and Expanding
Domestic Demand’ in 2013. This document calls for pilot
smart cities projects financed by local governments
through local treasury bonds and with participation of
private firms.
6  For a description of innovation diffusion mechanisms,
see Xufeng Zhu, ‘Mandate Versus Championship: Vertical
Government Intervention and Diffusion of Innovation in
Public Services in Authoritarian China’, Public Management
Review 16, no. 1 (2014): 117-139.
7  In 2017, the Ministry of Science and Technology assigned
Baidu to develop autonomous driving; Alibaba, smart
cities; Tencent, medical imaging; and iFlytek, intelligent
voice technologies. Later on, the team was expanded to
15 companies. Sheldon Chin, ‘What could we learn from
China’s National AI Team [国家队] Strategy’, Medium, 12
August 2019, accessed 8 April 2020, https:/ /medium.com/@
smuaiclub/what-could-we-learn-from-chinas-national-ai-
team-国家队-strategy-3cb4732b3d25.
8  Jeffrey Ding, ‘China’s Current Capabilities, Policies, and
Industrial Ecosystem in AI’, testimony before the US-China
Economic and Security Review Commission’s Hearing on
Technology, Trade, and Military-Civil Fusion: China’s Pursuit of
Artificial Intelligence, New Materials, and New Energy, 7 June
2019: 16-25.
9  In fact, a recent study of ‘ordinary’ smart city projects
in Wuhan notes that ‘it is difficult to find visible or
tangible evidence of the “smart”’ upon arrival in town.
This observation mirrors authors’ own experience from
visiting several Chinese cities in 2016. Robert Cowley et
al., ‘Ordinary Chinese Smart Cities: The Case of Wuhan’
in Inside Smart Cities: Place, Politics and Urban Innovation,
eds. Andrew Karvonen, Federico Cugurullo, and Federico
Caprotti (Routledge, September 2018), 45-64.
10  Alibaba Clouder, ‘City Brain Now in 23 Cities in Asia’,
Alibaba Cloud, 28 October 2019, accessed 8 April 2020,
https:/ /www.alibabacloud.com/blog/city-brain-now-in-23-
cities-in-asia_595479.
11  Barry Naughton, ‘Chinese Industrial Policy and the
Digital Silk Road: The Case of Alibaba in Malaysia’, Asia
Policy 27, no. 1 (2020): 23-39.
12  We couldn’t find evidence of extensive engagement
with non-government stakeholders prior to the
commencement of the project in either the Chinese or
English press.
13  Abigail Beall, ‘In China, Alibaba’s Data-Hungry AI is
Controlling (and Watching) Cities’, Wired, 30 May 2018,
accessed 10 April 2020, https:/ /www.wired.co.uk/article/
alibaba-city-brain-artificial-intelligence-china-kuala-
lumpur.
14  This model is described in detail in Chong-En Bai,
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Zheng Michael Song, Special deals with
Chinese characteristics (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research, May 2019).
15  The factual information about the functions of the
‘System 206’ is derived from a comprehensive study by
Yadong Cui, the former president of Shanghai High People
Court, who oversaw the development and deployment
of the system. Yadong Cui, Artificial Intelligence and Judicial
Modernization (Singapore: Springer, 2020), 22.
16  A fact pattern is a summary of the key facts of a
particular legal case, presented without any associated
discussion of their legal consequences.
17  Kai-fu Lee, ‘ Judging the Judges’, AI Superpowers,
5 February 2019,
https:/ /aisuperpowers.com/blog/judging-the-judges.
18  Cui, Artificial Intelligence and Judicial Modernization, 72-76.
19  Samuel Gibbs, ‘Chatbot Lawyer Overturns 160,000
Parking Tickets in London and New York’, Guardian, 26
June 2016, accessed 7 April 2020, https:/ /www.theguardian.
com/technology/2016/jun/28/chatbot-ai-lawyer-
donotpay-parking-tickets-london-new-york.
20  These issues are also debated in the US, where some
courts use criminal-sentencing AI algorithms to estimate
the defendant’s likelihood of committing a future crime.
Derek Thompson, ‘Should We Be Afraid of AI in the
Criminal-Justice System?’, The Atlantic, 20 June 2019,
accessed 9 April 2020, https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/
ideas/archive/2019/06/should-we-be-afraid-of-ai-in-the-
criminal-justice-system/592084/.
21  For a summary of risks of AI use for sentencing
reference, see Noel L. Hillman, ‘The Use of Artificial
Intelligence in Gauging the Risk of Recidivism’, The Judges’
Journal 58, no. 1 (2019): 36-39.
22  Cui, Artificial Intelligence and Judicial Modernization,
notes support from Meng Jianzhu and Han Zheng, both
members of CPCCC’s powerful Political Bureau at the
time.
23  Cui, Artificial Intelligence and Judicial Modernization,
xvii, states that ‘System 206’ was widely applied to the
whole city since March 2018 and ‘public security organs,
procuratorates, and courts used the 206 System to handle
100% cases’.
24  24 With the notable exception of public security
applications of the smart city technologies, which appear
to be mandatory rather than optional.
25  See Cui, Artificial Intelligence and Judicial Modernization,
72-76, for a list of technologies used in the Shanghai Smart
Court.
26  Samm Sacks, ‘China’s Emerging Data Privacy System
and GDPR’, Commentary, 9 March 2019, accessed 6 April
2020, Center for Strategic and International Studies,
https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/chinas-emerging-data-
privacy-system-and-gdpr. See also https:/ /medium.com/
the-balance-of-privacy/chinas-dataprivacy-law-vs-gdpr-
566fde8c213c and https:/ /epernot.com/data-privacy-law-
china-comparison-europe-usa/.
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
042

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
043
China’s growing technological prowess is
capturing the attention of the world as its
companies and government rapidly build
and deploy new technologies, with an eye
on global AI leadership.1 While Chinese
bureaucracy has traditionally been a
technology laggard, it too is waking up
to the promise of previously untapped
data within government. The Social Credit
System (SCS) is the government’s attempt to
modernise its governance capacity through
data and technology. In western media it is
often caught up in a web of misconceptions
centred around a perceived ‘Orwellian’
system that involves using big data to score
citizens’ morality.2 In reality, the initiative is a
cluster of experiments harnessing public data
to improve governance by boosting trust
between government, firms and individuals.
This includes larger national efforts, such as
Blacklist-Redlist Joint Sanctions and Rewards
regimes, as well as smaller efforts taking
place in a handful of cities, where efforts at
scoring citizens are being experimented with
– albeit in fairly mundane fashion compared
to reporting in mainstream western media.
The SCS is best understood as an overarching
policy initiative consisting of multiple sub-
systems, some with different policy goals
and rules, rather than one distinct system.
Ambitiously, it takes aim at nearly all of
China’s development ills – from environmental
protection to IP and financial fraud to
academic plagiarism – which the government
believes stems from firms and individuals not
following laws and regulations.3 This is seen to
be largely due to the judicial system’s failure to
enforce laws, but is also put down to a general
weakness in the country’s institutions, which
the government believes is holding China
back in its path to becoming a developed
country with a ‘decisive market economy’.4
The SCS is an attempt to ‘encourage
individuals, business, legal institutions and
government itself to be more “trustworthy”
(守信, shouxin)’.5
While, as this essay shows, Chinese
government efforts to aggregate public
data and attempt regulatory experiments
to boost trust and improve law enforcement
are much more limited in scope, and possibly
effectiveness, than they are frequently
portrayed outside China, the system does
raise questions of fairness, transparency and
privacy. However, it is a mistake to conflate all
surveillance in China into the SCS. It may be
that the issue is less the SCS itself than the
laws it is seeking to enforce more effectively.
05.
Separating Myth from Reality:
How China’s Social Credit
System uses public data
for social governance
By Dev Lewis
Fellow and program lead at Digital Asia Hub
Yenching scholar at Peking University

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
044
To enable the collection of this data,
governments across the country have
built Public Credit Information Platforms
to ‘aggregate data generated from
public management functions by various
departments and units’.7 The data collection
typically begins at the municipal (city) level
where respective city governments aggregate
credit information from government
ministries, departments and public
enterprises in the city. For instance, in Fuzhou,
the capital city of Fujian province, the data
platforms receive credit information from as
many as 630 different entities.8 Organised in
a hierarchical fashion, the city level platforms
connect up to provincial platforms, which
finally connect to the national level platform
in Beijing. This reportedly receives data from
44 other national government ministries and
32 provincial-level platforms.
The data layer:
Public data platforms
Included within the SCS policy umbrella is
building a modern financial credit reporting
system, as exists in developed economies.
This is the kernel for the SCS and can be
traced back to the late 1990s, when it was
led exclusively by the People’s Bank of China
(PBOC). Today, financial credit reporting
remains a key priority but the scope of the
SCS as a whole goes far beyond it, with the
government’s chief policy planning agency,
the National Development and Reform
Commission (NDRC), now jointly leading
the policy initiative.
The SCS aims to channel public data across
departments so that it can be used for
decision-making by other government or
private sector actors. In government and
legal documents this data is referred to
as ‘public credit information’, defined to
include broadly any information and data
‘collected or generated by public agencies
that can be used in evaluating how well a
subject observes its legal and contractual
obligations’.6

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
045
Pooling the credit information in these
platforms creates the crucial data layer.
On top of this the government has been
able to operationalise some regulatory
initiatives aimed at enforcement of the law.
The application layer: Blacklists,
redlists, sanctions and rewards
The use of blacklists and redlists, combined
with what is known as the Joint Sanctions
and Rewards (JSR) regime, can be seen as
the key initiative of the emerging SCS so far.
Essentially, agencies and government
departments blacklist individuals or entities
found to break laws, regulations or legally
binding decisions, and ‘redlist’ those with
exemplary records within their jurisdiction.12
Names and related information are
aggregated in the public credit information
platforms and those on blacklists face
a number of sanctions, such as being
disqualified from participating in government
tenders or obtaining credit from banks. Their
names can be publicly searchable on the
credit platform portals for the benefit of
other government or private sector actors. In
some cases there is even an element of public
shaming, displaying names in public spaces,
such as cinemas or cellphone caller tunes.13
The first target of this initiative was debt
default. This was addressed through what
is known as the Nationwide Judgement
Defaulter Blacklist, maintained by the
Supreme People’s Court, which contains a
list of individuals and firms with outstanding
court judgements against them, in most
cases willful debt defaulters.
The platforms are also designed to have
public-facing portals through which
government agencies, the private sector
and the wider public can query information
and obtain other credit services, which is
discussed in the next section.
In the absence of a national law, the data
collection processes and details of the
systems in general are usually governed by
the credit regulations of the respective city or
provincial government. Thus the build out is
often not uniform across the country, as local
governments co-operate and compete with
each other, working to the same objectives
but with some freedom to experiment, as is
the norm in modern governance in China9,
and as Jeff Ding explores in his essay.
These credit regulations also control the
collection of certain types of data, forbidding
the collection of religious faith, genetics,
fingerprints, blood type and medical
history. Some are more progressive than
others, for instance Shanghai’s social credit
regulations include provisions for a ‘right to
be forgotten’.10
While the core scope for data collection
within the SCS is credit information, the
initiative has also spurred on existing efforts
to upgrade China’s open government data
practices. In the past couple of years, more
than 46 open government data portals have
been set up by governments, intended
to include a variety of datasets such as
administrative penalties, administrative
licenses, land ownership, tender notices,
credit rating, corporate credit, foreign
business, revocation, credit services
and rights protection.11
'While the social credit system is much more
limited in scope, and possibly effectiveness,
than it is frequently portrayed outside China,
the system does raise questions of fairness,
transparency and privacy'

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
046
The AI powered state: China's approach to public sector innovation
Citizen scoring
While the blacklist-redlist and JSR regime
does not involve computing scores of
any sort, some city governments are
experimenting with using credit information to
generate scores that assess a citizen’s level
of promise keeping. In 2018, Suqian and
Suzhou in Jiangsu province, Hangzhou in
Zhejiang province, and Xiamen and Fuzhou
in Fujian province, all relatively prosperous
cities on the east coast, rolled out city-level
personal credit scores (个人信用评分).16
The scoring system is highly experimental
at this stage but the in-depth case studies17
I have previously undertaken of Xiamen’s
Bailu score and Fuzhou’s Moli score reveal
the general design.
Both cities assign a score from 0-1000 to
each citizen as a reflection of their ‘adherence
to laws, promise keeping, and credit in
daily life’. The scores, accessed by citizens
via smartphone apps, are computed using
models not dissimilar to existing credit scoring
models that have been in use globally in the
finance industry, such as the FICO model, but
remixed with a different set of variables and
data points towards the goals of the system.
Now there are a growing number of
industry blacklists ranging from tax evasion
and unpaid salaries to customs and even
academic plagiarism.
The blacklists gain their bite when combined
with the JSR regime. Departments that sign
up to this regime agree to recognise each
other’s blacklists and take enforcement
actions within their power. For instance,
the names from the Judgement Defaulter
Blacklist are shared with about 40 other
central government agencies who then
impose sanctions within their respective
authority.14 These punishments can range
from being disqualified from obtaining bank
credits and government subsidies to, more
famously, bans on purchasing flights or
high-speed rail tickets. Increasingly, private
companies are also entering into agreements
with the government, committing to limit
services or access to their platforms. For
instance, ride hailing service Didi may prevent
blacklisted drivers or riders from using its
platforms.15 Ant Financial’s Sesame Credit
score, used for a number of services, is
negatively affected by blacklist status.
The key policy motive behind the JSR is
to strengthen the enforcement power of
regulations by coercing individuals or firms
to fulfil their legal obligations. In the case of
the judgement defaulter list, the aim is clearly
to strengthen the Supreme People’s Court
and coerce firms and individuals to pay back
loans. According to data published on the
China Credit website and collected by this
author, from June 2018 to May 2019 1.3 million
firms and 2.2 million people were added to
various government blacklists. During the
same time 813,000 firms and 1.56 million
people were removed.
'While the blacklist-redlist and JSR regime
does not involve computing scores of any sort,
some city governments are experimenting with
using credit information to generate scores that
assess a citizen’s level of promise keeping'

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
The AI powered state: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
047
Figure 1. Summary of Xiamen and Fuzhou’s scoring systems
Bailu Score Moli Score
Date of introduction August 2018 April 2018
Registered users 210,000 6.9 million
Registered users as
% of city population 5% 21%
Active users* 85,000 1.19 million
Score range 0-1000 0-1000
Average score 666 ‘good credit’ 650-700 ‘good credit’
User-interface (UI) WeChat Miniprogram e-Fuzhou app
Algorithm model FICO model Multi-dimensional model
Operated and managed Xiamen Big Data Company Fuzhou NDRC Big Data Office
*Users that have used their score to avail a service at least once.
Source of data: interviews with stakeholders and various media reports18
Bailu Score Moli Score
Basic information: refers to the behaviour of
those living in Xiamen, reflecting the relationship
between the individual and the city and the
individual’s participation and stability in the city.
Public credit: whether or not citizens are abiding
by public morals as well as actively contributing
to public interest activities.
Keeping promises: public welfare behaviours
that show care for others and a positive return
to society is a manifestation of personal social
responsibility and trustworthiness.
Credit ability: a citizen’s basic credit
circumstances and initial credit condition.
Untrustworthy breach of contract: violating
regulations and owing fees reflects a negative
manifestation of individual’s willingness and
ability to obey the law.
Working ability: whether in daily work-
life a citizen is industrious, hard-working/
conscientious and meticulous (爱岗敬业),
and strictly observes ethics and morals.
Credit repair: refers to the individual’s efforts to
repair credit and regain integrity through active
participation in public interest events, social
services and public welfare activities.
Economic ability: includes delayed payment
to common reserve fund, defrauding/cheating
the healthcare fund, common reserve fund or
wages, or embezzling (侵占) people’s legitimate
interests and rights.
Administrative law ability: whether citizens are
abiding by the system of regulations and rules
and staying away from illegal activities and
unlawful practices.
Legal ability: whether or not citizens are abiding
by laws and legal duties.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
048
of implementing the system suggest that
they are hoping the score can be adopted
by more government agencies and reduce
the friction citizens may face when using
government services.19
Conclusion
The SCS has catalysed the Chinese
government’s efforts to digitise and pool
public data, particularly within the realm of
administrative regulations and laws, towards
its use as a form of reputation that is now
institutionalised in government decision-
making around allocation of resources and
services, evident in both the blacklists and
citizen scores.20
The creation of public credit platforms can
be seen as a significant landmark in Chinese
government efforts at collecting public data,
chipping away at the ‘data islands’ between
ministries and departments,21 an aspect
of government data that Rogier Creemers
also discusses in his essay in this collection.
Studies of open government data platforms
reveal they meet industry benchmarks, are
fitted with APIs and offer data in a variety
of machine readable formats. However, there
are question marks around the consistency of
data gathering, especially between platforms
in the less developed cities away from the
east coast.22 Conversations with officials also
suggest there is still work to do in building a
culture of digital record keeping, with some
departments still lagging behind and relying
on physical documents.
The blacklist-JSR regime has strengthened
considerably with real implications for
individuals and businesses. Data published
on the blacklist platform indicates that, for
every two names added to the list each
month, one is removed. This suggests that
the system is encouraging individuals and
firms to take desired actions. The expansion
from the judgement defaulter list to other
areas reflects the government’s view on its
effectiveness, although it is difficult to answer
conclusively if the policy is truly achieving the
goal of individuals and firms behaving more
in a more ‘trustworthy’ manner.
As with the blacklists, the focus remains on
a citizen’s standing with the law, which plays
the most decisive component in determining
whether a score is high or low. The general
message is that citizens should fulfil the basic
expectations in a timely fashion: paying utility
bills, income tax, healthcare, social security
and other mandated government payments
on time, and thus having no ‘notices’ against
one’s name. Individuals with legal charges
against them stand to lose points, in some
cases as much as 150 points per legal offence.
Unlike in the JSR system, which mainly
focuses on disincentives in the form of
sanctions, these systems focus exclusively
on incentives for those with high scores in
an attempt to encourage the types of
behaviour the government considers
desirable. In interviews with this author,
officials revealed that activities such as
volunteering, donating blood, using public
transport, separating waste or working in
areas of public interest, such as teachers or
doctors, could be interpreted as ‘good credit’
and boost one’s score.
Citizens in the ‘good credit’ region (600 and
above), can unlock a range of benefits that
can be placed in three categories:
• Deposit-free access such as public cycles.
• Discounted access such as subway rides.
• Priority access to services such as
government administrative services.
In its present iteration the scores seem more
like a government version of a loyalty scheme
— all citizens get access to the basic service
but some can opt-in for fringe benefits for
convenience and comfort. Those with a low
score face no direct punishments but the low
score is the punishment itself, as it denies
access to the benefits afforded to high scores.
The scores are voluntary at the moment and,
so far, there has been fairly low engagement,
with less than one-third of either city’s
population registered on the app and the
average score lying between 600 and 650.
Government officials in charge

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
049
Examining the systems, as this essay has
done, largely shows that western media
narratives of social credit as a morality
score, which is devised by capturing all
citizen behaviour, from social media posts to
supermarket purchases, and which regulates
citizens’ movements and access to basic
services,23 is unfounded. As demonstrated
above, the type of data collected is far more
limited in scope and national schemes do not
involve scoring at all. Even in the pilot cities
the scoring is far more benign in nature.
That is not to suggest there are no reasons
to be concerned. The system in its present
form raises questions of fairness, especially
given the growing span of punishments
over and above those mandated by
existing laws. While important terms such
as ‘trustworthiness’ remain undefined in law,
the blacklist JSR system continues to expand
and impact millions of people.24 The system
itself relies on transparency to achieve some
of its goals but individuals have very little
knowledge about the type of data collected,
which leaves them vulnerable to incorrect
data and the implications it can bring, as
Danit Gal explores in her essay on ethics.
These are some of the problems that deserve
further research rather than focusing on
potential implications of what the system
could one day evolve into. Analysing the
SCS from the lens of China as a surveillance
state tends to miss the actual story and
conflate all surveillance in China, such as
law enforcement, into the SCS. As Jeremy
Daum, editor of China Law Translate, has
emphasised, the problem may be less the
SCS itself and rather the ‘bad laws’ that it is
trying to enforce more effectively,25 many of
which run counter to core democratic values,
such as freedom of speech.
Going into 2020, the final year of the 2014
State Council Plan, discussions around
assessing the system are taking place inside
and outside of government. These range
from assessing the merits of the system and
the potential harms it may pose, as well as
engaging with questions around fairness,
to thorny issues such as privacy and ethics.
Parallel to the SCS, legal regimes around
data protection are expected to expand
and mature over the next couple of years,
which will place new boundaries on what
type of data can be collected, as well as
address a critical question of how data
from the private sector can be ‘imported’
into SCS’s initiatives. A ‘credit law’ is currently
being drafted, although most experts expect
it remains several years away as critical
questions around ethics, privacy and fairness
are addressed. Yet the biggest question
that the Chinese government will have to
answer is whether the system is meaningfully
improving trust in institutions and catalysing
the country’s development trajectory in the
way the government believes it can.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
050
1  Graham Webster et al., ‘Full Translation: China’s “New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan”’,
DigiChina, 1 August 2017, accessed 23 February 2020,
New America, https:/ /www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-
initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-
generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/.
2  Anna Mitchell and Larry Diamond, ‘China’s Surveillance
State Should Scare Everyone’, The Atlantic, 2 February 2018,
https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2018/02/
china-surveillance/552203.
Steven W. Mosher, ‘China’s New ‘Social Credit System’ is a
Dystopian Nightmare’, New York Post, 18 May 2018,
https:/ /nypost.com/2019/05/18/chinas-new-social-credit-
system-turns-orwells-1984-into-reality.
3  State Council, ‘Planning Outline for the Construction
of a Social Credit System (2014-2020)’, China Copyright and
Media, 14 June 2014, updated 25 April 2015.
https:/ /chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.
com/2014/06/14/planning-outline-for-the-construction-of-
a-social-credit-system-2014-2020/.
4  State Council, ‘Planning outline’.
5  Shazeda Ahmed, ‘The Messy Truth About Social Credit’,
Logic Magazine issue 7 (1 May 2019), retrieved 16 January
2020, https:/ /logicmag.io/china/the-messy-truth-about-
social-credit/.
6  China Law Translate, ‘上海市社会信用条例’, China Law
Translate, 30 June 2017, https:/ /www.chinalawtranslate.com/
shanghai-municipal-social-credit-regulations/.
7  State Council, ‘Planning outline’.
8  ‘《福州市公共信用信息管理暂行办法》_行政法规、规
章和规范性文件_福州市人民政府’, accessed 4 February
2020, http:/ /www.fuzhou.gov.cn/zfxxgkzl/szfbmjxsqxxgk/
szfbmxxgk/fzsrmzf/zfxxgkml/xzfggzhgfxwj/201711/
t20171128_1894930.htm.
9  Lizhi Liu and Barry R Weingast, ‘Taobao, Federalism,
and the Emergence of Law, Chinese Style’, Minnesota Law
Review, n.d., 28.
10  Translate, China Law. “上海市社会信用条例.”
China Law Translate (blog), June 30, 2017.
https:/ /www.chinalawtranslate.com/shanghai-municipal-
social-credit-regulations/
11  ‘China Open Data Report 2018’, Fudan University,
National Center on Information Research, n.d.
12  Jeremy Daum, ‘The Redlists Are Coming! The Blacklists
Are Coming!’ China Law Translate, 30 March 2018, https:/ /
www.chinalawtranslate.com/the-redlists-are-coming-the-
blacklists-are-coming/.
13  Yin Yijun, ‘Chinese App Gives Blacklisted People
“Dishonest’ Caller ID”’, Sixth Tone, 30 August 2017. http:/ /
www.sixthtone.com/news/1000762/chinese-app-gives-
blacklisted-people-dishonest-caller-id.
14  Daum, Jeremy. “The Redlists Are Coming! The Blacklists
Are Coming!” China Law Translate (blog), March 30, 2018.
https:/ /www.chinalawtranslate.com/the-redlists-are-
coming-the-blacklists-are-coming/
15  “国家发改委与滴滴签署信用信息共享协议-中新网.”
Accessed February 21, 2020. http:/ /www.chinanews.com/
business/2018/03-07/8461965.shtml
16  厦门市大数据. (n.d.). 厦门市民个人信用“白鹭分”正
式发布. WeChat Official Accounts Platform. Retrieved
February 4, 2020, from https:/ /mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__
biz=MzU1NjY4MjA2MA==&mid=2247483658&idx=1&s
n=44bff6b198c6262504adf28c025cea1a&chksm=fbc01f
29ccb7963f8e4ce5d40fac59eff8fb59a7ffc22ddd
2209b7e2b585fe89c037631ef338#rd
17  Dev Lewis “All Carrots and No Sticks: A Case Study on
Social Credit Scores in Xiamen and Fuzhou”, 4 Oct 2019
https:/ /medium.com/berkman-klein-center/social-credit-
case-study-city-citizen-scores-in-xiamen-and-fuzhou-
2a65feb2bbb3
18 《征信》. (n.d.). 国内城市个人信用分，这一篇讲
透了！. WeChat Official Accounts Platform. Retrieved
4 February 2020, from http:/ /mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__
biz=MzI3ODM1MzI3NA==&mid=2247493124&idx
=1&sn=5d56f7418c97895d12a1e990a64958d2&
chksm=eb5ae211dc2d6b0785664c07d364376a6f8
bdb633820a28d9472ba7894ce8345a91693bf8769#rd
19  Information shared with the author in interviews with
NDRC officials implementing these scores.
20  Xin Dai, ‘Toward a Reputation State: The Social Credit
System Project of China’, SSRN Electronic Journal (10 June
2018), https:/ /doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3193577.
21  Mareike Ohlberg, Shazeda Ahmed, and Bertram Lang,
‘Central Planning, Local Experiments’, MERICS China
Monitor, 12 December 2017, Mercator Institute for China
Studies (MERICS), https:/ /www.merics.org/sites/default/
files/2017-12/171212_China_Monitor_43_Social_Credit_
System_Implementation.pdf.
22  Xiao Diyu [肖荻昱]. ‘An analyses of open government
data and credit service platforms in China’, Journal of
Library and Information Science Volume 7 (2019) [图书 情
报导刊] , Yuandian Credit, https:/ /mp.weixin.qq.com/s/
xugzyprTafQYRaoP8Ve9bQ.
23  Mitchell and Diamond, ‘China’s Surveillance State’.
24  Luo Peixin-罗培新-社会信用法 Social Credit Law：原
理，规则，案例 principles, rules, cases (2018), 15, Peking
University Press.
25 Elizabeth M. Lynch , ‘What’s the T on China’s Social
Credit System - Jeremy Daum Explains - Part 1 of 2’, China
Law & Policy, 12 November 2018, accessed 10 March 2020,
https:/ /chinalawandpolicy.com/2018/11/12/whats-the-t-on-
chinas-social-credit-system-jeremy-daum-explains-part-
1-of-2/.
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
051
The ethics and
ideology of China’s
approach to AI

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
052

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
053
In its 2017 New Generation AI Development
Plan, the Chinese State Council paved the
path for a government-endorsed process of
debating and adopting artificial intelligence
(AI) ethics principles.1 Since then, ministries,
businesses, academic institutions and
expert committees have stepped up to
formalise their existing, and institutionalise
new, discussions about AI ethics. Nearly
three years down the line, these discussions
are becoming more common, taking place
in government consultations, corporate
meetings, academic fora and online
conversations.
It is therefore surprising that the western
misconception that China lacks debate
around AI ethics seems to prevail, when in
fact: i) existing Chinese AI principles largely
align with global ones; ii) Chinese discussions
enjoy unprecedented government support;
and iii) the country is already investigating
the technical and social implementation
of these principles by exploring how they
interact with its distinct cultural heritage.
In this essay I explore AI ethics in China
through the lens of some of the key topics
discussed in depth in the other essays in this
collection – education, healthcare, smart cities
and social credit systems – to consider which,
if any, ethical issues are unique to China and
which should be seen as global concerns.
Mapping official AI ethics
discussions in China
Notable examples of bodies discussing AI
ethics in a formal, government-endorsed
capacity are found in three sets of
documents that contain AI ethics principles.
The first one is the Beijing AI Principles
(BAIP), released in May 2019, backed by the
Ministry of Science and Technology and
drafted by the Beijing Academy of AI in a
multi-stakeholder consultative process.2
While the contents of the BAIP closely
align with existing international principles,
it has some distinctive features. The BAIP
takes an applied approach to AI ethics by
suggesting detailed and action-oriented
goals, norms and best practices in research
and development, AI use and AI governance.
In addition, the document references the
‘philosophy of “optimising symbiosis”’.3 One of
the drafters, Yi Zeng, explains that optimising
symbiosis refers to the principle of ‘harmony’
in Chinese philosophy, where all life forms
evolve in harmony rather than competition
and is especially relevant in the context of
human-machine interactions.4 This particular
application of Chinese ethics and philosophy
to AI is a distinctive approach that I will return
to in this essay.
06.
China’s Approach to AI Ethics
By Danit Gal
Technology advisor to the UN Secretary General’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation
Associate fellow at the Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence at the University
of Cambridge

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
054
considerable similarity with the two previous
Chinese documents. Predominantly applied
in nature, this document again references
harmony, offering a more direct translation
as ‘human-machine harmony’. In a global
landscape of human-centred AI ethics, this
vision is unique in its holistic approach to
the interactions between humans and AI,
and the way they shape and are being
shaped by each other.8
An additional official committee still in
discussion is the Professional Committee
on AI Ethics under the Chinese Association
for Artificial Intelligence, a state-level AI
organisation under the Chinese Ministry
of Civil Affairs. In a media interview, the
committee’s leader, Professor Chen Xiaoping,
shared his goal of developing ‘an entire system
of AI ethics, with ethical guidelines and a set of
operating mechanisms to realise them’.9
These official committees are joined by
ongoing corporate efforts to align with
the developing AI ethics discussions. These
efforts received considerable attention during
the Chinese Government’s Two Sessions in
March 2019, when the CEOs of technology
companies Baidu and Tencent submitted
proposals calling for AI ethics principles
and rules. Baidu’s proposal called for the
sharing of distinct Chinese wisdom with the
international AI ethics community,10 and
Tencent’s proposal focused on the societal
applications and implications of AI.11
In line with its applied focus, theBAIP also
touches on long-term planning for the
expected development trajectory of AI. The
BAIP’s forward-looking, hands-on approach
and long-term outlook are unique among
other global principles, as is the way it links
existing principles to Chinese practices and
philosophical traditions.
The second document is a draft Joint Pledge
on AI Industry Self-Discipline, also released
in May 2019. It was backed by the Ministry
of Industry and Information Technology and
drafted by the China Academy of Information
and Communication Technology in another
multi-stakeholder consultative process.5 Again,
this document largely aligns with other global
AI ethics principles but has one notable
point of distinction. Article 10: Self-discipline
and self-governance, is unique in the global
landscape as well as the Chinese one.
This article calls to ‘strengthen awareness
of corporate social responsibility, integrate
ethical principles into all aspects of AI-related
activities and implement ethical reviews.
Promote industry self-governance, formulate
norms of behaviour for practitioners, and
progressively build and strengthen industry
supervision mechanisms.'6 The suggestion
of ethical reviews, self-governance
and industry supervision mechanisms
introduces a significantly stronger degree of
implementation, enforcement and oversight
on AI ethics compliance, a field still largely
considered soft law. This lends a more
applied nature to AI ethics principles in the
Chinese AI industry, in the event that this joint
pledge materialises.
Finally, the third document is the Governance
Principles for a New Generation of AI,
released in June 2019, also backed by the
Ministry of Science and Technology and
drafted by the National New Generation
AI Governance Expert Committee.7 As well
as being aligned with other international AI
ethics principles, these principles also share

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
055
AI applications in healthcare:
privacy and bias
As illustrated by Andy Chun’s essay on AI in
public healthcare services, China is rushing
ahead in deploying AI technology to deliver
consistent, higher-quality medical care to
more than 1.4 billion citizens. Such rapid
and wide-scale use of AI requires near-
constant collection, storage and analysis of
large personal data troves. These pervasive
and data-intensive operations have raised
enduring public concerns about the privacy
of patients during and after treatment and
the security of their data. The sensitivity of
public health information has long been a
focal point for government action,18 but has
yet to be fully addressed. With mounting
public pressure over frequent medical data
leaks affecting tens of millions of patients,19
we can expect this issue to continue
capturing a significant portion of the
applied AI ethics discussion in China.
While this ethical issue is not unique to
China, the country’s strong push to apply
AI to the world’s largest healthcare system
(by patient numbers) does carry distinct
implications by virtue of its size. There are
no clear differences in the ethical discourse
and approaches taken by western and
Chinese entities in this regard, with one
exception. China is more proactive in curbing
privacy breaches under its aforementioned
regulatory frameworks by developing
and enacting national laws and actively
monitoring and punishing violators.20
An additional, albeit less central, ethical
concern relates to bias. While bias within
Chinese AI use in healthcare is still in early
discussion stages and mostly applies to the
urban-rural divide, a study has highlighted
the bias that exists in foreign systems used to
service Chinese patients. An example of that
is the trialling of IBM’s Watson for Oncology,
mentioned in Andy Chun’s essay, which was
trained on western datasets.
AI ethics in Chinese
applications of AI
What does the applied approach to Chinese
AI ethics detailed above look like in real-life
AI applications? Generally speaking, Chinese
discourse revolves around two axes, the
application of Chinese ethics and philosophy
to AI and the ethical implications of AI use in
public services.
The Chinese cultural and philosophical
concept of harmony (和) occupies a special
place in the official discussions of AI ethics.
While many of the other principles are,
at least in theory, universally shared, the
concept of harmony as applied to ethics
is unique to China.12 Attempts to apply this
concept, among other Chinese ethical and
philosophical principles, to AI are actively
debated in China.13 A number of experts
have explored how harmonisation between
different ethical and philosophical principles
within China and abroad can be achieved,
so that they evolve in a complementary
manner rather than a mutually exclusive
one.14 However, it has not yet moved beyond
discussions to play a more practical role.
Privacy is among the most visible ethical
issues when it comes to AI in public services.
Chinese authorities have been particularly
receptive to public discourse and have been
strict in regulating personal data collection
and using sharp-toothed enforcement
mechanisms. Public services that fail to comply
with the Cybersecurity Law of the People’s
Republic of China15 and Personal Information
Security Specification16 are suspended
until proven otherwise or entirely banned.
Authorities periodically review such services
and respond to the public’s complaints on
privacy breaches and data leaks.17

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
056
Many other countries are facing similar
predicaments, which UNICEF is working
to address by advancing children’s rights
in the age of AI.26 The approach that the
Chinese government is taking to addressing
the privacy vulnerabilities of children in
the application of AI in public services
is also in line with other international
efforts. If anything, China’s rush to deploy
AI-enabled education throughout the
country is magnifying such privacy efforts
and underscoring the importance of their
implementation.
The ethical issue of accessibility to China’s
AI-enabled education applications is shaped
by its rural-urban divides. With advanced
technology being less available in rural areas,
the efficacy of these applications for rural
education efforts is put into question. This is
further exacerbated by the lack of teaching
capacity to supplement areas of educational
enrichment not provided by AI. While
improved access to some unified education
resources is granted, this still falls short of
the high level of education and resources
accessible in urban schools.27
Urban-rural education divides are being
tackled through AI in other countries, too, of
course. What does make China stand out is
the scale of its ambition as it leads the way
with extensive, government-backed efforts
to introduce AI in public education services.
As such, the solutions that China is testing
now will diffuse into other developing
countries later,28 making them a pressing
global concern.
The discrepancies between the western and
Chinese datasets led to some biased system
recommendations that did not apply to
Chinese patients.21 This joins other western-
trained technologies that present such biases,
such as iPhone’s facial recognition software
not distinguishing between different Chinese
faces.22 This is a more general issue, with
people of Asian descent being among the
underrepresented groups in western training
datasets.
The ethical question surrounding bias in AI
is often discussed globally but is relatively
new to internal Chinese ethical discourse.
With a largely homogenous population,
Chinese applications of AI in public services
have made significant attempts to alleviate
biases in other aspects of diversity, such
as dialects,23 but this is typically as far as
it extends before venturing into broader
urban-rural divides, which fall under ongoing
discussions on equity and equality.
AI applications in education:
Privacy and accessibility
Yi-Ling Liu’s essay on China’s use of AI in
its education system highlights two ethical
issues: privacy and accessibility. On the
privacy side, AI-enabled education systems
collect, store and analyse students’ facial
expressions, although this is pending further
regulation,24 to identify how students are
responding to the content being taught
by the system. In addition to the pervasive
privacy implications this has for individuals,
there are the legal implications of these
individuals being minors. This is expected to
be addressed, at least partially, by the Law
of the People’s Republic of China on the
Protection of Minors, which is being
amended to include cyberspace.25
'The use of facial recognition and biometric
identification to commute, pay for transactions
and use public infrastructure...establishes a
culture of pervasive monitoring of citizens'

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
057
AI applications in smart cities:
Privacy and accountability
As Eugeniu Han demonstrates in his essay,
AI-enabled smart cities are abundant in
China, which has about 50 per cent of the
world’s smart cities in-the-making.29 However,
considering that residents’ facial information
is collected to board subways,30 sort trash
and enforce recycling,31 and obtain toilet
paper in public toilets,32 this raises serious
privacy concerns. The use of facial recognition
and biometric identification to commute, pay
for transactions and use public infrastructure
is powered by concentrated and vulnerable
public data treasure troves. It also establishes
a culture of pervasive monitoring of citizens.
Recently, China also came under fire for
using facial recognition in Xinjiang for
racial profiling-based monitoring.33
While this elevates the ethical issue of privacy
breaches via smart infrastructure monitoring
in China to new heights, it is, again, a concern
that extends beyond China. Many other
countries are using facial recognition in their
smart infrastructure for racial profiling-based
monitoring.34 However, what once again
makes China different is the magnitude and
scope of operations. While privacy laws
in China protect citizens’ data from abuse
by non-governmental actors, they do not
limit the government’s access to and use of
private data. In this regard, China is lagging
behind other countries seeking enhanced user
privacy while balancing security concerns.
China is also unusual in its attempt to co-
create smart courts that automate case
handling, as Eugeniu Han describes in
Shanghai. It raises the ethical concern of
accountability given the role fulfilled by the
AI application in holding others accountable.
With smart courts and AI judges making
opaque decisions that directly affect humans,
we are also left with the question of who is
accountable for the AI systems’ actions?

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
058
AI applications in social credit
systems: Privacy and transparency
As Dev Lewis shows in his essay on social
credit systems, pervasive data collection
and linking pose significant privacy concerns.
By breaking data silos and linking public
data collected by different government
departments and corporate actors, these
systems enhance access to this data and,
at the same time, the risk of privacy invasion.
The essay also shows that addressing these
pervasive data collection concerns are
regulations limiting the types of sensitive
information that can be collected (such as
religious faith). However, private data is still
collected and linked in order to achieve social
credit scoring, putting citizen’s privacy at risk
if abused.
In addition, with these courts handling cases
where Alibaba, the defendant in most cases,
is also the co-creator of the smart court,
questions of conflict of interest arise, further
exacerbating legal accountability for decisions
made by using these systems.
The use of AI to support court systems is
not unique to China but the instance of a
smart court and AI judge handling claims
against a corporate actor, while also being
developed by that very same corporate
actor, is. With China’s move to advance the
rule of law throughout the country, the partial
privatisation of smart courts and AI judges
highlights the ethical issue of questionable
accountability for such legal actions carried
out by opaque systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
059
Conclusions
While AI use in Chinese public services is
unique in scope, the majority of ethical issues
such use highlights, and the approaches
taken by the government to address them
where relevant, are not. The exception is the
concept of ‘harmony’. As AI ethics discussions
in China develop, we can expect more
explorations of how Chinese philosophical
and cultural practices apply to AI ethics
principles. This, alongside the implementation
of other principles, will mark further progress
from principles to action, where we can
better observe the similarities and differences
that emerge between countries.
As this essay demonstrates, there are more
similarities than differences at this point,
which is not surprising given the unified
nature of AI and commonalities among
available public services worldwide. It
does, however, create a great opportunity
for fostering global co-operation on these
shared concerns, especially considering
China’s robust AI ethics discussions and
the country’s key role as a developer and
exporter of AI applications. Both the above-
mentioned Chinese AI ethics and governance
bodies and the international community
should do more to bring a diverse group of
relevant stakeholders into key conversations
on AI ethics. We’re all in the same boat, using
very similar oars.
While the mechanisms of credit score
systems are not unique to China (and use
similar methods to systems already used in
the USA,35 for example) the governmental-
level development and deployment of such
an initiative is, again, unique in scale. With
many competing initiatives, personal data
is collected and linked by multiple actors,
creating multiple vulnerability points. Given
China’s observed approach to privacy
violations and data leaks, we may expect the
forthcoming Credit Law to address privacy
protection (although Dev Lewis notes that local
experts believe this is still far from enough).
Another ethical issue highlighted by this
case study is transparency. In particular,
transparency around how these social credit
scores are calculated and the repercussions
of errors in calculations. Without knowledge
of how these mechanisms work, citizens will
have a hard time appealing their decisions.
The models and variables used to calculate a
citizen’s score remain largely opaque, making
auditing these systems nearly impossible.
Without such basic transparency, inequality
between citizens with high and low scores
may further exacerbate, unchecked.
Social credit scores are still largely voluntary
at the moment and improving transparency
is essential before making them mandatory.
The lack of transparency in credit scoring
schemes is a globally shared ethical issue
we must collectively tackle before using AI in
public services that have the ability to grant
or deny access to other critical public services.
'While privacy laws in China protect citizens’
data from abuse by non-governmental actors,
they do not limit the government’s access to
and use of private data'

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
060
Endnotes
1  Graham Webster et al., ‘Full Translation: China’s “New
Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan”’,
DigiChina, 1 August 2017, New America, https:/ /www.
newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-
translation-chinas-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-
development-plan-2017/.
2  BAAI, ‘Beijing AI Principles’, Beijing Academy of Artificial
Intelligence, 28 May 2019, https:/ /baip.baai.ac.cn/en.
3  BAAI, ‘Beijing AI Principles’.
4  Yi Zeng, remote interview by Danit Gal, 14 March 2019.
5  Graham Webster, ‘Translation: Chinese AI Alliance Drafts
Self-Discipline “ Joint Pledge”’, DigiChina for New America,
17 June 2019, https:/ /www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-
initiative/digichina/blog/translation-chinese-ai-alliance-
drafts-self-discipline-joint-pledge/.
6  Webster, ‘Self-Discipline Joint Pledge’.
7  Lorand Laskai and Graham Webster, ‘Translation:
Chinese Expert Group Offers “Governance Principles” for
“Responsible AI”’, DigiChina for New America, 17 June 2019,
https:/ /www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
digichina/blog/translation-chinese-expert-group-offers-
governance-principles-responsible-ai/.
8  Danit Gal, ‘Perspectives and Approaches in AI
Ethics: East Asia’ in Oxford Handbook of Ethics of Artificial
Intelligence, eds. M. Dubber, F. Pasquale, & S. Das
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020).
9  Xinhua, ‘China Hosts Conference to Promote
AI Ethical Standards’, XinhuaNet, 12 June 2019.
10  新浪财经综合, ‘李彦宏三大提案:完善电子病历 加强人工
智能伦理研究’, 新浪财经, 4 March 2019, http:/ /finance.sina.
com.cn/review/jcgc/2019-03-04/docihsxncvf9583301.shtml.
11  腾讯研究院, ‘2019年两会，马化腾提了这7份建议案 |
2万 字全文版’, 6 March 2019, https:/ /mp.weixin.qq.com/s/
yb6OyuIvHQjImcNMJsJYSw.
12  Chenyang Li, ‘The Ideal of Harmony in Ancient
Chinese and Greek Philosophy’, Dao 7 (2008): 81-98.
13  See for example ‘About Linking Artificial Intelligence
Principles (LAIP)’, LAIP,
http:/ /www.linking-ai-principles.org/about.
14  John Thornhill, ‘Formulating Values for AI is Hard
When Humans Do Not Agree’, Financial Times, 29 July 2019,
https:/ /www.ft.com/content/6c8854de-ac59-11e9-8030-
530adfa879c2.
15  Rogier Creemers, Paul Triolo, and Graham Webster,
‘Translation: Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic
of China [Effective June 1, 2017]’, DigiChina for New
America, updated 29 June 2018, https:/ /www.newamerica.
org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/translation-
cybersecurity-law-peoples-republic-china/.
16  Mingli Shi et al., ‘Translation: China’s Personal
Information Security Specification’, DigiChina for New
America, 8 February 2019, https:/ /www.newamerica.org/
cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/translation-chinas-
personal-information-security-specification/.
17  Minghe Hu, ‘China Issues Rules to Stop Apps from
Abusing User’s Personal Information in Latest Data Privacy
Effort’, South China Morning Post, 31 December 2019,
https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/apps-social/article/3044051/
china-issues-rules-stop-apps-abusing-users-personal-
information.
18  Shan Juan, ‘New Rules Will Keep Patients’ Info Secret’,
China Daily, updated 3 May 2017, https:/ /www.chinadaily.
com.cn/china/2017-05/03/content_29174728.htm.
19  Eliza Gkritzi, ‘Chinese Tech Companies Still Can’t Stop
Medical Data Leaks’, TechNode, 9 January 2020,
https:/ /technode.com/2020/01/09/chinese-tech-
companies-still-cant-stop-medical-data-leaks/.
20  Liu Shuangshuang and Denise Jia, ‘China Starts
Crackdown on Apps’ Violations of User Privacy’, CX Tech,
5 November 2019, https:/ /www.caixinglobal.com/2019-11-
05/china-starts-crackdown-on-apps-violations-of-user-
privacy-101478807.html.
21  Chaoyuan Liu et al., ‘Using Artificial Intelligence (Watson
for Oncology) for Treatment Recommendations Amongst
Chinese Patients with Lung Cancer: Feasibility Study’,
Journal of Medical Internet Research 20, issue 9 (2018): 1 – 10.
22  Zhuang Pinghui, ‘Chinese Women Offered Refund After
Facial Recognition Allows Colleague to Unlock iPhone X’,
South China Morning Post, 14 December 2017,
https:/ /www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2124313/
chinese-woman-offered-refund-after-facial-recognition-
allows.
23  Qian, Zhecheng, ‘Saving China’s Dialects?
There’s an App for That’, Sixth Tone, 25 June 2019,
https:/ /www.sixthtone.com/news/1004175/saving-chinas-
dialects%3F-theres-an-app-for-that.
24  BBC News, ‘China to Curb Facial Recognition and Apps
in Schools’, BBC News, 6 September 2019,
https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-49608459.
25  Wei Sheng, ‘China Amends Minor Protection Law to
Include Cyberspace’, TechNode, 25 October 2019,
https:/ /technode.com/2019/10/25/chinas-draft-
amendment-to-minors-protection-law-highlights-cyber-
regulations/.
26  Erica Kochi, Jennie Bernstein, and Tushar Ghei,
‘Generation AI’, UNICEF, 10 December 2018,
https:/ /www.unicef.org/innovation/stories/generation-ai.
27  China Power Team. ‘How Does Education in
China Compare With Other Countries?’,
China Power, 15 November 2016,
https:/ /chinapower.csis.org/education-in-china/.
28  Karen Hao, ‘China Has Started a Grand Experiment
in AI Education. It Could Reshape How the World Learns’,
MIT Technology Review, 2 August 2019,
https:/ /www.technologyreview.com/s/614057/china-
squirrel-has-started-a-grand-experiment-in-ai-education-
it-could-reshape-how-the/.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
061
29  Jamil Anderlini, ‘How China’s Smart-City
Tech Focuses on its Own Citizens’, Financial Times,
5 June 2019. https:/ /www.ft.com/content/46bc137a-5d27-
11e9-840c-530737425559.
30  Sarah Dai, ‘China’s Subways embrace Facial
Recognition Payment Systems Despite Rising Privacy
Concerns’, South China Morning Post, 4 December 2019,
https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/apps-social/article/3040398/
chinas-subways-embrace-facial-recognition-payment-
systems-despite.
31  Celia Chen, ‘China’s War on Trash Goes Hi-tech With AI-
driven Apps for Sorting and Facial Recognition to Enforce
Recycling’, South China Morning Post, 18 July 2019.
https:/ /www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3018992/chinas-
war-trash-goes-hi-tech-ai-driven-apps-sorting-and-facial.
32  Nick Statt, ‘China is Fighting Toilet Paper Thieves with
Facial Recognition Software’, The Verge, 20 March 2017.
https:/ /www.theverge.com/2017/3/20/14986640/china-
toilet-paper-theft-facial-recognition-machine.
33  Paul Mozur, ‘One Month, 500,000 Face Scans:
How China Is Using AI to Profile a Minority’, New York
Times, 14 April 2019, https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/
technology/china-surveillance-artificial-intelligence-racial-
profiling.html.
34  See for example: Niraj Chokshi, ‘Facial Recognition’s
Many Controversies, From Stadium Surveillance to Racist
Software’, New York Times, 15 May 2019,
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2019/05/15/business/facial-
recognition-software-controversy.html; Geoff White, ‘Use
of Facial Recognition Tech “Dangerously Irresponsible”’,
BBC News, 13 May 2019, https:/ /www.bbc.com/news/
technology-48222017; and Sahil Chinoy, ‘The Racist History
Behind Facial Recognition’, New York Times, 10 July 2019,
https:/ /www.nytimes.com/2019/07/10/opinion/facial-
recognition-race.html.
35  Mike Elgan. ‘Uh-oh: Silicon Valley is Building a
Chinese-Style Social Credit System’, Fast Company,
26 August 2019, https:/ /www.fastcompany.com/90394048/
uh-oh-silicon-valley-is-building-a-chinese-style-social-
credit-system.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
062

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
063
As China devotes significant efforts to
realising its goal of becoming a leading
global player in artificial intelligence (AI)
technology, the question of which values will
be reflected in and furthered by these new
capabilities has rapidly gained prominence.
In western countries, these questions relate
to how China’s government might use AI
to enhance a digital authoritarian state
or to expand surveillance of its citizens.
Yet within China, the ethics and governance
of AI have also received considerable
attention. In the spring and summer of 2019,
several companies, business associations
and expert groups released principles and
policies for the ethical use of AI, which
usually highly resemble similar documents
in western countries. The New Generation
AI Governance Expert Committee, convened
by the Ministry of Science and Technology,
declared AI should ‘conform to human
values, ethics and morality […] should be
based on the premise of safeguarding
social security and respecting human
rights, avoid misuse, and prohibit abuse
and malicious application’.1 The Beijing AI
Principles, formulated by the Beijing Academy
of Artificial Intelligence, state that ‘human
privacy, dignity, freedom and rights should
be sufficiently respected’.2 These principles
are explored in more detail in Danit Gal’s
essay in this collection.
To foreign observers, such language appears
counterintuitive. China is not usually seen
as a staunch defender of human rights or
civil liberties, and its use of AI in repressive
surveillance programmes is widely reported.
How, then, does one make sense of these
initiatives? Are they merely a hypocritical
charade intended to cover up the unsavoury
exercise of power by an autocratic regime
and ensure Chinese businesses remain
palatable abroad, or do they reflect a way
of seeing the world – and the role of digital
technology in it – in a different manner?
As a set of high-priority technologies with
considerable political, economic, social – and
international – impact, debates surrounding AI
governance are a microcosm of the questions
about China’s future continually addressed by
its leaders. What goals should the technology
achieve? Where will it be encouraged,
tolerated or rejected? Who will have access
to its levers, or the vast amount of data, and
who will be exempt from it? This essay argues
that Communist Party ideology is the best
framing device to understand how China’s
leadership intends to steer the development
of AI. With specific regard to the deployment
of AI in governance, the key ideological
assumption is that social order is governed
by an objective, external and intelligible set
of ‘laws’ (guilü). Big data and AI technologies
not only assist in better understanding these
laws, they can also help in ‘engineering’
society to solve development problems.
This, in turn, will help the Party achieve its
utopian goal: the Chinese dream of the great
rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.3
07.
The Ideology Behind
China’s AI Strategy
By Dr Rogier Creemers
Assistant professor in the Law and Governance of China at Leiden University
Associate fellow of the Hague Program for Cyber Norms, Institute of Security
and Global Affairs

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
064
tensions with the United States are growing,
and observers increasingly see this as a
‘Sino-US technology Cold War’,6 China strives
for self-reliance on core technologies, of which
AI is one.
The third component is the use of AI
technologies in all areas of social governance.
The 2017 Plan calls for the widespread use
of AI in ‘education, medical care, pensions,
environmental protection, urban operations,
[and] judicial services’, in order to enhance
citizens’ quality of life. But it also proposes
coercive applications: ‘AI technologies can
accurately sense, forecast and provide early
warning of major situations for infrastructure
facilities and social security operations;
grasp group cognition and psychological
changes in a timely manner; and take the
initiative in decision-making and reactions –
which will significantly elevate the capability
and level of social governance, playing an
irreplaceable role in effectively maintaining
social stability.’ In other words, China’s
leadership – in the same paragraph –
identifies AI both as a promising conduit for
better provision of public services and as a
channel for more effective prevention and
control of social unrest. The tension between
these two sides of the coin has been touched
on throughout the essays in this collection,
through the lens of different areas of social
policy, from education and smart cities to
social credit systems.
However, what is striking about the 2017 Plan
is not merely the scale of the objectives or the
ambition to become an AI world leader by
2030. It is also the level of detail and intricacy
with which the path to those objectives is laid
out. In terse phrases, it covers interlocking
This essay will elaborate this point in three
sections. First, it will review the different
components of China’s AI development plans
and their driving motivations. Second, it will
briefly sketch how Party ideology developed
to the point that AI would become a top
priority for the leadership. Third, it will discuss
the inherent tensions within Party ideology
that AI may well lay bare, including the
tension between the desire for autonomous
decision-making systems and the necessity
to maintain the primacy of Party authority.
What are China’s AI objectives?
The Chinese leadership finds AI technologies
attractive for three major reasons. First and
foremost, the 2017 AI Development Plan
claims that AI is the ‘core driving force for a
new round of industrial transformation’, which
will trigger ‘significant changes in economic
structure, profound changes in human modes
of production, lifestyle, and thinking; and a
whole leap of achieving social productivity’.4
As China’s previous growth model of export-
led, low-added value manufacturing has run
out of steam and its economy is entering a
‘new normal’ of lower annual GDP growth, AI
promises new sources of productivity growth,
as well as potential new markets for China’s
increasingly sophisticated digital goods and
services. Second, as a ‘strategic technology’,
AI is also important in national security, most
significantly competition with the United
States. The People’s Liberation Army (PLA)
has identified AI as a revolutionary force in
military affairs and it is a central element of
the ‘military-civil fusion’ initiative that aims to
leverage the strengths of the public sector for
China’s military build-up.5 More broadly, as
'The key ideological assumption is that social
order is governed by an objective and intelligible
set of laws. Big data and AI technologies not
only assist in better understanding these laws,
they can also help in ‘engineering’ society to
solve development problems'

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
065
in which a disciplined, professional party
forms a vanguard leading society towards
the promised destination. Yet safeguarding
the CCP’s supreme authority also became a
goal in itself. In the same way that airplane
passengers should don their own oxygen
mask before helping others, the Party
believes enabling its own survival is the chief
necessary condition for it to achieve its goal
of the ‘great rejuvenation of the Chinese
nation’.7 In the past decade, this has led to
the construction of an increasingly capable
security state,8 in which AI technology is now
starting to play an important role.
Apart from maintaining its dominance,
the Party has sought a specific approach
to ensure national wealth and strength
throughout its tenure in power. The first
three decades of Party rule saw a pendulum
between Maoist voluntarism and careful
Soviet-style economic and social planners.
Mao triumphed twice, initiating the disastrous
Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution.
After Mao’s death, the new paramount
leader, Deng Xiaoping, looked for another
way forward. As one of the only Chinese
leaders to have travelled abroad, Deng
recognised how far China lagged behind
developed countries and envisioned a path
forward based on science and technology.
In this view, science not only provided
material progress, it also played an important
role in social governance and management.
Luminaries such as Qian Xuesen, the
progenitor of China’s nuclear programme,
explored how complex systems theory could
both explain the functioning of the social
order and provide tools to predict and
control it.9 In this view, social reality is a system
conditioned by objective ‘laws’ (guilü) in the
same way as the natural world. These laws
are intelligible and can be used to engineer
society in pursuit of historical progress.
It may be trite (and, indeed, incorrect) to
refer to China’s leadership as consisting
largely of engineers but the metaphor of
social management as engineering is strong.
Artists, for instance, are still referred to as
‘engineers of human souls’, while the complex
development initiatives such as the 2017
AI Plan display clear influence of systems
engineering thinking.
and mutually supportive elements, ranging
from supporting scientific research and
development to specific AI development
focus projects to human resources and
financial market reform. This whole-of-society,
systems-based view of AI development is only
one of many salient examples of the extent to
which systems engineering theory has come
to underpin Party ideology. It not only reflects
how society as a whole is seen as a complex
system amenable to intervention, or how the
structure of policymaking echoes that system,
it also clearly indicates the engineering-type
solutions that AI technologies are envisaged
to generate.
Why does Party ideology need
digital technology?
It is nearly impossible to overestimate the
importance of Party ideology in the politics
of today’s China. It is not only the intellectual
glue that holds 90 million Party members
together, it is also an intellectual framework
that frames the tasks and challenges the
Party faces, and shapes and constrains
solutions. This does not mean that all Party
members hold similar, monolithic opinions, but
there is a carefully monitored and manicured
corpus of beliefs to which they must
demonstrate allegiance.
Like a seabed, Party ideology is a complex
accretion of sedimentary ideas, forming over
centuries. Some go back to imperial practice,
where dominant state doctrine held social
order and harmony as the highest good.
This required that, in China’s highly
hierarchical society, everyone learned to know
their place and carry out the concomitant
duties. After the fall of the empire, Marxism
and Leninism were introduced to China
in response to deep political crisis, as
reformers sought to restore the nation to
‘wealth and strength’ (fuqiang). Marxism
was attractive as it provided a scientific
theory for historical progress, aimed at
achieving a state of material abundance
and, thereby, social harmony. In other words,
the essence of what became Communist
Party authority is to implement an objective
and external scientific theory. Leninism
provides the organisational component,

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
066
However, in practice, the social ‘machine’ is
highly complex. Consequently, realising the
vision of engineering social change requires
considerable information gathering and
processing capabilities. This is where AI and
big data technologies come in. For the first
time in history, the leadership believes, digital
technologies provide the data management
abilities and the computational power to
permit it to realise its project and propel
China into the future. In this new, data-driven
future, a number of perennial problems
plaguing the Party will be eliminated.
Smart devices, for instance, will gather data
more efficiently and communicate them
more sincerely than notoriously unreliable
local governments. Nationwide integrated
databases will liberate government-held
information from the paper forms and
incompatible formats in which they have
been imprisoned – the ‘data islands’ as
Dev Lewis describes them in his essay on
Social Credit Systems – and thus enable
more efficient and automated forms of
governance. Curiously, Chinese political
leaders seem to share the typical Silicon
Valley belief that Evgeny Morozov calls
‘solutionism’: that the right code, algorithms,
In this ideological view, the keyword is unity.
There is only one accepted form of truth,
which is both scientifically correct and morally
good. There is only one political organisation
with a sufficient grasp of that truth to ensure
progress. There is only one integral nation
and in the words of Xi Jinping, ‘only when
the country does well, can the individual do
well’.10 This has major implications for notions
of social governance. Ideology assumes
the world can be perfected and made
harmonious. Conflicts and contradictions,
therefore, are indications that someone
has, consciously or unconsciously, made a
mistake. Government should create systems
to educate and govern the well-meaning,
vast majority of the population so they do not
make mistakes, and to protect the Party and
the nation from the small number of ‘enemies’
who seek to undermine its integrity. It should
not be encumbered through legal niceties
such as powerful individual rights. On the
contrary, it should be empowered to make
the required changes effectively. This means
rights are only possible if there is a powerful
state and are always conditional upon them
not hindering the execution of the political
programme.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
067
First and foremost, it is clear that the use
of AI in the domestic security environment
will be further expanded in the everlasting
pursuit of social and political stability.
Yet even if one takes the cynical view that
everything the Chinese leadership does is
aimed at consolidating Party rule, it must
equally be recognised the leadership believes
an efficient way of doing so is ensuring the
population is, by and large, satisfied. This is
often couched in economic terms and GDP
growth rates but perhaps equally important
is the provision of social services to an
ever more demanding populace. Under
Xi Jinping’s ‘new normal’, the Party seeks
to combine a gradually reducing growth
rate with greater attention to public welfare
and social development. AI will thus also
be deployed to remedy problems ranging
from an ageing population and shrinking
workforce to the shortage of doctors and
teachers in remote and rural areas. China’s
giant digital corporations will be supportive
partners, able to score political points and
derive considerable income from helping
the state to achieve its goals.
data sources and applications can solve
all of mankind’s problems and make life
‘frictionless’ and problem-free.11 In both
China and California there is a drive to use
technology to eliminate imperfections in
social life and make everything more efficient,
through ‘programming’ the behaviour of
individuals.
How does this ideological view
influence the use of AI in governance?
As indicated above, both the AI strategy
and the Party’s overall programme have
three main pillars: economic growth, national
security and domestic governance. The latter
has, over the past decades, been mobilised
in order to realise the two former. Yet China is
now more wealthy and powerful than it has
been in recent history and is on the verge of
achieving the first of two markers Xi Jinping
put forward: the Party’s 100th anniversary
in 2021. By this time, China should have
become a moderately prosperous society,
growing into a fully-fledged developed nation
by the second marker: the centenary of the
People’s Republic in 2049. If China manages
to continue along this path, and leaves the
crises of its past further behind, the question
what sort of society it wishes to be is now
becoming more acute. Digital technologies
and AI will lie at the centre of these debates.
At this point in the argument, it would be
customary to reflect on the likelihood that AI
might contribute to political liberalisation in
China. However, such expectations are wide
of the mark. At least within the foreseeable
future, the position of the Party seems to be
secure and if fundamental political change
were to come to China, chaos and disruption
would be far more likely than successful
democratisation. Instead, the interesting
questions are how the Party could use AI to
adapt itself to ever-changing circumstances,
and how the development of AI might be
constrained by its political context.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
068
the loop may mean the existing pathologies
in the Party-state architecture are sustained.
This issue also raises a bigger point about
the relationship between AI and means and
ends in governance. Based as it is on the idea
of perfectibility, the engineering approach
may work very well in those areas of social
life where the ends are clear and broadly
shared, and there is a direct, well-understood
connection between inputs and outcomes.
Here, AI could play a very important role
in raising efficiency and improving social
outcomes.
However, many areas of social life are
complex and unpredictable, while others
are beset by conflicts between values
that are all seen as desirable, yet may
be incommensurable. In these areas,
the engineering approach is highly likely
to backfire. This tension can be clearly
seen in the use of AI in education, as
Yi-Ling Liu explores in her essay, where the
most ‘efficient’ form of education is not
necessarily the most effective pedagogically.
Technocratic decision-making enhanced by
technology is simply not a substitute for the
agility and flexibility required to navigate
the ultimate difficulty of governance:
operating under uncertain circumstances,
with unpredictable outcomes, on the basis of
incomplete information. This, incidentally, is
the same criticism made against the Silicon
Valley approach discussed earlier: if the
technocratic logic is all, where is the room
for judgment and accountability?
At the same time, two major issues
will need to be addressed
The first is the question of data quality and
data protection. China does not have, nor
is it likely to develop, an all-encompassing
privacy right for individuals. It is in the
process of developing data frameworks
detailing which specific actors can collect,
access and process which data. Yet this
process has advanced slowly, as behind-the-
scenes negotiations between businesses and
related government departments continue
to unfold. Businesses are, unsurprisingly, not
keen to share full access to data with other
businesses or government offices. They might
lose their competitive advantage, see the
risk of data leaks increase, and lose user
confidence, and have thus often managed
to stave off requirements for doing so.
One reason business data is attractive is
that it tends to be more reliable than
government data, where incentives for
corruption and abuse have proliferated
for decades. As the success of any AI
application depends on the quality of the
underlying data, the success of projects in the
public sector may remain below par for quite
some time.
The second is the nature of decision-making
itself. In many ways, China seeks to use AI
and other digital technologies to automate
governance, creating self-correcting social
systems requiring far less government
intervention and supervision than the present
model. However, if this requires autonomous
decision-making technologies, involving
self-improving machine learning algorithms,
it threatens the monopoly on political
decisions the Party has reserved for itself
since 1949. While this is of less importance
in areas with clearly defined and generally
accepted outcomes, such as healthcare,
it may well become a source of tension
in politically sensitive areas such as the
judiciary. Eugeniu Han touches on this when
he considers System 206 smart courts in
his essay on smart cities in this collection,
and raises the question of the difficulty of
challenging AI processes and AI-generated
assessments. In contrast, keeping a human in

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
069
Endnotes
1  1 Lorand Laskai and Graham Webster, ‘Translation:
Chinese Expert Group Offers “Governance Principles” for
“Responsible AI”’, DigiChina for New America, 17 June 2019,
accessed 5 March 2020, https:/ /www.newamerica.org/
cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/translation-chinese-
expert-group-offers-governance-principles-responsible-ai/.
2  BAAI, ‘Beijing AI Principles’, Beijing Academy of Artificial
Intelligence, 28 May 2019, https:/ /baip.baai.ac.cn/en.
3  Xi Jinping, ‘Speech at “The Road to Rejuvenation”’,
China Copyright and Media, 19 December 2012, updated
26 February 2014, accessed 5 March 2020, https:/ /
chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2012/11/29/
speech-at-the-road-to-rejuvenation/.
4  Graham Webster et al., ‘A New Generation Artificial
Intelligence Development Plan’, DigiChina for New America,
July 20, 2017, accessed 5 March 2020,
https:/ /www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-generation-
artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/.
5  Elsa B. Kania, ‘In Military-Civil Fusion, China is Learning
Lessons From the United States and Starting to Innovate’,
Center for a New American Security,
27 August 2019, accessed 5 March 2020, https:/ /www.
cnas.org/publications/commentary/in-military-civil-fusion-
china-is-learning-lessons-from-the-united-states-and-
starting-to-innovate.
6  Adam Segal, ‘Year in Review 2019: The U.S.-China Tech
Cold War Deepens and Expands’, Council on Foreign
Relations, 18 December 2019, accessed 5 March 2020,
https:/ /www.cfr.org/blog/year-review-2019-us-china-tech-
cold-war-deepens-and-expands.
7  Rogier Creemers, ‘Party Ideology and Chinese Law’,
in Law and the Party in China: Ideology and Organisation,
eds. Sue Trevaskes and Rogier Creemers (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, forthcoming).
8  Yuhua Wang and Carl Minzner, ‘The rise of the Chinese
security state’, The China Quarterly 222 (2015): 339-359.
9  Børge Bakken, The Exemplary Society: Human
Improvement, Social Control, and the Dangers of Modernity in
China (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000); Mara Hvistendahl,
‘A Revered Rocket Scientist Set in Motion China’s Mass
Surveillance of its Citizens’, Science, 14 March 2018,
accessed 5 March 2020, https:/ /www.sciencemag.org/
news/2018/03/revered-rocket-scientist-set-motion-china-
s-mass-surveillance-its-citizens.
10 Xi, ‘Road to Rejuvenation’.
11  Evgeny Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly
of Technological Solutionism (New York: Public Affairs, 2013)

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
070
China is innovating with AI in public services
at breathtaking speed. It is striding ahead
in terms of its levels of investment, rate of
experimentation and adoption, and breadth
of applications. Policymakers around the
world need to pay attention to developments
in China and learn from what’s happening if
they want to keep pace.
The essays in this collection show the
benefit of a nuanced understanding of
AI in China and offer some insights that
might be unexpected. Challenging common
misconceptions helps us understand what is
really happening in China – in terms of what
technologies are being used, who is involved
and what the underlying motivations are.
We learn, for example, that China’s
innovation hasn’t only been driven by
cutting-edge technologies but also the
skilful deployment and scaling of existing
AI technologies. Rather than only looking
to the most advanced technologies as
solutions, policymakers in Europe could
learn from China’s approach and consider
how harnessing and scaling already-existing
technologies might be an equally innovative
way to improve services and solve problems.
We also learn that China is engaged in
discussions about the ethics of AI. This
provides an opportunity to bring China into
global AI governance conversations, and for
Europe to draw on its strengths and be a
co-operation partner in areas such as data
protection and AI ethics.1
While China’s authoritarian politics mean
that there are significant elements of the
government’s approach that should be
condemned, it is important not to lose sight
of all of China’s advances. Even if we disagree
with China’s political system, there are still
elements of its AI innovation that we could
usefully learn from, and interesting ideas that
could be adapted for a European context to
benefit citizens.
There are insights to be gained from China’s
local innovation ecosystems and how they
drive AI development and implementation –
policymakers in Europe could assess which
cities have the right conditions to build this
kind of AI innovation ecosystem and support
these to develop, through capital and other
policy supports. In light of the UK’s regional
levelling-up ambitions, this approach might
be a particularly promising way to boost
research and innovation throughout the UK.
China’s agile and experimental approach
to finding new AI applications for real-world
problems is also worth attention. While it
would not be replicable in a European context
due to the regulatory environment, it is worth
considering how experimentation methods
such as regulatory sandboxes and innovation
testbeds could be used to foster rapid AI
innovation in important application areas.
Observing China’s use of AI in public services
with a critical eye helps us pinpoint what’s
concerning about China’s approach and
identify where AI systems are being designed
or implemented in ways that perpetuate
inequalities, diminish citizens’ rights or
give too much power to tech companies
or governments. These insights offer a
cautionary tale for what we should strive to
avoid, and remind us of the need for open
and equitable AI systems.
There is a need for transparency about
where, how and why AI is used in public
services, and for accountability structures to
be put in place, so that algorithmic decision-
making processes remain open and auditable
and citizens are able to challenge decisions
they deem unfair.2

Conclusion

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
071
EndnotesCitizens and civil society stakeholders
should have a voice in decisions around
data collection and the development of AI,
to ensure that systems are designed and
implemented in ways that are inclusive
and protect citizens’ digital rights.3
It is critical that policymakers around
the world pay attention to how China is
innovating with AI in public services if they
want to learn from and keep pace with
China’s advances. We hope these essays give
readers a deeper understanding of China’s
use of AI and challenge existing thinking.
As well as offering new and useful ideas and
insights, this collection should help readers
to reflect on fundamental questions around
the broader ethical, social and political
implications of applying AI in public services.
Hessy Elliott,
Government Innovation Research, Nesta
1  Kai von Carnap and Kristin Shi-Kupfer, ‘Values as a
Quality Seal: Germany Should be More Active in Shaping
Cooperation with China’, MERICS Blog - European Voices
on China, 4 September 2019, Mercator Institute for China
Studies (MERICS), https:/ /www.merics.org/en/blog/values-
quality-seal-germany-should-be-more-active-shaping-
cooperation-china.
2  Eddie Copeland, ‘10 principles for public sector use of
algorithmic decision making’, Nesta (blog), 20 February
2018, https:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/10-principles-for-
public-sector-use-of-algorithmic-decision-making/.
3  ‘Digital Rights Policy-Making’, Digital City Toolkit,
https:/ /sokotech_team.gitlab.io/unhabitat/digital_city_
toolkit.html; Tom Saunders, ‘How to involve the public
in the development of artificial intelligence’, Nesta (blog),
18 December 2017, https:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/blog/how-
to-involve-the-public-in-the-development-of-artificial-
intelligence/.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
072
Andy Chun
Dr Andy Chun is a council member and
convenor of the AI Specialist Group of the
Hong Kong Computer Society and an adjunct
professor at the City University of Hong Kong.
Andy is a seasoned technology executive
and an AI pioneer with over 30 years of
experience. Currently, he is with the global
financial services group Prudential plc as the
regional director of technology innovation for
Asia, providing leadership in the use of AI for
digital transformation. Previously, Andy was
the chief information officer at City University
of Hong Kong and an associate professor
at its Computer Science Department. Andy
holds a PhD in Electrical Engineering from the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
and attended Executive MBA training at
Boston University.
Rogier Creemers
Dr Rogier Creemers is an assistant professor
in the law and governance of China at Leiden
University. He holds degrees in Chinese
Studies and International Relations, and a
doctorate in Law. His research focuses on two
major projects: China’s efforts to build itself
into a digitised ‘Smart State’, and the impact
of China’s technological rise on global cyber
affairs. Rogier’s research has been published
in journals including the China Journal and
the Journal of Contemporary China, and he
is a frequent commentator in news media
including the New York Times, the Economist
and the BBC. He is a co-founder of the
DigiChina programme at New America, and a
fellow of the Hague Project for Cyber Norms.
Jeffrey Ding
Jeffrey Ding is a DPhil researcher at the
Centre for the Governance of Artificial
Intelligence, within the University of
Oxford’s Future of Humanity Institute,
where he leads the centre’s research on
China’s AI development. Interested in
the relationship between technological
change and the rise and fall of great
powers, Jeff is reading for a DPhil (PhD) in
International Relations as a Rhodes Scholar
at the University of Oxford. His writing
has appeared in forums such as Foreign
Affairs and MIT Technology Review, and his
research has been cited in the Washington
Post, Financial Times and other outlets. Jeff
is the creator of a weekly ChinAI newsletter
featuring translations of Chinese media and
scholarship on AI-related topics.
Danit Gal
Danit Gal is technology advisor to the UN
Secretary General's High-level Panel on
Digital Cooperation. Previously, she was
project assistant professor at the Cyber
Civilizations Research Centre at the Keio
University Global Research Institute in
Tokyo, Japan and a Yenching fellow at
Peking University. Danit chairs the IEEE
P7009 standard on the Fail-Safe Design of
Autonomous and Semi-Autonomous Systems
and is an associate fellow at the Leverhulme
Centre for the Future of Intelligence at the
University of Cambridge, and an affiliate at
the Center for Information Technology Policy
at Princeton University.

Contributors

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
073
Yi-Ling Liu
Yi-Ling Liu is a nonfiction writer covering
technology, culture and society in China.
She is visiting scholar at the NYU Arthur L
Carter Journalism Institute, a recipient of the
Matthew Power Literary Reporting Award
and the Overseas Press Club Foundation
Fellowship and her work has been published
in the New York Times Magazine, the New
Yorker, the Economist and Foreign Policy. As an
educator, she has designed workshops and
directed summer camps for high-schoolers
around the world. She is interested in
storytelling as pedagogy, cultivating self-
authorship and preparing the next generation
of students for the age of automation.
Eugeniu Han
Eugeniu Han is a PhD candidate in Policy
Analysis at the Pardee RAND Graduate
School and an assistant policy researcher at
the RAND Corporation. His research interests
lie at the intersection of technological
innovation, international economics and
national security. He has also co-authored
several studies in education and health
policy. Eugeniu received a master’s degree in
Public Policy from the University of Chicago,
specialising in economics and data analysis,
and a Master’s degree in Management
from Tsinghua University. He completed his
undergraduate studies in Chinese and Russian
languages at the University of Bucharest.

Dev Lewis
Dev Lewis is a fellow and program lead at
Digital Asia Hub and a Yenching scholar at
Peking University. His research interests lie at
the intersection of technology, politics and
policy, and he is currently conducting research
on the Social Credit System in China. Dev has
an International Relations degree from Roger
Williams University and studied Mandarin
in Shanghai and Zhengzhou. He frequently
writes for several regional publications and
think tanks, and previously spent time at
Gateway House, a foreign policy think tank
in Mumbai, and Infosys China, an IT services
Multinational. He also writes a bi-weekly
newsletter ChinaIndia Networked.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
The AI Powered State: China's approach to public sector innovation
074
58 Victoria Embankment
London EC4Y 0DS
+44 (0)20 7438 2500
information@nesta.org.uk
facebook.com/nesta.uk
nesta.org.uk
@nesta_uk
