
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Science of
Using Science
Learning
Report
November 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
2
Science of using Science Learning Report
The Joint UCL Public Policy & Alliance for Useful Evidence training programme
was an experimental learning programme for researchers across UCL departments
that aimed to support researchers to develop their understanding and skills in
engaging and communicating evidence for impact. Based on the 2016 Science
of Using Science project conducted by the Alliance for Useful Evidence, the EPPI-
Centre at UCL, the Wellcome Trust, and the What Works Centre for Wellbeing, it
sought to explore what works to increase the use of evidence in policy, and how
these skills could be developed within an academic cohort. It was designed to
focus on in-practice application, and was delivered in ten 2-hour sessions spread
over 9 months in order to encourage the group to reflect, learn and develop their
competence by problem-solving with their peers from different departments
and disciplines. Given that the programme was an experimental learning offer,
it was developed with a high level of flexibility in order to test various learning
models in response to the needs and feedback of the cohort. It experimented with
many different formats, approaches, and tools to determine what resonated with
the intervention groups. As a result, a highly diverse programme was delivered
over eight sessions between October 2017 and May 2018. The following report
describes the programme that was delivered, provides a summary of the feedback
received from the participants, a puts forward key insight and recommendations
for both partners taking it forward.
The programme included an application process that was managed by the
UCL Public Policy team. This had three main aims: to manage demand for the
programme given that the programme was externally funded and unique in UCL;
to ascertain participants’ motivations to increase the impact of their work, and
to better understand the needs of those that would attend in order to shape
the content. These aims were explored through an online application form that
asked applicants to state their motivation for applying for the programme, their
current approach to impacting policy, and the challenges that they face within
this process. The shortlisting and selection process was managed by UCL and took
into consideration researchers current exposure to and engagement with policy
professionals as well as their expectations of the training course and the tools and
skills they hoped to gain. 22 applications were received with 20 being invited to
participate on the programme.
Participants’ experience levels ranged from early career researchers to
more experienced academics, and represented diverse disciplines, including
engineering, history, education, biomedical sciences, and more. Despite the diverse
backgrounds of the cohort, there were shared perceptions of the motivations
Introduction
The Participants

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
3
and challenges faced in translating their research into policy impact that are
summarized below:
Shared Motivations Shared Challenges
1. To learn and develop a plan/
str
ategy for demonstrating impact
in
1. Communicat ing research evidence
to appropriate audiences and in an
effective manner
2.
 Determine what methods f
or
research translation lead to the
greatest impact on policy, whether
it be through one-off evidence
uptake or more systematic
incorporation into decision-making
2.
 Uncov
ering pathways for policy
engagement and relationship
building with decision-makers
3.
 Impro
ve ability to communicate
research content tailored towards
both academic and policy
communities in a way that sparks
action; in that communication
effectively demonstrates internal
validity while remaining attractive
and accessible for policymakers
and non-specialist audiences
3.
 Communicat
ing the complexity of
the research in an easily digestible
way, including finding the most
suitable language for the relative
audience.
4.
 Enhance and strengthen
knowledge
, experience and skills in
policy engagements
4. A Lack o
f formal strategy or
training in strategies for research
translation or policy engagement
Despite many similarities amongst the participants, the application forms revealed
differences participant incentives and relationship with evidence-informed
policy making processes. For example, participants demonstrated contrasting
motivations in that some were interested in how the learning from the program
could be applied to individual research projects, whereas others were interested
in partaking in the programme to learn systems and skills in order to relay this to
their teams and/or colleagues.
The diversity of experience, especially in levels of experience working with
decision-makers, was particularly stark in the applications. Some participants had
pre-established working relationships with policymakers, whilst others had not yet
had the opportunity, nor confidence in the way in which they collated their data,
to present their research at this level. A full summary of participants’ background
and motivations can be found here.
The learning content was structured around 6 core modules which were drawn
from UCL Public Policy’s experience and the Science of Using Science research.
These modules consisted of either 1 or 2 sessions that involved a mixture of
research and expert input, combined with activities and worksheets that
supported the application of content to their work and action planning. A diverse
range of methods were used to encourage and support the group in developing
practical applications of their work within these areas, as opposed to working
within more abstract concepts.
The Modules

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
4
The learning programme
The first module of the programme framed the programme. It provided the group
with an overview of the research, introduced the action planning component of the
training and crowdsourced participant needs as the basis of design for the core
content, which was used and reviewed with the group at stages throughout the
programme.
Crowdsourcing allowed us to more closely design and align the content of the
programme with the needs of the group. A summary of what was requested
during the crowdsourcing portion of the programme can be found in the following
document. Key themes derived from this session included the importance of
balancing complexity and clarity, understanding different levels of the ecosystem,
and identifying institutional support and expertise.
Module two focused on the policy landscape and policy needs, and was delivered
through two sessions supported by policy expert Paul Cairney from the University
of Sterling. The first of these sessions drew from Paul’s research and provided
a theoretical framework for considering how to engage policy stakeholders. It
emphasised the messy reality of policy-making and the role that narratives and
storytelling have in effectively communicating messages. The second session put
this into practice, as participants presented their research tailored towards a
policy audience and received feedback on it. These insights were then added to
their action plan.
Module three focused on understanding policy stakeholders, and was delivered
through two sessions that explored how stakeholder engagement can be put into
practice. The first session provided participants with an overview of what the
research recommended around engaging policy stakeholders. Participants were
asked to identify patterns of engagement within a series of case studies, then
mapped their stakeholder base within their own policy areas. The second session
consisted of a panel of former and current civil servants and academics, including
a previous Chief Economist from the Department of Education and a current Civil
Servant working within the What Works Centre Coordination unit. Panelists were
asked to share what they experienced to be the biggest barriers in using research
in policy and what they found worked in getting evidence used. To ensure a high
level of attendance and engagement, the panel session the was opened for other
academics to also attend, around 40 participated in total.
Feedback received from participants at the mid-way point demonstrated that
the programme was too long (see section below on evaluation). As a result, the
remaining programme was shortened, with modules consisting of one session each
instead of two. A full outline of the rationale for this decision can be found here.
Module four focused on communicating evidence, with an emphasis on both
audience segmentation and the importance of tailoring based on the needs of
the audience. Participants were asked to prepare an email to be sent to policy
stakeholder that introduced their research area, which was then reviewed within
the session. The communication session drew heavily from the institutional
capacity and expertise of the UCL communications department, who led
Introduction
Understanding
policy
stakeholders
Facilitating
interactions
with policy
stakeholders
The policy
landscape &
policy needs
Communicating
evidence
Close & action
planning

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
5
presentations on branding and communications.
Module 5 focused on facilitating interactions with policy stakeholders, which was
structured around the presentation of current research surrounding interaction
facilitation as outlined within the Science of Using Science Report. During the
session, a member of the Alliance shared case studies of successful instances of
facilitation of policymakers, and led an activity in which participants developed a
theory of change for their approach to influence policy.
The final session focused on how participants consider impact in their research,
and how to further develop impact frameworks within their research moving
forward.. It involved two presentations by UCL collegues, one on the Research
Evaluation Framework (REF), as was requested by participants, and another on
incorporating impact into funding applications. The session finished with an action
planning session, in which participants reflected on all of the content covered
over the course of the programme and considered how they would put content
elements into action. Participants were encouraged to keep their action plans and
remain in contact with UCL Public Policy as they consider policy impact in their
work in the future.
Participation
UCL to add attendance at each session as a record
A
ttendance (%)
Session 1 90
Session 2 85
Session 3 85
Session 4 65
Session 5 90
Session 6 85
Session 7 25
Session 8 30
P
articipants were asked to provide feedback informally throughout the programme
directly to the UCL Public Policy team, and formally through two surveys, one
at the halfway point of the programme and another at the end. While overall,
little feedback was received both informally and formally, the feedback that was
gathered was used to influence the design of the programme and content.
Informal feedback was received on two modules: understanding the policy
landscape & policy needs, and understanding policy stakeholders. For the
understanding policy landscape sessions, informal participant feedback indicated
a need for a more engaging and applied presentation style.
In response to this feedback, all future modules included a strong element of
participation and application of concepts, whether through worksheets (such as
a network map or theory of change worksheet) or through case study examples.
Substantial positive feedback was received following the understanding policy
stakeholders panel session on the range of contributors, their experiences, and the
format of the session. Whilst it was not possible to replicate this format again in
the programme due to the limited availability of similar expertise, the team sought
to draw in expertise throughout the remaining modules where possible.
Formal feedback was requested from the participants through survey monkey
halfway through the programme and at the end of the programme. The focus of
Participant feedback

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
6
these surveys was to ascertain participants reflections on the sessions and their
utility. Five participants completed the first survey (25% of the cohort), none of
which had attended all of the modules delivered up to that point.
Midpoint feedback: participant attendance
Of those that responded, 80% stated that they had found the content very useful
or somewhat useful (four participants) while one participant stated had not found
it useful at all, stating “I do not know anything about the UK policy environment as
an overseas scholar. I am afraid I was completely lost”.
At the end of the programme, formal feedback was submitted by 7 participants
(35% of the cohort), non of whom had attended all sessions. None of those that
responded found the sessions to be damaging, though one participant found the
session with Paul Cairney un-useful. Across the modules, the first two sessions
received the most positive scorings, with the expert panel session coming in at a
close third.
End of programme feedback: Ratings by session
Percent Value
Introduction: Understanding the research and the approach.
The policy landscape & policy needs: Session 1, The theoretical
framework with Paul Cairney
The policy landscape & policy needs: Session 2, Putting it into practice
Understanding policy stakeholders: Session 1, Understanding &
identifying your network
Understanding policy stakeholders: Session 2, Expert panel
80%
100%
60%
80%
40%

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
7
Development Team Reflections (UCL Public Policy &
Alliance for Useful Evidence)
Strengths
Whilst it’s difficult to draw robust conclusions from such a small sample, the
feedback did highlight some strengths of the approach:
•
 Impro
ved Understanding of Policy Making Context: “[I feel more confident to
try to influence policy] in that understand its a complicated landscape and there are
different techniques/strategies and also its mostly luck!”. The programme sought
to develop people’s understanding of the complexities of the policy making
process and the need for a multi-level approach. We wanted to bust the myth
around there being a magic formula for getting research into policy. Some of
the feedback forms indicated that this objective was met,“I believe I am less
naive than I was before” .
•
 Impro
ved Awareness of Stakeholder Incentives: “I definitely got a better
understanding of civil servants and how they move around”. The programme
aimed to help participants understand the needs and challenges of policy
makers so that they can better see how their work can meet these needs. This
is driven from The Alliance’s experience which indicates that the research
community is prone to approaching policy makers without an awareness
of the political environment in which decision-makers are embedded: “The
programme has given me… more clarity about the needs of policy makers.”
•
 Emphasis on Proactiv
e Relationship-Building: “I think I am going to make an effort
to attend events, and make connections even if they aren’t obviously directly relevant”.
The programme put a big focus on the role of engagement and relationship
building, encouraging academics to strengthen their networks. For others, the
importance of being proactive stood out:, “Going forward I know who I need to talk
to in my organisation about influencing and some suggestions of what influencing
looks like”.
•
 Str
engthened Inner-Organizational Links: “The most valuable thing for me in this
programme was to see that most academics are facing the same challenges, but that
there are units at UCL that can help with many of the issues that we are confronted
with.” The programme design focused not only on bringing in external expertise,
but also raising the profile of the available expertise from UCL Public Policy
to connect and draw from the institutional capacity that already exists but
isn’t necessarily connected. On this point the programme seems to have been
particularly effective, as one participant put it, “The key insights was the resources
and expertise available through UCL Public Policy. In the future, I will be sure to their
feedback on policy engagement ideas before approaching stakeholders”.
Weakness
As the programme was a pilot, a key focus of its design and delivery was to test
the viability and format of a programme of this nature for a diverse group of
academics:
•
 Session
Timing: ‘Fewer, but possibly longer sessions with smaller gaps between them’.
Whilst training over longer periods of time allows for in-practice application
exercises, there was clear feedback from this cohort that this did not work
for them. Many participants suggested that they would have preferred “fewer
sessions”, and whilst the programme was shortened half way through, there was
a sense sessions could have been reduced even more. There was a diversity of

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
8
opinions regarding how session length and duration could be altered, whether it
should be more structured, ‘’ or something that did not require such high levels
of commitment, ‘I was of course not able to attend all sessions’.
•
 Pr
ogramme Tailoring: “More tailoring to individual participants needs”. Both
the diversity of participant experiences in policy and the range of disciplines
represented presented a challenge in the design of the programme, as the
policy landscape and networks for each policy areas are highly diverse. As a
result, the content had to be broadly applicable; drawing from examples from
a range of sectors in the UK. As a result, a few participants highlighted that the
programme didn’t closely meet their need. In addition, some participants felt
that , ‘the international perspective was widely missing”, or expressed the desire for
explicit tailoring of content material, “an initial one-on-one meeting with participants
at the start might help provide focus”.
•
 Applicability o
f Content: “More case studies”. Whilst case studies were woven
into many of the sessions, there was clear feedback that participants would
have liked more, and that they should be presented in greater depth that goes
beyond more generalisable theory: ‘Case studies could make more manifest some of
the ideas that were presented in abstract form in some of the presentations, as well as
show the full life cycle of engagement’. In addition, some participants wanted case
studies that related more closely to their discipline and builds on the previous
point around tailoring research content depending on the audience, “I would
have more examples from primary scientists who have influence at UCL.”
•
 Gr
oup Engagement: “I probably missed a lot of important insights”. Inconsistent
participation, commitment, and attendance within sessions was a challenge for
the programme that grew incrementally as the program progressed, and was
dependent on participant application to this work in between sessions. Some
participants indicated that this was due to scheduling,”It would have been good
to have the dates up front so that we could attend all sessions or decide that it wasn’t
feasible to do the programme”. Others weren’t able to commit due to the length of
the programme However, this lack of consistent attendance brought challenges
to creating an incremental learning journey: “It was therefore an issue when I
missed a session too”.
•
 Car
eer Motivational Constraints: ‘Some participants have research that clearly
has policy implications whereas some don’t.’ The diversity of participants’
experiences and needs brought challenges to the design of the programme,
which reflects feedback received that the programme wasn’t fully aligned
with participant needs. A particular challenge for some was that influencing
policy wasn’t relevant to their research, or that they were not yet in a position
of sufficient seniority or experience to be exposed to policy makers. For
these participants, the programme was not relevant to their needs and its
applicability was limited. As one participant shared, ‘I wasn’t in a position to
take forward actions straight away and would have appreciated some more
theory/practical examples that I could then apply to my own role.’
Recommendations
The Joint UCL Public Policy & Alliance for Useful Evidence training programme
aimed to experiment with what a collaborative learning offer based on the
Science of Using Science report would look like, and was successful in generating
a multitude of learnings and insights. As one participants stated: “it was an excellent
pilot programme, largely because I imagine it was clear which elements worked and which
didn’t.” This final section will outline our recommendations based on the experience
of this pilot:

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
9
1. Tailor Content to Areas of Expertise
Future learning offers need to be more tailored to learners subject areas and levels
of experience. The current pilot provided an interesting test case to see what, from
a learning angle, is possible to provide for a group of highly diverse academics,
yet demonstrated that this leads to a lack of adequate support for participants.
Tailoring content towards participants subject matter could help them feel better
connected to the content and think more critically about how the learnings can
be applied to their own work. Below are considerations and suggestions for how
to tailor content towards the varying levels of expertise and backgrounds within
audiences:
•
 A pre- w
orkshop meeting with participants could help guide initial discussions
surrounding how content is relevant to participant needs given varying
embeddedness within different political and decision-making contexts
•
 Be selectiv
e with participants. Use the information provided within the
programme application process, including baseline understandings surrounding
topics covered in the course, participant motivations, and experiences to tailor
case examples and content towards the audience.
•
 Segmentize w
orkshop components based on learning needs unravelled
during scoping conversations. While it’s important to consider participants’
backgrounds and levels of expertise when creating and delivering content,
there are other targeting characteristics that can be taken into account within
this process, including but not limited to: international vs. national focus, level
of bureaucratic change interest, proximity to decision-makers, and familiarity
with policy literature and landscape. If creating specific, tailored workshops is
not feasible due to resource constraints, another possibility is having breakout
sessions that reflect audience diversity.
2. Learning Offer Structure and Component Alterations
Changes can be made to the structure of the learning offer. These changes can
build on what is already available across the organisation, help promote both
the engagement and commitment of participants, and strengthen the ability of
organisers to meet participant needs. Structural changes related to the length and
frequency of workshops, content-creation processes, and learning mediums can all
affect the effectiveness of the learning offer:
•
 If planning long terms engagements, inf
orm participants of workshop dates
beforehand in order to allow for adequate planning time and reduce attrition
rates of participants. This prevents participants from missing any key content
discussed in prior sessions, which allows for more holistic learning and more
accurate feedback.
•
 Longer, mor
e frequent sessions help to ensure continuity of content from
one session to the rest, and allows adequate time for participants to do
‘deeper-dives’ into content. More frequent sessions allows for momentum and
enthusiasm surrounding the topic to be maintained.
•
 Draw on behaviour
al insights to better encourage participant feedback.
The low feedback responses of participants following workshop sessions
demonstrates a need to encourage more feedback. There is an opportunity to
draw on the literature in developing an engagement strategy for future learners.
•
 Cont
ent Variation depending on stage of learning and experience. Consider a
balance of more prescriptive content (online for example), more action-oriented
workshops, or one-on-one sessions depending on whether the learner is at the
‘raising awareness’ level or is at the ‘making it happen’ stage (see figure below).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
10
• Consider how learning offers can relate to existing UCL Public Policy Offers
and insti
tutional capacity. Of those sessions that were delivered, those that
drew on expert narratives and UCL departments were the most popular. UCL
Public Policy already offers sessions like these on an adhoc basis and had the
connections within the organisation to further elevate the expertise of UCL
in this area. There is the potential to consider how these are packaged and
combined together as a learning offer for cohorts of academics.
3. Embeddedness within Broader Systems
Participants, and academics more broadly, are situated within contexts of
meaning-making and sy
stems that influence their ability to participate in
evidence-informed policy. These can include organizational affiliations, internal
and external incentives, career mobility requirements, conceptualizations of
problem and purpose, and opportunities for engagement with policy. Organisers
should consider how to build bridges and target programming across these
systems in order to leverage all available support when supporting academics
within their learning journey and build participants motivation for considering
impact:
•
 Promo
te Knowledge Sharing Across Systems on existing support networks,
resources, or organizations that academics are able to tap into. For example,
many participants found a lot of value add in learning about how UCL Public
Policy was able to support them.
•
 Link Learning Approaches
tailored towards academics, so that organisers are
better able to target learning offers in a way that is not repetitive or counter to
participants’ prior learning experiences.
•
 Institutionaliz
e Support Networks, which allow for the development of trust
and social capital across stakeholders. Effort should be made to develop
and promote both formal and informal networking and relationship building
activities to allow for the co-creation of long-lasting and meaningful
partnerships between academics and decision-makers.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
11
• Tap Into Existing Incentive Schemes of participants in order to work within their
contexts of understanding. For example, one session presented REF, and how
the learning material can contribute towards this framework. Aligning learning
offers with existing academic incentive schemes helps to ensure participant
engagement and commitment.
Next Steps
The development and delivery of this pilot training programme has been an
important learning experience for both the delivery partners.
UCL Public Policy plans to take the activity forward by incorporating the learning
from the pilot, particularly regarding the type/variation in cohort, timing, duration
and delivery of training, as it develops its own plans for a blended training
programme for UCL staff in line with UCL Occupational Development.
The Alliance for Useful Evidence will use the lessons from the pilot to shape their
approach in the design and delivery of its ‘Research Uptake’ learning
programmes. It will help guide new iterations of cohort targeting, content
tailoring, and course structure, while contributing to the broader strategic
mission of embedding Science of Using Science learning within organisations.
The Alliance intends to deliver content derived from the pilot to undergraduate
and master’s students participating in UCL’s Global Citizenship Programme
during summer, 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Science of using Science Learning Report
12
