
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Makerspaces and
the search for mass
innovation
Tom Saunders and Jeremy Kingsley
March 2016
MADE
IN CHINA

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 1 Plough Place, London, EC4A 1DE.

www.nesta.org.uk © Nesta 2016
About Nesta
Nesta is an innovation foundation with a mission to help people and
organisations bring great ideas to life.
We are dedicated to supporting ideas that can help improve all our lives, with
activities ranging from early–stage investment to in–depth research and practical
programmes.
Acknowledgements
This report was produced in partnership with the British Council. We would like to thank
them for their input throughout the project, particularly Rebecca Shoesmith and Beatrice
Pembroke. Thanks to Kathleen Stokes, former Nesta staff member, for her help with the
design of the project and the survey. We would like to thank Hacked Matter – David Li and
Silvia Lindner - for their help carrying out the survey and insights into making in China. We
are very grateful to the interviewees who generously gave their time, expertise and insights
for the project. Thanks to Liz Corbin and Cat Rossi for their comments on early drafts of the
report. Thanks also to Nesta staff members Kirsten Bound, Florence Engasser and Ben Reid
for their comments on the draft.
This project was run in parallel with Living Research: Making in China, a partnership
between the British Council and the Arts and Humanities Research Council, who provided
funding through the Newton Fund, which aims to develop the UK’s science and innovation
partnerships in order to promote the economic development and welfare of developing
countries. Thanks to Daniel Charny, Professor of Design, Kingston University, faculty of Art
Design and Architecture for input into the initial development of the programme. Thanks to
Living research participants Molly Price, Fiona Dowling, Justin Marshall, Joel Trotter, Asa
Calow, Martin Hennessey, Sarah Robertson, Liz Corbin and Cat Rossi. Discussions with them
during the project have been invaluable in contextualising the findings of the survey results.
Living Research was run in collaboration and with the support of David Li and Shenzhen Open
Innovation Lab and was also kindly sponsored by Seeed Studio and Mass Innovation Week,
Shenzhen.
The views expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the project partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
FOREWORD 4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Made in China: makerspaces and the search for mass innovation 5
1. A snapshot of China’s makerspaces 10
2. Making for kicks 14
3. A search for innovation-led development 16
4. Makers meet industry 18
5. Makerspaces and an education revolution 20
6. Challenges 22
7. Case studies 23
 1. XinCheJian 24
 2. Mushroom Cloud 25
 3. Chaihuo Makerspace 26
 4. Nanjing Makerspace 28
 5. Ruichuang Makerspace 29
 6. SZDIY 30
 7. Blue Island Makerspace 31
8. The future of making in China 32
Annexe 34
Endnotes 35
MADE IN CHINA
Makerspaces and
the search for mass
innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Foreword
FOREWORD
In 2010 the first makerspace opened in China. Fast forward to 2016 and there has been an
explosion of spaces across the country, especially in 2015 when the government’s spotlight fell
on makerspaces as drivers of mass innovation and entrepreneurship.
The demand for new approaches to making and manufacture remains dynamic, with many
spaces opening as others close. There is some feeling that the bubble is bursting after the
2015 boom. But with increasing focus from the government on creativity and innovation,
captured in their ‘Made in China’ to ‘Designed in China’ campaigns, what will the future of the
makerspace look like?
The British Council is working with and through makerspaces around the world. We see them
as an important part of the changing nature of the creative industries, where both creative
professionals and the public are initiating new ways of working together. They are fostering
new forms of production, learning and business that can take advantage of new technologies
while still recognising the value of traditional craft and design skills.
We also believe that makerspaces, and other forms of creative hubs, can foster new forms of
cultural leadership. The convenors that build these spaces promote community spirit, vital to
local and global economic and social development.
This report and collaboration with Nesta is the start of a much bigger conversation about
how we can link makers in the UK and China more closely. We have a commitment to build a
longer term programme that will explore what we can learn from the unique making culture in
both countries and how these lessons can be shared globally.
Beatrice Pembroke and Rebecca Shoesmith,
Creative Economy team, British Council

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Executive Summary
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Made in China: makerspaces and the
search for mass innovation
I
n China, making things is a national specialism: whether it’s smartphones or
air conditioners, a staggering proportion of the things we use every day are
manufactured in the country. Indeed China today produces about a quarter of the
world’s goods, including 90 per cent of its personal computers, 70 per cent of its
mobile phones and 60 per cent of its shoes.
1 But as China’s manufacturing sector
matures and the economy grows, companies are beginning to move their factories
out of China to Vietnam, Bangladesh and even Mexico to take advantage of cheaper
wages. As a result, the way that China makes things has to change – from low-cost
components, assembly and labour-intensive processes associated with an often
pejorative ‘Made in China’ label, to higher value, innovation-led activities that could
see that label develop into a mark of quality. This could be the start of a new era of
‘Designed in China.’
Against this background, ‘makerspaces’ – open workshops that provide access to a range
of tools and resources for making physical objects – have spread rapidly across China in
the last five years. For many, they signal a new age of grassroots innovation and promise to
revolutionise ailing economic and educational systems.
The excitement around China’s makerspaces reached a peak in early 2015 when China’s
Premier Li Keqiang visited Chaihuo makerspace in Shenzhen and spoke of the significance of
the country’s burgeoning maker movement. Since then many local governments, companies
and schools across China have sprung into action, capitalising on central government
interest and committing to opening makerspaces. There are dozens of articles about China’s
makerspaces and many claim that they have a lot to teach their foreign counterparts. As
politicians in the west begin to look to makerspaces as a means of supporting startups,
entrepreneurship, and democratised participation in manufacturing, China may become
a model for how to do this. However, there are few systematic analyses of China’s maker
movement – even basic questions, such as how many makerspaces are there in the country
and who uses them, to questions about business models, relationships with businesses and
universities, and how and why they differ from their counterparts abroad, remain so far
unanswered.
Our report
This report analyses the prospects and dilemmas of China’s makerspaces. It is aimed at those
within China, as well as makerspaces around the world, and those who wish to understand
how they can better support them.
To do this Nesta and its partners – the British Council and Hacked Matter – came together to
carry out the first systematic survey of China’s makerspaces. Building on Nesta’s 2015 survey
of UK makerspaces, we surveyed almost 100 makerspaces in China and the resulting dataset
represents the most comprehensive picture of China’s makerspaces to date. To add context
to the findings of the survey we visited makerspaces in three major cities in China in October
2015 - Nanjing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, and interviewed the founders and managers of 12
makerspaces. We also held two expert workshops in London and Shenzhen.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Executive Summary
Makerspaces - a definition
Makerspaces, hackerspaces and Fablabs are all names for a similar phenomenon. Fablabs are
easy to identify: the term refers to a network of branded digital fabrication workshops that
grew out of MIT in 2001. An organisation has to apply to the Fablab network in order to be
able to use the name. Hackerspaces and makerspaces are harder to define. Hackerspaces
are workshops where people can ‘hack’ hardware. They appeared in Europe in the 1990s,
spreading to the US in the early 2000s. Alongside hackerspaces, makerspaces began to
appear in the mid to late 2000s and grew out of the ‘maker movement’ promoted by Make
magazine. No single organisation controls the hackerspace/makerspace movement, which
means anyone can use the label. This is why conferences about making and makerspaces
often spend a long time debating what exactly a makerspace is. For the purpose of this
report we define it simply as an open access space (free or paid), with facilities for different
practices, where anyone can come and make something.
Surveying China’s makerspaces - nine key takeaways
In the report we analyse the survey in detail but here are the nine most interesting findings:
1. Numbers: how many makerspaces are there in China? They have spread rapidly over the
past five years, from just one in 2010 to over a hundred in 2015.
2 In our survey, the number of
makerspaces doubled in 2015.
2. Geography: where are China’s makerspaces? Three-quarters are in large cities on China’s
developed east coast, the rest are in large northern and inland cities. So far, makerspaces are
an urban phenomenon.
3. People: who is a typical maker? Makers are typically young, male, highly-educated and
technically literate. Seventy-seven per cent are male and 54 per cent are currently studying
at university. They are most likely to be studying engineering or electronics. A large number
of makers are also school-age children.
4. Facilities: what tools and materials do they have? The typical Chinese makerspace is likely
to specialise in electronics – 85 per cent stock electronics equipment and one in two spaces
that specialise in a particular material focus on electronics. Spaces that focus on craft are in
the minority.
5. Types of space: we have identified five types of makerspace in China:
a. The community makerspace: this would be familiar to anyone involved with
makerspaces in the west; a mix of hobbyists and people working on ideas for products,
sharing access to tools. They host workshops, organise training and have a strong
community aspect.
b. Hardware accelerators and incubators: government interest in makerspaces has focused
on their potential to incubate startups and create jobs, and most government-backed
makerspaces are more accurately hardware incubators adopting the ‘makerspaces’ label
because of the current excitement around this term in China.
c. Kids’ education clubs: these are after-school and weekend clubs, run both by
independent organisations and also within schools, where kids can make things. They
differ from craft clubs in that they provide access to digital tools like 3D printers and
open source hardware like Arduino. They are an expression of a desire to bring creativity
and hands-on, project-based learning into China’s education system.
d. Open-access university labs: many universities across China – mainly those with a
focus on electronics and engineering – are setting up ‘makerspaces’ that provide access
to digital manufacturing tools and other equipment to any student enrolled in the
university. The idea is to promote innovation, potentially helping to incubate hardware
startups.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Executive Summary
e. Makerspaces within companies: From Foxconn, the world’s largest consumer electronics
manufacturer, to state-owned enterprises like the 14th Research Institute of the China
Electronics Technology Group (CETC) in Nanjing, companies across China are opening
in-house makerspaces to give employees the tools and space to test out new ideas
that may eventually become new products, and to improve the creativity and problem-
solving skills of their employees.
6. Money: how are spaces funded? China’s makerspaces are still experimenting with business
models. One in five is funded by a parent company. Workshops, membership fees and
donations are also a major source of income. Thirty-four per cent of makerspaces surveyed
have received some form of government support, from funding to subsidised rent. One in
four spaces has no income and relies on the support of volunteers.
7. Politics: how is the government supporting makerspaces?
a. High-level policy support: The central government has indicated its interest through
high-profile visits to makerspaces and by issuing several policy guidelines about
makerspaces and ‘mass innovation.’
b. Local government subsidies: Provincial and city governments provide makerspaces with
free workshop space or subsidised rents - almost one in five makerspaces have received
this kind of support. Several local governments have also announced plans to invest
large sums in setting up new makerspaces.
c. Encouragement and promotion: Local governments play an important role in
encouraging the maker movement. This includes organising maker events and
competitions, promoting university-makerspace interaction and encouraging businesses
to work with makerspaces on product development.
8. Relationships: Who are China’s makerspaces connected to? Two-thirds are connected to
government - receiving funding and support and hosting events; two-thirds are connected
to local manufacturers - who supply them with parts and organise small patch production
runs for them; three out of four are connected to universities - hosting joint events, to
access advanced equipment and running maker education courses; and 36 per cent have
international connections, mainly through joint events and visits.
9. Challenges: What challenges do China’s makerspaces face?
a. Funding: Spaces that don’t have a parent company struggle with developing a
sustainable business model – 52 per cent highlighted this as an issue.
b. Membership: Despite claiming large numbers of members, maintaining membership was
a major concern for many spaces.
c. Skills: New members rarely have the skills to use the tools in makerspaces, meaning
makerspaces have to spend time and resources training them
d. Understanding and advocacy: For many in China, ‘Makerspaces’ are synonymous with
entrepreneurship and few people understand maker culture, which makes it difficult
to recruit people interested in making. Government understanding of makerspaces as
startup factories means that it is difficult for spaces that focus on other things to access
government support.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Executive Summary
Five trends driving China’s maker movement
First imported into China in 2010, the term ‘makerspace’ now refers to a range of activities
and spaces, many of which meet a unique need of China’s social and economic situation.
Below, we highlight the five trends that are driving China’s maker movement:
1. A changing economy means the way that China makes things has to change. Manufacturing
is at the heart of the Chinese economy, but global economic forces are pushing up wages
in China, making low-cost, labour-intensive manufacturing much less lucrative for Chinese
companies. A shift in sophistication and a greater focus on innovation and design are now
required. For many companies, makerspaces represent the potential to release the creative,
innovative energy of their employees.
2. A search for innovation-led development is key to the Chinese government’s interest in
makerspaces. No longer satisfied with ‘made in China, designed elsewhere’, for the past ten
years the government has sought to put China on a path to innovation-led development.
Realising that top-down edicts can only go so far, the government hopes that makerspaces
can foster grassroots innovation, and entrepreneurship, helping to drive the next phase of
innovation-led economic growth in China.
3. Makerspaces represent a desire for radical reform of the education system. Rote learning
served China well when ‘Made in China’ was the main driver of the economy, but a transition
to ‘Designed in China’ requires more creativity, more freedom of expression and more
freedom of thought. Makerspaces potentially represent a way to bring these values into the
traditional education system.
4. China’s urban middle class are looking to reconnect with craft, just like their western peers.
While manufacturing is still a major part of the Chinese economy, millions of young Chinese
graduates will never need to work with their hands. For them, makerspaces are a reflection
of a desire to be creative and make physical objects. Furthermore, the urban middle classes
are starting to get more time off work and some of them are turning to making to fill it.
5. Shanzhai - a system of rapid, open-source, iterative innovations - is key to understanding
China’s makerspaces. Weaker IP protection and cut-throat competition mean that
companies and entrepreneurs place less emphasis on protecting their inventions in China,
instead attempting to innovate quicker than their competitors. As a result, China’s makers
have easy access to thousands of cheap, open-source electronics components, which are an
extremely useful resource for grassroots innovators and makers.
The Chinese maker movement is still in its infancy. As with any new movement, it’s difficult to
predict what it will look like a few years from now. In our survey, several respondents said that
makerspaces will be so common in schools and businesses that no one will talk about them
anymore. Others said that the maker bubble will burst in the next couple of years, government
funding will be pulled or won’t materialise, and a core of ‘real’ makerspaces will be left
struggling without funding or support. Whatever the truth of these two visions, government,
business and education institutions will continue to experiment with the meaning of making
and makerspaces, taking the maker movement in new directions, which could potentially
provide useful models and lessons for the international community of makers and those who
wish to support them.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Executive Summary
The makerspace movement has taken off in China
China’s makers: young, male, educated
Main challenge: Funding
75% of makerspaces
are in east coast
cities
‘Other’ includes visits from
government officials and companies
32%
30%
21%
17%
Hobbyist
To learn
To set up a company
Other
32%
30%
21%
17%
77%
male 54%
studying
at university
Funded
by a parent
company
Received
government
support, from
grants to
subsidised rent
Have no
income and
are supported
by volunteers
Why do people visit your makerspace?
52%
concerned
about
funding
New makerspaces
per year
1-4 spaces
5-9 spaces
10+ spaces
2010 2015
20% 34% 24%
Shenzhen
Factory of the world – first stop
for western makers in China
Shanghai
China's first
makerspace
founded here
Beijing Home to China's
largest makerspace,
the 16,500m
2 i.Center
China’s makerspaces in numbers

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
1. A snapshot of China’s makerspaces
1. A snapshot of China’s makerspaces
A
t Nanjing Makerspace on the east coast of China, large crates arrive every day
containing things you might never expect to see in a makerspace – fridge-
freezers and other white goods, solar panels and bathtubs. These and other
consumer products are sent to Nanjing Makerspace by companies in the hope that
members of the makerspace might be able to improve their design or solve a tricky
problem. The ‘smart ball’ used in Haier’s latest washing machines is one example: at a
hackathon - an event where people collaborate and compete on hardware challenges
- Haier organised with Nanjing Makerspace, one member came up with the idea of
placing absorbent balls between the inner and outer drum of the washing machine to
keep it clean and as a result extend its lifespan. Haier went on to commercialise the
idea, paying the inventor from Nanjing makerspace a fee for his troubles.
What’s going on here is part of an exciting new chapter in the story of how things are made
in China. As low-cost production starts to move abroad in response to inflation and higher
wages, Chinese companies are beginning to move up the value chain, focusing on innovation
and design. Makerspaces are part of this story. Originally a western import, they were used
mainly by expats and returnee students who had been members of makerspaces in the west
and wanted to continue to socialise with like-minded hobbyists, to experiment and make
things in their spare time in China. However, in the last five years the Chinese government,
businesses, schools and universities have all taken an interest in the concept, recognising the
potential of maker culture to transform production by nurturing and harnessing the creative
energy of grassroots innovators. As such, the makerspace concept is adapting to meet
the needs of the Chinese economy and society, and the maker movement in China is now
fantastically diverse. Here’s a snapshot of what is going on:
• Inside the Shenzhen plant of Foxconn, the world’s largest consumer electronics
manufacturer, the company hopes that its in-house makerspace will promote a new wave
of innovation by encouraging its employees to play and work on new ideas.
3
• Tsinghua University’s i.Center is a 16,500m2 makerspace, the largest in China. It was set up
in 2013 to give students a practical education, access to advanced tools and to promote
entrepreneurship. It hosts weekly hacking workshops and an annual ‘maker day’, open to
the public.
• Ruichuang Makerspace is based in the 14
th Research Institute of the China Electronics
Technology Group (CETC), a major state-owned conglomerate focusing on defence R&D.
It has set up a maker programme for its new engineering recruits where they attend the
in-house makerspace weekly to work on ideas for products. Those who go through the
programme are much better at problem solving and also have higher confidence levels.
• Maker Mountain is a hardware accelerator and incubator in Shenzhen. It provides office
space, on-site prototyping and seed funding for successful applicants to the programme.
• Litchee Lab is an example of the type of maker education for children that is springing up
across China, teaching hands-on creativity, critical thinking and freedom to experiment. It
hopes to be part of a revolution in the education system.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
1. A snapshot of China’s makerspaces
The context for this report
If you’re reading this in a developed country, chances are you rarely make physical products,
especially in a work context. ‘Work’ most likely means sitting in front of a computer screen for
eight hours a day. After half a century of production outsourcing, there is both nostalgia for
working with one’s hands and a desire to relearn the knowledge and skills needed to make
things. Furthermore, the space to make physical products is scarce in western cities, which are
almost wholly devoted to the service economy. These are some of the drivers of the global
‘maker movement’.
In China it’s different. Making things is a national specialism, from a rich, deep-rooted craft
heritage to its more recent dominance in mass manufacturing as the world’s factory for
consumer goods. As a result, nostalgia for the production of physical goods and the need to
relearn production skills are not issues in China. And yet makerspaces have spread rapidly
in the last five years, from just one in 2010 to over a hundred in 2015. More and more blogs,
articles and academic papers have been written about the potential of China’s makerspaces,
yet they are still little understood outside of China.
The excitement around China’s makerspaces reached a peak in early 2015 when China’s
Premier Li Keqiang visited Chaihuo makerspace in Shenzhen and spoke of the significance of
the country’s burgeoning maker movement. Since then many local governments, companies
and schools across China have sprung into action, capitalising on central government
interest and committing to opening makerspaces. As politicians in the west begin to look
to makerspaces as a means of supporting startups, entrepreneurship, and democratised
participation in manufacturing, China may become a model for how to do this.
Chaihuo Makerspace (circa 2013)
Mitch Altman. Licence CC BY SA 2.0

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
1. A snapshot of China’s makerspaces
Why has China, which has such a different economic and industrial heritage from the west,
adopted the idea of ‘making’ – a western concept – so wholeheartedly? What is going on in
China’s makerspaces and what lessons, if any, can UK makerspaces and those who hope to
support them seek to learn from China? With international attention set to focus on China’s
makerspaces in 2016 with the global Fablab conference, Fab12, scheduled to take place in
Shenzhen in August, now seems like a good time to search for these answers.
Translating makerspaces
The Chinese term for maker 创客 is not an invention by the government, but was coined
by China’s makers themselves. They chose the term to distinguish their work from the
more negative 黑客 or hacker – 创客 has the benefit to connote related words such as 创新
(innovation), 创业 (startup a business), and 创意 (creativity). The character 创 features in all of
these words and so the meaning of 创客 itself is flexible and can be used in a variety of ways.
Silvia Lindtner, Mass Making in China: Cultivating an Entrepreneurial Mindset.
Data collection
To answer these questions we ran the first comprehensive survey of China’s makerspaces.
Working with Hacked Matter, a Chinese research consultancy founded by David Li, the
founder of China’s first makerspace, we adapted Nesta’s 2015 survey of UK makerspaces to
the unique Chinese context and surveyed almost 100 spaces. The resulting data represents
the most comprehensive overview to date of China’s makerspaces.
Collecting the data for the survey posed several difficulties. Most Chinese makerspaces do not
register themselves in the global makerspace directory, and they do not keep their websites
up to date. It is also difficult to find makerspaces using search engines. Instead, we posted a
link to the survey in 30 of the most popular makerspace groups on WeChat, the widespread
Chinese messaging app. Many members of these groups are founders or active members of
makerspaces around China. We first ran a pilot with ten makerspaces to test the questions
then launched the revised survey in November 2015.
Building on this survey, we visited makerspaces in three major cities in China in October
2015 and interviewed the founders and managers of 12 makerspaces. Nesta’s research trip
was run in conjunction with one undertaken by nine makers and academics from the UK.
This project, called ‘Living Research’, was developed by the British Council and the Arts
and Humanities Research Council. Discussions with them during and after the trip offered a
unique opportunity to view China’s makerspaces through the lens of those who are involved
in the maker movement and have been invaluable in contextualising the findings of the survey
results. We also held two expert workshops, in London and Shenzhen.
Makerspace - a definition
It is tricky to define exactly what a makerspace is as there are no restrictions on who can use
the label. Some take a broad view, defining it as any space where people can make things.
Others see makerspaces as synonymous with digital fabrication and don’t include traditional
arts and crafts activities. The degree to which a space is open to the public is also an
important factor - private workshops are usually excluded from the definition.
For this report we used the same definition as Nesta’s 2015 survey of UK makerspaces: “an
open access space (free or paid), with facilities for different practices, where anyone can come
and make something.”
4

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
1. A snapshot of China’s makerspaces
While this definition might seem very broad, for China it excludes a large number of spaces
that self-identify as makerspaces. Many organisations that don’t provide access to tools have
started calling themselves makerspaces in response to government and media interest in the
concept. In reality these spaces are mainly incubators, accelerators and coworking spaces.
Lots of companies that offer specific manufacturing services to businesses, e.g. 3D printing
and laser cutting, have also begun to call themselves makerspaces. Both of these types of
spaces have not been included in the survey.
5 Therefore, while the latest plan for economic
and social development by the NDRC, China’s planning ministry, claims that there are 2,300
makerspaces in China, we believe, and our survey confirms, that there are much closer to 100
spaces that could realistically be called makerspaces.
China’s makerspaces in numbers
Category Statistics
Number of spaces surveyed 93
Average size 521m2
Location 75% in cities on the east coast of China
Founded by: Individual 56%
 Local government 23%
 Informal group 13.5%
 University 5%
 School 2.5%
Average number of members 100
Profile of a Chinese maker University students 54%
 Male 77%
Why do people visit makerspaces? ‘It’s my hobby’ 32%
 ‘To learn’ 30%
 ‘To set up a company’ 21%
 other (includes visits from government 17%
 officials and large companies)
Average number of staff Full time 5
 Part time 5
 Volunteers 11
Average income 100,000 RMB (24% of spaces have no income)
Makerspaces that have 38% - includes members getting products funded on Kickstarter
commercialised products? and startups successfully creating products through maker
 incubation programmes
Makerspaces with links to 73% - includes working with companies on hackathons and
manufacturing getting prototypes built
Makerspaces with international links 36% - includes links with universities and attending international
 maker events

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
2. Making for kicks
2. Making for kicks
Why did you set up a makerspace?
To spread craft culture and a spirit of practical experience.
MakerFamily, Beijing
To promote the development of open source hardware and software in
China.
oa25 open source group, Shanghai
Because we needed a space where like-minded people can come together
and create things.
SZDIY, Shenzhen
China’s first hackerspace, XinCheJian, was founded in 2010 (see case study 1, page 24). The
first makerspaces were very similar to those in the west, largely because expats and Chinese
returnee students were copying what they had seen outside of China. These hobbyist style
spaces have continued to grow slowly across China - prominent examples include SZDIY and
Chaihuo, both in Shenzhen. Much like their counterparts in the west, they organise workshops
and hackathons and members use the space to make anything they are interested in. During
our visits to these types of spaces we saw all manner of DIY creations, from go-karts to
electronic drum-kits. These projects are primarily about the joy of making. They represent
the rise of making as a hobby, largely for China’s urban middle class, who, like their western
counterparts, are largely employed in jobs that don’t involve manual work.
Making as a hobby is
not really part of the
media narrative on
making in China, which
sees makerspaces
as largely about
entrepreneurship. But
our survey confirmed
that hobbies are a major
reason why people visit
makerspaces, making
up a third of all visits.
This compares to just
over one in five visits
that are about setting
up a company and 30
per cent of visits that
are about education/
learning.
Having time for hobbies, at least for working-age people, is fairly new for China. The last
several decades of rapid economic growth left little time for the individual to explore their
interests. “Getting rich first” was how Duncan Hewitt described it in his 2008 book of that
title.
6 Now, many Chinese white collar workers are relatively rich and they’re looking for
something more than the nine-to-five job.
Shanghai Maker Carnival
Tom Saunders CC BY SA 2.0

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
2. Making for kicks
When it comes to what people are making in China’s makerspaces, it is largely focused
on electronics and digital fabrication: three out of four spaces are equipped with digital
fabrication machines - 3D printers, laser cutters etc., 85 per cent stock electronics equipment
and one in two spaces that specialise in a particular material, focus on electronics. In contrast,
just under one-third of spaces said that they work with fabrics (32 per cent) and one-fifth of
spaces said that they work with stone, clay and ceramics.
There are a number of potential reasons for this focus on digital fabrication and electronics
over craft and other practices. Makerspaces around the world have a strong digital focus: in
Nesta’s survey of UK makerspaces, digital fabrication tools were the most commonly reported
type of tool that makerspaces hold.
7 Alongside this, our survey of Chinese makerspaces found
that over half (54 per cent) of makerspaces members are currently studying at university.
While the survey did not ask what courses these students are studying, it was clear from
our visits to makerspaces in China that the majority of them are studying engineering and
electronics. A third potential reason for the focus on electronics in China’s makerspaces is the
abundance of cheap electronics components that those interested in making can purchase at
wholesale electronics markets like Huaqiangbei in Shenzhen (pictured above) and also online.
Huaqiangbei electronics market
Jeremy Kingsley CC BY SA 2.0

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
3. A search for innovation-led development
3. A search for innovation-led
 development
A
s makerspaces started to develop in China they began to show commercial
potential. Stories about ‘makers’ setting up companies and getting their
products onto crowdfunding platforms piqued the government’s interest -
could makerspaces help foster entrepreneurship, innovation and ultimately economic
growth?
For the past ten years the Chinese government has been searching for ways to support and
promote innovation-led economic growth. The Made in China 2025 strategy, published in
2015, is part of this search. It is about changing the model from cheap manufacturing to one
which is focused on innovation, creativity and design.
8 According to Jin Xiaofei, co-founder of
Nanjing makerspace, “The government wants to persuade people to stop copying and to build
their own things and makerspaces are a big part of that.”
9
Alongside innovation and entrepreneurship, a second driver of government interest in
makerspaces is their potential to solve the graduate unemployment problem. Every year,
roughly 7.5 million students enter the job market and with a slowing economy, it’s proving
more difficult for them to find jobs.
10 As Jin Xiaofei told us, “Startups and entrepreneurship are
one way to solve the employment problem and makerspaces could be the space where those
startups are born.”
11
How does the government support makerspaces?
It starts with high-level political support. While China has moved a long way towards
becoming a market economy, there are still elements of the command and control economy
in place. Small signals from government are watched closely by companies and local
policymakers, to get an idea of what the government’s priorities are and where it will invest.
In 2015, Premier Li Keqiang visited Chaihuo makerspace in Shenzhen. During his visit, he
said: “Makers show the vitality of entrepreneurship and innovation among the people, and
such creativity will serve as a lasting engine of China’s economic growth in the future.”
12
In addition to this, in January 2015 the State Council, China’s highest administrative body,
issued guidelines on ‘Mass Innovation and Entrepreneurship.’
13 These guidelines are designed
to support and promote what the government calls ‘mass makerspaces’, which it defines
as “service platforms for entrepreneurship” and hints at a range of support that it will offer,
including space and subsidies.
As a result of these high-level policies, local governments across China have begun to offer
makerspaces a large amount of support. The types of support differ depending on the
provincial or city government. For example in 2015, Chenzhou, a city in Hunan province in
central China, set aside funding to build five makerspaces in the city. To be eligible for funding,
an organisation needs to commit to setting up a makerspace that is between 1,000m
2-
10,000m2 and, among other support measures, will receive a grant of £20,000 for equipment
and interior design, 50 per cent rent subsidy for three years, and a £3,000 annual operating
subsidy.
14
Survey results confirmed that government has a strong interest in supporting makerspaces.
Two-thirds of makerspaces said they have a relationship with government and 34 per cent
said that they had received some form of government support. Often, this relationship is about

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
3. A search for innovation-led development
funding, including free office and workshop space, as well as grants. Just under one-fifth (19 per
cent) of spaces received support relating to office space, either subsidised rent or free space.
This is a trend that is likely to carry on growing, as several government-backed incubators that
we talked to said that they were planning to offer free space to makerspaces. Furthermore,
11 per cent of spaces surveyed said that that they received financial support from the
government. Other makerspaces said that they receive policy support, although it wasn’t clear
what this means.
Government support is important to the makerspaces we surveyed, as half (52 per cent)
said funding was a problem. However, as the government is largely interested in supporting
spaces that focus on entrepreneurship, it often has requirements that mean community-based
makerspaces and those that focus on craft are unable to access funding. For example, many
local governments only fund makerspaces if they commit to taking on very large premises
(in the above example of Chenzhou this is 1,000m
2) yet most makerspaces are much smaller
than this (the average size in our sample was 500m2). Some local governments also require
makerspaces to have a minimum amount of savings in the bank, which is difficult for many
makerspaces to achieve, given that one-quarter of them have no income whatsoever.
In many instances, organisations have also set up new makerspaces when requested to do so
by the local government. For example, the Northern Experimental maker centre in Tianjin told
us: “The local government asked us to set up the makerspace in order to improve the culture
and environment for innovation in the city and to promote the maker spirit.” Two other spaces
in the survey said that they were managed or directed by the government. This number is
likely to increase in future as the government continues to set up its own makerspaces.
Many of the makerspaces that local governments have given support to would be a bit of a
culture shock for visitors used to making in the UK, as they typically do not have tools on site
and look just like any other office space. They are, in effect, incubators, accelerators and co-
working spaces that recruit teams of hardware startups.
Shenzhen - city of industrial design
When western makers and entrepreneurs come to China, they usually head straight to
Shenzhen. There, they will find a world of factories, industrial designers, hardware accelerators
and markets stocked with every conceivable component. It’s no wonder then that The
Economist called Shenzhen “the best place in the world for a hardware innovator to be.”
15
As China’s first ‘special economic zone’, Shenzhen began to receive foreign investment to
set up factories for contract manufacturing in the 1980s. The city later became home to
some of the world’s largest manufacturers such as Foxconn, which produces devices for
Apple. Alongside contract manufacturing for international brands, Shenzhen is the birthplace
of several of China’s biggest electronic brands such as Huawei, ZTE and TCL. Later on,
manufacturing companies in Shenzhen started to incorporate design into their business and
industrial design companies and studios grew rapidly to fulfil their needs. As a result, in 2008
Shenzhen was appointed a UNESCO City of Design.
The most famous landmark in Shenzhen for makers is the Huaqiangbei electronics market.
Consisting of dozens of multi-storey electronics shopping centres spanning five city blocks,
they are full of every kind of electronic component you can imagine, all available at wholesale
prices. Beyond components, Huaqiangbei is a dense collection of human capital, knowledge
and networks that can help with sourcing, prototyping and producing all sorts of hardware
products. For example, Huaqiangbei International maker centre,
16 Hax and Dangerous
Prototypes are all based in the area. The first two are incubators for hardware startups, while
the latter creates open source hardware projects.
17

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
4. Makers meet industry
4. Makers meet industry
Why did you set up a makerspace?
Wish more startups come out of the makerspaces and grow to become
great companies.
i+ Makerspace, Hefei
To lower the barriers to entry so that more people can become
entrepreneurs.
Ruichuang Makerspace, Nanjing
We wanted to promote maker culture, to improve the links between the
aviation industry and the public and to bring more knowledge into aviation.
Xingtiandi Makerspace, Shanghai
To stimulate innovation within our company.
GSY group makerspace, Shanghai
The government is not the only sector that has begun to take an interest in makerspaces.
Starting around 2012, large companies and manufacturers began to explore how they could
engage with the maker community. Now, China’s makerspaces are highly connected to
businesses: in our survey two-thirds of makerspaces said that they work with either local
companies or local manufacturers.
One way businesses are collaborating with makerspaces is on product development through
hardware hackathons. The idea is similar to software hackathons: a company sets a group of
makers a challenge that they’ve been having difficulty with and participants come up with
ideas, first brainstorming what could be done, then tinkering with the products. For example
Haier, China’s largest white goods manufacturer, regularly hosts hackathons with Chinese
makerspaces. Local governments across China also organise hackathons, inviting makerspaces
from across the country to come up with ideas about how to improve the products of local
companies. For makerspaces, the prize money that they get from winning hackathons can be
an important revenue stream and a good way to diversify their income sources.
In the west, hackathons are about learning, building networks and coming up with ideas for new
products and potentially new companies. But they are generally not about hacking a company’s
products – indeed companies do their best to keep the inner workings of their technology at
arm’s length. This could mean that China is much further ahead of the curve than the west, or it
could point to a problem with the Chinese innovation system. For example, it may be that the
services that universities provide to companies in the UK – consultancy, contract research etc.,
are not as well developed in China. Another issue to consider is that the looser IP environment
in China may mean that companies are more willing to open up the product development
process to large numbers of people – they know that it is the speed of innovation that gives
them the advantage, rather than trying to protect every idea that they have.
As well as working with makerspaces on product development, many companies are setting
up their own makerspaces. There are many ways that this can happen. Firstly, open-source
hardware companies such as Seeed studio and DFRobot have set up makerspaces (see case
studies on page 26 and 25). There are a variety of motivations for this - it is a useful marketing
tool for their open source kits that are mainly used by makers and it is a good way to support
and promote the maker movement, which is ultimately good for their companies. These
makerspaces tend to be very sustainable, as they are supported by the philanthropy of their
parent companies.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
4. Makers meet industry
Other companies are setting up makerspaces as a way to support and promote innovation
within their companies. One prominent example of this is Foxconn, the world’s largest
electronics manufacturer. For Foxconn, it is about unleashing the creativity of its workers
- the hope is that by giving workers access to space and tools and allowing them to make
whatever they want, they will come up with product ideas which Foxconn could eventually
commercialise.
18 Several companies are setting up makerspaces for this purpose in China.
However, it is important not to oversell the significance of these experiments - Foxconn’s
factories are some of the largest in the world, whereas the makerspace is just a large brightly
coloured workbench with a few 3D printers and other tools placed around it.
Perhaps more promising is the way that companies are using in-house makerspaces as a
learning tool. The idea here is that offering employees a space where they can build anything
they like and test out their ideas will help them become more creative, improve their problem-
solving skills and ultimately make them better at their job. Ruichuang makerspace, which is
based within the 14
th Research Institute of the China Electronics Technology Group (CETC)
a state-owned company in Nanjing (see case study on page 28), is a typical example of this
in practice. New recruits to the company are put through a three-month maker programme,
where they attend the makerspace once a week to work on their ideas, often with the help
of technicians. The organisers of Ruichuang Makerspace have found that recruits who go
through the programme are able to develop their own ideas much faster than those who
don’t. The programme has also had a positive impact on confidence levels, creativity and
problem-solving areas where the Chinese education system has traditionally struggled.
Nanjing Makerspace
Members of Nanjing
Makerspace regularly come
up with ideas for
commercial products at
Hackathons. In this photo,
co-founder Jin Xiaofei of
Nanjing Makerspace holds up
a solar panel (right) which a
company sent to the
makerspace. One member
came up with the idea of
using the company’s solar
cells to create a flexible solar
charger for camping (left).
The maker received
compensation for coming
up with the idea.
Tom Saunders CC BY SA 2.0

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
5. Makerspaces and an education revolution
5. Makerspaces and an education
 revolution
Why did you set up a makerspace?
To use the interest around the maker movement to get kids interested in
science and technology and help them develop STEM skills and abilities.
Baoshan home makerspace movement
To let children from our area have the same opportunities to interact with
advanced technologies as children in Beijing and Shanghai do.
Zibo makerspace, Zibo, Shandong
Because I thought it would have a very good impact on teaching and
learning for children.
Wenzhou Makerspace
Lanzhou is a third-tier city and doesn’t have advanced manufacturing
industry like other parts of the country. But we can’t give up because of
this. We don’t have makers, so we need to train some. We are working with
middle and infant schools to promote maker education so that children
here can access the best education.
LXT makerspace, Lanzhou
It’s not just companies that are trying to use makerspaces to reform China’s education system.
Makerspaces themselves put a lot of effort into education: 92 per cent of makerspaces
surveyed said that they provide training, with two-thirds of spaces offering classes and
formal courses. Many schools and universities are also setting up in-house makerspaces, or
working with established makerspaces to run maker education courses. Why are educators so
interested in making?
As the Chinese economy first started to grow rapidly in the 1970s, the skills it needed were
those associated with low-cost labour, for example the ability to follow instructions. Later
on, as the economy developed and started to focus on more advanced manufacturing,
China’s education system became adept at producing graduates with a strong grasp of
the fundamentals of science and engineering. However, as China’s economy matures it is
becoming expensive for companies to outsource manufacturing to China. As a result, Chinese
companies now need to focus much more on design, creation and innovation to make a living.
The Chinese education system is regularly criticised for not being able to provide the skills
required by this innovation-led economy.
Makerspaces offer a very different type of education from that which is available in the
Chinese education system. They provide a space where members can experiment, play and
explore their ideas. Many makerspaces combine this with workshops and, more importantly,
opportunities for informal learning and sharing of skills. Many argue that the skills which
this environment can foster - problem-solving, risk taking, creativity and the confidence to
experiment - are precisely those required by China’s economy today.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
5. Makerspaces and an education revolution
Our survey shows that there are now a large number of organisations across China that
provide maker education for children: one in five spaces said that the majority of its members
are school-aged children. One such organisation is Litchee Lab in Shenzhen. Founded in 2014
by Benjamin James Simpson, an American and his Chinese partner Lit Liao, it organises maker
education for children through its ‘Make Club.’ Makerspaces like Litchee Lab differ from craft
clubs in that they provide access to digital tools like 3D printers and open source electronics
like Arduino. They are an expression of a desire to bring creativity and hands-on, project-
based learning into China’s education system.
Schools themselves are also setting up makerspaces. Comprehensive lists are hard to come by,
but by the end of 2014 at least 16 schools had set up makerspaces.
19 The first school to set up a
makerspace was the Shenzhen International American School. In its makerspaces, children can
engage in everything from sewing and jewellery making to electronics and gardening.
20
The maker revolution has also extended beyond schools to universities. Over 75 per cent
of the makerspaces surveyed said that they have a relationship with China’s universities.
These relationships are mainly in three areas: hosting joint events, makerspaces working with
universities to organise ‘maker’ courses for their students and makerspaces working with
universities to access the more advanced tools and equipment that it would be too expensive
for them to buy.
Alongside this, many universities are setting up their own makerspaces. Examples of makerspaces
in universities include Fablab Shanghai, based at Tongji University and the i.Center, based at
Tsinghua University, which is the largest makerspace in China at 16,500m
2. Makerspaces tend
to be in universities and departments that focus on engineering and electronics. Often, the
university already has much of the equipment in place, and sets up makerspaces as a way to
provide a focal point for making (see page 31: Blue Island Makerspace case study).
According to Eric Pan, founder of Seeed Studio and Chaihuo Makerspace, there are several
drivers behind university interest in makerspaces: “The government is pushing students to
set up startups, so this is the political driver,” says Pan. Alongside this “students like making
things and hardware innovation,” meaning there is a large community of would-be makers in
universities. Pan thinks there is a lot of value in universities setting up makerspaces: “they help
break down the barriers between different disciplines - engineers and designers.”
21
Children learning how to solder - Beijing Makerspace
Mitch Altman. Licence CC BY SA 2.0.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
6. Challenges
6. Challenges
What are the main challenges your makerspace faces?
Coming up with a sustainable business model for our makerspace.
Wenzhou Makerspace
Too many people come to the makerspace just to have a look around – it’s
too busy.
Dalian Makerspace
Workshop space and funding are both a problem.
Changzhou Makerspace
Getting teachers to understand the value of making and persuading them
to combine the standard curriculum with a maker education model.
Blue Island Makerspace, Nanjing
Running a makerspace is challenging, and the challenge for China as a whole is in turning
top-down support into a maker movement that is self-sustaining. In our survey, respondents
highlighted three main issues: funding, skills and promotion.
Funding: Just over half of makerspaces (52 per cent) said that funding was a problem.
Average income was 100,000 RMB but 11 spaces (24 per cent) said they have no income
whatsoever. One in five makerspaces has a parent company subsidising it. For example,
it could be based within a company, like Ruichuang Makerspace, or it is largely funded
directly by a company, like Mushroom Cloud. For spaces that don’t have this type of funding,
developing a sustainable business model is a challenge. Fewer than 10 per cent of the
makerspaces surveyed receive their main source of funding from membership fees. Other
sources of funding include workshops and training, which may become more lucrative as
the maker movement grows and interest in increases. Alongside this, local governments
across China have recently started to provide support and funding to makers. While funding
requirements differ by region, in general it is only available for makerspaces that are focused
on commercial aspects of making, for example, hardware incubators. This means that many
of the spaces that focus on craft or the hobbyist aspects of making are unable to access
government support.
Skills: Makerspaces are often filled with equipment that people will have had little chance to
engage with in their schooling or working lives: 3D printers, laser cutters and soldering irons,
for example. In one sense, this could be an opportunity for makerspaces to generate income,
as they can charge members for attending workshops and training courses. But in another
sense it can limit the number of people who are able to take part in making if they can’t afford
or are not inclined to pay for training. It also places a burden on the resources of many smaller
makerspaces which don’t charge for training but still want to help new members access the
tools in the space.
Promotion: Another challenge mentioned by many respondents was the difficulty of
promoting the maker movement. Makerspaces are new to China and most people don’t
understand them, often mistaking them for incubators because of the media’s focus on the
commercial aspect of their operation. Many makerspace founders said that a challenge for
them was to promote maker culture, so that more people come to makerspaces who have a
genuine interest in making rather than just in starting companies.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
7. Case studies
I
n October 2015 and January 2016 we visited three of China’s major cities, Shanghai,
Nanjing and Shenzhen to interview makerspace founders and members. Here are
the stories of seven of those spaces: XinCheJian and Mushroom Cloud in Shanghai,
Nanjing Makerspace, Nanjing Ruichuang Makerspace and Blue Island Makerspace in
Nanjing, SZDIY and Chaihuo Makerspace in Shenzhen.

XinCheJian
(Page 24)
Mushroom Cloud
(Page 25)
NANJING SHANGHAI
SHENZHEN
Blue Island Makerspace
(Page 31)
Ruichuang Makerspace
(Page 29)
Nanjing Makerspace
(Page 28)
SZDIY
(Page 30)
Chaihuo Makerspace
(Page 26)

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
1. XinCheJian
China’s first makerspace focuses on those interested in making as a hobby

“At XinCheJian we offer space and tools, that’s it,” says Lionello Lunesu, one of XinCheJian’s
first members. “In a city like Shanghai, people can’t afford to have a garage – this is like the
shared version of that. We do for tools what a library does for books.”
XinCheJian will look very similar to those that are familiar with the maker scene in the west. It
mainly caters to people who want to make things for fun, rather than would-be entrepreneurs,
and is full of all the things you would expect to see in a makerspace: 3D printers, a CNC
milling machine, workbenches and lots of hand tools and materials. Like many spaces in the
UK, most of the members have full-time jobs or are at university, so it is largely empty during
the day, filling up only on weekends and the occasional evening.
Founded in 2010 by David Li, Minlin Hsie and Ricky Ng-Adam, the name means ‘new
workshop’. During its early years the space was mainly used by expats – makerspaces were
a western concept that locals weren’t that familiar with, and XinCheJian is the earliest import
of the idea. Fast-forward to 2015 and around half the members are locals, a testament to how
the popularity of makerspaces has grown in China.
While China’s makerspaces have evolved a lot in the last few years, XinCheJian has stuck to
its roots, resisting the business focus that has come to define other makerspaces in China.
Lunesu is typical of many of XinCheJian’s members: he used to work at Microsoft, as an
engineer, and now spends his days working at his IoT robotics startup, but “wanted to do
something in the evenings that wasn’t sitting at a computer. I wanted to make things.” His
projects are all about having fun with technology: they include an armchair that you can drive
around, and an LED display that reacts to changes in sound.
Education is also a big focus at XinCheJian. Rather than traditional classes run by paid
teachers, members share skills with each other. For example, XinCheJian runs a series of
workshops: “Every time we see a member doing something cool we invite them to turn it into
a workshop so that others can learn about it.” This kind of informal skills teaching and learning
was common across all the spaces we visited.
While fun is the driver of almost all projects at XinCheJian, occasionally they do take on a
more commercial focus. One example is STARY, which bills itself as the world’s lightest and
most affordable electric skateboard. In June 2015 it was successfully funded on Kickstarter to
the tune of $742,000 – more than seven times its goal.
22
Despite this, Lunesu feels that makerspaces are, in general, too focused on commercial
outcomes in China. Policymakers mainly see makerspaces as hardware incubators and this,
says Lunesu, could have a negative effect on the creativity of makers – stifling the space for
making culture grow in China.
CASE STUDY
Location: Shanghai Founded: 2010
Membership: 120 Fees (RMB): 100/month or 450/six months
Size: 280m2 Employees: One full-time, ten volunteers
Challenges:
1. Space – they recently had to move to a new location and this has disrupted their membership base
2. Their founders believe maker movement in China is too focused on entrepreneurship and
 undervalues what XinCheJian does
Website: www.xinchejian.com

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
25
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
2. Mushroom Cloud
A makerspace in Shanghai used mainly by professional engineers with advanced skills

A musical device that works by “making the air around it explode” is perhaps not the kind
of thing that the Chinese government is thinking about in its drive to support the maker
movement. But this impractical and highly dangerous object was the first project we were
shown when we visited the Mushroom Cloud stand at Shanghai Maker Carnival in 2015. Asked
about the purpose of the device, the member said he was just doing it for fun.
As the name suggests, Mushroom Cloud is a bit different from your average makerspace.
Based in Shanghai’s high-tech park and founded by DFRobot, a company that manufactures
and sells open-source hardware, its members are mainly IT and engineering professionals who
work for multinational companies. As a result, members have unusually advanced engineering
and electronics skills and often take on highly ambitious projects.
It is these skills and ambitions which are the major difference between makerspaces in China
and the west, one member told us: “Because engineering and science courses are so popular
in China, people who go to makerspaces tend to have advanced engineering and electronics
skills. So the projects we take on are often much more advanced than those you would see in
a western makerspace.”
Mushroom Cloud’s members can, if they choose, turn their hand to more commercial
endeavours. Asked in our survey about the makerspace’s greatest success story, we were told:
“taking a person who doesn’t know anything about making and helping them create a product
themselves and get it on an international crowdfunding website.”
Beyond tinkering away in Shanghai, members travel around the country to take part in
maker competitions, and given their advanced skills, they often win. As a result, it is perhaps
unsurprising that Mushroom Cloud is making a bit of a name for itself and is coming to the
attention of businesses and local governments across China. For example, local governments
regularly invite members of Mushroom Cloud to take part in hackathons which are designed
to improve the products of local companies.
With all the government and media interest in making, lots of people now come to Mushroom
Cloud asking for help to create hardware startups. Here they act a bit like an incubator,
assessing the merits of an idea and team before they allow them to use the makerspace’s
facilities and offer help and advice.
The growing commercial focus is a welcome source of income for Mushroom Cloud and its
members. Monetary prizes for winning hackathons go to individual members, but they usually
give a large proportion of their winnings back to the makerspace. As one member told us:
“We have well-paid jobs so we aren’t in it for the money.”
CASE STUDY
Location: Shanghai Founded: 2012
Membership: 110 Fees (RMB): 70/month
Size: 100m2 Employees: Two full-time, three part-time, three volunteers
Challenges:
1. The need to constantly cultivate the creativity of its members
2. The difficulty of maintaining and growing its community of members
Website: www.dfrobot.com.cn/community/forum-98-1.html

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
3. Chaihuo Makerspace
One of China’s earliest and most well known makerspaces, it is the organiser of Shenzhen
Maker Faire and plays an important role promoting maker culture

When Chinese Premier Li Keqiang set out the country’s agenda for home-grown innovation
at the beginning of 2015, he did so with a well-publicised visit to Chaihuo, a makerspace in
Shenzhen, the global capital of manufacturing, on his first workday of the year. Held up as
exemplar for the maker movement in China, the coverage has since propelled the space and
its founder, Eric Pan, to great reputation and has inspired many to follow in his stead.
Chaihuo grew out of Eric Pan’s Seeed studio, a company which he set up in 2008 to support
makers: “I saw makers making lots of interesting things, but I also saw that they needed
lots of support, from equipment to training to services.” Similar to Adafruit in the US, Seeed
makes most of its income from kits it sells to makers around the world. But Seeed is also a
unique kind of facilitator to the maker community, providing not just open-source hardware to
makers but also helping with everything from schematic design and components and small-
batch manufacturing to supply chain management and shipping, thanks to its being located
right at the heart of the global manufacturing ecosystem.
Chaihuo Makerspace is part of Pan’s ongoing effort to support and promote the maker
movement in China. In 2011, Pan decided to set up a makerspace after witnessing the
makerspace phenomenon firsthand in the US and spotting an opportunity at home. In
Shenzhen he connected with a collective of makers called SZDIY, a community without a
space to work out of. “They needed a space so I offered them one.”
SZDIY moved and set up on its own in 2015 as a result of the growing media and government
attention - including almost daily visits to the makerspace - which made working in Chaihuo
impractical. The original Chaihuo makerspace, housed in an arts and cultural centre in the
west of the city, popular with creative businesses and up-market, artsy shops, is small and
unremarkable in a way that belies its reputation. It looks like many community workshops
in the west and is now mainly used for visitors including the media, western makers and
government delegations, who want to learn about making. The plan is to move to a much
larger space in 2016, which can accommodate both visitors and makers.
“For Chaihuo, it’s about focusing on innovators – it’s a lot about openness and sharing,”
explains Pan. The space was established for people to learn about and play with technology,
but its founders also know that some people hope to turn their ideas into companies, and
that increasingly many come to them with that ambition. As a result, in 2015 Chaihuo started
Chaihuo VIP, a spillover space for nascent startups that emerge from Chaihuo, in the same
building complex.
Pan describes this as “a real space where people can make things”. Acting as something in
between a makerspace and an incubator, companies receive the space for free, in return for a
cut of the business. On our visit, two companies occupied the space: Halo, which is building
CASE STUDY
Location: Shenzhen Founded: 2011
Membership: Over 3,600 Fees (RMB): 200-5,000/month
Size: 60m2 Employees: Three full-time, one part-time
Challenges:
1. Too many visits, which disturbed the makers who were actually making things
2. Lacking a sustainable operation model
3. People are too focused on entrepreneurship, making it difficult for them to really enjoy making
Website: www.chaihuo.org/

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
27
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
a heads-up display for cars, and Dorabot, which is developing a robotic arm for warehouse
order fulfilment. In each case, the founders met each other at Chaihuo proper, initially using
the space for their hobby before developing an idea that they thought had commercial
potential. After moving into Chaihuo VIP and setting up a company, they are now looking for
venture capital funding.
Rather than the Chaihuo to Chaihuo VIP graduation being a planned one, the space has
popped up organically after the success of these two impromptu companies, none of whose
founders particularly intended to start businesses.
Alongside providing physical space for makers, Chaihuo plays a major role in promoting
the maker movement in China and creating links with makerspaces around the world. For
example, since 2012 Chaihuo has organised the annual Shenzhen Maker Faire. The event,
hosted over three days, has hundreds of exhibits and sees tens of thousands of visitors.
A large number of western makers attend the event, making it an important channel for
international maker collaboration.
“If China wants the next wave of entrepreneurs, they all should like Eric Pan,” says David Li.
Son of two teachers in a small city outside of Shenzhen, Pan, and his entrepreneurial record, is
a made-in-China success story. Having been educated fully in China, Pan worked at Intel after
university, but decided, against his parents’ wish, that Chinese business had more to offer than
a big western company, and quit to try his luck at startups. “Eric actually rode a bike from
Beijing to Shenzhen, checked into a small apartment, with a friend, and started Seeed Studio
from his living room. And he’s now grown it to an internationally respected brand. Without Eric
there might not be the political will, as he is the political poster boy for the whole thing.”
Looking to the future, Pan, who is a bit overwhelmed by the constant media coverage over the
past year, hopes that Chaihuo can start to focus on social problems: “It’s good to be famous”
he says of Chaihuo, “people now know innovation is possible for everyone. It’s a great starting
point, but now we need to use that platform to focus on social problems.” As an example, he
mentions the environment: “Many Chinese people now care about the environment and we will
give people a space to work with technology on problems like air and water pollution.”
Alongside this, Pan wants to do something much more basic and perhaps also more urgent:
“We want to come back to the fundamentals and work out how to make a makerspace that is
sustainable. We want to develop a business model that people can copy from.”

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
4. Nanjing Makerspace
Turning a community of amateur electronics tinkerers into an open-source research and
development talent pool

At Nanjing Makerspace on the east coast of China, large crates arrive every day containing
things you might never expect to see in a makerspace – fridge-freezers and other white
goods, solar panels, bathtubs. These and other consumer products are sent to Nanjing
Makerspace by companies in the hope that members of the makerspace might be able to
improve their design or solve a tricky problem.
Recently, says co-founder Jin Xiaofei, Haier came to Nanjing Makerspace with a specific
problem plaguing its washing machines: with routine use, dirt was clogging up the area
outside the drum, shortening the appliances’ life. One maker came up with the idea of placing
a ball outside the drum, which would roll around the machine absorbing dirt. Haier ran with
the idea, which worked perfectly, and within three months created a new product with the
design a core feature.
Nanjing Makerspace is one of the most established makerspaces in China. Founded in
2012 as a hobbyist club for robotics enthusiasts, the collective has since expanded to five
workshops across the city. The organisation also acts as the secretariat of the nationwide
China Makerspace Association, helping makerspaces across the country develop ties with
industry. They have also set up a website where makers can list their inventions. If a company
is interested in commercialising the invention, Nanjing Makerspace helps the maker negotiate
with the company, to ensure that they get a good deal.
What makes Nanjing Makerspace particularly notable, however, is its relationship with
industry. Having developed a strong community of innovators in the city, with considerable
experience in electronics, the group has begun offering up its collective expertise to major
consumer electronics and appliance firms, of which Haier is just one. For companies like Haier,
which gave a cash prize to the maker who came up with the ‘smart ball’ idea, the motivation
for working with makers is the promise of tapping into a talent pool for open innovation: the
ability to drawn upon a wide variety of skills outside the corporate groove.
Beyond Nanjing, provincial governments, most recently Guangdong, have started inviting
Nanjing Makerspace to visit local companies. The hope is that Nanjing Makerspace can help
these companies address some of their innovation challenges. Alongside this, companies
from across the country, not just Haier, send their products to Nanjing Makerspace for their
members to tinker with, and hold joint hackathons to problem-solve or develop new product
ideas. The money that the organisation makes from these activities helps subsidise its core
purpose: “Providing a space for amateur enthusiasts to tinker on electronics and hardware
projects in whatever way they like, with equipment they otherwise wouldn’t have access to,
and with the opportunity to meet and collaborate with like-minded people to improve their
skills and develop their ideas,” says Jin Xiaofei.
CASE STUDY
Location: Nanjing Founded: 2012
Membership: Over 3,100 Fees (RMB): Doesn’t charge membership fees
Size: 5,000m2 across five locations Employees: Four full-time, five part-time, 36 volunteers
Challenges:
1. Finding resources to expand, particularly workshop space and equipment
2. Difficulty of getting to the workshops (they are mostly in the suburbs, as city centre space is
 too expensive)
3. Issues finding competent managers for each of the spaces
Website: www.do-idea.org/

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
29
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
5. Ruichuang Makerspace
Using making as an education tool, to help the company’s employees become more creative,
confident and independent

Visiting a makerspace in a defence research and development institute, one might plausibly
hope to see grassroots innovation of the military kind: DIY rocket launchers, open-source
‘killer robots’, or hacked and modified armoured vehicles. If that’s the case, Ruichuang
Makerspace might disappoint: projects we were shown on our visit included a DIY ‘smart’ door
lock that can be controlled by a smart phone and a keyboard for children where the keys light
up when they should be played. Why would a military research institute set up a makerspace
for its engineers to get involved in amateur electronics?
Owing to the spike in government and media interest in makerspaces over the last few years,
many organisations have set up their own in-house spaces. Nanjing Ruichuang Makerspace
is one of the more curious examples. Set up by China Electronics Technology Group (CETC)
which is mainly involved in defence R&D, it claims to be the first of its kind to be set up by a
state-owned enterprise.
For Ruichuang Makerspace, it’s all about creativity and innovation – spurring more
entrepreneurial and creative thinking amongst its engineers. With this in mind, in 2013 the
founder set up a three-month maker programme for new recruits to the company. Around
200 employees come to the makerspace each week to work on their ideas, often with the
help of technicians. They have found that recruits who go through the programme are able to
develop their own ideas much faster than those who don’t.
Another benefit of the programme is its effect on the confidence of young graduates, the
founder of Ruichuang Makerspace told us: “We give the students a space for their characters
to grow. This is not something you get in the normal Chinese education system. It helps people
develop their confidence, especially when they feel they are making successful products. It
also improves their problem-solving skills and makes them think more creatively.”
Ruichuang Makerspace is only open to company employees at the moment, as the parent
company deals with state secrets. However, the founder of the makerspace is keen to develop
a more open model. As well as taking members of the makerspace to compete in hackathons
around the country, he also plans to set up a charity to teach making and spread maker skills
throughout society.
CASE STUDY
Location: Nanjing Founded: 2013
Membership: 200 per programme Fees (RMB): None
Size: 5,000m2 across five locations Employees: 20
Challenges:
1. As it is part of a state-owned company engaged in military R&D, it is difficult for it to collaborate
 with other makerspaces and makers
2. Difficulties promoting an entrepreneurial mindset - it hopes its members will create spin out
 companies but young engineers mostly want a secure career in a big company
Website: www.glarun.com (parent company)

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
6. SZDIY
A hardcore hobbyist makers happily coexisting with professional makers

SZDIY (Shenzhen DIY) is a vibrant community of hackers and hardware geeks in Shenzhen,
whose mission in life is simply to ‘make cool things’, using open software and open hardware.
The things they make here are suitably geeky: examples include the Polascii – a camera that
produces pictures of people in ASCii computer code. It has a strong reputation in Shenzhen
and beyond for being a ‘hardcore’ hackerspace, and many of its members are uninterested
in the commercial direction that Chinese makerspaces are taking. And yet, SZDIY’s story is a
bit more complicated than that, and shows how makerspaces engage in a broad spectrum of
activities, and the contradictions that arise when next steps are discussed.
SZDIY grew out of the free software movement – its founding members were Linux User
Group members - and wanted to take the same spirit into hardware. They initially used
Chaihuo Makerspace (see case study on page 26) for their meetings, moving out in 2015. The
new workshop is hard to find; expensive rents have driven it into a so-called ‘urban village’
- an area of the city where a lack of building regulations have created a jumble of tightly-
packed apartment blocks, warehouses and factories. The space itself looks like a western
hackerspace: an industrially shabby workshop with a mishmash of tools and equipment,
mainly electronics, spare parts and half-completed projects spilling out electronic guts and
sprouting wires, surrounding a large workbench.
Providing space for hobbyists isn’t the only motivation for SZDIY. For Ryan Liang, a freelance
design engineer and one of the more active members of the makerspace, his interest is the
freedom that it gives him to produce creative designs: “Companies design products then
come to me and ask me to make them work,” he says of his day job. “I would often have
ideas for improvements, but the customers always said no to them. So I was having a lot of
ideas but no way to implement them. At SZDIY I work with other members to create open-
source designs that improve existing products. I recently did this for a dehumidifier and were
accepted onto the Hax accelerator programme.”
The more professional and hobbyist versions of making seem to co-exist relatively happily at
SZDIY. Liang is equally enthusiastic about making as a hobby and making as a way to improve
product design, for commercial ends. “We just come together and make things. We enjoy it.
Sometimes that might result in ideas for products which we might want to sell, which is great.
But if not, we still get to make cool stuff.”
Looking to the future, a big question for SZDIY is whether to accept government support.
With government interest in makerspaces at such a high point in China at the moment, even
SZDIY, a space which mainly focuses on hobbyists, has been offered government support - a
free workspace and modest levels of funding. Put to a vote, the members of SZDIY recently
chose to reject this, believing that it would have a negative influence on their independence
However, Liang hopes that members will soon change their minds. Looking around at the
members of the space, who combine great enthusiasm with advanced technical skills, it’s
difficult not to wonder what they could achieve if they were given the proper resources.
CASE STUDY
Location: Shenzhen Founded: Originally 2009 - became a makerspace after 2010
Membership: 30 Fees (RMB): A voluntary payments system - members
 usually pay between 200-500/month
Size: 120m2 Employees: Three part-time staff
Challenges:
1. Whether or not to accept government support - members have mixed views on this
2. Funding - the organisation is mainly run on membership fees and donations
Website: www.szdiy.org/

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
31
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
7. Case studies
7. Blue Island Makerspace, Nanjing
 Institute of Mechatronic Technology
A makerspace exploring the role of innovation and entrepreneurship in tertiary education

What happens when you set up a makerspace inside a technical university, with access to
a range of cutting edge equipment, highly skilled instructors and connections to some of
China’s biggest tech companies? That’s what the Nanjing Institute of Mechatronic Technology
is trying to find out with its Blue Island Makerspace.
The founders had a diverse range of motivations for setting up the space, which opened in
March 2015. Partly, it was about experimenting with teaching methods. According to Diao
Aijun, who is on the board of the makerspace: “We wanted to explore what a method of
education that involved merging vocational education and maker education would look like.”
What this looks like in practice is an open space where students can access a mixture of
workshops, tool inductions and technical support. Membership is free for students enrolled at
the university and they have a materials shop on site where students can purchase materials.
it is possible to become a member of the space even if you aren’t a student at the university,
although in practice nearly all of the members are students.
Because it is a technical university, the equipment they have in their makerspace is very
advanced, allowing students can work on some very high-tech projects. But the university
has always had the equipment, what Blue Island Makerspace provides is a network of makers:
“Before, if you wanted to be a maker you didn’t have anywhere you could go to sign up. Now
there is this organisation which promotes making across the university,” said a student we
talked to at Shanghai Maker Carnival in October 2015.
Students can make whatever they want in the space, they just need to come with an idea and
try things out: “I’m building an electronic door lock that can be opened with a smartphone”,
the student we interviewed told us. His motivations are a mix of wanting to do something
fun and wanting to solve a practical challenge: “At our university dormitory the main door is
opened with a key. Sometimes you forget your key and have to shout for someone to let you
in. The university could install smartphone enabled locks, but they are very expensive. So my
idea is to create a much cheaper version of a smartphone lock.”
What happens to these projects is up to the student: “You might just want to create a great
project for your school work or just do something for fun, but if you have a good idea, the
university can help by providing technicians to help out on the more advanced machines and
also resources to scale up your prototypes.” For students with commercial aspirations, the
university can help by offering introductions to large Chinese companies such as Huawei,
which can help students commercialise their products.
CASE STUDY
Location: Nanjing Founded: 2015
Membership: 815 Fees (RMB): None
Size: 10,000m2 Employees: Three full-time, 60 volunteers
Challenges:
1. Getting teachers to understand the value of making and persuading them to combine the standard
 curriculum with a maker education model
Website: www.nimt.cn (university website)

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
8. The future of making in China
8. The future of making in China
What is the future of making in China?
A lot of big makerspaces will close down...when the current heat cools
down. The public will realise the most valuable thing a makerspace can
provide to the community is education about creativity, critical thinking
and freedom to try on a project one really likes.
Litchee Lab
Half of China’s GDP will be generated by makers in the future!
Wuhan Fab Lab
Every child in Lanzhou will be able to take part in maker-type education
and also STEAM.
LXT Makerspace, Lanzhou
The internet, open-source hardware and digital fabrication will allow
anyone to take part in the age of invention.
SEG makerspace, Shenzhen
China’s ‘maker movement’ is only five years old and yet in that time it has evolved rapidly to
suit the needs of the Chinese economy and society. Interest from government, businesses,
schools and universities will all help shape the maker movement over the next five years.
Below, we discuss the role that makerspaces could play in each of these sectors.
• Government: For the Chinese government, makerspaces are about supporting innovation
and entrepreneurship. This support has grown stronger over the last five years, with
local governments across the country offering space, grants and policy support to
makerspaces. Yet in 2016, minor grumbles are emerging – the idea that government
is wasting its money by investing in organisations that are little more than co-working
spaces, for example.
23 Over the next few years, local governments will likely reassess
their support for makerspaces. One outcome could be that they decide to stop offering
funding and support. Another, more desirable outcome would be that the central and
local governments come to take a broader view of makerspaces, not just seeing them
as hardware incubators and accelerators, but instead appreciating the range of benefits
they potentially offer, from a more holistic model of education to the ability to promote
innovation within companies.
• Business: In 2016, the relationship between businesses and makerspaces in China is
still in a highly experimental phase. Companies across China are just beginning to
explore what makerspaces can do for them. These experiments will gather pace over
the next couple of years, with more companies opening in-house makerspaces, working
with independent makerspaces to organise maker education for their employees and
organising hackathons as a way to open up their product R&D to a wider community
of innovators. Manufacturing companies will also increasingly open up their services to
makers, with small batch production, for example. It is impossible to say what the result
of all this experimentation will be, but it will certainly go a long way to creating a uniquely
Chinese maker movement.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
33
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
8. The future of making in China
• Schools and universities: In 2015, schools and universities across China began to
open in-house makerspaces. As the Chinese economy changes, requiring employees
who are more creative, independent and good at problem solving, makerspaces and
‘maker education’ - hands on, project-based learning - will come to play an increasingly
important role in the education system. As more schools and universities set up in-house
makerspaces, as well as increase their collaboration with independent makerspaces to
set up maker-education courses, the role that makerspaces can play in education will
develop and evolve and should be watched closely by western educators.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Annexe
Annexe
a. About the authors
Tom Saunders is Senior Researcher – International Innovation at Nesta. His work focuses on
helping governments learn from innovations around the world, with particularly the use of
digital technologies to address urban challenges. Tom also leads on Nesta’s research and
engagement with China and is co–author of China’s Absorptive State: Research, innovation
and the prospects for China–UK collaboration.
Jeremy Kingsley is Assistant Editor of The Long+Short, Nesta’s magazine of innovation. He is
a Contributing Editor at WIRED, and as a journalist and researcher has covered technology,
economics and innovation for, amongst others, The Economist, Slate, The Economist
Intelligence Unit and the Future Laboratory.
b. Makerspaces visited
i. Shenzhen Open Innovation Lab (SZOIL)
ii. Huaqiangbei International Maker Center
iii. Chaihuo makerspace
iv. Chaihuo VIP
v. Make Mountain
vi. Litchee Lab
vii. Nanjing Makerspace
viii. Nanjing Ruichuang Makerspace
ix. XinCheJian
x. Mushroom cloud
xi. SZDIY
xii. Blue Island Makerspace

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
35
MADE IN CHINA Makerspaces and the search for mass innovation
Endnotes
Endnotes
1. http:/ /www.ibtimes.com/china-manufacturing-10-things-chinese-make-more-anyone-else-world-
infographic-1369727
2. Ninety-three spaces responded to our survey but we are aware of several spaces that didn’t complete the survey
and believe there are just over 100 makerspaces in China.
3. http:/ /tieba.baidu.com/p/3848347305
4. Note that open-access doesn’t necessarily mean open to the public. Makerspaces in universities, for example, are
open to their students but not members of the public and makerspaces within companies are regularly open to
any employee, but not the public.
5. http:/ /online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/NPC2016_NDRC_English.pdf
6. Hewitt, D. (2010) ‘Getting rich first: Life in a changing China.’
7. http:/ /www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/open_dataset_of_uk_makerspaces_users_guide.pdf
8. http:/ /knowledge.ckgsb.edu.cn/2015/09/02/technology/made-in-china-2025-a-new-era-for-chinese-
manufacturing/
9. Author interview, 15/10/2015.
10. http:/ /www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-07-02/dreams-collide-with-china-slowdown-for-job-seeking
graduates
11. Author interview 15/10/2015.
12. http:/ /www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2015twosession/2015-03/09/content_19760292.htm
13. http:/ /english.gov.cn/policies/latest_releases/2015/03/11/content_281475069667730.htm
14. http:/ /www.czs.gov.cn/czj/12867/12875/content_607371.html
15. http:/ /www.economist.com/news/special-report/21593590-why-southern-china-best-place-world-hardware-
innovator-be-hacking
16. Makerspace located in the heart of Huaqiangbei, the centre of Shenzhen’s electronics markets area. Occupies
office area owned by Shenzhen Huaqiang Industry Co Ltd, which also owns most of properties in the area. Focus is
on incubation and innovation. Established in circa 2012-2013.
17. For more on Huaqiangbei see: ‘An Insider’s Guide to Shenzhen Manufacturing’ published in Make Magazine.
18. http:/ /tieba.baidu.com/p/384347305
19. http:/ /blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_6611ddcf0102v7qt.html
20. http:/ /creativeconomy.britishcouncil.org/blog/15/11/22/fiona-livingtheresearch-week-two/
21. Author interview: 24/02/16.
22. https:/ /www.kickstarter.com/projects/staryboards/stary-worlds-best-electric-skateboard-get-yours-fo
23. http:/ /www.china.com.cn/lianghui/news/2016-03/03/content_37926218.htm [Mandarin]

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Nesta
1 Plough Place
London EC4A 1DE
research@nesta.org.uk
 @nesta_uk
 www.facebook.com/nesta.uk
www.nesta.org.uk
March 2016
Nesta is a registered charity in England and Wales with company number 7706036 and charity number 1144091.
Registered as a charity in Scotland number SCO42833. Registered office: 1 Plough Place, London, EC4A 1DE.
