
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
NATIONAL SCIENCE BOARD
SCIENCE & ENGINEERING INDICATORS 2022
Innovation
Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation
NSB-2022-4
March 08, 2022
This publication is part of the Science and Engineering Indicators suite of reports. Indicators is a
congressionally mandated report on the state of the U.S. science and engineering enterprise. It is policy
relevant and policy neutral. Indicators is prepared under the guidance of the National Science Board by
the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, a federal statistical agency within the National
Science Foundation. With the 2020 edition, Indicators is changing from a single report to a set of
disaggregated and streamlined reports published on a rolling basis. Detailed data tables will continue to
be available online.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  3
Table of Contents
 
 7Executive Summary
 9Introduction
 14Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas
 16Contributors to U.S. Patent Activity
 19The Geography of U.S. Patenting
 20Patenting in Context: U.S. Businesses Use a Variety of Intellectual Property Protections
 22Global Trends in Patenting Activity
 26Characteristics of Patented Inventors
 29Knowledge Transfer Indicators: Making Information Available
 30Business Collaborations in Published Literature
 31Publications Cited in Patents
 32University Knowledge Transfer Activities
 34Federal Government Knowledge Transfer Support
 39U.S. Startup Trends
 42Innovation Indicators: Introducing New Products and Processes
 43Business Innovation
 47Trademarks: U.S. Trends
 48The Geography of U.S. Trademarking
 50Venture Capital from a Global Perspective
 54Business Dynamics of New Firms
 55Household Innovation
 55Government Innovation
 57Conclusion
 59Glossary
 59Definitions
 61Key to Acronyms and Abbreviations

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  4
 62References
 67Notes
 68Acknowledgments and Citation
 68Acknowledgments
 68Citation
 69Contact Us
 69Report Author
 69NCSES
List of Sidebars
 40Sidebar: Citizen Science in Federal Agencies and Departments
 55Sidebar: Rapid Innovation and the Development of the COVID-19 Vaccine
 38Sidebar: U.S.-International Collaborations in Open-Source Software
List of Tables
INV-1 11

Direct and indirect indicators of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation used in the report and their
sources
INV-2 33 University technology licenses or license options executed, by company characteristic: 2009, 2014, and 2019
INV-3 35 Federal laboratory technology transfer activity indicators, by selected departments and agencies: FY 2016
INV-4 37 Cumulative contribution of selected entities to open-source software on GitHub: 2010–19
INV-A 41 Federally sponsored citizen science projects on citizenscience.gov, by federal department or agency: 2020
List of Figures
INV-1 15 USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. owners: 2002–20
INV-2 17 USPTO utility patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy: 2000–20
INV-3 18 USPTO patents granted to inventors from China, by field of technology: 2020
INV-4 19 USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. owners per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2020
INV-5 21

Rating of importance of different types of intellectual property protections by U.S. companies that performed
or funded R&D: 2018
INV-6 22

R&D performing or funding U.S. companies that rate intellectual property protection as important, by
intellectual property type and industry: 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  5
INV-7 23 International patent families granted, by country: 2000, 2010, and 2020
INV-8 24 Log scale of international patent families granted, by region, country, or economy: 2020
INV-9 25

Share of electrical and mechanical engineering patents in a selected region's, country's, or economy's
international patent families granted: 2020
INV-10 26 USPTO patents granted to U.S. inventors, by field of technology: 2020
INV-11 27 Share of PCT applications with at least one woman listed as inventor for the top 20 origins: 2019
INV-12 30

Coauthored business-sector publications with other academic, government, and foreign institutions: 2008
and 2020
INV-13 32

Log scale of citations of U.S. S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by selected patent sector and S&E article
field cited: 2020
INV-14 34 Startup companies based on licensed university technology: 1999–2019
INV-15 36 SBIR and STTR programs, by number of firms and total funding: FYs 2000–20
INV-16 40 New firms and employment from new firms: 1990–2018
INV-17 44 Share of U.S. companies reporting product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2015–17
INV-18 45 U.S. companies introducing product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2015–17
INV-19 46

Share of U.S. companies introducing product or process innovations, by owners' sex, race, and ethnicity:
2015–17
INV-20 48 Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by business sector: 2010 and 2020
INV-21 49 Number of registered USPTO trademarks per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2020
INV-22 50 Number of registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country, or economy: 2007–20
INV-23 51 Global venture capital investment, by selected country, region, or economy: 2010–20
INV-24 52

Venture capital investment received by firms headquartered in the United States, by industry sector: 2018,
2019, and 2020
INV-25 53

Venture capital investment received by firms headquartered in China, by industry sector: 2018, 2019, and
2020
INV-26 54 Share of firms, job creation, and employment from firms 5 years old or younger: 1982–2018
INV-A 39

International collaborations with the United States and with non-U.S. countries in development of open-
source software, by 10 largest contributing countries: 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  7
Executive Summary
 
Key takeaways:
Invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation are three interrelated concepts that form the organizing framework for
assessing the U.S. and global science and engineering (S&E) enterprise in this report. Using indicators of activity and
output by sector, industry, and technology area, this three-part approach highlights trends, strengths, and opportunities.
Patenting and trademark data represent early and late stages of innovation activity. Both show that these activities are
geographically concentrated in the same regions of the United States, suggesting opportunities for these activities to
become more broadly distributed throughout the country. Consistent with the trend of increasing internationalization, of
the 354,000 utility patents awarded by the USPTO in 2020, about half were awarded to foreign inventors. Among utility
patents awarded to a U.S. entity, businesses accounted for 85%, individuals for 8%, universities for 4%, and the
government for 1%.
U.S. patenting and trademark activities are concentrated in certain areas of the country, with the highest rates on the
east and west coasts, around the Great Lakes, and in parts of the Southwest.
U.S. patents are increasingly global. Inventors residing in the United States are named on fewer than half of U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO) patents.
Inventors from Japan and the European Union make up the largest shares of USPTO patents granted to foreign
inventors.
While inventors from China account for a relatively small number of USPTO patents, over the last decade, these have
increased more than 10-fold. More than half of these are in electrical engineering.
Together, biological and biomedical sciences and health sciences are major drivers of U.S. patenting activity; these are
the top cited publication fields in USPTO patents across all U.S. sectors—academia, business, and federal government.
Based on patenting across national jurisdictions, patenting activity is increasing in many parts of the world and
particularly China; in 2020 inventors from China were granted almost half of all international patents.
Electrical engineering is a strong area of invention activity with nearly half of all international patents granted to U.S.
inventors in 2020 in this area.
Coauthorship of peer-reviewed publications shows that U.S. businesses collaborate extensively with U.S. academic
researchers and with foreign authors.
Academic research and licensing of the resulting technology leads to new startup firms, which are most often founded
within the state of the university producing the technology.
Federal agencies contribute to technology transfer through licensing and research partnerships as well through the
sharing of open-source software.
Innovation rates were much higher for firms that manufacture communications equipment or publish software, where
two-thirds of these firms introduced a new product or process, compared to the 27% overall rate for firms in the United
States.
Venture capital continues to spread globally, and investors from China are increasingly providing capital both in China
and internationally.
U.S. venture capital continues to flow to information technology firms, a sector that includes innovation intensive
hardware, software, and communications services. This investment increased 31% from 2019 to 2020.
Women and underrepresented demographic groups are increasing their participation in patenting and firm-level
innovation.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  8
Analysis of the literature cited in patent applications provides insight into knowledge transfer across sectors, fields, and
international boundaries. Peer-reviewed publications from U.S. academic institutions accounted for almost a third (31%)
of the citations in USPTO patent applications to S&E literature in 2020. Furthermore, articles in biological and biomedical
sciences and health sciences received the most citations, indicating that publication is a major output of these areas and
that they are drivers of innovation. Additionally, U.S. business-authored publications are increasingly coauthored with U.S.
academic researchers; more than half (56%) of U.S. business-authored publications share a U.S. academic coauthor.
International collaboration is also increasing, with 40% of business-authored publications having one or more authors
from another country. Both international collaboration and collaboration across sectors within and between countries
contributes to globally important innovation activity.
Similar to publications, technology transfer represents a mechanism to evaluate the transfer of knowledge from academic
and government sectors to the industry sector. Universities reported a continued increase in patenting and technology
licensing activity, including through licensing to startup firms. About a fifth (19%) of the almost 8,000 new university
licenses or options on licenses went to startup firms in 2019. Through the federal government, the Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) program and its newer partner, the Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program,
provided support to more than 4,000 firms in 2020.
Two new topic areas, citizen science and open-source software (OSS), provide insight into efforts by the federal
government to promote public participation in and understanding of science and distribution of federal research output
into the public sector. By engaging individuals or organizations in organized scientific projects, citizen science activities
transfer knowledge to the public. In 2020, there were 268 federally supported citizen science projects. In the last decade,
knowledge transfer has been increasing according to data on the use of OSS. In 2009, only the Department of Energy
(DOE), the Department of Commerce (DOC), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) used open-
source platforms to share software with other users; by 2019, 21 federal departments and agencies did so.
Innovation intensity is a measure of the share of all firms within a group that report any innovation—the release of a new
product or process—within a given period. Based on data from 4.6 million firms that responded to the Annual Business
Survey (ABS) regarding the introduction of a new product or process from 2015 to 2017, the software publishing industry
has a high rate of innovation (66%). This greatly exceeds the average innovation intensity of 27% for all U.S. firms and is
matched by two industries that are part of the manufacturing industry. Firms that manufacture communications
equipment (66%) or instrumentation (64%) have similar innovation intensities to that of the software publishing industry.
Chemical manufacturing also has a higher-than-average innovation intensity at 55%, which is largely driven by the
innovation intensity of the pharmaceutical industry.
Firm owners reporting their ethnicity as White make up 86% of the total companies and had a 26.5% innovation intensity.
Thus, innovation by firms owned by Whites largely drives the overall innovation rate of 27%. However, the innovation
intensity survey data suggest that women and underrepresented minorities are making marginally more frequent
contributions to innovation in business than male and White firm owners, respectively. From 2015 to 2017, majority-
female-owned firms reported slightly higher innovation intensity (27.5%) compared with majority-male-owned firms
(26.2%). However, these slightly higher innovation intensities have a limited impact on overall innovation intensity because
majority-female-owned firms represented 21% of all firms. For the same 3-year period, 28.0% of firms whose owners
reported their race as Black or African American and 28.7% of business owners who reported their ethnicity as Hispanic or
Latino reported an innovation.
Although most aspects of the economy reflected pandemic-related disruptions, as indicated by newly registered
trademarks in the United States, innovation activity related to COVID-19 was strong. Newly registered USPTO trademarks,
which can indicate release of a new product into the market, dropped 9% from 2019 to 2020. This decline contrasts with
the previous decade of consistent growth. In contrast, the swift development of COVID-19 vaccines demonstrated the
value of invention and knowledge transfer based on basic research and development (R&D) to facilitate the rapid
distribution of vaccines using a novel technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  9
Introduction
 
Governments, academia, and business all contribute to the activities that comprise the innovation process. Successful
business research and development (R&D) incorporates new knowledge into new products and processes while
attempting to prevent useful new knowledge from spreading to rivals (Arora, Belenzon, and Sheer 2017). Governments
limit release of knowledge that could compromise national security. Otherwise, governments and academia tend to create
new basic knowledge with the intention of transferring the new knowledge for innovation that betters society or becomes
a foundation for new products or processes in the marketplace. New knowledge created by R&D activities across all
sectors takes different forms, including scientific literature meant to be published and shared and private knowledge
meant to be kept secret, both of which may contribute to inventions or innovations.
In this report, inventions are defined as any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or
any new and useful improvement; an invention that has been introduced into public use is an innovation. That use may be
in the market or may be freely shared. The distinction between invention and innovation is an important one in the study of
technological advancement. To be considered patentable, an invention must meet the additional criterion of non-obvious
and useful.1 However, the usefulness criterion requires only that an invention be useful in principle. The Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) distinguishes innovation from invention by defining the former as “a
new or improved product or process (or combination thereof) that differs significantly from the unit’s previous products or
processes and that has been made available to potential users (product) or brought into use by the unit (process)” (OECD
Eurostat 2018). The term unit here is generic and refers to any institutional unit in any sector, including households and
their individual members. Thus, the OECD’s definition identifies innovations as those inventions that have achieved some
degree of user impact.
These definitions identify new knowledge as a set of nested concepts (Image INV-1). All R&D output qualifies as new
knowledge. A subset of this new knowledge takes the form of inventions, and a subset of inventions qualifies as
innovations. Knowledge is shared among individuals, transmitted from one organization to another, and applied to new
domains and fields of study. Transfer of knowledge is essential to the transformation of knowledge into new types of
output. The processes by which new knowledge becomes embodied in inventions and inventions are then transformed
into innovations are not linear, nor do they proceed only in one direction. Attempts to transform new scientific knowledge
into invention, for example, often lead to new scientific insights. Similarly, the work required to bring new products and
processes to market often leads to technology refinements that qualify as new inventions. Image INV-1 illustrates the
relationship between the concepts covered in this chapter—invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation—and how they
combine to push forward scientific and technological advancements.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  10
Image INV-1
Although the definitions presented above describe invention and innovation in terms of output, both terms are also
frequently used to describe the processes by which inventions and innovations are created. This report treats patents as
an invention output measure and counts of trademarks and counts of companies introducing new products and
processes as innovation output measures. Not all invention and innovation activity is covered in this report; good
indicators are not available for many creative activities that go unmeasured. This unmeasured activity is sometimes
referred to as dark innovation (Martin 2016).
Knowledge transfer is closely associated with invention and innovation. Technology developed at universities, for
example, is rarely ready for use outside the lab without further work. Companies that license university technology usually
invest significant effort in refining the new technology before introducing it to the marketplace. In this regard, the
distinctions made in Image INV-1 and the divisions of this report into invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation are
inherently artificial constructs.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  11
The indicators of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation presented in this report come from data available in public
records, data collected as part of government activity, and data contained within confidential government-administered
surveys (Table INV-1). Measurement of invention output relies heavily on patent data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), as well as data regarding business approaches to
intellectual property protection contained in surveys administered jointly by the U.S. Census Bureau and the National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). The contributions of individual inventors, separate from their
activities as employees, are assessed by analysis of patents assigned to individuals.
Table INV-1
Direct and indirect indicators of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation used in the report and their sources
(Indicator, source, and measurement type)
Section Indicator Source
Measurement
type
Invention Indicators:
Protecting Useful Ideas
Number of USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. owners by type of
grantee USPTO Direct
Business ranking of importance of mechanisms for intellectual
property protection
NCSES
U.S. Census Bureau Direct
Number of world patent applications, by country income group WIPO Direct
Number of international patent families granted, by selected region,
country, or economy EPO Direct
Number of USPTO utility patents granted, by selected region, country,
or economy USPTO Direct
Number of USPTO patents granted to inventors in selected countries,
by field of technology USPTO Direct
Number of USPTO utility patents by U.S. county USPTO Direct
Proportion of patent applications by country with at least one woman
applicant WIPO Direct
Knowledge Transfer: Making
Information Available
Number of coauthored business sector publications with other
academic, government, and foreign institutions
USPTO
Elsevier SCOPUS Direct
Number of citations to S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by article
field and sector of assignee
USPTO
Elsevier SCOPUS Direct
Number of university technology licenses or license options executed,
by company characteristic AUTM Direct
Total number of startups launched annually based on university
technology AUTM Direct
Number of startups supported by federal laboratories, by selected
agency
NIST
Department of
Commerce
Indirect
Number of technology transfer activities supported by federal
laboratories, by selected agency
NIST
Department of
Commerce
Direct
Number of firms supported by SBIR and STTR programs Small Business
Administration Indirect
Funding in millions of dollars by SBIR and STTR programs Small Business
Administration Indirect
International collaborations in development of open-source software
by selected country Robbins et al. 2021 Direct
Number of open-source GitHub repositories shared by U.S. federal
departments and agencies Robbins et al. 2021 Direct
Number of new firms and employment from new firms (less than 1
year old) U.S. Census Bureau Indirect
Number of federally sponsored citizen science projects on
citizenscience.gov, by agency citizenscience.gov Indirect
Number of federal citizen science projects with specific participation
tasks citizenscience.gov Indirect
Innovation: Introducing New
Products and Processes
Number of U.S. companies introducing product or process innovation,
by selected industry
NCSES
U.S. Census Bureau Direct

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  12
Table INV-1
Direct and indirect indicators of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation used in the report and their sources
(Indicator, source, and measurement type)
Section Indicator Source
Measurement
type
Share of U.S. companies introducing product or process innovation, by
selected industry
NCSES
U.S. Census Bureau Direct
Share of innovating businesses that are female owned NCSES
U.S. Census Bureau Direct
Share of innovating businesses that are non-White owned NCSES
U.S. Census Bureau Direct
Number of registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country,
or economy USPTO Direct
Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by business sector USPTO Direct
Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by selected Nice
classification USPTO Direct
Number of USPTO trademarks by U.S. county USPTO Direct
Global venture capital investment in billions of dollars, by selected
country or economy PitchBook Indirect
Chinese share of U.S. venture capital investment, percentage and total
dollars PitchBook Indirect
U.S. venture capital investment in billions of dollars, by selected
industry groupings or technology areas PitchBook Indirect
U.S. share of Chinese venture capital investment, percentage and total
dollars PitchBook Indirect
Share of firms, job creation, and employment from firms 5 years old or
younger U.S. Census Bureau Indirect
EPO = European Patent Office; NCSES = National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; NIST = National Institute of Standards and
Technology; SBIR = Small Business Innovation Research; STTR = Small Business Technology Transfer; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office;
WIPO = World Intellectual Property Organization.
Note(s):
Direct measures use data that explicitly reflect on the rate, volume, and mix of invention and innovation outputs and knowledge transfer activities.
Indirect measures are those that are correlated with these concepts but for which the linkage and impact must be inferred.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; SRI International.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The indicators assessed in this report include both direct and indirect measures. Direct measures use data that explicitly
reflect the rate, volume, and mix of invention and innovation outputs and knowledge transfer activities. Indirect measures
are those that are correlated with these concepts but for which precise linkage and impact must be inferred. Patent
application numbers, for example, reflect directly on invention output. Similarly, firms that cite patents as important to
intellectual property protection are providing data that directly reflect their use of patents and thus their invention output.
The number of total new firms started in a year, on the other hand, is an indirect measure of knowledge transfer. A share
of these firms will be formed on the basis of new scientific and technical knowledge acquired from outside of the firm.
Accordingly, there is a correlation between new firm formation and knowledge transfer, but the formation of a new firm
does not necessarily involve knowledge transfer. The indicator thus relies on correlation rather than direct measurement.
Measures related to knowledge transfer embedded in R&D outputs include coauthorship of research publications across
sectors; citations to the peer-reviewed scientific literature appearing in patents; the licensing by businesses of university-
owned patents; and invention disclosure made by, patents granted to, and licenses granted by federal government
entities. Knowledge transfer indicators also include measures of formal research collaboration in the form of cooperative
R&D agreements between federal laboratories and one or more nonfederal organizations. In addition to these direct
indicators, the report examines knowledge transfer through the lens of startup activity, including U.S. startup formation

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  13
and employment trends and federal government support for startups made available through the Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. Indicators of innovation output
rely on Annual Business Survey (ABS) data on the introduction of new products and processes, trademark registration by
the USPTO, U.S. and global trends in venture capital investment, and patterns of new firm formation and employment.
The motivations to conduct R&D are diverse and include both the potential for profit as well as the desire to expand
scientific knowledge. The individuals who engage in R&D and knowledge transfer are equally diverse and include staff
working in commercial, government, and academic organizations as well as individual inventors and citizen scientists. As
data permit, this report assesses the role and impact of contributions from academia, government, and industry, and of
individuals working independently. The report also includes analyses of the geographical distribution of invention
activities across the United States. Additionally, a sidebar highlights participation by citizen scientists in projects
organized by federal government agencies. Finally, two additional sidebars are included. One examines open-source
software (OSS) as an example of international collaboration on innovation, and the final sidebar considers how the
COVID-19 pandemic has influenced innovation activities in the drive for the rapid development of vaccines.
For the first time, this report also includes three county-level machine readable public use data sets that can be
downloaded to create analyses of U.S. patenting and trademarking. The patent data sets provide 23 years of county-level
patent data tabulated for each of 35 technology areas based on the location of the inventor (File Supplemental Workbook
INV-1) and based on the location of the patent owner (File Supplemental Workbook INV-2). The trademark dataset (File
Supplemental Workbook INV-3) provides 23 years of county-level trademark data tabulated for each of 10 goods or
services classifications based on the location of the trademark owner.
The major sections of the report describe the concepts of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation in detail and
present diverse indicators for each. The section on invention considers the entities that create potentially useful new
products and processes, including national and international trends in invention output. The section on knowledge
transfer examines the many ways in which knowledge created in one setting is refined and used in other settings,
including the transfer of knowledge from universities into the commercial sector. Finally, the section on innovation
examines a series of output indicators for innovation following an internationally comparable definition that has two parts:
(1) an innovation is a new or improved product or process or combination of the two that differs significantly from the
innovator’s previous products or processes, and (2) if a product, it has been made available to potential users, and if a
process, it has been brought into use (OECD Eurostat 2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  14
Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas
 
As described in the introduction, R&D activities from all parts of society create new knowledge (Image INV-1, see
Introduction). A large share of this new knowledge is intended as a public good and disclosed to the scientific community
and to the public via scientific literature. This activity is described in the Indicators report “[2022] Publications Output: U.S.
Trends and International Comparisons.” A subset of new knowledge takes the form of inventions, which are the
development of new and useful processes, machines, manufactures, or compositions of matter, or any new and useful
improvements. Examples of invention include mechanical devices, new materials, new processes, and software
programs. Inventors include researchers in government, academia, private nonprofit institutions, business firms, and
individuals working independently.
The distinction between invention and innovation is important and often overlooked. Just as invention represents a subset
of newly created knowledge, innovation represents a subset of invention. It is innovation that brings new products and
processes into our lives. While all inventions have the potential for practical use, few are ever put to use in operational
settings (Shepherd 1979). A new product or process becomes an innovation when it has been made available to potential
users or brought into use (OECD Eurostat 2018). The mechanisms by which inventions are refined into innovations are
complex and nonlinear, subject to feedback loops, reversals, and unforeseen, often surprising areas of application
(Rosenberg 1983). A single invention can have far-reaching, multiplicative impact, not just on innovation but on further
invention and scientific knowledge creation.
Governments grant exclusive rights to inventions to create incentives for organizations and individuals to conduct R&D
and other activity that produces inventions and brings them into use. To qualify for the legal protection of a patent,
inventions must be more than merely useful; they must also satisfy the criteria of being novel and non-obvious. Patent
applications, patents granted, and citations in patent documents represent the most common set of indicators of
invention. Applications are statements of potential inventions for official review, and patents granted represent official
protection that is subsequently granted to that invention, after review. In this report two dimensions of patent activity are
shown, patenting based on the residence of the inventor, and based on the institutional owner of the patent rights.
The U.S. federal government grants three types of patents: (1) design patents, which protect the visual characteristics of
an invention; (2) utility patents, which protect the way that an invention functions; and (3) plant patents, which are issued
for the discovery or invention of new and distinct asexually reproducing plants. In addition to patents, the U.S. Copyright
Office provides for the legal protection of integrated circuit layout designs by granting mask works, which are images
representing the predetermined, three-dimensional pattern of materials used to form the layers of a semiconductor chip
product. Only utility patents, the largest component of patenting, are presented in this report. Trends in USPTO design and
plant patents are covered in the Indicators 2020 “Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation” report section "[2020]
Invention: U.S. and Comparative Global Trends."
The expense associated with filing, maintaining, and defending a patent can be substantial, and patenting is not the only
way that inventions are protected. In some cases, inventors do not seek patent protection because they intend for their
creations to be immediately shared widely, or they choose a different form of protection. Many inventions are not
patented because they do not qualify as patentable under patent law or because the disclosure required by patent
applications places more information in the public domain than companies would prefer. Additionally, inventors may not
consider the period of patent protection, which is 20 years from date of application, sufficient to protect their inventions.
For these reasons, many commercial entities choose to protect their inventions through nondisclosure agreements and
trade secrets rather than via the legal protection conferred by patenting.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  15
0
Despite the many reasons inventors often do not patent their inventions, the scope of patent data available from the
USPTO, the European Patent Office’s PATSTAT database, and WIPO provide extensive and detailed indicators of invention,
including a historical record of changing patterns of the organizations that have patented inventions. For example,
although the post-World War II period in the United States has been one of dominance for business patenting and a
relative decline of individual patenting, USPTO data indicate the absolute number of patents granted to individuals each
year remains steadily above 10,000 patents, including 14,373 in 2020, about 8% of patents granted to U.S. owners (Figure
INV-1 and Table SINV-1).
Figure INV-1
USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. owners: 2002–20
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Patents are allocated according to patent ownership information. Patents are credited on a fractional-count basis (i.e., for patents with collaborating
institutions, each institution receives fractional credit on the basis of the proportion of inventors from participating institutions). See Table SINV-1
for more detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
USPTO, PATSTAT, and WIPO data and analysis are used in this report to examine U.S. and global trends in patenting by
contributor, industry, geography, and technology area. Analysis of global trends reveals how the United States compares
internationally as a source of invention. Additional data from the 2018 Business Research and Development Survey,
conducted jointly by NCSES and the U.S. Census Bureau, provide indicators of the use of both patenting and trade secrets
by businesses, including cross-industry differences in these indicators.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  16
Contributors to U.S. Patent Activity
USPTO patent records provide industry, technology areas, and geographical inventor information for all patents registered
in the United States, including patents granted to individuals and to foreign entities. More information on the patent data
used in this report is available in the Technical Appendix provided with this report.
The USPTO awarded 353,701 utility patents in 2020, nearly equally divided between foreign and domestic owners (Table
SINV-1). Obtaining and defending a patent incurs significant costs, and among U.S. assignees (patents that assigned the
rights of ownership to a U.S. entity), businesses received by far the most patents (150,558 or 85%) (Figure INV-1 and
Table SINV-1). Utility patents assigned to individuals represented 8% of the total in 2020 (Table SINV-1). Academia
received 4% of utility patent grants, and the government sector (primarily federal) received 1% of utility patents in 2020
(Table SINV-1). The persistently small contribution of the government is not surprising given that not all government labs
emphasize filing patent applications for their internal research staff’s discoveries; instead, federal agencies and
institutions are encouraged to openly share the results of their research (Holdren 2013).
The number of patents awarded annually to U.S. patent owners dropped 1% from 2019 to 2020 after increasing 16% in the
prior year. This 2020 drop is primarily accounted for by a drop in business patents. In contrast, university patents
increased by almost 1% from 2019 to 2020 (Table SINV-1). The number of patents awarded to individuals also increased
from 2018 to 2020; however, the share continues a long-term decline (Table SINV-1).
While international patent family data provide an illustration of global trends, USPTO patents focus on inventions, both
foreign and domestic, that are granted exclusive use rights in the U.S. market. Of the 353,701 utility patents granted in
2020 by the USPTO, 164,074 were granted to U.S. inventors, or 46%. Foreign inventors were granted 54% in 2020, up from
46% in 2000, continuing the trend of increased internationalization of U.S. patents (Table SINV-44).
Large multinational companies, including those based outside of the United States, have increasingly sought patent
protection beyond their domestic borders. As commercial activities increasingly cross international borders, rising rates of
foreign patenting reflect, among other factors, the desire of foreign firms to seek patent protection in multiple
international jurisdictions (Fink, Khan, and Zhou 2015). The European Union (EU) and Japan continue to account for the
largest numbers of foreign USPTO patent grantees (Figure INV-2). Although inventors from China account for a relatively
small number of USPTO patents, over the last decade, these have increased more than 10-fold from 1,606 in 2008 to
22,500 in 2020 (Figure INV-2). Patents related to electrical engineering accounted for the majority (63%) of USPTO
patents granted to inventors from China (Figure INV-3).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  17
0
Figure INV-2
USPTO utility patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy: 2000–20
EU = European Union; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
*Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom was no longer a member of the EU.
Note(s):
Patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based
on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. China includes Hong Kong. See Table SINV-44 for additional countries.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  18
0
Figure INV-3
USPTO patents granted to inventors from China, by field of technology: 2020
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Civil engineering is included in Other fields. Patents are allocated geographically according to patent inventorship information. They are classified
technologically under the World Intellectual Property Organization classification that is made up of 35 International Patent Classification technical
fields. Fractional counts of patents to each technological field assign the weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields. For instance,
a patent that is classified under five different technological fields will contribute 0.2 patent counts to each of its technological fields. Data across
technical fields also sum up to the total number of USPTO-granted patents. See Table SINV-4 for more information on fields of technology. See
Table SINV-45 through Table SINV-80 for data by technical field.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
According to a recent USPTO report, the growth in USPTO patents granted to China is driven by both market forces and
nonmarket factors. University and government subsidies for patenting can exceed the cost of filing the patent and these
subsidies are often higher for patents granted in foreign jurisdictions (USPTO 2021a).
To accelerate the patent approval process for inventions related to COVID-19 that are also subject to Food and Drug
Administration approval, the USPTO instituted a program early in 2020 that would allow for prioritized examination
without an additional prioritization fee. As of August 2021, 120 patents have been issued under the pilot program (USPTO
2021b).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  19
The Geography of U.S. Patenting
As a market-driven activity, invention tends to take place where skilled human capital and other inputs are relatively
abundant and low cost. As new knowledge spreads, it produces growth benefits or spillovers with a localized dimension
that drive additional growth (Grossman and Helpman 1991). States that have relatively high proportions of workers with a
bachelor’s degree or higher in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) are located primarily on the east
and west coasts of the United States and in the Midwest (see Indicators report “[2022] The STEM Labor Force of Today:
Scientists, Engineers, and Skilled Technical Workers”). As skilled labor and other inputs accumulate, the result can be that
a location’s initial advantages grow over time relative to other locations, leading to different growth rates and economic
outcomes. Patenting provides an indicator of the location of inventive activity.
County-level patenting intensity is measured here by the location of the owner of the patents granted per 1,000 population
in 2020;2 counties with high patenting intensity are concentrated in the United States along the coasts and in parts of the
Great Lakes region, Texas, and the Rocky Mountains (Figure INV-4). This geographic distribution corresponds with
indicators of knowledge- and technology-intensive (KTI) industries, in which California is the single largest producer of KTI
industry output, followed by Texas and New York (see forthcoming Indicators report “[2022] Production and Trade of
Knowledge- and Technology-Intensive Industries”).
Figure INV-4
USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. owners per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2020
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
USPTO patents are allocated according to ownership information. U.S. addresses were geocoded to 3,143 U.S. counties according to U.S. states,
U.S. cities, and zip codes appearing in these addresses. Because of the absence of zip codes for most U.S. addresses in the patent data, co-
assignment to multiple U.S. counties occurred for addresses accounting for about 14% of all U.S. patent counts, mostly in populous cities
encompassing multiple counties. This may lead to some underestimation or overestimation of patent output for some counties within these cities.
Further manual disambiguation was performed based on information available to assign some of the ambiguous addresses to a single county.
When more than one county remained for an address on a patent, the fraction of the patent associated to this address was split equally across all of
the counties. Patents are classified under the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) classification of patents, which classifies

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  20
International Patent Classification (IPC) codes under 35 technical fields. IPC reformed codes take into account changes that were made to the
WIPO classification in 2006 under the eighth version of the classification and were used to prepare these data. However, because PatentsView only
provides the original IPC codes as they appeared on patents and not the IPC reformed codes, current Cooperative Patent Classification codes on
patents were converted back to the most recent IPC classification to prepare these statistics. Fractional counts of patents were assigned to each
technological field on patents to assign the proper weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields under the classification. See File
Supplemental Workbook INV-2 for additional detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2021; Population data from the U.S.
Census Bureau accessed June 2021 at https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2021/2020-vintage-population-estimates.html.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The county patenting data files released with this report provide additional detail by technology area, showing, for
example, the high rate of patenting in transportation technology in Oakland and Wayne Counties in Michigan (File
Supplemental Workbook INV-2). Industry output data at the state level show that Michigan’s output has a high degree of
specialization in the KTI industry of motor vehicle production (see forthcoming Indicators report “[2022] Production and
Trade of Knowledge- and Technology-Intensive Industries”).
In 2020, 41.6% of counties had zero patents granted to owners in that county. A patent count of less than one can occur
when there are two or more county addresses on the patent. The patent is treated as a fraction in this case and divided
across the relevant counties. The top three counties in 2020 for patenting intensity are Santa Clara in California, followed
by Schenectady and Westchester Counties in New York (Figure INV-4).
Patenting in Context: U.S. Businesses Use a Variety of Intellectual Property Protections
The detailed geographic analyses possible with patent data represent just a portion of all the ways that economically
valuable ideas and inventions are protected by their owners. Nondisclosure agreements, trade secrets, trademarks, and
copyrights are used by U.S. businesses in addition to utility and design patents (Shackelford and Kindlon 2021).
Business survey data for 2018 show that almost half (49%) of businesses with 10 or more employees rated utility patents
as either very or somewhat important (Figure INV-5). Trade secrets were important for just over three-quarters (76%) of
these businesses (Figure INV-5).

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  21
0
Figure INV-5
Rating of importance of different types of intellectual property protections by U.S. companies that performed or funded R&D: 2018
Note(s):
"Important" is the sum of two columns of response, very important and somewhat important. The Business Research and Development Survey does
not include companies with fewer than 10 domestic employees.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau, Business Research and Development Survey, 2018.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The importance of patenting varies widely across the U.S. industries that perform or fund R&D. The industries that place
the highest importance on patenting include utilities (77%) and mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction (76%) (Figure
INV-6). Across each of the industries analyzed, trade secrets were rated as more important than patents, although for the
utilities and mining industries, the difference was minor. The relative importance of trade secrets was highest in finance
and insurance, in which 70% of businesses rated trade secrets as important, while only 19% of businesses rated patents
as important (Figure INV-6). Among electronic shopping and auctions businesses, an additional 48% of businesses rated
trade secrets important than rated patents important (Figure INV-6).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  22
0
Figure INV-6
R&D performing or funding U.S. companies that rate intellectual property protection as important, by intellectual property type and
industry: 2018
Note(s):
"Important" is the sum of two columns of response, "very important" and "somewhat important."
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau, Business Research and Development Survey, 2018.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Global Trends in Patenting Activity
In contrast to the U.S.-focused data from the USPTO, this section presents global patenting trends through patents
granted in international jurisdictions. International patents, as described in this section are an unduplicated count of
original or priority patents in any individual jurisdiction. The unit of measurement is a patent family that shares a single
original invention in common. All subsequent patents in a family refer to the first patent filed, called the priority patent.
One patent family consists of all of the patents granted for the same invention in at least one patent jurisdiction, based on
the priority date. They represent a broad measure of international trends in inventive activity that prevents double counting
when an invention is registered in multiple jurisdictions. The underlying data are prepared based on the International
Patent Documentation from the European Patent Office’s Worldwide Patent Statistical Database, adjusted to account for
jurisdictional differences in registering provisional patents.3
On this basis, there were 938,038 international patents granted in 2020. U.S. inventors accounted for 95,347 (10%) in
2020, up from 73,622 in 2010 (Figure INV-7). In comparison, the number of USPTO patents registered to U.S. inventors
was greater, at 164,074 patents (Table SINV-44). Based on the international patent family counting, these 95,347
international patents are an indicator of the birth of a new patent family, based on an original priority patent.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  23
0
Figure INV-7
International patent families granted, by country: 2000, 2010, and 2020
Note(s):
International Patent Documentation (INPADOC) patent families across all patent offices covered in the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database
(PATSTAT) are counted according to the year of the first granted patent in the patent family. Patent families are allocated according to patent
inventorship information found on the priority patent of the INPADOC families. To account for missing ownership information in PATSTAT for some
offices, a method designed by de Rassenfosse et al. (2013) is used to fill missing information on priority patents using information in successive
filings within the families. Priority patents not indexed in PATSTAT are replaced by the next utility patent(s) in the families according to filing dates.
Patent families are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors.
China includes Hong Kong. See Table SINV-5 for additional countries.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PATSTAT, accessed October 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
By this broad measure, new patent family activity is currently centered in Asia. Inventors from Japan had the highest
number of patents granted in 2000 and 2010; however, the number of patents granted to Japanese inventors started
declining in 2014. By 2020, inventors from China made up the largest number, with about 456,000, accounting for nearly
half (49%) of the patents granted in 2020 (Figure INV-7). Inventors from two of China’s high-income neighbors accounted
for large numbers of international patents granted; 141,286 international patents were granted in Japan and 104,490 in
South Korea (Figure INV-8).

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  24
1
Figure INV-8
Log scale of international patent families granted, by region, country, or economy: 2020
EU = European Union; ROW = rest of world.
Note(s):
World total equals 938,038. International Patent Documentation (INPADOC) patent families across all patent offices covered in the Worldwide
Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) are counted according to the year of the first granted patent in the patent family. Patent families are
allocated according to patent inventorship information found on the priority patent of the INPADOC families. To account for missing ownership
information in PATSTAT for some offices, a method designed by de Rassenfosse et al. (2013) is used to fill missing information on priority patents
using information in successive filings within the families. Patent families are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based
on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. China includes Hong Kong. See Table SINV-5 for additional countries.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PATSTAT, accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
While historically patenting has been an activity of high-income countries, rapid growth in patents from China have
changed this dynamic. China is not the only middle-income country of the top 15 locations where international patents are
registered. Russia and India are also considered middle-income countries and in the top 15 locations with the highest
number of international patents granted in 2020 (Table SINV-5). India, with more than 5,000 patents in 2020, is the only
lower middle-income country in the top 15 (Table SINV-5). Patents granted to inventors in Brazil, an upper middle-income
country, increased nearly twentyfold from 2000 to 2020, reaching more than 2,000 patents in 2020. It is now the 18th-
highest patenting country.
Technology fields within patent documents allow comparisons across countries at both a broad and detailed level (Table
SINV-4 through Table SINV-41). The 35 detailed categories aggregate into five broad technology areas: electrical
engineering with 34% of patents (317,611), mechanical engineering with 22% (208,560), chemistry with 19% (176,693), and
instruments with 16% (148,131). Other fields accounted for 9% (82,036) in 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  25
0 5
Based on technology areas, within electrical engineering patents, information technology management patents increased
at the fastest rate, 35%, from 2019 to 2020 (Table SINV-12). Six other detailed categories increased 15% or more from
2019 to 2020: patents in computer technology (Table SINV-11), also an electrical engineering area; the categories of
macromolecular chemistry and polymers, basic materials, and chemical engineering within chemistry patents (Table
SINV-22, Table SINV-24, and Table SINV-28, respectively); and other special machines within mechanical engineering
(Table SINV-34).
Electrical engineering patents are an area of relative strength for U.S. inventors. Electrical engineering made up close to
half (44%) of international patents awarded to U.S. inventors in 2020, compared with 34% for inventors from all locations.
Inventors in the EU produced a larger share of mechanical engineering patents (Figure INV-9).
Figure INV-9
Share of electrical and mechanical engineering patents in a selected region's, country's, or economy's international patent families
granted: 2020
EU = European Union.
*Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom was no longer a member of the EU.
Note(s):
International Patent Documentation (INPADOC) patent families across all patent offices covered in the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database
(PATSTAT) are counted according to the year of the first granted patent in the patent family. Patent families are allocated according to patent
inventorship information found on the priority patent of the INPADOC families. To account for missing ownership information in PATSTAT for some
offices, a method designed by de Rassenfosse et al. (2013) is used to fill missing information on priority patents using information in successive
filings within the families. Priority patents not indexed in PATSTAT are replaced by the next utility patent(s) in the families according to filing dates.
Patent families are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors.
China includes Hong Kong. The electrical and mechanical engineering fields of technology are defined using the World Intellectual Property
Organization classification of patents. See Table SINV-4 for more information on fields of technology. See Table SINV-6 through Table SINV-13 and
Table SINV-30 through Table SINV-37 for data by technical field.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PATSTAT, accessed October 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Tabulated data for each of the 35 technology areas by country and year (Table SINV-4 through Table SINV-41) and for U.S.
inventors by technology area and year (Table SINV-42 and Table SINV-43) are provided in Supplemental Tables.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  26
0
Characteristics of Patented Inventors
Patenting activity is unevenly distributed among men and women, with men much more likely to be named as inventors on
patents issued, according to recent analyses by the USPTO and WIPO. While the two analyses used different datasets and
different measures of patenting and participation, both found underrepresentation of women named as inventors in
patent documents (USPTO Office of the Chief Economist 2020; WIPO 2020b).
One way to see trends in inventorship by women is based on the number of patents with at least one woman named as an
inventor. The patent team may have one woman or twenty, and the count would be the same number. This number divided
by the total number of patents issued in that year is an indicator of the share of patents with at least one woman named
as an inventor. For patents granted by the USPTO in each year, this share was 22% in 2019, a share that increased from
under 5% in 1976 (USPTO Office of the Chief Economist 2020).
Another useful ratio is the women inventor rate (WIR), which is the number of women named as inventors on all patents
issued divided by the number of all named inventors for a given period. This ratio is a somewhat broader way to measure
changes in the participation of women as patented inventors. By this measure, the WIR was 12.8% for 2019 (USPTO Office
of the Chief Economist 2020).
To put the sex imbalance in context, patents in electrical and mechanical engineering made up 61% of all USPTO patents
granted to U.S. inventors in 2020 (Figure INV-10). As two of the thematic reports in Indicators 2022 describe, engineering
is an area in which women are underrepresented in the United States. In 2019, women received about a quarter of
bachelor’s degrees and doctoral degrees in engineering and held about a quarter of the postdoc positions in engineering
(see Indicators report “[2022] Higher Education in Science and Engineering” and Indicators report “[2022] The STEM Labor
Force of Today: Scientists, Engineers, and Skilled Technical Workers”).
Figure INV-10
USPTO patents granted to U.S. inventors, by field of technology: 2020
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  27
0 5
Note(s):
Civil engineering is included in Other fields. Patents are allocated geographically according to patent inventorship information. They are classified
technologically under the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) classification that is made up of 35 International Patent Classification
(IPC) technical fields. Fractional counts of patents to each technological field assign the weight of a patent to the corresponding technological
fields. For instance, a patent that is classified under five different technological fields will contribute 0.2 patent counts to each of its technological
fields. Data across technical fields also sum up to the total number of USPTO-granted patents. See Table SINV-4 for more information on fields of
technology. See Table SINV-45 through Table SINV-80 for data by technical field.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
However, as the USPTO report points out, women participate in all science occupations at a much higher rate than they
invent patented technology, suggesting that increasing the numbers of women in science and engineering jobs alone will
not bring parity in the number of women as inventor-patentees (USPTO Office of the Chief Economist 2020).
Internationally, WIPO has analyzed the representation of women in patenting, finding substantial variations across
countries (WIPO 2020b).4 For the 20 patent offices with the highest numbers of patenting activity, WIPO found that based
on applications registered through WIPO’s Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), the share of patent applications with at least
one woman was highest for China (32%) and South Korea (27%) (Figure INV-11). In contrast, only 17% of the PCT
applications from the United States had a woman listed as an inventor.
Figure INV-11
Share of PCT applications with at least one woman listed as inventor for the top 20 origins: 2019
PCT = Patent Cooperation Treaty.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  28
Note(s):
In order to attribute sex to inventors’ names recorded in PCT applications, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) produced a sex–
name dictionary based on information from 13 different public sources. Sex is attributed to a given name on a country-by-country basis because
certain names can be considered male in one country but female in another.
Source(s):
WIPO Statistics Database and Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) database, September 2020, accessed March 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The likelihood of patenting is linked to family income and education, as well as the sex of the individual. By linking USPTO
patent data to the income of individuals (or households) through confidential tax records, an analysis over time of 1.2
million U.S. inventors found that those who were from high-income families as children are 10 times more likely to
become inventors than those who were from below median-income families as children. The same analysis found U.S.
men were more likely to invent than U.S. women (Bell et al. 2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  29
Knowledge Transfer Indicators: Making Information Available
 
As described in the previous Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section, the output of R&D, both formal and
informal, includes scientific knowledge, inventions (i.e., new and useful processes, machines, manufactures, or
compositions of matter, or any new and useful improvements thereof), and innovations, which are new products or
processes that have been made available to potential users or brought into use (OECD Eurostat 2018). Knowledge
transfer is broader and more diverse. It encompasses the many activities whereby newly created knowledge is shared
with those who can apply it, develop it, or transform it into new outputs, inventions, and innovations. The institutional
performers of R&D activity are covered in detail in the forthcoming Indicators report “[2022] Research and Development:
U.S. Trends and International Comparisons” and the Indicators report “[2022] Academic Research and Development.”
Knowledge transfer also includes transfer between individuals, transfer from one organization to another, and transfer to
new fields of study and domains of application.
The transformative role of knowledge transfer is illustrated in Image INV-1 (see Introduction section). The processes by
which knowledge becomes embodied in new inventions, and inventions are transformed into innovations, are nonlinear
and proceed through multiple directions. New insights on the natural world emerge from successful and unsuccessful
attempts to transform new scientific knowledge into inventions. Similarly, the work required to bring new products and
processes to market often leads to refinements that themselves qualify as new inventions.
Knowledge embedded in technology constitutes a special case of knowledge transfer often referred to as technology
transfer. Indicators discussed in this chapter include both the narrower case of technology transfer and the broader
category of knowledge transfer. Although businesses conduct the largest share of U.S. R&D, academic institutions and
federal labs are also key contributors to knowledge creation (see forthcoming Indicators report “[2022] Research and
Development: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons”) and knowledge transfer.
Both formal R&D and informal activities conducted by organizations and individuals produce new knowledge. That
knowledge can be transferred through the dissemination of the information embedded in documented R&D outputs, such
as publications, patents, and software; through direct organization-to-organization interaction and collaboration; and via
direct and tacit interaction among individuals. Most knowledge transfer indicators described in this report directly
measure the operation of these transfer mechanisms. Coauthorship of research publications across business, academia,
and government is used to assess the transfer of knowledge across sectors. Citations to the peer-reviewed scientific
literature appearing in patents provide evidence of the application of scientific knowledge to invention and highlight
knowledge transfer between universities and businesses.
In addition to its contribution to indicators based on published research, the role of academia in knowledge transfer is
assessed via the licensing by businesses of university-owned patents. Several indicators highlight the role of the federal
government in knowledge transfer. These include: (1) invention disclosures made by, patents granted to, and licenses
granted by federal government entities; (2) cooperative R&D agreements between federal laboratories and one or more
nonfederal organizations; and (3) the open-source licensing of software created for government use.5
Startup companies that form based on the licensing of university technology represent a particularly important form of
knowledge transfer: they signal the active commercial use of new knowledge and overlap with those described above. In
addition to the formal licensed use of technology, knowledge transfer can play an indirect role as startups draw on newly
created knowledge to provide the basis for their commercial activities. Indicators related to startups include general U.S.
startup formation and employment trends and financial support of startups through the SBIR and STTR programs.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  30
0
Business Collaborations in Published Literature
All parties benefit when business, academia, and government agencies collaborate. Through collaboration, the
participants gain access to advanced tools, emerging technologies, unpublished or private data, and technical expertise.
An indicator of such collaborations is the authorship data of peer-reviewed publications in the Scopus database. Scopus
is an abstract and citation database of scholarly literature provided by Elsevier Publishing. Peer-reviewed publications by
business authors have become more collaborative over time, although fewer in number. One indication of the high impact
of collaborations on the progress of science and engineering (S&E) is the greater than average citation of articles with
authors from multiple sectors versus those with authors from a single sector or institution (Shneiderman 2018).
Authors with U.S. business affiliations published 49,000 peer-reviewed publications in 2020, based on the Scopus
publications output data reported in the Indicators report “[2022] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons.” The total number of peer-reviewed publications in that year with a U.S. address was almost half a million
(456,000). Almost 90% (43,203) of business-authored publications were coauthored with authors from other institutions,
including other businesses, up from 75% in 2008 (Figure INV-12). Business-authored publications are increasingly
coauthored with U.S. academic researchers, the share increasing from 43% (25,112) in 2008 to 56% (27,475) in 2020
(Figure INV-12). Collaboration between the federal government and business represent a relatively small portion of the
coauthored publications in 2020 at 13% (6,563) (Figure INV-12).
Figure INV-12
Coauthored business-sector publications with other academic, government, and foreign institutions: 2008 and 2020
Note(s):
Publications are classified by their publication year and are assigned to a sector based on the institutional address(es) listed within the author
information. Each publication is credited to a sector based on the institution type. Each collaborating institution is credited as coauthoring in this
table when the listed authors come from different sectors. The publication is counted as one count in the sector (whole counting). Publications can
be authored by collaborators in multiple sectors, thus the sum of publications coauthored with various sectors can exceed the total. Publications
from unknown U.S. sectors are not shown.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Elsevier; Scopus abstract and citation database, tabulated by Science-Metrix, May 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  31
Business-authored publications are also increasingly coauthored with international authors, a trend reflected in the overall
increase of international collaboration in peer-reviewed literature (NSB 2021a). Among the business-coauthored
publications, this category of cooperation grew the most. From 2008 to 2020, the number and proportion of publications
coauthored between U.S. businesses and foreign collaborators increased, reaching 40% (19,884) in 2020 (Figure INV-12).
Publications, citations, and collaborations in peer-reviewed literature are covered in greater depth in the Indicators report
“[2022] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.”
Publications Cited in Patents
When peer-reviewed publications like those described above are cited in patent documents, the linkage between the two
documents provides an indicator of knowledge transfer from the scientific literature to the patent. These indicators show
the disproportionately large role of academic publications in patent citations, pointing to the importance of academic
research in invention. Data for peer-reviewed publications are from the Scopus database used in the Indicators report
“[2022] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.” The same taxonomy of disciplines for fields of
science and classification of sectors that produce publications from that report are used here.
Biological and biomedical sciences are most often cited in patent documents; this is true for U.S. authors affiliated with
academia, business, or federal labs (Figure INV-13). However, the scale of these citations varies substantially. Authors
from academia contributed the greatest number and proportion of S&E articles cited in patents in 2020. Of the 696,000
citations to S&E articles in patents in 2020, about 31% (214,305) were to articles from the U.S. academic sector (Table
SINV-82). Publications of U.S. S&E articles with academic-affiliated authors in the biological and biomedical sciences
received 66,000 citations in patent documents, publications with business-affiliated authors received 15,000 citations, and
publications with federal government-affiliated authors received almost 7,000 (Figure INV-13).6 Health sciences
publications, the next most cited category for each sector, was the field with the largest number of publications worldwide
in 2020 according to the analysis of all S&E articles in the Indicators report “[2022] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and
International Comparisons.”

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  32
1
Figure INV-13
Log scale of citations of U.S. S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by selected patent sector and S&E article field cited: 2020
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
See Table SINV-82 for additional detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2021; Elsevier, Scopus abstract and
citation database, accessed May 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
University Knowledge Transfer Activities
Licensing and university-based startup activity are two frequently tracked indicators of the technology commercialization
component of knowledge transfer by university faculty, staff, and students. The analysis of these activities is based on
data from AUTM, a membership organization that supports the technology transfer of academic research.7 The transfer of
knowledge embedded in technology constitutes a special case of knowledge transfer often referred to as technology
transfer. This section considers the special case of knowledge transfer in the form of technology transfer from
universities to the business sector.
For many technology-based startups, possession of a patent or an exclusive option to license a patent is the first step to
attracting external financing. Patented inventions can be licensed directly to an external party, or an exclusive option can
be granted for licensing rights at a future date. The startups assessed in this section are companies that are founded
using university intellectual property (AUTM 2021). These startup companies reported by universities in AUTM data refer
to companies that were formed in the reporting year specifically to develop the technology being licensed.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  33
According to AUTM, in 2019, U.S. universities executed almost 8,000 new licenses or options. Increasingly, these licenses
or options are executed by startups and small firms (those with fewer than 500 employees). In 2009, startups accounted
for 15% (800) and small businesses 50% (2,597) of new licenses or options (Table INV-2). By 2019, university startups
accounted for about 1,500 licenses (19%) and small companies licensing university technology accounted for almost
4,700 (59%) (Table INV-2). Most university-related startups are located in the home state of the research university; only
26% were in another state in 2019 (Figure INV-14). The number of university-related startups launched annually has
increased steadily since 2000, and in 2019 AUTM reported a combined 1,029 new university-related startups (Figure
INV-14).
Table INV-2
University technology licenses or license options executed, by company characteristic: 2009, 2014, and 2019
(Number)
Company characteristic 2009 2014 2019
New licenses or options executed 5,222 6,327 7,974
Startups 800 1,131 1,481
Small companies 2,597 3,064 4,684
Large companies 1,825 2,132 1,809
All licenses, total active 33,523 42,015 49,477
Note(s):
AUTM collects data on invention and patent-related activities of its member universities and hospitals. The number of member universities varies
slightly from year to year. There were 248 in 2009, 252 in 2014, and 236 in 2019. Responding institutions may report for any 12-month period ending
in the identified year. Startup companies reported by universities in AUTM data refer only to those companies that were formed in the reporting year
specifically to develop the technology being licensed. Counts of licenses to startups and small companies are mutually exclusive. Small companies
are those with fewer than 500 employees.
Source(s):
AUTM, AUTM Licensing Survey (various years), accessed February 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  34
0
Figure INV-14
Startup companies based on licensed university technology: 1999–2019
Note(s):
The survey question asks how many startup companies were formed in a given year that were dependent upon the licensing of the institution's
technology for initiation. Startup companies reported by universities in AUTM data refer only to those companies that were formed in the reporting
year specifically to develop the technology being licensed.
Source(s):
AUTM, STATT Database, Version 4.2, accessed February 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Federal Government Knowledge Transfer Support
Multiple indicators provide insight into how federal R&D contributes to innovation through knowledge transfer. Federal
laboratories in multiple agencies or departments facilitate knowledge transfer through the information included in
invention disclosures and patents and by way of licenses and collaborative relationships. Collaborative relationships
include cooperative R&D agreements (CRADAs), of which the traditional type involves an agreement between a federal
agency or laboratory and one or more nonfederal organizations. The nonfederal organization (a business, nonprofit, or
other government entity) provides some of its own resources for the research activity. In exchange, the nonfederal
organization is granted the option to license resulting technology. Nontraditional CRADAs provide a material transfer or
other forms of federal technical assistance that may result in protected information.8 Additionally, federal laboratories and
federal science-funding agencies support startups in many ways, including through the SBIR and STTR programs, the
latter of which supports technology transfer from universities.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  35
Nine federal departments or agencies reported R&D obligations of at least $1 billion in 2018, which generated significant
new knowledge available for transfer (see Indicators 2020 report “Research and Development: U.S. Trends and
International Comparisons”). Some of these departments and agencies report support for startups to the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). For reporting departments and agencies, of the startups that received
support from federal laboratories in 2016, the Department of Commerce (DOC) funded the most at 51 (Table INV-3).9 In
2016, the Department of Energy (DOE), with 1,760, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), with
1,554, disclosed the greatest numbers of inventions (Table INV-3). DOE had the highest number of patents granted (856
out of 2,341 total) (Table INV-3). DOE also had the greatest number of active invention licenses (943) and executed the
highest number of new invention licenses (145) (Table INV-3). Furthermore, DOE had the highest total active licenses
(5,410) (Table INV-3). As is the case with university licensing, federal government licensing of its inventions represents
the technology transfer special case of knowledge transfer. Patents are used here as indicators of knowledge transfer
because the assignment of patent protection allows for subsequent use and commercialization.
Table INV-3
Federal laboratory technology transfer activity indicators, by selected departments and agencies: FY 2016
(Number)
Technology transfer activity All reporting federal agencies and departments DOD DOE NASA USDA DOC DHS
Total startups supporteda na na na 19 na 51 0
Invention disclosures and patenting              
Inventions disclosed 5,086 874 1,760 1,554 244 64 17
Patent applications 2,596 941 999 129 109 25 15
Patents issued 2,341 665 856 103 60 16 3
Licensing              
All licenses, total active in the fiscal year 8,950 515 5,410 452 441 57 5
Invention licenses, total active in the fiscal year 4,156 358 943 387 370 57 5
New invention licenses in the fiscal year 572 57 145 97 27 15 1
Collaborative relationships for R&D              
CRADAs, total active in the fiscal year 11,644 3,125 739 12 238 2,940 343
Traditional CRADAs 6,720 2,297 739 12 161 335 272
Other collaborative R&D relationships 18,472 452 0 2,204 11,854 3,273 71
na = not applicable; data not reported at this level.
CRADA = Cooperative R&D Agreement; DHS = Department of Homeland Security; DOC = Department of Commerce; DOD = Department of Defense;
DOE = Department of Energy; NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration; USDA = Department of Agriculture.
a Startups are companies that have been in existence for 5 years or less.
Note(s):
In addition to the federal departments and agencies listed in the table, the "All reporting federal agencies and departments" totals also include the
Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of the Interior, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Veterans Affairs,
and the Environmental Protection Agency. Invention licenses refer to inventions that are patented or could be patented. CRADAs refer to all
agreements executed under CRADA authority (15 U.S.C. 3710a). Traditional CRADAs are collaborative R&D partnerships between a federal
laboratory and one or more nonfederal organizations. In addition to CRADAs, federal agencies have varying authorities for other kinds of
collaborative R&D relationships, such as Space Act Agreements (NASA) or other transaction authorities. Agency support for startups is defined as
critical technical support (NIST 2019).
Source(s):
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce, Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2016:
Summary Report to the President and the Congress (2019), accessed 10 January 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  36
0
Collaborative relationships were unevenly distributed among the six federal departments. Of the 30,116 active
collaborations across all federal laboratories, the U.S. Department of Agriculture was involved in more than a third
(12,092), and most of these (11,854) were not CRADAs (Table INV-3). With 27% and 25%, respectively, the Department of
Defense and DOC had the greatest proportions of the 11,644 active CRADAs in 2016 (Table INV-3). These data suggest
that the CRADA mechanism is suitable for establishing collaborations by some agencies, but other mechanisms, such as
licensing, appear better able to meet the needs of other agencies.
Focused cross-agency federal initiatives strive to strengthen the development and flow of early-stage technologies into
the commercial marketplace. The most substantial federal initiatives focused on small companies are two
complementary programs, SBIR and STTR. Both are administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration with the goal
of fostering innovation among domestic small businesses engaged in R&D activities to meet federal R&D needs. These
two programs provide competitively awarded funding to small businesses (fewer than 500 employees) with the goal of
stimulating technological innovation to address federal R&D needs. The programs are run through individual federal
agencies with extramural research budgets of $100 million or greater. Many of the program recipients are startups,
especially those receiving funds as part of the STTR program.
Established in 1992, the STTR program focuses on partnerships between small businesses and universities or other
nonprofit research institutions. Accordingly, it plays a large role in knowledge transfer, and program award data provide a
useful indicator of the same. The number of firms supported by the program rose from 272 in 2000 to 745 in 2020 (Figure
INV-15). Program funding grew from $63 million to $455 million over the same period.
Figure INV-15
SBIR and STTR programs, by number of firms and total funding: FYs 2000–20
SBIR = Small Business Innovation Research; STTR = Small Business Technology Transfer.
Note(s):
Funding data are awarded amount through FY 2014; obligated amount in FY 2015 and later.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  37
Source(s):
Small Business Administration, SBIR/STTR official website, accessed August 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
SBIR participant companies often rely on third parties to help perform program-funded research, the results of which are
transferred to participants. SBIR program data therefore also provide an indication of knowledge transfer, albeit a less
direct one. The SBIR program conferred awards to 3,564 firms in 2020, up from 2,277 in 2000. The 2020 awards
accounted for almost $3.5 billion in funding (Figure INV-15).
At the state level, SBIR and STTR funding as a ratio to state gross domestic product provides a direct measure of federal
support for small businesses. These data are available in the National Science Board’s State Indicators Data Tool. From
2016 to 2018, the SBIR ratio is highest in two New England states, Massachusetts and New Hampshire, followed by New
Mexico and Colorado (NSB 2021b).
Increasingly, another form of shared knowledge is original computer software created for government activities
throughout the U.S. federal government. Much of this software has the potential for reuse, both inside and outside of
government. The U.S. federal government supports the sharing of software developed by and for the federal government
through its Federal Source Code Policy, which provides a framework for government code to be released and reused
through OSS licensing. This policy allows software created for narrow federal purposes to be reused elsewhere within the
federal government, multiplying its value to the government, and outside of the federal government, further extending its
impact.
One indication of the increasing activity of federal departments and agencies is the sharing of computer software
repositories with an Open Source Initiative (OSI)–approved license on the GitHub platform. Repositories contain all of the
files and folders associated with a specific OSS project and can be owned by individual entities or shared across multiple
entities. While this measure based on GitHub is not comprehensive (federal agencies may share through separate
platforms), it shows that from 2010 to 2019, the 10 most active federal department and agency participants in OSS
sharing contributed to over 15,000 distinct OSS repositories (Table INV-4). Representative government-contributed OSS
projects include DOE’s Raven, code for performing risk analysis of nuclear reactor systems, and DOE’s Qball, code for
performing molecular dynamics to compute the electronic structure of matter. Not surprisingly, because DOE and NASA
were early adopters of OSS, these two agencies have the largest number of repositories among federal agencies. In 2009,
only DOC, DOE, and NASA used open-source platforms to share software with other users; by 2019, 21 agencies did so
(Table SINV-83).
Table INV-4
Cumulative contribution of selected entities to open-source software on GitHub: 2010–19
(Number)
Institution Count of repositories contributed to by institutional members
Federal total 15,716
Department of Energy 11,156
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 1,102
Department of Health and Human Services 863
Department of Commerce 819
Department of the Interior 537
Department of Defense 321
General Services Administration 319
Smithsonian Institution 107
Department of Agriculture 104
Department of Veterans Affairs 76
All other federal departments and agencies 312

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  38
Table INV-4
Cumulative contribution of selected entities to open-source software on GitHub: 2010–19
(Number)
Institution Count of repositories contributed to by institutional members
Selected business and university repositories 57,284
Microsoft 25,365
RedHat 24,767
University of California, Berkeley 7,152
Note(s):
Included repositories are those public on GitHub with machine detectable Open Source Initiative-approved licenses that received contributions from
affiliates from each organization; software shared through other licenses are excluded. Public higher education institutions and selected private
entities are included as benchmarks. The Department of Energy encompasses 17 national laboratories, 16 of which were included in the data. The
exception is the Department of Energy's SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, formerly known as Stanford Linear Accelerator. Due to data
constraints, these repositories are attributed to the operator (Stanford), rather than to the Department of Energy. Overall, in terms of number of
repositories, Microsoft and RedHat are the two largest contributors from the private sector and UC Berkeley from higher education institutions.
Source(s):
Robbins C, Korkmaz G, Guci L, Santiago Calderón J, Kramer B. 2021. A First Look at Open-Source Software Investment in the United States and in
Other Countries, 2009–2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
SIDEBAR SIDEBAR: U.S.-INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATIONS IN OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE
Sidebar: U.S.-International Collaborations in Open-Source Software
Developers throughout the world collaborate widely through the creation of open-source software (OSS). GitHub, the
world’s largest remote source code–hosting platform, provides tools to collect user attribute and activity data that
can be analyzed to assess OSS collaborations across countries. Collaboration is defined in terms of pairs of
individuals that contribute code to a common repository. Similar to the way in which research publication records
show patterns of collaboration in the Indicators report “[2022] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons,” OSS collaboration networks show international relationships in knowledge creation and transfer.
The dataset used for analysis contains each GitHub repository with an open-source license as well as information on
the location of each repository’s contributors for 2018. For OSS developers in the United States with projects on
GitHub, cooperation was most frequent with collaborators from Germany, followed by the United Kingdom, and India
(Figure INV-A). This collaboration pattern differs from that of peer-reviewed publications in which authors from the
United States are most often collaborating with Chinese coauthors (see Indicators report “[2022] Publications Output:
U.S. Trends and International Comparisons”).

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  39
0
Figure INV-A
International collaborations with the United States and with non-U.S. countries in development of open-source software, by 10
largest contributing countries: 2018
Note(s):
Collaborations are counted using whole counts by which each collaboration partner receives one count for each open-source software
collaboration identified in GitHub.
Source(s):
Robbins C, Korkmaz G, Guci L, Santiago Calderón J, Kramer B. 2021. A First Look at Open-Source Software Investment in the United States and
in Other Countries, 2009–2019.

Science and Engineering Indicators
U.S. Startup Trends
A significant amount of knowledge transfer to startup companies takes place via startup licensing of university and
government technology and from startup participation in government programs like STTR. However, many startups that
rely on outside knowledge as the basis for their new products and processes neither license that outside knowledge nor
participate in government programs. Data from university technology transfer offices, for example, indicate that just over
1,000 university-related startups were formed in 2019 (Figure INV-14). Thus, the data described in preceding sections do
not account for all knowledge transfer to startups.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, over 400,000 firms in the United States were less than one year old in 2018. Many
factors influence startup activity, not only transfer of science and technology knowledge. That said, data on trends for
total new firm formation provide a top-down and indirect view of knowledge transfer to startups over time that
complements license and program participation data. An increase or decrease in new firm formation could be expected to
correlate with overall knowledge transfer to new firms. In other words, if many more or many fewer new firms are formed,

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  40
0 0
it is likely that a correspondingly larger or smaller number of new firms are making use of external knowledge. From 1990
to 2018, the number of new firms (those less than a year old) fell from 494,000 to 431,000 (Figure INV-16). While it may
be the case that the share of young firms relying on external science and technology knowledge has grown during this
period, this long-term decline in new firm formation suggests a decline in the flow of knowledge into this sector of the
economy or other factors holding back firm formation.
Figure INV-16
New firms and employment from new firms: 1990–2018
Note(s):
New firms are firms less than one year old. Number of jobs created is from opening establishments during the last 12 months.
Source(s):
U.S. Census Bureau, Business Dynamics Statistics, accessed March 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
SIDEBAR SIDEBAR: CITIZEN SCIENCE IN FEDERAL AGENCIES AND DEPARTMENTS
Sidebar: Citizen Science in Federal Agencies and Departments
Learning by doing is a way for innovation to occur through practical activities. By allowing individuals to participate in
organized science activity, knowledge is transferred to the lay public to use. Citizen science is a form of open
collaboration in which individuals or organizations participate as volunteers in scientific progress. Approximately 10%
of U.S. adults say that they have taken part in citizen science in the past year, and just over a quarter (26%) say that
they have participated in citizen science within their lifetime (Thigpen and Funk 2020). The forthcoming Indicators
report “[2022] Science and Technology: Public Perceptions, Awareness, and Information Sources” covers this topic

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  41
from the perspective of participating individuals and public perceptions of science. Here, the focus is on how federal
science agencies support citizen science. Data collected from the U.S. federal government website,
citizenscience.gov, provide the number of citizen science projects per agency and the tasks in which citizen scientists
engage.
In 2020, there were 268 citizen science projects sponsored by U.S. federal agencies and departments and reported on
citizenscience.gov (Table INV-A). With 174 projects, the National Park Service leads federal agencies and
departments in sponsoring citizen science projects, followed by the National Science Foundation (NSF) at 77 and
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration at 60 (Table INV-A).
Table INV-A
Federally sponsored citizen science projects on citizenscience.gov, by federal department or agency: 2020
(Number)
Sponsor Number
National Park Service 174
National Science Foundation 77
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 60
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 47
U.S. Geological Survey 44
U.S. Department of Agriculture 37
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 28
U.S. Forest Service 21
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 16
Smithsonian Institution 14
National Institutes of Health 12
Department of Energy 8
U.S. Department of the Interior 8
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 7
Bureau of Land Management 4
All other U.S. federal projects 22
Source(s):
citizenscience.gov, tabulated by SRI International, February 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Beyond those identified as sponsored by the federal government, in 2020, more than 4,000 such projects were listed
on citizen science websites and databases (SRI International 2020). There are now citizen science associations in the
United States, the European Union, and Australia (Heigl et al. 2019). Compared with patenting activity (as described in
the Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section of this report) and the completion of advanced degrees in
science (NSB 2020), participation by men and women is more balanced. According to a Pew Research Center survey,
roughly half of citizen science participants in the United States are female (Thigpen and Funk 2020). See the
forthcoming Indicators report “[2022] Science and Technology: Public Perceptions, Awareness, and Information
Sources” for more discussion about Americans’ participation in citizen science activities and their perception of it.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  42
Innovation Indicators: Introducing New Products and Processes
 
The previous sections of this report examined indicators of invention output and knowledge transfer activities. As
described earlier, invention represents a subset of R&D output that includes new and useful processes, machines,
manufactures, or compositions of matter, or any new and useful improvements thereof. Knowledge transfer, the second
theme of this report, encompasses the activities by which this newly created knowledge is shared with those who can
apply it, further develop it, and transform it into new outputs, including innovation outputs.
For measurement purposes, innovation has an internationally agreed upon definition. The Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) defines an innovation as a new or improved product or process that differs
significantly from previous products or processes and that the innovator has made available to potential users or brought
into use (OECD Eurostat 2018). The implementation of these ideas as products or processes with real-world applications
is what separates inventions from innovations. There is broad consensus among countries that policies at the national
level should encourage and support innovation because innovation supports economic growth and advances knowledge
(OECD 2010). Accordingly, many countries use policies that promote innovation to foster the creation of new products
and processes.
This section presents a range of indicators of innovation output, starting with data on the introduction of new or
significantly improved products and processes by U.S. businesses, from a joint NCSES and U.S. Census Bureau survey.
Examined next are data on the registration of new trademarks from the USPTO and from other national intellectual
property (IP) offices collected via WIPO. As described by von Graevenitz, Graham, and Myers (2019), trademark
registrations “capture the moment at which products or services are introduced into the market, turning inventions into
innovations.” Thus, trademarks represent another direct measure of innovative output by firms. Compared with patenting,
trademarking is easier and less costly, and it does not have the same requirements regarding novelty (Millot 2009);
consequently, small and new businesses apply for trademarks more frequently than they apply for patents (Greenhalgh et
al. 2011; Seip, Castaldi, and Flikkema 2019). Therefore, trademarks can reveal service, marketing, and organizational
innovation that would not otherwise be captured because the source of innovation is not always tied to technological
advances (Castaldi, Block, and Flikkema 2020).
In addition to these direct measures of innovation output from the private sector, several indirect innovation indicators
connected to venture investment and new firm formation are presented. Access to financing is an essential component of
the translation of new knowledge into innovations. Entrepreneurs rely on a variety of sources of financing, including their
own funds, friends and family, bank loans, government support, angel investment, and venture capital (OECD 2014).
Venture capital is a particularly important indicator of innovation because venture investors tend to invest in companies
whose products they believe have a significant likelihood of achieving market success. Venture capital firms that become
publicly traded are more likely to have recorded R&D expenditures compared to publicly traded firms that were not
originally venture-backed (Lerner and Nanda 2020). In this regard, data on U.S. and global venture capital investment
trends, provided by PitchBook, can be viewed as leading indicators of the innovative output expected from startups as
they use those funds to create innovations. Of particular focus in this chapter is the expanding role of China in the global
venture investment landscape.
Annual state-level data on venture capital disbursed relative to state gross domestic product (GDP), available in the
National Science Board’s State Indicators Data Tool. At the state level, the highest venture capital/GDP ratios are in
California and Massachusetts (NSB 2021c). Data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Dynamics Statistics on firm
formation are presented below as a complement to the venture capital data. These additional data provide a view of the
total number of small firms in the United States and their associated employment levels. Although they indicate innovative
output only indirectly, statistics on new firm formation and employment correlate with overall levels of innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  43
The central role of the business sector in innovation activity has shaped the available data, and most indicators of
innovation address the private sector. Notwithstanding the availability of data, however, a diverse set of actors that span
the economic sectors of the economy contribute to the creation of innovative output, including universities, government
agencies, and citizen scientists. The impact of government and private citizens on innovation is briefly discussed toward
the end of this section. As robust indicators are not currently available for evaluation of their innovation output, patent
data from the Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section that bear on the inventive outputs of these two groups
are highlighted.
The section concludes with a sidebar on vaccine development during the COVID-19 pandemic. The sidebar discusses the
rapid innovation achievable when a deep basis of scientific knowledge has been created through decades of federally and
privately funded research and when knowledge transfer is accelerated through the intensely collaborative activities of
academia, government, the nonprofit sector, and private companies.
Business Innovation
High rates of innovation activity in the business sector indicate a dynamic economy, whether at the local, regional, or
national level (Hall and Jaffe 2018). A key indicator of business innovation activity is the proportion of companies within
an industry that introduces new or significantly improved products and processes. In the United States, over 1 million
businesses introduced a new or significantly improved product or process from 2015 to 2017, representing 27%
(approximately one in four) of businesses, according to the ABS (Figure INV-17).10 Compared with the one in six
businesses reported in the Indicators 2020 report “Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation,” this increase in the
reported ratio is affected by the evolution of the U.S. business innovation survey to cover innovation more
comprehensively (NCSES 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  44
0
Figure INV-17
Share of U.S. companies reporting product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2015–17
Note(s):
Classification is by 2017 North American Industry Classification System codes and based on the dominant establishment payroll. Statistics are
representative of companies located in the United States. Industries shown in the table are those in which more than half of the firms within the
industry reported an innovation in the 3-year period from 2015 to 2017. For this survey, an innovation must have characteristics or intended uses
that are new or that provide a significant improvement over what was previously used or sold by the business. Product innovations may be goods or
services. Process innovations may be methods of manufacturing; logistics, delivery, or distribution methods; or supporting activities, such as
maintenance or operations systems.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau, Annual Business Survey, 2017.
Science and Engineering Indicators
More than half of the businesses in 11 industries reported innovation activity, above the national average for all industries
of 27% (Figure INV-17). Many of these companies are in manufacturing industries; 45% (99,847) of manufacturing
companies surveyed reported the release of new or significantly improved products or processes. Nine of the eleven
industries reporting innovation rates above 50% were manufacturing industries, confirming the overall high prevalence of
innovation in that sector (Figure INV-17).
The manufacturing industry with the highest proportion of innovative companies was communications equipment (66%)
(Figure INV-17). Chemical companies also had high innovation rates (55%) due to the inclusion of the pharmaceutical
industry, which is R&D- and patent-intensive (Figure INV-17).

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  45
0
Two information industries—data processing and related services (56%) and software publishers (66%)—were among the
11 industries reporting high rates of companies with new products or processes (Figure INV-17). Overall, innovation rates
in the United States are relatively high for parts of the manufacturing and information industries.
Looking at absolute numbers, the retail trade industry reported the most companies (152,920) introducing a new or
significantly improved product or process from 2015 to 2017 in the United States (Figure INV-18). The only other
industries reporting more than 100,000 companies introducing product or process innovations during this period were
construction (112,877) and health care services (111,310) (Figure INV-18). However, the ranking of retail trade and health
care services as two of the top industries is partly explained by those industries accounting for the largest share of firms;
nearly half a million of all the surveyed companies were in each of those two industries (545,440 and 447,069,
respectively).
Figure INV-18
U.S. companies introducing product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2015–17

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  46
0 5
Note(s):
For this survey, an innovation must have characteristics or intended uses that are new or that provide a significant improvement over what was
previously used or sold by the business. Product innovations may be goods or services. Process innovations may be methods of manufacturing;
logistics, delivery, or distribution methods; or supporting activities, such as maintenance or operations systems. Classification is by 2017 North
American Industry Classification System codes and based on the dominant establishment payroll. Statistics are representative of companies
located in the United States.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau, Annual Business Survey, 2017.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The ABS includes new demographic data on innovation rates of firms that are majority-female-owned and majority-male-
owned. From 2015 to 2017, majority-female-owned firms reported slightly higher innovation rates (27.5%), compared with
majority-male-owned firms (26.2%) (Figure INV-19). That said, these majority-female-owned firms represent only 20% of
all firms (NCSES 2018). Newly available survey data also show that firm owners who identify as Black (or African
American) or Hispanic (or Latino) report slightly higher process and product innovation rates. From 2015 to 2017, 28.0%
of firms whose owners reported their race as Black or African American introduced a product or process innovation
compared to 26.5% of firms who reported their race as White (Figure INV-19). For business owners who reported their
ethnicity as Hispanic or Latino, 28.7% reported an innovation compared to 26.3% for those who reported their ethnicity as
non-Hispanic (Figure INV-19). However, Black or African American owners account for only 2% of all firms, and Hispanic
or Latino firms account for only 5% of all firms. Overall, this suggests that women and underrepresented minorities, while
underrepresented as business owners, are making above average contributions to innovation in business.
Figure INV-19
Share of U.S. companies introducing product or process innovations, by owners' sex, race, and ethnicity: 2015–17

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  47
Note(s):
For this survey, an innovation must have characteristics or intended uses that are new or that provide a significant improvement over what was
previously used or sold by the business. Product innovations may be goods or services. Process innovations may be methods of manufacturing;
logistics, delivery, or distribution methods; or supporting activities, such as maintenance or operations systems. Classification is by 2017 North
American Industry Classification System codes and based on the dominant establishment payroll. Statistics are representative of companies
located in the United States.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau, Annual Business Survey, 2017.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Trademarks: U.S. Trends
Trademarks provide legal registration and protection to commercially used symbols, images, and names. The application
and registration of a trademark is a way to announce to the market that the firm has introduced a new product, thus
making a useful indicator of innovative output. Trademarks also signify when newly registered products are different from
others in the market (Castaldi, Block, and Flikkema 2020). For companies in the United States that either perform or fund
R&D, trademarks are considered as important as utility patents as an intellectual property protection strategy, as shown in
the Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section of this report (Figure INV-5).
Trademark registration is a significant and lower-cost way, compared to patents, for startups to signal the potential value
of their innovative assets. Firms often wait until a successful product has been developed before registering a trademark
(Castaldi, Block, and Flikkema 2020). Trademark registration is typically associated with later stages of the innovative
process than are patents, signaling those new products and processes are ready for introduction to the market.
Trademark ownership increases the probability of venture capital investment (Zhou et al. 2016), suggesting trademarking
is a signal to venture capital firms of the commercial readiness of startup technology.
Along with other indicators of the disruption of economic activity in 2020, the number of USPTO trademarks registered
dropped 9% from 2019 to 283,479 in 2020, breaking a decade of consistent growth (Table SINV-84). Products receiving
trademark protection provide an indication of industries with high innovation activity. Across product types, knowledge-
intensive products and services account for high numbers of trademarks. For U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks in 2020,
the top product categories were leisure and education, research and technology, and business services (Figure INV-20).

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  48
0
Figure INV-20
Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by business sector: 2010 and 2020
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information and are fractionally allocated to regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion
of residences of all named holders. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice classification of goods and services, which
classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned to each category
to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification. See Table SINV-87 through Table SINV-97 for
other years and countries. See Table SINV-85 for detail on the 10 aggregate business sectors.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The Geography of U.S. Trademarking
Geographic clustering of knowledge creation and innovation are well established features of innovation systems. As an
indicator of the introduction of new products, innovation may well have more potential to affect economic growth at the
regional level compared with inventions that may never be implemented (Carlino and Kerr 2015). County-level trademarks
issued by the USPTO are shown per 1,000 residents, revealing that trademark activity is unevenly spread across the United
States with more intensive activity along the coasts, the Rocky Mountain region, parts of Texas, and the Great Lakes
region (Figure INV-21).11 In 2020, 25.7% of all counties had zero trademarks issued, making trademark activity more
geographically disbursed across the interior of the United States compared with the regional patenting described in the
Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section of this report, in which 41.6% of counties had zero patents. The top
three counties in 2020 for trademark intensity are Sheridan County in Wyoming, followed by Fairfax City in Virginia, and
New York County in New York (Figure INV-21).

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  49
Figure INV-21
Number of registered USPTO trademarks per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2020
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
USPTO Trademarks are allocated according to holder information. U.S. addresses were geocoded to 3,143 U.S. counties according to U.S. states,
U.S. cities, and zip codes appearing in these addresses. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice classification of goods and
services, which classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned
to each category to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification. These counts are then grouped
under 10 industry sectors following a mapping defined by Edital. See File Supplemental Workbook INV-3 for additional detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2021;
Population data from the U.S. Census Bureau accessed June 2021 at https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2021/2020-vintage-
population-estimates.html.
Science and Engineering Indicators
At the international level, the internationalization of commerce has coincided with an increasing share of USPTO
trademarks registered to foreign assignees. Since 2008, the number of foreign-registered USPTO trademarks has grown
174%, compared with 16% growth in the number of USPTO trademarks registered to U.S. assignees (Figure INV-22). While
those from the EU maintained a steady presence, the number of trademarks from China grew more than 20-fold during
this period (Figure INV-22).

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  50
0
Figure INV-22
Number of registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country, or economy: 2007–20
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office; EU = European Union.
*Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom was no longer a member of the EU.
Note(s):
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information. Trademarks are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on
the proportion of residences of all named holders. China includes Hong Kong. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice
classification of goods and services, which classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of
trademarks were assigned to each category to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification. See
Table SINV-84 for additional countries.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The growth in USPTO trademarks and patents from China is driven by both market and nonmarket factors (USPTO
2021a). Market factors include economic growth and increased exposure to international trade. According to a recent
USPTO report, the nonmarket factors behind the increase in trademark activity in China includes government subsidies for
foreign trademark applications that exceed the cost of filing and government mandates requiring an increase in trademark
filing (USPTO 2021a).
Venture Capital from a Global Perspective
Venture capital provides funding for startups and early-stage firms. Because early-stage firms have a high risk of failure,
venture investors pursue a portfolio approach to their investments. Vehicles for this early-stage venture capital include
accelerators, crowdfunding, and angel investors, while mutual funds, hedge funds, corporations, and sovereign wealth
funds focus more heavily on later stage firms (Lerner and Nanda 2020). Despite the potential headwinds of the global
pandemic, global venture capital investment measured in current dollars rose 22% from 2019 to 2020, to a total of $277

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  51
0
billion in 2020 according to data from PitchBook. The United States remains the leading country recipient of venture
capital funds, with U.S.-headquartered firms receiving 47% ($129 billion) of total global venture capital funds (Figure
INV-23). Firms headquartered in China received the second largest amount, with $60 billion in venture capital funds or
22% of the global share (Figure INV-23). As a region, firms headquartered in Europe received 15% ($41 billion) of total
venture capital in 2020; firms headquartered in India received 4% ($12 billion) of the global total.
Figure INV-23
Global venture capital investment, by selected country, region, or economy: 2010–20
ROW = rest of the world.
Note(s):
China includes Hong Kong. Country, region, and economy is attributed to location of the headquarters of the investing company. See Table SINV-98
for additional regions or countries.
Source(s):
Venture capital and private equity database, PitchBook, accessed September 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Venture Capital Investment in the United States
Two decades ago, the United States was the main location of venture capital activity, with U.S.-headquartered firms
receiving about 75% of annual venture capital investment from 2000 to 2005. Rapid growth in this type of funding activity
increased from $2 billion in 2000 to $129 billion in 2020. However, venture capital investment has grown even more
rapidly globally; the U.S. share of this total decreased over the same period to 47% in 2020 (Table SINV-98). The rapid
growth in venture capital investments by large U.S.-based Internet and software companies, such as Alphabet, Amazon,
Facebook, and Microsoft, have contributed to the expansion of investment in information technology firms, a sector that

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  52
0
includes hardware, software, and communications services. Investment increased 31% from 2019 to 2020, continuing the
growth from the previous year (Figure INV-24). This sector contains two industries—communications equipment and
software publishers—that reported the greatest number of product and process innovations from 2015 to 2017 in the
business survey data described earlier in this report.
Figure INV-24
Venture capital investment received by firms headquartered in the United States, by industry sector: 2018, 2019, and 2020
Note(s):
Information technology (IT) includes communications and networking, computer hardware, semiconductors, IT services, software, and other
information technology. Health care includes health care devices and supplies, health care services, health care technology systems,
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, and other health care. Business to consumer includes apparel and accessories, consumer durables, consumer
nondurables, retail, transportation, media, restaurants, hotels and leisure, services (nonfinancial), and other consumer product services. Business to
business includes commercial products, commercial services, commercial transportation, and other business products and services. Financial
services includes capital markets/institutions, commercial banks, insurance, and other financial services. Materials and resources includes
agriculture, chemicals and gases, construction (nonwood), forestry, metals, minerals and mining, textiles, and other materials. Energy includes
energy equipment, exploration, production and refining, energy services, utilities, and other energy. Industries classified by PitchBook on the basis of
the firm's primary industry. See Table SINV-99 for additional detail.
Source(s):
Venture capital and private equity database, PitchBook, accessed 13 September 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  53
0
Venture Capital Investment in China
Global venture capital investment from firms headquartered in China was $60 billion dollars globally in 2020, rebounding
after the precipitous drop from 2018 to 2019 that broke a decade-long trend of global rapid growth (Figure INV-23). The
2019 decline followed the increasing uncertainty for foreign investment in the United States following the passage in 2018
of the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA), which broadened the U.S. government’s authority to
review and respond to national security concerns arising from investments and real estate transactions with foreign
persons (U.S. Department of the Treasury 2021).
The investment drops from 2018 to 2019 were largest in the information technology sector and business-to-consumer
sector, which provides products and services to consumers (Figure INV-25). Both sectors rebounded in 2020. As the
COVID-19 pandemic grew in 2020, venture capital investment in firms headquartered in China in the health care sector
more than doubled from 2019 to 2020.
Figure INV-25
Venture capital investment received by firms headquartered in China, by industry sector: 2018, 2019, and 2020
Note(s):
Business to consumer includes apparel and accessories, consumer durables, consumer nondurables, retail, transportation, media, restaurants,
hotels and leisure, services (nonfinancial), and other consumer product services. Information technology (IT) includes communications and
networking, computer hardware, semiconductors, IT services, software, and other information technology. Business to business includes
commercial products, commercial services, commercial transportation, and other business products and services. Financial services includes
capital markets/institutions, commercial banks, insurance, and other financial services. Health care includes health care devices and supplies,
health care services, health care technology systems, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, and other health care. Energy includes energy equipment,
exploration, production and refining, energy services, utilities, and other energy. Materials and resources includes agriculture, chemicals and gases,
construction (nonwood), forestry, metals, minerals and mining, textiles, and other materials. Industries classified by PitchBook on the basis of the
firm's primary industry. See Table SINV-99 for additional detail.
Source(s):
Venture capital and private equity database, PitchBook, accessed 13 September 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  54
0
Business Dynamics of New Firms
Firm-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Dynamics Statistics provide information on establishments
opening and closing, firm startups and shutdowns, and the associated impact on employment. The count of new firms
that are less than one year old provide an indirect measure of innovation output as it is presumed that a share of these
firms is established to bring new innovations to market. Whereas in 1982, half of U.S. firms were 5 years old or younger,
the proportion of new firms steadily declined until leveling off at about a third from 2012 to 2018 (Figure INV-26).
Consistent with this decrease in new firms, young firms accounted for 19% of employment in 1982 but only 10% in 2018
(Figure INV-26).
Figure INV-26
Share of firms, job creation, and employment from firms 5 years old or younger: 1982–2018
Source(s):
U.S. Census Bureau, Business Dynamics Statistics, accessed March 2021.
Science and Engineering Indicators
While many factors account for these changes, two relevant explanations are the impacts of technological change and of
changing market structure. Technological change can affect business dynamism through productivity shocks to existing
firms and through changes in the cost of entry (De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Mongey 2021). High-productivity firms are
likely to survive, and increased entry costs will discourage new firms. Changes in the structure of the overall economy can
take place as the composition of the business sector shifts toward the service and information sectors and away from
manufacturing. While an example of this is the transformation of the retail sector toward big box sellers and large national
firms, firm and industry analysis show that the effect is more than just a shift in composition (Decker et al. 2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  55
Household Innovation
The role of individuals as innovators is less well-measured than for businesses, but that is changing. The latest edition of
the innovation measurement handbook, the Oslo Manual, provides a common framework for measuring innovation in a
more inclusive manner across the economy, in government, in nonprofit organizations, and in households (OECD Eurostat
2018). Academic researchers have fielded surveys of individuals in several high-income economies, including Canada,
Japan, and several European countries. These surveys identify household innovation, an activity in which household
resources are devoted to creating a product or process that will be used in the future. Data from these pilot surveys
indicate about 4% to 10% of the surveyed population reported household innovation activity (Sichel and von Hippel 2019;
Søndergaard and Thøgersen 2021).
Data from scientific publications show that patents for computers and communications technologies owned by
individuals were cited at similar rates to those owned by businesses (Miranda and Zolas 2017). For other technology
areas, the citation rate of patents held by individuals was lower than the rate of patents held by businesses.
The motivations of household innovators differ from those of businesses since they are not usually driven by profit or self-
enhancement (Søndergaard and Thøgersen 2021). As a result, they are less likely to pursue IP registration for the
associated inventions (von Hippel and Krogh 2003), although there is some patenting by individuals. As reported in the
Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section of this report, individuals accounted for 8% of the USPTO patents
awarded in 2020 (Figure INV-1).
Government Innovation
Government innovation activity is continuous but often underappreciated. Government innovation output receives
occasional attention through coverage, adoption, or dissemination of transformational projects. Examples include the
exploration of space, the development of the Internet, and the race to create critically needed vaccines.
To provide a better view into the role of governments in innovation, the United States joined with 40 nations in 2019 to
adopt shared principles that include drawing attention to and supporting government innovation (OECD 2019). The EU,
Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and five Nordic countries have tested survey-based
measurements of innovation in schools, hospitals, universities, and other public workplaces. Quantifiable measures that
emerged from this work include in-house innovation activities and education for staff, as well as investment in contract
research and acquisitions of new equipment and software for innovation (OECD 2020).
Similar to household innovation, comprehensive indicators for innovation activities in government are not currently
available. As reported in the Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas section of this report, patent data from the
USPTO indicate the government is a small contributor to inventions, with about 1% of USPTO patents awarded to
government assignees in 2020 (Figure INV-1). However, this is likely an underrepresentation of the contribution of
government to invention because publicly funded R&D performed by the government is often within the public domain and
thus not protected IP or is classified due to security concerns and thus not released widely.
SIDEBAR SIDEBAR: RAPID INNOVATION AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COVID-19 VACCINE
Sidebar: Rapid Innovation and the Development of the COVID-19 Vaccine
Epidemiologists, doctors, and other scientists worked under extreme time pressure to develop, test, and produce
effective vaccines for COVID-19. The contributions of globally recognized universities, government agencies, nonprofit
initiatives, and pharmaceutical companies demonstrate the kind of rapid action and knowledge sharing that can take
place in emergency situations like the pandemic.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  56
The medical and scientific achievements related to the pandemic were possible due to decades of federally and
privately funded research. For more than 50 years, scientists have studied the family of coronaviruses circulating
among livestock and poultry that have demonstrated the ability to jump from their original host animals to humans. In
the past two decades, members of this coronavirus family that have jumped to humans have caused outbreaks of
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), and the current coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). After the emergence of SARS in 2002 and MERS in 2012, coronavirus research expanded
significantly. Research on the coronaviruses that cause SARS and MERS provided a stock of knowledge available to
scientists, including data on the structure, genome, and life cycle of this family of coronaviruses, when the SARS-
CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 emerged in December 2019.
The World Health Organization’s declaration of a pandemic in March 2020 has led to even more research on
coronaviruses and COVID-19 specifically. By October 2020, more than 3,600 trials about COVID-19 had been
conducted or were still ongoing; most of these were clinical trials for COVID-19 treatments (OECD 2021). The
COVID-19 pandemic has also spurred a large increase in scientific publications, with more than 175,000 articles
related to COVID-19 published on PubMed, a resource sharing biomedical and life sciences literature, by September
2021 (NIH 2021). See the Indicators report “[2022] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons”
for more information on how scientific publication output has changed during the pandemic.
With regard to vaccine development, as of September 2021, there were 114 COVID-19 vaccines in clinical
development, including some that were in the development phase at the outset of the pandemic. These vaccine
candidates utilize ten different technology platforms, one of which is mRNA-based vaccine technology (World Health
Organization 2021). The research underpinnings of mRNA vaccines date back to 1989 (Malone, Felgner, and Verma
1989). In 2005, researchers at the University of Pennsylvania solved a key technical barrier to the use of mRNA in
vaccine or drug applications (Karikó et al. 2005), and several biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms, including
BioNTech and Moderna, licensed their work hoping to develop marketable pharmaceuticals. Prior to the emergence of
SARS-CoV-2, these efforts were largely unsuccessful in bringing products to market. However, all of this work on
mRNA technology was useful; it provided knowledge and technologies that enabled researchers to quickly develop
mRNA vaccines for SARS-CoV-2. On December 2, 2020, less than a year after COVID-19 was declared a pandemic, the
United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency granted temporary regulatory approval for
the Pfizer-BioNTech mRNA vaccine, making the United Kingdom the first country in the world to approve an mRNA-
based vaccine for use in humans (Lamb 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  57
Conclusion
 
A dynamic system of innovation activities, including invention, the transfer of knowledge, and the introduction of new
products and processes, generates outcomes that range from new modes of mobile communication to new vaccines to
counter a pandemic. Historically, participation has tended to be limited to higher-income countries, regions, and
economies, and within these locations, participation has tended to be limited to higher-income men. These trends are
changing.
Intellectual property indicators, such as patenting and trademarks, show where new products and processes are
emerging. Patenting and trademark activity by middle-income countries is increasing. This increasing participation of
middle-income countries in IP registration and other innovation activities results in both collaboration opportunities and
competition challenges. Additionally, with the global supply chain reliant on international S&E capacity, this
interconnectedness generates widespread risk in terms of national security, transmission of disease, and disruption in
global and domestic economies.
Both international collaboration and collaboration across sectors within and between countries contributes to globally
important innovation activity. Domestically, annual statistics on knowledge transfer at universities and federal labs show
growth in research collaborations, technology licensing, and support for startups.
Indeed, the process of innovation, from R&D to invention to the release of a new product or process, can be a long one.
Thus, introduction of a new product or process in U.S. businesses is assessed over a 3-year period with the most recent
data from 2015 to 2017. In this time frame, one in four U.S. firms reported having introduced a product or process
innovation. Federal science investments supported many of the industries with higher-than-average innovation intensities,
including health-related industries and industries that produce information and communication technologies. These
industries are integral parts of the domestic economy, perform high levels of R&D, and compete globally. Thus, federal
science investments play an important role in the overall innovation ecosystem in the United States.
The regional and demographic differences in invention activities (patenting) and innovation activities (trademarking) show
that these critical activities are unevenly distributed among demographic groups and among geographic regions. Whereas
Black or African American firm owners account for only 2% of all firms, and Hispanic or Latino firms account for only 5%
of all firms, these firms reported slightly higher-than-average rates of process and product innovations. Women also
participate throughout the system, although their numbers are fewer than those for men. Majority-women-owned firms
report higher innovation rates than majority-male-owned firms.
Geographically, county data for the United States on patenting and trademark activity show that the intensity of innovation
activities takes place unevenly across the country, with more dense activity in urban and metropolitan areas, along the
coasts, and in the Northeast. This is consistent with patterns from other countries as well, where R&D, highly skilled
workers, and patenting tend to concentrate in metropolitan areas (Planes-Satorra and Paunov 2017). Concentration
supports local growth at the same time that other regions, lacking these attributes, grow more slowly. The
underparticipation of large sections of the population provides an opportunity to increase innovation in multiple
dimensions.
The data highlighted in this report also illustrate shifts in the locations and types of R&D activities and associated outputs.
Chief among these shifts is the rise of China as a global contributor to inventive output and to the transformation of new
ideas into innovations, recent cautions about both quality and incentives notwithstanding. Another clear shift is the
growing role of universities in private-sector innovation. The last decade has seen a 50% increase in the number of
university licenses and license options to private-sector entities. This growth is due to university technology transfer to
startups and other small companies, a trend somewhat at odds with the long-term decline in share of firms and
employment accounted for by these companies in the U.S. economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  58
Invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation are indispensable to improving national and global health, well-being, and
security. The indicators reviewed in this report suggest that the global S&E enterprise remains healthy and productive and
that long-term trends will continue in the direction of greater output and productivity. The federal government funded
basic research decades ago that enabled the rapid development of vaccines for the coronavirus pandemic. The decades-
long investment in genetic sequencing and vaccine research bore fruit in the 2020 effort to bring effective vaccines to
everyone.
The data in this report raise some questions as well. According to U.S. Census data, more than 400,000 new firms (less
than one year old) have been created annually in recent years, but technology transfer data shows impacts for just a few
thousand startup firms each year. Clearly, there is unmeasured activity here or dark innovation (Martin 2016). Preliminary
information in this report on government sharing of OSS and household innovation, and geographic data on new
trademarks provides part of the answer, but not all. Taken together with the Indicators 2022 thematic reports, regional
variation matters.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  59
Glossary
 
Definitions
Citizen science: A form of open collaboration in which individuals or organizations participate voluntarily in scientific
progress.
Copyright: A legal protection for original works of authorship, including literary, dramatic, musical, architectural,
cartographic, choreographic, pantomimic, pictorial, graphic, sculptural, and audiovisual creations. Definition from U.S.
Copyright Office, https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/definitions.html. Accessed March 2021.
Design patent: A grant of a property right to an inventor to protect the visual ornamental characteristics of an article of
manufacture.
Economic sectors: Economic activity is organized in national economic accounts into four sectors: business, government,
nonprofits serving households, and households. This organization has also been recommended for innovation statistics
(OECD Eurostat 2018). In the statistical data in this report, public universities and private nonprofit universities are shown
together as academic institutions. The term individuals refers to the household economic sector.
European Union (EU): The EU comprises 27 member nations: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, and Sweden. As of 2020, the United Kingdom is not a
member of the EU. Several figures show the EU 27 plus the United Kingdom.
Innovation: A new or improved product or process (or combination thereof) that differs significantly from the unit’s
previous products or processes and that has been made available to potential users (product) or brought into use by the
unit (process). The unit is a generic term to describe the actor responsible for innovations. It refers to any institutional unit
in any sector, including households and their individual members, according to the Oslo Manual, Revision 4 (OECD
Eurostat 2018).
Intellectual property: Creations of the mind including inventions, literary and artistic works, and symbols, names, images,
and designs used in commerce. Industrial intellectual property includes patents, utility models, trademarks, and industrial
designs. Intellectual property covered by copyright includes literary, artistic, and musical works. Available at https://
www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/. Accessed March 2021.
International patents: These are original patents that have been issued by any international jurisdiction, adjusted to count
only the first issuance of a series or family of related patents. The unit of measurement is a patent family that shares a
single original invention in common. All subsequent patents in a family refer to the first patent filed, or priority patent and
the indicator provides an unduplicated count of original or priority patents in any individual jurisdiction.
Invention: Any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful
improvement thereof (U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 2020).
Knowledge transfer: The process by which technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied
and used in another place for the same or a different purpose. This transfer can occur freely or through exchange and be
deliberate or unintentional. Technology transfer represents a specific case of knowledge transfer that involves the
transfer of knowledge embedded in technology.
Mask work: “A series of related images, however fixed or encoded (1) that have or represent the predetermined three-
dimensional pattern of metallic, insulating, or semiconductor material present or removed from the layers of a
semiconductor chip product; and (2) in which series the relation of the images to one another is that each image has the
pattern of the surface of one form of the semiconductor chip product.” The definition is provided in the Semiconductor
Chip Protection Act (SCPA) of 1984. Available at https://www.copyright.gov/circs/circ100.pdf. Accessed March 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  60
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): An international organization headquartered in Paris,
France. At the time of publication, the 38 member countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Among its many activities, OECD
compiles social, economic, and science and technology (S&T) statistics for all member and selected nonmember
countries.
Patent family: See international patents.
Patenting intensity: Number of patents per population in a geographic location.
Priority patent: The first patent filed in a family of subsequent patents that refers to the original patent. The original filing
may be domestic or from another jurisdiction.
Technical field in patents: Chemistry: Biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, organic fine chemistry, microstructural and
nanotechnology, chemical engineering, macromolecular chemistry and polymers, basic materials chemistry, materials,
metallurgy, surface technology, coating, environmental technology, food chemistry. Electrical engineering: Computer
technology, electrical machinery, apparatus and energy, semiconductors, digital communication, telecommunications,
audio-visual technology, basic communication processes, IT methods for management. Mechanical engineering: Other
special machines, engines, pumps, and turbines, transport, mechanical elements, machine tools, textile and paper
machines, thermal processes and apparatus, handling. Instruments: Medical technology, measurement, analysis of
biological materials, optics, control. Other categories: Civil engineering, other consumer goods, furniture, games.
Technology transfer: The process by which technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied
and exploited in another place or for another purpose. In the federal setting, technology transfer is the process by which
existing knowledge, facilities, or capabilities developed under federal R&D funding are used to fulfill public and private
needs.
Trademark: A word, phrase, symbol, design, or a combination thereof, that identifies and distinguishes the source of the
goods of one party from those of others. In this report, trademark refers to both goods and services.
Trade secret: Information that fulfills all of the following requirements, as defined by the USPTO: “Either actual or potential
independent economic value by virtue of not being generally known, has value to others who cannot legitimately obtain
the information, and is subject to reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy.” Available at https://www.uspto.gov/ip-
policy/trade-secret-policy. Accessed March 2021.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent: As defined by the USPTO, a property right granted by the U.S.
government to an inventor “to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention throughout the
United States or importing the invention into the United States” for a limited time in exchange for public disclosure of the
invention when the patent is granted. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/glossary. Accessed 15
June 2021.
Utility patent: Intellectual property protection for a potentially useful, previously unknown, and non-obvious invention.
Young firm: A business enterprise that is 5 years old or younger.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  61
Key to Acronyms and Abbreviations
ABS: Annual Business Survey
COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019
CRADA: Cooperative R&D Agreement
DOC: Department of Commerce
DOD: Department of Defense
DOE: Department of Energy
EPO: European Patent Office
EU: European Union
INPADOC: International Patent Documentation
MERS: Middle East respiratory syndrome
mRNA: Messenger Ribonucleic Acid
NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NCSES: National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
NSF: National Science Foundation
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OSS: Open-Source Software
PCT: Patent Cooperation Treaty
R&D: Research and Development
S&E: Science and Engineering
SARS: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
SBIR: Small Business Innovation Research
STTR: Small Business Technology Transfer
UK: United Kingdom
USDA: U.S. Department of Agriculture
USPTO: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
WIPO: World Intellectual Property Organization
WIR: Women Inventor Rate

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  62
References
 
Arora A, Belenzon S, Sheer L. 2017. Back to Basics: Why Do Firms Invest in Research? NBER Working Paper 23187.
AUTM. Statistics Access for Technology Transfer Database (version 4.2). Accessed February 2021.
AUTM. 2021. AUTM Licensing Activity Survey. Available at https://autm.net/surveys-and-tools/surveys/licensing-survey/
2020-licensing-survey. Accessed February 2021.
Bell A, Chetty R, Jaravel X, Petkova N, Van Reenan J. 2018. Who Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of
Exposure to Innovation. NBER Working Paper. Available at http://www.equality-of-opportunity.org/assets/documents/
inventors_paper.pdf. Accessed 1 June 2021.
Carlino G, Kerr W. 2015. Agglomeration and Innovation. The Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 5(2015):349–
404. Elsevier Press.
Castaldi C, Block J, Flikkema M. 2020. Why and When Do Firms Trademark? Bridging Perspectives from Industrial
Organization, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship. Industry and Innovation 27(1–2):1–10.
Decker P, Haltiwanger J, Jarmin R, Miranda J. 2014. The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic
Dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28:3–24. Available at
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.3.3. Accessed October 2021.
De Loecker J, Eeckhout J, Mongey S. 2021. Quantifying Market Power and Business Dynamism in the Macroeconomy.
NBER Working Paper 28761.
de Rassenfosse, G, Dernis H, Guellec, D Piccic, L, and Pottelsberghe de la Potteriee, B. 2013. The Worldwide Count of
Priority Patents: A New Indicator of Inventive Activity. Research Policy 42(3):720–737.
Elsevier. Scopus Abstract and Citation Database (tabulated by Science-Metrix). Available at https://www.elsevier.com/
solutions/scopus. Accessed May 2021.
European Patent Office. Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) (tabulated by Science-Metrix). Available at
https://www.epo.org/searching-for-patents/business/patstat.html. Accessed October 2021.
Fink C, Khan M, Zhou H. 2015. Exploring the Worldwide Patent Surge. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 25(2):
114–42.
Grossman G, Helpman E. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Greenhalgh C, Rogers M, Schautschick P, Sena V. 2011. Trade Mark Incentives. UK Intellectual Property Office. Research
Paper Report No. 2011/1. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2710619. Accessed 15
June 2021.
Hall B, Jaffe A. 2018. Measuring Science, Technology, and Innovation: A Review. Annals of Science and Technology Policy
2(1):1–74.
Heigl F, Kieslinger B, Paul J, Uhlik J, Dörler D. 2019. Opinion: Toward an International Definition of Citizen Science.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 116(17): 8089-8092.
Holdren JP. 2013. Increasing Access to the Results of Federally Funded Scientific Research. Memorandum from the Office
of Science and Technology Policy. Available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/
ostp/ostp_public_access_memo_2013.pdf. Accessed April 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  63
Karikó K, Buckstein M, Ni H, Weissman D. 2005. Suppression of RNA Recognition by Toll-Like Receptors: The Impact of
Nucleoside Modification and the Evolutionary Origin of RNA. Immunity 23(2):165–175. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.immuni.2005.06.008. Accessed 15 June 2021.
Lamb YN. 2021. BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 Vaccine: First Approval. Drugs 81(4):495–501. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40265-021-01480-7. Accessed 15 June 2021.
Lerner J, Nanda R. 2020. Venture Capital’s Role in Financing Innovation: What We Know and How Much We Still Need to
Learn. NBER Working Paper 27492. Available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27492. Accessed September 2021.
Malone RW, Felgner PL, Verma IM. 1989. Cationic Liposome-Mediated RNA Transfection. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 86(16):6077–6076. Available at https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
86.16.6077. Accessed 15 June 2021.
Martin BR. 2016. Twenty Challenges for Innovation Studies. Science and Public Policy 43(3):432–450. Available at https://
doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scv077. Accessed 1 June 2021.
Martinez G, Raffo J, Saito K. 2016. Identifying the Gender of PCT Inventors. WIPO Economic Research Paper 33. Available
at https://www.wipo.int/publications/en/details.jsp?id=4125. Accessed July 2021.
Millot V. 2009. Trademarks as an Indicator of Product and Marketing Innovations. Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) Science, Technology, and Industry Working Papers 2009/06. Available at https://doi.org/
10.1787/224428874418. Accessed October 2021.
Miranda J, Zolas N. 2017. Measuring the Impact of Household Innovation Using Administrative Data, in Measuring and
Accounting for Innovation in the Twenty-first Century. NBER Press. Cambridge.
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). 2018. Business Research and Development 2018. Detailed
Statistical Tables NSF 21-312. Alexandria, VA: National Science Foundation. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/
nsf21312.
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). 2021. Annual Business Survey Description. Alexandria, VA:
National Science Foundation. Available at https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvyabs/#sd&tabs-1.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce. 2019. Federal Laboratory
Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2016: Summary Report to the President and the Congress. Available at https://
www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2019/10/30/fy2016_fed_lab_tech_transfer_rept_fina_9-10-19.pdf. Accessed 10
January 2021.
National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Library of Medicine. PubMed. Available at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
Accessed 9 September 2021.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2020. Higher Education in Science and Engineering.
NSB-2019-7. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20197.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2021a. Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons. NSB-2021-4. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20214.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2021b. Average Annual Federal Small Business Innovation
Research Funding per $1 Million of Gross Domestic Product. Science and Engineering Indicators: State Indicators.
Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/indicators/states/indicator/ave-sbir-funding-per-1-million-state-gdp.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2021c. Venture Capital Disbursed per $1 Million of Gross
Domestic Product. Science and Engineering Indicators: State Indicators. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://
ncses.nsf.gov/indicators/states/indicator/venture-capital-per-1-million-state-gdp.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  64
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2010. The OECD Innovation Strategy: Getting a Head
Start on Tomorrow. Paris: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd.org/berlin/45331377.pdf. Accessed 15 June
2021.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2014. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook
2014. Paris: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/oecd-science-
technology-and-industry-outlook-2014_sti_outlook-2014-en. Accessed 1 June 2021.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2019. Declaration on Public Sector Innovation.
Available at https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0450. Accessed 15 June 2021.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2020. Measuring Public Sector Innovation Why, When,
How, for Whom and Where to? Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of the European Union and OECD. Available at
https://oecd-opsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Measuring-Public-Sector-Innovation-Part-5b-of-Lifecycle.pdf.
Accessed 17 February 2021.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2021. OECD Science, Technology and Innovation
Outlook. Available at https://doi.org/10.1787/25186167. Accessed 9 September 2021.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Eurostat. 2018. Oslo Manual 2018: Guidelines for
Collecting, Reporting and Using Innovation Data. 4th ed. Paris.
PitchBook Data, Inc. Venture Capital and Private Equity Database. Accessed September 2021.
Planes-Satorra S, Paunov C. 2017. Inclusive Innovation Policies: Lessons from International Case Studies. OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers 2017/02. OECD Publishing, Paris. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
a09a3a5d-en. Accessed 1 June 2021.
Robbins C, Korkmaz G, Guci L, Santiago Calderón J, Kramer B. 2021. A First Look at Open-Source Software Investment in
the United States and in Other Countries, 2009–2019. Available at https://iariw.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/robbins-
paper.pdf.
Rosenberg N. 1983. Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge University Press.
Seip M, Castaldi C, Flikkema M. 2019. A Taxonomy of Firm-Level IPR Application Practices to Inform Policy Debates.
Laboratory of Economics and Management Working Paper 2019/03. Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa.
Available at https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/203093/1/1047757427.pdf. Accessed 15 June 2021.
Shackelford B, Kindlon A; National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). 2021. Nondisclosure
Agreements, Trade Secrets, and Trademarks Considered Very Important to More U.S. Businesses than Were Patents or
Copyrights in 2017. NSF 22-305. Alexandria, VA: National Science Foundation. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/
nsf22305.
Shepherd WG. 1979. The Economics of Industrial Organization. Prentice Hall.
Shneiderman B. 2018. Twin-Win Model: A Human-Centered Approach to Research Success. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 115(50):12590–94. Available at https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1802918115. Accessed 1 June 2021.
Sichel D, von Hippel E. 2019. Household Innovation and R&D: Bigger Than You Think. Review of Income and Wealth.
Available at https://doi.org/10.1111/roiw.12477. Accessed 1 June 2021.
Small Business Administration. SBIR-STTR Award Analytic Dashboard. Available at https://www.sbir.gov/analytics-
dashboard?view_by=Year. Accessed August 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  65
Søndergaard HA, Thøgersen J. 2021. The Value Priorities of Consumer Innovators. Science and Public Policy 48(5):679–
696. Available at https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scab040. Accessed September 2021.
SRI International. 2020. White Paper on Citizen Science.
Thigpen C, Funk C. 2020. Younger, More Educated U.S. Adults Are More Likely to Take Part in Citizen Science Research.
Available at https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/06/25/younger-more-educated-u-s-adults-are-more-likely-to-
take-part-in-citizen-science-research/. Accessed 14 June 2021.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2020. Vintage 2020 County Population Totals. Available at https://www.census.gov/programs-
surveys/popest/technical-documentation/research/evaluation-estimates/2020-evaluation-estimates/2010s-counties-
total.html. Accessed June 2021.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2021. Business Dynamics Statistics. Available at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/
bds.html. Accessed March 2021.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2021. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS). Available at:
https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/international/the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states-cfius.
Accessed 15 June 2021.
U.S. General Services Administration (GSA). Federal Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Catalog, tabulated by SRI
International in February 2021. Available at https://citizenscience.gov. Accessed February 2021.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). PatentsView (tabulated by Science-Metrix). Available at https://
patentsview.org. Accessed June 2021.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2020. 2104 Requirements of 35 U.S.C. 101 [R-10.2019]. Available at https://
www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s2104.html. Accessed August 2021.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2021a. Trademarks and Patents in China: The Impact of Non-Market Factors on
Filing Trends and IP Systems. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/USPTO-
TrademarkPatentsInChina.pdf. Accessed 12 September 2021.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2021b. Modification of COVID-19 Prioritized Examination Pilot Program.
Available at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/09/03/2021-19114/modification-of-covid-19-prioritized-
examination-pilot-program. Accessed 13 September 2021.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), Office of the Chief Economist. 2020. Progress and Potential: 2020 Update on
U.S. Women Inventor-Patentees. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/OCE-DH-Progress-
Potential-2020.pdf. Accessed September 2021.
von Graevenitz G, Graham SJH, Myers A. 2019. Distance (Still) Hampers Diffusion of Innovations. CEPR Working paper.
Available at https://www.qmul.ac.uk/busman/media/sbm/research/researchcentres/cgr/CGRWP98.pdf. Accessed 16
June 2021.
von Hippel E, Krogh GV. 2003. Open-Source Software and the “Private-Collective” Innovation Model: Issues for
Organization Science. Organization Science 14(2):209–223.
The World Bank. World Bank Country and Lending Groups. Available at https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/
knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups. Accessed May 2021.
World Health Organization. 2021. COVID-19 Vaccine Tracker and Landscape. Available at https://www.who.int/
publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid-19-candidate-vaccines. Accessed 9 September 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  66
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). 2020a. Statistics Database (tabulated by Science-Metrix). Available at
https://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/help/. Accessed March 2021.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). 2020b. World Intellectual Property Indicators 2020. Available at https://
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_941_2020.pdf. Accessed 16 June 2021.
Zhou H, Sandner PG, Martinelli SL, Block JH. 2016. Patents, Trademarks, and Their Complementarity in Venture Capital
Funding. Technovation 47:14–22. Available at https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0166497215000796. Accessed 16 June 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  67
Notes
 
1 This corresponds to the USPTO criteria for a utility patent of new, non-obvious, and useful.
2 Population data come from U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau 2021.
3 This adjustment is discussed in greater detail in the Technical Appendix and the methodology report prepared by
Science-Metrix.
4 Name matching (disambiguation) for this analysis is based on a 6.2 million name database for 182 countries, created
using country-level sets of name dictionaries (Martinez, Raffo, and Saito 2016).
5 OSS licenses allow developers to share their software with the public so that others can use, modify, and extend the
original computer software programs. Proprietary software, by contrast, is generally not accessible for modification and is
not available for use free of charge.
6 The biological and biomedical sciences contributions to patenting take place both before and during the COVID-19
pandemic.
7 As a membership-based organization, its coverage is less than complete; the values reported can be considered a lower
boundary.
8 Within these agreements, protected CRADA information means generated information that would have been proprietary
had it been obtained from a nonfederal entity instead of from the U.S. federal government.
9 Both the Department of Energy (DOE) and the Department of Defense (DOD) support startups. However, neither
department reported startup support to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) during 2012–2016.
10 Businesses with one to nine employees are now surveyed on innovation activities with the Annual Business Survey-1
(ABS) questionnaire. Businesses with 10 or more employees are surveyed with the ABS-2, which focuses on innovation,
technology, intellectual property, and business owner characteristics but not on research and development.
11 Trademarks are assigned to geographic locations based on the county of residence of the trademark holders. To
avoid double counting, this report uses fractional counts for trademarks shared by holders in multiple locations; a county
receives partial credit for a trademark based on the number of trademark holders who reside in that county divided by all
the holders of that trademark. Less than 3% of trademarks are assigned to more than one county.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  68
Acknowledgments and Citation
 
Acknowledgments
The National Science Board extends its appreciation to the staff of the National Science Foundation and to the many
others, too numerous to list individually, who contributed to the preparation of this report.
This report was produced under the leadership of Amy Burke, Program Director, Science and Engineering Indicators
Program of the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES); Emilda B. Rivers, Director, NCSES; and
Vipin Arora, Deputy Director, NCSES.
The report benefitted from extensive contributions from NCSES staff. Matthew Williams provided advice on statistical
issues. Carol Robbins and Karen White served in administrative roles. May Aydin, Catherine Corlies, and Rajinder Raut
coordinated the report’s publication process and managed the development of its digital platform. Christine Hamel and
Tanya Gore conducted editorial and composition review.
SRI International, Center for Innovation Strategy and Policy, assisted with report preparation. Jessica Avery, Claire
Lecornu, and Lucien Randazzese of SRI International all provided especially large contributions to the report. Science-
Metrix provided data preparation and content analysis. Vladimir Lopez-Bassols assisted with editorial and composition
review. Nathan Yates at RTI International provided editing services. Nancy Gough at BETAH Associates and Michelle
Goryn at SRI International provided editorial assistance. Staff at Penobscot Bay Media, LLC (PenBay Media), created the
report site. The following persons and agencies reviewed this report:
Carolina Castaldi, Utrecht University
Jennifer Kuan, California State University, Monterey Bay
Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland
Tom Guevara, Indiana University
Bureau of Economic Analysis
Office of Science and Technology Policy
National Science Foundation
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
National Institute for Standards and Technology
The National Science Board is especially grateful to the Committee on National Science and Engineering Policy for
overseeing preparation of the volume and to the National Science Board Office, under the direction of John Veysey, which
provided vital coordination throughout the project. Nadine Lymn led the outreach and dissemination efforts. Reba
Bandyopadhyay and Portia Flowers served as Board Office Liaisons to the committee. Carol Robbins, May Aydin, and
Anne Emig were the Executive Secretaries.
Citation
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2022. Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation. Science and
Engineering Indicators 2022. NSB-2022-4. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20224/.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2022-4  69
Contact Us
 
To report an issue with the website, please e-mail ncsesweb@nsf.gov. For questions about the National Science
Foundation (NSF), please visit the NSF help page at https://nsf.gov/help/. To see more from the National Science Board,
please visit https://nsf.gov/nsb/.
Report Author
Carol Robbins
Senior Analyst
Science & Engineering Indicators Program
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
crobbins@nsf.gov
NCSES
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
National Science Foundation
2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite W14200
Alexandria, VA 22314
Tel: (703) 292-8780
FIRS: (800) 877-8339
TDD: (800) 281-8749
ncsesweb@nsf.gov
