
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
NATIONAL SCIENCE BOARD
SCIENCE & ENGINEERING INDICATORS 2024
Innovation
Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation
NSB-2024-1
February 29, 2024
This publication is part of the 2024 edition of the Science and Engineering Indicators (Indicators) suite of
reports. Indicators is prepared under the guidance of the National Science Board by the National Science
Foundation’s National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. The Indicators suite consists of a
summary report called The State of U.S. Science and Engineering, more-detailed thematic reports with
supporting data, and a data tool that provides state-level indicators.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  3
Table of Contents
 
7Executive Summary
8Introduction
10Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas
10Contributors to U.S. Patent Activity
13The Geography of U.S. Patenting
21Global Trends in Patenting Activity
23Global Patenting Activity in Artificial Intelligence
27Counting Women as Patented Inventors
29Knowledge Transfer Indicators: Putting Information to Use
29Business Collaborations and Patent Citations to Published Literature
31Publications Cited in Patents
32Federal Publications Cited in Patents
32Startup Companies and University Knowledge Transfer Activities
35Federal Government Knowledge Transfer Support
40Innovation Indicators: Introducing New Products and Processes
40Small Business Innovation Research
42Venture Capital and Innovation
45Trademarks: U.S. Trends
48Business Innovation
51Conclusion
52Glossary
52Definitions
53Key to Acronyms and Abbreviations
55References
60Notes

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  4
61Acknowledgments and Citation
61Acknowledgments
61Citation
62Contact Us
62Report Author
62NCSES
63Correction(s)
List of Sidebars
37Federal Support for Open Science and Public Engagement in Science
26Patenting That Addresses CHIPS and Science Act Technologies
14Patenting That Addresses Environmental Sustainability
List of Tables
INV-1 Indicators of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation used in this thematic report and their sources 9
INV-2 USPTO utility patent and publication metrics for selected federal departments or agencies: 2022 32
INV-3 University technology licenses or license options executed, by company characteristic: 2011, 2016, and 2021 34
INV-A USPTO patents granted to selected regions or countries in environmental sustainability technologies: 2022 16
INV-B USPTO utility patents granted in critical technology categories: 2022 26
INV-C Cumulative federally sponsored public science projects on CitizenScience.gov, by federal department or
agency: 2022
38
INV-D Knowledge products posted by selected federal agencies: 2020 39
List of Figures
INV-1 USPTO utility patents granted to owners, by nationality and U.S. sector: 2002–22 10
INV-2 USPTO utility patents granted to inventors, by selected region, country, or economy: 2000–22 11
INV-3 USPTO utility patents granted in semiconductors, by selected country or economy: 2022 12
INV-4 USPTO utility patents granted to inventors per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2022 14
INV-5 PCT applications for selected regions, countries, and economies: 2000–22 22
INV-6 PCT applications for selected technology areas, by selected region, country, or economy: 2022 23
INV-7 Worldwide utility patents in AI granted to inventors, by selected country or economy: 2000–22 24
INV-8 Worldwide granted utility patents in AI techniques, functional applications, and application fields, by selected
country: 2000–22
25

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  5
INV-9 Inventors with female names on granted USPTO patents, by technology area: 2000–22 27
INV-10 Inventors with female names on granted USPTO patents, by technology area and issue year: 2000–22 28
INV-11 Business sector publications coauthored with academic, government, and foreign institutions: 2008 and 2022 30
INV-12 Citations of U.S. academic S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by S&E field of the articles cited: 2022 31
INV-13 Annual economywide business startups and startups with licensed university technology: 2000–21 33
INV-14 Startup companies based on licensed university technology, by company location: 1999–2021 35
INV-15 Invention disclosures reported by selected agencies: FYs 2011–20 36
INV-16 New CRADAs signed by selected agencies: FYs 2011–20 37
INV-17 Firms receiving Phase II SBIR or STTR awards: 2012–22 41
INV-18 Firms receiving Phase II SBIR or STTR awards, by awarding agency: 2012–22 42
INV-19 Venture capital investment received by firms headquartered in the United States, by deal stage: 2003–22 43
INV-20 Firms headquartered in the United States receiving venture capital investment, by Census region: 2003–22 44
INV-21 Firms headquartered in the United States receiving venture capital investment, by industry: 2013–22 45
INV-22 U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by business sector: 2022 46
INV-23 Registered USPTO trademarks per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2022 47
INV-24 Registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country, or economy: 2008–22 48
INV-25 Share of U.S. companies reporting product innovation, by selected industry: 2018–20 49
INV-26 Share of U.S. companies reporting product innovation: 2016–18, 2017–19, and 2018–20 50
INV-A Specialization of patents among technology areas for the top 5 regions or countries in environmental
sustainability technology: 2011–22
17
INV-B Share of environmental sustainability technology patents for the top 5 regions or countries, by technology
area: 2011–22
18
INV-C Location quotients of U.S. states for patents in climate change mitigation technologies in energy generation,
transmission, or distribution: 2011–22
19
INV-D Location quotients of U.S. states for patents in environmental management: 2011–22 20

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  7
Executive Summary
 
Key takeaways:
U.S. patenting and trademark activities are concentrated in certain areas of the country, with the highest rates on the
East Coast and West Coast, around the Great Lakes, and in parts of the Southwest.
Internationally, China and the United States are granted the highest numbers of artificial intelligence (AI) utility patents,
with China’s AI patents primarily granted in machine learning.
Consistent with the overall increase of international collaboration in peer-reviewed literature, the largest increase in
collaboration for U.S. business-authored publications is with international authors.
Among patents on technologies for climate change mitigation and adaptation issued by the Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO), those for climate change mitigation in energy generation, transmission, and distribution account for
the highest number granted to inventors in each of the five most active countries or regions.
About 190,000 USPTO utility patents were granted in 2022 in technology areas that correspond to CHIPS and Science
Act technologies, almost half of which were granted to U.S. inventors.
As an indicator of knowledge flow, biological and biomedical sciences publications and health sciences publications
are by far the most cited by patent documents.
The number of university licenses and license options granted to private sector entities has increased 50% in the last
decade.
Peer-reviewed publications from authors at the Department of Health and Human Services received more citations in
patent documents than any other federal agency over the period from 2013 to 2022.
At the federal agency level, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Department of Energy
(DOE) report the highest numbers of invention disclosures in each year from 2011 through 2020, an indicator of
invention prior to patenting.
In 2009, only DOE, the Department of Commerce, and NASA used open-source platforms to share software with other
users; by 2023, 26 federal departments and agencies did so.
Venture capital investment dropped globally in 2022 after reaching record levels in 2021.
The incidence of product innovation in the United States decreased between 2017 and 2020, driven by decreases in
smaller companies with service sector innovation.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  8
Introduction
 
Governments, academia, and business all contribute to the activities that comprise the innovation process. Through
intellectual property protection measures, successful business research and development (R&D) incorporates new
knowledge into new products and processes while attempting to prevent useful new knowledge from spreading to rivals
(Arora, Belenzon, and Sheer 2017). In contrast, many government, academic, and nonprofit institutions create new
knowledge with the intention of sharing it widely to support innovation—for example, through publications, data sets, and
technology transfer agreements. New knowledge created by R&D activities across all sectors takes different forms,
including scientific literature meant to be published and private knowledge meant to be kept secret. Both forms may
contribute to inventions or innovations.
The distinction between invention and innovation is an important one; implementation of new ideas as products or
processes with real-world applications is what separates inventions from innovations. In this report, an invention is
defined as any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, including any new and useful
improvement thereof (USPTO 2020). By contrast, an innovation is “a new or improved product or process (or combination
thereof) that differs significantly from the unit’s previous products or processes and that has been made available to
potential users (product) or brought into use by the unit (process)” (OECD/Eurostat 2018). The activities along the way
constitute innovation activities.
This report starts with invention, ends with innovation, and situates knowledge transfer activities in between. Where
applicable, this report also addresses critical and emerging technologies using current and relevant typologies. For
example, the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC 2022) includes advanced manufacturing, biotechnologies,
and artificial intelligence (AI) as current examples of critical and emerging technologies, among other priorities. This
report provides tabulations of international AI patents and of Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patents granted
based on two different typographies: environmental sustainability technology areas, and technology areas named in the
CHIPS and Science Act of 2022.
The geography of innovation is addressed in this report through county-level data on patenting and trademarking for the
United States, as well as regional breakdowns where possible, such as with venture capital data. These units of geography
are imperfect: for economic processes, metropolitan areas may be preferred; for political processes, congressional
districts may be preferred. While resource and space limitations have guided this choice in this thematic report, machine-
readable patent and trademark data sets provided with this report allow users to combine county-level data for their own
purposes.
Similarly, the central role of the business sector in innovation activity has shaped the available data, and most indicators
of innovation address the private sector. Notwithstanding the availability of data, however, a diverse set of actors who
span the economic sectors of the economy contributes to the creation of innovative output, including universities,
government agencies, and individuals. Not every topic that matters has relevant high-quality data available for this report.
The innovation indicators in this report include both direct, survey-based measures of innovation output from the
businesses and also indirect innovation indicators connected to venture investment and trademarks. Self-reported
company data on the introduction of new or significantly improved products are reported based on a joint National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) and Census Bureau survey that now contains three consecutive years of
data.
Access to financing is an essential component of the translation of new knowledge into innovations. Venture capital is a
particularly important indicator of innovation because venture investors tend to invest in companies whose products, they
believe, have a significant likelihood of achieving market success. Venture capital–backed firms that become publicly
traded are more likely to have recorded R&D expenditures compared to publicly traded firms that were not originally

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  9
venture backed (Lerner and Nanda 2020). In this regard, data on U.S. and global venture capital investment trends,
provided by PitchBook, can be viewed as leading indicators of the innovative output expected from startups and from
early investments to create innovations. The data sources for the indicators used in this report are shown in Table INV-1
and rely on both administrative data and survey data and on public as well as private data sources.
Table INV-1
Indicators of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation used in this thematic report and their sources
(Indicator and source)
Section Indicator Source
Invention Indicators: Protecting
Useful Ideas
Number of USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. owners, by type of grantee USPTO
Number of world patent applications WIPO
Number of USPTO utility patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy USPTO
Number of USPTO patents granted to inventors in selected countries, by field of
technology USPTO
Number of USPTO utility patents, by U.S. county USPTO
Proportion of patent applications by country with at least one woman applicant WIPO
International patents granted in artificial intelligence EPO
Knowledge Transfer: Making
Information Available
Number of coauthored business sector publications with other academic, government,
and foreign institutions
USPTO
Elsevier Scopus
Total number of U.S. establishment startups Census Bureau
Total number of startups launched annually based on university technology AUTM
Number of technology transfer activities supported by federal laboratories, by selected
agency NIST
Number of peer-reviewed publications by federal authors Elsevier Scopus
Number of patents issued to federal inventors USPTO
Number of open-source projects sponsored by federal agencies
GSA
Code.gov
Number of federally sponsored public science projects on CitizenScience.gov, by
agency
GSA
CitizenScience.gov
Innovation: Introducing New
Products and Processes
SBIR and STTR program funding awards
Small Business
Administration
Venture capital investments PitchBook
U.S. companies introducing product innovation
NCSES
Census Bureau
Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by business sector USPTO
EPO = European Patent Office; GSA = General Services Administration; NCSES = National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; NIST =
National Institute of Standards and Technology; SBIR = Small Business Innovation Research; STTR = Small Business Technology Transfer; USPTO =
Patent and Trademark Office; WIPO = World Intellectual Property Organization.
Source(s):
NCSES; RTI International; 1790 Analytics; SRI International; Science-Metrix
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  10
0
Invention Indicators: Protecting Useful Ideas
 
Contributors to U.S. Patent Activity
USPTO patent records provide industry, technology areas, and geographical inventor information for all patents registered
in the United States, including patents granted to individuals and foreign entities. Most patent topics in this report cover
only inventions protected by utility patents. Design patents are included in this report in the coverage of patenting by
gender; plant patents were last covered in Science and Engineering Indicators 2020 (see Indicators 2020 report “[2020]
Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation”). More information on the patent data used in this report is available in the
Technical Appendix provided with this report, and detailed methodological information is provided in Science-Metrix
(2024).
The USPTO awarded 325,000 utility patents in 2022, of which 152,000 (47%) were assigned to domestic owners (Table
SINV-1). Obtaining and defending a patent incurs significant costs; among U.S. assignees (the U.S. entities to whom
inventors assign the rights of ownership), private owners—which are primarily businesses—receive by far the most patents
(86%), while individual filers and those in academia and government account for much smaller shares (Figure INV-1). In
the wake of the global pandemic, the total number of USPTO utility patents awarded annually to U.S. owners has declined
since 2019, when 179,000 were granted. Patents assigned to U.S. businesses declined 15% between 2019 and 2022, in
contrast to a general upward trend from 2000 to 2019 (Table SINV-1).
Figure INV-1
USPTO utility patents granted to owners, by nationality and U.S. sector: 2002–22
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Patents are allocated according to patent ownership information. Patents are credited on a fractional-count basis (i.e., for patents with collaborating
institutions, each institution receives fractional credit on the basis of the proportion of inventors from participating institutions). Unclassified
patents are not shown. See Table SINV-1 and the Technical Appendix for additional detail.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  11
0
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
As commercial activities increasingly cross international borders, rising rates of foreign patenting reflect the desire of
foreign firms to seek patent protection in multiple international jurisdictions (Fink, Khan, and Zhou 2015). Foreign owners
were assigned rights to 53% of USPTO utility patents in 2022, an increase from 44% in 2000 (Table SINV-1). In contrast
with ownership information, the addresses of inventors provide information about where inventors reside. The European
Union (EU-27) and Japan continue to account for the largest numbers of foreign inventors (Figure INV-2). In 2020, the
number of patents granted to inventors from China exceeded the number of patents granted to inventors from South
Korea for the first time ever. Inventors with addresses in China received about 28,000 patents in 2022 (Figure INV-2).
According to a USPTO report, the growth in USPTO patents granted to China is driven by nonmarket factors as well as by
traditional market factors. The report identifies nonmarket factors such as university and government subsidies for
patenting that can exceed the cost of filing the patent. These subsidies are often higher for patents granted in foreign
jurisdictions (USPTO 2021).
Figure INV-2
USPTO utility patents granted to inventors, by selected region, country, or economy: 2000–22
EU-27 = European Union; USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based
on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. China includes Hong Kong. The United States includes Puerto Rico and all other U.S.
territories. See Table SINV-4 for additional countries.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  12
2.6
27.7
6.7
12.3
7.8
2.6
3.2
14.8
6.9
6.9
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
United States
Taiwan
Japan
South Korea
China
Germany
France
Singapore
Austria
Belgium
Semiconductor patent share of total patents (%)
.
.
3,674
3,262
3,077
2,723
2,165
418
201
156
93
91
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
United States
Taiwan
Japan
South Korea
China
Germany
France
Singapore
Austria
Belgium
Number of semiconductor patents granted
United States
Taiwan
Japan
South Korea
China
Germany
France
Singapore
Austria
Belgium
Science and Engineering Indicators
USPTO utility patents granted in semiconductors make up 5% of total 2022 patents. Inventors who were resident in the
United States received the largest number of USPTO patents in semiconductors, which is identified as a critical or
emerging category (NSTC 2022) (Figure INV-3). In addition to inventors from the United States, the highest numbers of
USPTO utility patents in semiconductors were issued to inventors from Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, and China.
Semiconductor utility patents make up more than a quarter of the USPTO patents received by inventors from Taiwan
(Figure INV-3). A public-use file contains data on USPTO patents granted by five broad technology areas and tabulated in
Table SINV-4 through Table SINV-9 (File USPTO patents, by county and technical field).
Figure INV-3
USPTO utility patents granted in semiconductors, by selected country or economy: 2022
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based
on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. China includes Hong Kong. The United States includes Puerto Rico and all other U.S.
territories. See Table SINV-10 for additional regions, countries, and economies.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed September 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  13
As presented above, these data provide rich geographic and technological detail; however, patent data represent just a
portion of all the ways that economically valuable ideas and inventions are protected by their owners. Nondisclosure
agreements, trade secrets, trademarks, and copyrights are used by U.S. businesses in addition to utility and design
patents (Shackelford and Kindlon 2021).
The Geography of U.S. Patenting
Invention is a market-driven activity and tends to take place where skilled human capital and other inputs are relatively
abundant. As new knowledge spreads, it produces localized growth benefits or spillovers that drive additional growth
(Grossman and Helpman 1991). States that have relatively high proportions of workers with a bachelor’s degree or higher
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) are located primarily on the East Coast and West Coast of
the United States and in the U.S. Midwest (see Indicators 2022 report “[2022] The STEM Labor Force of Today: Scientists,
Engineers, and Skilled Technical Workers”). As skilled labor and other inputs accumulate, a location’s initial advantages
grow over time relative to other locations, leading to different growth rates and economic outcomes. Because patent
documents include the addresses of both the inventor and the patent owner, patent data provide an indicator of the
location of inventive activity.
County-level patenting intensity is measured in this thematic report by the location of the inventor of utility patents
granted per 1,000 population. Counties with high patenting intensity are concentrated in the United States along the
coasts and in parts of the Great Lakes region, Texas, and the Rocky Mountains (Figure INV-4). This geographic
distribution corresponds to indicators of knowledge- and technology-intensive (KTI) industries, in which California is the
single largest producer of KTI industry output, followed by Texas, Washington, and New York (see Indicators 2022 report
“[2022] Production and Trade of Knowledge- and Technology-Intensive Industries”). In 2022, Santa Clara County in
California’s Silicon Valley region had the highest patenting intensity. Three of the country’s top five counties in patenting
intensity were in the San Jose–San Francisco–Oakland combined statistical area. The top three counties in 2022 for
patenting intensity are Santa Clara in California, followed by Fairfax City in Virginia and San Mateo County in California
(Figure INV-4).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  14
Figure INV-4
USPTO utility patents granted to inventors per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2022
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
USPTO patents are allocated to counties according to the address for each inventor listed on a patent. U.S. addresses were geocoded to 3,143 U.S.
counties according to U.S. states, U.S. cities, and ZIP Codes appearing in these addresses. Because of the absence of ZIP Codes for most U.S.
addresses in the patent data, coassignment to multiple U.S. counties occurred for addresses accounting for about 14% of all U.S. patent counts,
mostly in populous cities encompassing multiple counties. Further manual disambiguation was performed based on information available to assign
some of the ambiguous addresses to a single county. When more than one county remained for an address on a patent, the fraction of the patent
associated to this address was split equally across all the counties. See File USPTO patents, by county and technical field and the Technical
Appendix for additional detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023. Population data from the Census
Bureau, https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest/tables/2020-2022/counties/totals/co-est2022-pop.xlsx, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The county patenting data files released with this report provide additional detail by technology area, showing, for
example, the high rate of transportation technology patenting in Oakland and Wayne Counties in Michigan (File USPTO
patents, by region, country, economy, and technical field). In 2022, 64% of all counties had at least one patent granted to
inventors in that county.1 Beyond geography, the technological detail in the patent documents makes it possible for new
insights into environmental management and mitigation. The sidebar Patenting That Addresses Environmental
Sustainability provides country and U.S. state data on the patents granted and geographic specialization in these
technologies. A supplemental workbook released with this report provides annual country-, state-, and county-level data
for 1998–2022 (File USPTO environmental and critical technology patent data).
SIDEBAR PATENTING THAT ADDRESSES ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Patenting That Addresses Environmental Sustainability

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  15
Patenting that addresses climate change through mitigation and adaptation is of increasing interest internationally,
and renewable energy generation is identified as a critical or emerging technology (NSTC 2022). Based on an analysis
of Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) utility patents, the foreign locations where inventors have the highest
numbers of patents that address environmental sustainability through climate change mitigation and adaptation are
the European Union (EU-27), China, Japan, and South Korea. Climate change mitigation in energy generation,
transmission, or distribution has the highest numbers of USPTO patents granted.
The following analysis of utility patents that address this topic is based on a set of classification codes developed by
the United Nations and the European Patent Office. This classification system for patent documents identifies climate
change mitigation technologies (CCMT), climate change adaptation technologies (CCAT), and environmental
management technologies that explicitly and cleanly correspond to existing patent classification systems that are
used by USPTO and the World Intellectual Property Organization (Veefkind et al. 2012; Haščič and Migotto 2015). In
2022, more than 32,000 USPTO utility patents were granted in these environmental technologies, a threefold increase
since 2000 (Table SINV-A). These 10 technologies are classified as follows:
Climate change mitigation in energy generation, transmission, or distribution have the highest numbers of USPTO
patents granted in each of the five most active countries or regions, with a global total of about 7,900 USPTO patents
granted in 2022 (Table INV-A). The classification used for this analysis includes patenting related to a sustainable
ocean economy: 280 such USPTO utility patents were granted in 2022. Additionally, almost 700 patents within these
10 categories address sustainable technologies for agriculture and forestry (Table INV-A).
Environmental management
CCMT in energy generation, transmission, or distribution
CCMT in capture, storage, sequestration, or disposal of greenhouse gases
CCMT in transportation
CCMT in buildings
CCMT in wastewater treatment or waste management
CCMT in the production and processing of goods
CCMT in information and communications technologies
CCAT
Sustainable ocean economy
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  16
Table INV-A
USPTO patents granted to selected regions or countries in environmental sustainability technologies: 2022
(Number)
Technology area World China EU-27 Japan South Korea United States
Environmental management 5,288 295 873 890 268 2,321
CCMT in energy generation, transmission, or distribution 7,943 757 1,103 1,622 1,154 2,544
CCMT in capture, storage, sequestration, or disposal of greenhouse gases 199 7 25 25 11 98
CCMT in transportation 5,170 172 983 1,105 353 2,035
CCMT in buildings 2,317 258 341 325 156 996
CCMT in wastewater treatment or waste management 557 42 88 51 17 262
CCMT in the production or processing of goods 3,975 306 635 710 286 1,542
CCMT in information and communication 3,428 447 260 304 410 1,532
CCAT 2,974 140 364 198 87 1,722
Sustainable ocean economy 280 18 45 19 15 131
Addendum
CCAT in agriculture, forestry, livestock, or agroalimentary production 442 36 38 20 14 262
CCMT in agriculture, livestock, or agroalimentary industries 245 24 31 7 11 134
CCAT = climate change adaptation technology; CCMT = climate change mitigation technology; EU-27 = European Union; USPTO = Patent and
Trademark Office.
Note(s):
USPTO patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. USPTO patents are fractionally allocated among regions, countries,
or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. Patents are classified under the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) classification of patents, which classifies International Patent Classification (IPC) codes under 35 technical fields. IPC
reformed codes take into account changes that were made to the WIPO classification in 2006 under the eighth version of the classification and
were used to prepare these data. However, because PatentsView only provides the original IPC codes as they appeared on patents and not the
IPC reformed codes, current Cooperative Patent Classification codes on patents were converted back to the most recent IPC classification to
prepare these statistics. Fractional counts of patents were assigned to each technological field on patents to assign the proper weight of a
patent to the corresponding technological fields under the classification. Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom was no longer a member of
the EU. China includes Hong Kong. See File USPTO environmental and critical technology patent data.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Along with the number of patents granted, location quotients (LQs) are a useful analytical tool for providing insight
into the technological specialization by region, country, or economy relative to overall size. The LQs here compare
activity in specific technology categories to overall global or national patents in environmental technologies.* For
example, while the presentation shown in Table INV-A shows higher levels of patenting in energy generation,
transmission, or distribution relative to other sustainable technologies, LQs show specialization. For example, an LQ
of 1.5 implies that the location has 50% more activity in a given technology than would be expected based on volume
alone. Inventors from China are more specialized in CCMT related to buildings (1.9) than would be expected, while the
EU-27 (1.3) is more highly specialized in CCMT in transportation, as is Japan (1.4). As shown by LQs closer to 1.0, the
United States is more balanced than other locations in its overall concentration of its patenting by technology area
(Figure INV-A).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  17
Figure INV-A
Specialization of patents among technology areas for the top 5 regions or countries in environmental sustainability technology:
2011–22
CCAT = climate change adaptation technology; CCMT = climate change mitigation technology; EU-27 = European Union.
Note(s):
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. USPTO patents are fractionally
allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. Patents are classified under
the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) classification of patents, which classifies International Patent Classification (IPC) codes
under 35 technical fields. IPC reformed codes take into account changes that were made to the WIPO classification in 2006 under the eighth
version of the classification and were used to prepare these data. However, because PatentsView only provides the original IPC codes as they
appeared on patents and not the IPC reformed codes, current Cooperative Patent Classification codes on patents were converted back to the
most recent IPC classification to prepare these statistics. Fractional counts of patents were assigned to each technological field on patents to
assign the proper weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields under the classification. Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom
was no longer a member of the EU. China includes Hong Kong. United States includes Puerto Rico and all other U.S. territories.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The percent distribution of each region’s or country’s patenting across environmental sustainability technology areas
shows where its patenting activity is greatest. For each of the five leading regions or countries in environmental
sustainable technology patenting, climate change mitigation technologies in energy generation, transmission, or
distribution represent the largest share of patents (Figure INV-B).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  18
0
Figure INV-B
Share of environmental sustainability technology patents for the top 5 regions or countries, by technology area: 2011–22
CCAT = climate change adaptation technology; CCMT = climate change mitigation technology; EU-27 = European Union.
Note(s):
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. USPTO patents are fractionally
allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. Patents are classified under
the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) classification of patents, which classifies International Patent Classification (IPC) codes
under 35 technical fields. IPC reformed codes take into account changes that were made to the WIPO classification in 2006 under the eighth
version of the classification and were used to prepare these data. However, because PatentsView only provides the original IPC codes as they
appeared on patents and not the IPC reformed codes, current Cooperative Patent Classification codes on patents were converted back to the
most recent IPC classification to prepare these statistics. Fractional counts of patents were assigned to each technological field on patents to
assign the proper weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields under the classification. Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom
was no longer a member of the EU. China includes Hong Kong. United States includes Puerto Rico and all other U.S. territories.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Based on inventor addresses within the United States, the state of New Mexico has the highest degree of
specialization in patents in the critical or emerging technology of renewable energy generation and storage among all
states. Inventors in New Mexico are 2.5 times more specialized in this technology than would be expected (Figure
INV-C). For environmental management technologies, Louisiana has the highest degree of specialization, more than
2.1 times what would be expected (Figure INV-D). Supplementary tables and public-use data sets released with this
report provide annual state-level USPTO patent counts by sustainability category that will allow for additional analysis
(File USPTO environmental and critical technology patent data).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  19
 
Figure INV-C
Location quotients of U.S. states for patents in climate change mitigation technologies in energy generation, transmission, or
distribution: 2011–22
CCMT = climate change mitigation technology.
Note(s):
Patents are attributed to states using a fractional count based on the states listed as the residences of inventors. Location quotient measures
each state's concentration of patenting in a technology area among sustainable technologies relative to the U.S. concentration of patenting in
that area.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  20
 
Figure INV-D
Location quotients of U.S. states for patents in environmental management: 2011–22
Note(s):
Patents are attributed to states using a fractional count based on the states listed as the residences of inventors. Location quotient measures
each state's concentration of patenting in a technology area among sustainable technologies relative to the U.S. concentration of patenting in
that area.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  21
* A location quotient of 1.0 in each technology means that particular subregion and the entire area are equally
specialized in the technology based on patents granted. A location quotient greater than 1.0 means that the subregion
is relatively more specialized than the entire area in that technology. A public-use file released with this report
provides region, country, or economy data along with U.S. state-level data for these patents (File USPTO
environmental and critical technology patent data).
Global Trends in Patenting Activity
In contrast to the U.S.-focused data presented earlier in this report from USPTO, this section presents global trends using
a more inclusive global data set that is based on patent application information rather than patents granted. Patent
applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) show the number of inventions whose owners have sought
international protection across many countries or economies simultaneously. The data source in this section is the World
International Property Organization (WIPO) database and the unit of measurement is a patent application filed under the
PCT. This treaty allows a patent to gain protection in multiple jurisdictions, and use of these application data avoids
double counting across these jurisdictions. These data have different characteristics compared with USPTO data on
patents granted. Compared with patents filed solely in an inventor’s home jurisdiction, fewer patents are filed under the
PCT. Other differences are that not all applications are subsequently granted and that not all patented inventions appear
in the application data. Also, these PCT application data are classified based on the receiving office, which usually
corresponds to the location of the inventor. Taiwan is not a party to the PCT, so it is not represented in the data. Table
SINV-11 through Table SINV-16 provide data by country and broad technology area.
China, the United States, the EU-27, and Japan are leading jurisdictions in terms of the number of PCT applications filed in
2022. Of these, the fastest growth over the preceding 10-year period occurred in China (330%) and South Korea (110%). In
2015, the United States had more than twice the number of PCT applications as China, the two countries had similar
application numbers in 2020, with China’s applications exceeding those of the United States for the first time in 2021
(Figure INV-5).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  22
0
Figure INV-5
PCT applications for selected regions, countries, and economies: 2000–22
EU-27 = European Union; PCT = Patent Cooperation Treaty.
Note(s):
Figures are based on publication year of PCT applications. Countries are allocated using the receiving office for each PCT application, which is
based on the location of the inventors. In cases where PCT applications are filed directly with the World Intellectual Property Organization via its
international bureau, the priority country of the earliest document in the same patent family is used (i.e., where the first application in the patent
family was filed). Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom was no longer a member of the EU. China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; EP Bibliographic Data (EBD), European Patent Office; 1790 Analytics, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
International Patents, by Broad Technology Category
Chemistry, electrical engineering, instruments, mechanical engineering, and other fields are broad categories for the
technology areas of utility patents (Table SINV-3). At the national level, both chemistry and instruments were technology
areas with greatest participation by U.S. inventors. In 2022, inventors from the United States were granted 27% of
chemistry patents and 27% of instruments patents; inventors from China had 37% of the PCT patents granted in electrical
engineering (Figure INV-6).

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  23
0
Figure INV-6
PCT applications for selected technology areas, by selected region, country, or economy: 2022
EU-27 = European Union; PCT = Patent Cooperation Treaty.
Note(s):
Figures are based on publication year of PCT applications. China includes Hong Kong. Technology areas are derived from the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO) concordance of International Patent Classifications to technology categories available at https://www.wipo.int/
ipstats/en/. Countries are allocated using the receiving office for each PCT application, which is the location of the inventors. In cases where PCT
applications are filed directly with WIPO via its international bureau, the priority country of the earliest document in the same patent family is used
(i.e., where the first application in the patent family was filed). See Table SINV-11 through Table SINV-16.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; EP Bibliographic Data (EBD), European Patent Office; 1790 Analytics, accessed July 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Global Patenting Activity in Artificial Intelligence
This section examines trends over time in AI patenting across regions, countries, and economies. AI is identified as a
critical or emerging technology (NSTC 2022). The technology-level analysis of international patent family data from the
European Patent Office’s Global Patent Index database covers years since 2000 with AI patents granted, rather than
applications, as the unit of measurement.
This presentation contains 13 categories based on 3 distinct dimensions of AI patents that are categorized using a
taxonomy developed by the Association for Computing Machinery and employed in previous studies of AI patenting by
WIPO (WIPO 2019). AI techniques are defined by how the invention works, with categories such as machine learning, logic
models, and fuzzy logic. Functional applications reflect what the invention does, with categories including computer vision,
control systems, measurement and testing, and knowledge representation (Table SINV-18). Application fields reflect
where the invention is designed to be used, with categories of life sciences, transportation, energy management, and
industrial and manufacturing applications.2

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  24
0
Based on this taxonomy, about 190,000 AI patents were granted worldwide between 2000 and 2022 (Table SINV-17). In
2022, about 40,000 AI patents were granted to inventors with addresses from China; the comparable figure for the United
States was about 9,000 (Figure INV-7). Machine learning, personal devices and computing, and computer vision were
categories that had the highest number of patents received, based on technology, application, or field. Among the United
States, China, Japan, and South Korea, inventors with addresses in China had the highest number of patents in all three
categories (Figure INV-8). Within the United States, inventors received the highest number of patents in machine learning,
followed by personal devices and telecommunications applications (Figure INV-8).3
Figure INV-7
Worldwide utility patents in AI granted to inventors, by selected country or economy: 2000–22
AI = artificial intelligence.
Note(s):
Granted patents for all patent authorities are allocated according to patent inventorship information. AI patents are identified and divided into
categories using filters consisting of Cooperative Patent Classifications and International Patent Classifications plus keywords and phrases. Details
of these filters can be found at https://github.com/georgetown-cset/1790-ai-patent-data/. Only the first granted patent in each patent family is
counted so as to avoid double counting the same invention. Patent families containing no granted patents are excluded. Country assignments are
based on fractional counting of countries of residence of inventors as listed in the associated record from the Global Patent Index. If no inventor
countries are listed, the priority country is used (i.e., where the first application in the patent family was filed). China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; European Patent Office Global Patent Index; 1790 Analytics, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  25
0
Figure INV-8
Worldwide granted utility patents in AI techniques, functional applications, and application fields, by selected country: 2000–22
AI = artificial intelligence.
Note(s):
Granted patents for all patent authorities are allocated according to patent inventorship information. AI patents are identified and divided into
categories using filters consisting of Cooperative Patent Classifications and International Patent Classifications plus keywords and phrases. Details
of these filters can be found at https://github.com/georgetown-cset/1790-ai-patent-data/. Only the first granted patent in each patent family is
counted so as to avoid double-counting the same invention. Patent families containing no granted patents are excluded. Country assignments are
based on fractional counting of inventor locations as listed in the associated record from the Global Patent Index. If no inventor countries are listed,
the priority country is used (i.e., where the first application in the patent family was filed). China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; European Patent Office Global Patent Index; 1790 Analytics, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  26
In addition to AI, there are critical or otherwise important technologies within the technologies such as chemistry,
electrical engineering, or instruments. USPTO patenting activity for the technologies funded by Congress in recent
legislation is described in the sidebar Patenting That Addresses CHIPS and Science Act Technologies.
SIDEBAR PATENTING THAT ADDRESSES CHIPS AND SCIENCE ACT TECHNOLOGIES
Patenting That Addresses CHIPS and Science Act Technologies
The CHIPS and Science Act, passed in 2022, provides research funding in several technical areas identified as
important to competitiveness and national security. While semiconductor technology was highlighted in coverage of
the act, several technological areas were identified within the legislation (Congress.gov 2022). Table INV-B provides
preliminary and prototype classifications and patent counts for 2022 for the technologies within the legislation that
link to technologies within existing utility patent classes. By this measure, there were 190,000 Patent and Trademark
Office utility patents granted in 2022 in technology areas that correspond to CHIPS and Science Act technologies,
about half of which were granted to U.S. inventors. By this measure, over half of the patents granted in artificial
intelligence, machine learning, autonomy, and related advances; robotics, automation, and advanced manufacturing;
biotechnology, medical technology, genomics, and synthetic biology; and data storage, data management, distributed
ledger technologies, and cybersecurity, including biometrics, were awarded to inventors who resided in the United
States. A public-use file released with this report provides region, country, or economy data along with U.S. state-level
data for the 10 subcategories shown in Table INV-B (also see File USPTO environmental and critical technology
patent data).
Table INV-B
USPTO utility patents granted in critical technology categories: 2022
(Number)
Category Worldwide U.S. inventors
All critical technology categories 192,754 85,739
Artificial intelligence, machine learning, autonomy, and related advances 16,288 8,245
High-performance computing, semiconductors, and advanced computer hardware and software 42,064 19,529
Quantum information science and technology 2,019 907
Robotics, automation, and advanced manufacturing 4,450 2,356
Natural and anthropogenic disaster prevention or mitigation 15,402 6,146
Advanced communications technology and immersive technology 28,056 13,384
Biotechnology, medical technology, genomics, and synthetic biology 21,853 11,366
Data storage, data management, distributed ledger technologies, and cybersecurity, including biometrics 18,246 9,551
Advanced energy and industrial efficiency technologies, including (but not limited to) the purposes of electric
generation 29,150 8,968
Advanced materials science, including composites 2D materials, other next-generation materials, and related
manufacturing technologies 15,226 5,287
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are credited on a fractional-count basis (i.e., for patents with
collaborating institutions, each institution receives fractional credit on the basis of the proportion of inventors from participating institutions).
See File USPTO environmental and critical technology patent data.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  27
0
5
Counting Women as Patented Inventors
The information required to register a patent generally includes an inventor’s name but not their gender. Thus,
comprehensive longtime sources of information on patenting by gender are scarce. Computer matching of inventor
names to their most likely gender is often used along with verification against data sets of known inventors and their
gender.4 Analyses like these have shown that patenting activity is unevenly distributed among men and women, with men
much more likely to be inventors named on granted patents (USPTO, Office of the Chief Economist 2020; WIPO 2020).
This section reports on the prevalence of women as inventors in design patents and utility patents in broad technology
areas. The analysis is based on USPTO data and uses the WIPO Gender Name Dictionary drawn from a data set of
worldwide patents to assign inventors to a gender (Martinez et al. 2021). The methodology is further described in the
Technical Appendix to this report. For all patents granted from 2000 through 2022, the share of inventors who are women
is highest in chemistry-related utility patents and design patents (based on female names) on patents granted (14% each),
and mechanical engineering has the smallest share (5%) over the 22-year period (Figure INV-9). Across all fields, women
have increased their participation in patenting, with the fastest increase in electrical engineering, where the share of
women inventors increased from 5% in 2000 to 10% in 2022. The category with the highest share in 2022 is chemistry
(18%), followed closely by design patents (16%) (Figure INV-10).
Figure INV-9
Inventors with female names on granted USPTO patents, by technology area: 2000–22
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
The analysis of patenting by gender is based on patents granted by USPTO. Fractional counting of inventors is used, with the credit for each patent
divided equally between the inventors. The gender of inventors is determined using the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) World
Gender-Name Dictionary Version 2.0, available at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/WGND. The process for matching inventor names to
genders is based on the WIPO guidelines described at https://tind.wipo.int/record/45020?ln=en. Technology areas are based on the WIPO
concordance of International Patent Classifications to technology categories available at https://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  28
0
2
4
6
8
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; USPTO Bulk Data Storage System (BDSS); 1790 Analytics, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Figure INV-10
Inventors with female names on granted USPTO patents, by technology area and issue year: 2000–22
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
The analysis of patenting by gender is based on patents granted by USPTO. Fractional counting of inventors is used, with the credit for each patent
divided equally between the inventors. The gender of inventors is determined using the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) World
Gender-Name Dictionary Version 2.0, available at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/WGND. The process for matching inventor names to
genders is based on the WIPO guidelines described at https://tind.wipo.int/record/45020?ln=en. Technology areas are based on the WIPO
concordance of International Patent Classifications to technology categories available at https://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; USPTO Bulk Data Storage System (BDSS); 1790 Analytics, accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Academic research on the share of women as inventors has highlighted factors outside of the technology field. Once
women are in the science and engineering (S&E) workforce, factors that are associated with the increased participation of
women as patented inventors include collaboration with university advisors in graduate programs. This collaboration is
associated with higher rates of first-time patenting by women, identifying a role for mentorship at universities in the
invention process (Delgado and Murray 2021, 2022).
1 A patent count of less than 1.0, but more than 0.0, can occur when there are two or more different county addresses on
the patent. The patent count is divided across the relevant counties.
2 A patent may be included in more than one category within a dimension and also be classified along more than one
dimension. For example, a patent describing a machine learning-based image processing tool for an autonomous vehicle
will be counted in all three dimensions (i.e., AI technique: machine learning; functional application: computer vision;
application field: transportation).
3 These categories are not mutually exclusive.
4 These analyses are based on algorithms that match names to the usual gender associated with that name, an inexact
but still useful process.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  29
Knowledge Transfer Indicators: Putting Information to Use
 
Both formal R&D and informal activities like learning-by-doing produce new knowledge. Knowledge transfer encompasses
the many activities whereby newly created knowledge is shared with those who can apply it, develop it, or transform it into
new outputs, inventions, and innovations. That knowledge can be transferred through the dissemination of the information
embedded in documented R&D outputs, such as publications, patents, and software; through direct organization-to-
organization interaction and collaboration; and via both formal and informal interaction among individuals. Coauthorship
of research publications across business, academia, and government is used to measure the transfer of knowledge
across sectors. Citations to the peer-reviewed scientific literature appearing in patents provide evidence of the application
of scientific knowledge in inventions and highlight knowledge transfer within and between sectors (such as between
universities and businesses).
Knowledge embedded in technology constitutes a special case of knowledge transfer often referred to as technology
transfer and is tracked for universities as well as for the federal government. Indicators discussed in this thematic report
include both the narrower case of technology transfer and the broader category of knowledge transfer.
The institutional performers of R&D activity are covered in detail in the forthcoming Indicators 2024 report “[2024]
Research and Development: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons” and the Indicators 2024 report “[2024] Academic
Research and Development.” Knowledge transfer also includes transfer between individuals, transfer from one
organization to another, and transfer to new fields of study and domains of application.
Business Collaborations and Patent Citations to Published Literature
All parties have the potential to benefit when business, academia, and government agencies collaborate. Through
collaboration, the participants share access to advanced tools, emerging technologies, unpublished or private data, and
technical expertise. Coauthorship of peer-reviewed publications in the Scopus database is an indicator of such
collaborations. The Scopus database is an abstract and citation database of scholarly literature that is also used in the
Indicators 2024 report “[2024] Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.”
To calculate collaboration activity, each author is credited once for their participation in the article. On this basis, more
than 51,000 publications included authors with U.S. business affiliations.5 In 2022, over 45,600 (90%) of business-
authored publications were coauthored with authors from other institutions, up from about 44,000 (75%) in 2008 (Figure
INV-11). Collaborations between U.S. business authors and U.S. academic authors grew by almost 4,000 publications to
more than 29,000 in 2022 (Figure INV-11). There were about 7,000 coauthored publications with U.S. government and U.S.
business institutions, about 13% of all business-authored publications in 2022 (Figure INV-11).

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  30
0
Figure INV-11
Business sector publications coauthored with academic, government, and foreign institutions: 2008 and 2022
Note(s):
Publications are classified by their publication year and are assigned to a sector based on the institutional address(es) listed within the author
information. Each publication is credited to a sector based on the institution type. Each collaborating institution is credited as coauthoring in this
figure when the listed authors come from different sectors. The publication is counted as one count in the sector (whole counting). Publications can
be authored by collaborators in multiple sectors; thus, the sum of publications coauthored with various sectors can exceed the total. Publications
from unknown U.S. sectors are not shown.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Elsevier; Scopus abstract and citation database, accessed May 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Consistent with the overall increase of international collaboration in peer-reviewed literature (NSB 2021a), the largest
increase in collaboration for business-authored publications is with international authors. Among the business-
coauthored publications, this category of cooperation grew the most. From 2008 to 2022, the number and proportion of
publications coauthored between U.S. businesses and foreign collaborators increased, reaching about 21,500 (42%) of all
business-authored publications in 2022 versus about 14,500 in 2008 (25%) (Figure INV-11). Publications, citations, and
collaborations in peer-reviewed literature are covered in greater depth in the Indicators 2024 report “[2024] Publications
Output: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.”

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  31
0
Publications Cited in Patents
When peer-reviewed publications from any author are cited in the reference section of patent documents, the linkage
between the two documents indicates that the scientific literature may have contributed knowledge to the patented
invention. Analyses of these citations show the disproportionately large role of academic publications in the nonpatent
literature cited in patents, pointing to the importance of academic research in invention (Table SINV-21). Of almost
634,000 citations to S&E articles in patents in 2022, about 30% were to articles from the U.S. academic sector (Table
SINV-21).6
By field of science, biological and biomedical sciences are cited more often than any other S&E field in U.S.-granted
patents; this is true for U.S. authors affiliated with academia, business, or federal laboratories. However, the scale of these
citations varies substantially among sectors: for S&E publications in the biological and biomedical sciences, those with
academic authors were cited by patents 61,000 times, while those publications with business authors were cited 13,000
times and those with federal authors were cited 5,000 times (Table SINV-21). In addition to biological and biomedical
sciences, health sciences publications are cited next most frequently in patent documents. U.S. academic authors
accounted for almost 50,000 health sciences citations in patent documents (Figure INV-12).
Figure INV-12
Citations of U.S. academic S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by S&E field of the articles cited: 2022
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
See Table SINV-21 for additional detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2023; Elsevier, Scopus abstract and
citation database, accessed May 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  32
Federal Publications Cited in Patents
At the department or agency level and across disciplines, the Department of Energy (DOE) has the highest number of peer-
reviewed publications by federal government authors, about 19,100 in 2022, followed by Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) with 14,000. Publications by federal government authors affiliated with HHS received about 16,000
citations in patent documents in 2022, and those affiliated with DOE authors received the next highest number of citations
with about 11,100 citations (Table INV-2). The role of these agencies in knowledge transfer is illustrated by the relative
magnitudes of these publications and patent citations compared with the magnitude of USPTO patents granted to
inventors from federal departments or agencies. Only inventors affiliated with the Department of Defense (DOD) and DOE
were granted more than 400 utility patents in 2022 (Table INV-2).
Table INV-2
USPTO utility patent and publication metrics for selected federal departments or agencies: 2022
(Number)
Metric description USDA DOC DOD DOE HHS DHS DOI DOT VA EPA NASA
Publications cited in granted USPTO patents, by author's
affiliated agency 1,689 1,505 4,614 11,116 16,063 61 134 29 6,027 127 1,277
Publications with authors from U.S. federal agencies, by
author's affiliated agency 6,422 4,209 9,160 19,100 13,923 157 2,725 181 13,422 672 6,303
Patents granted to U.S. federal agencies, by inventor's agency
of employment 22 37 465 425 147 43 1 1 64 8 73
DHS = Department of Homeland Security; DOC = Department of Commerce; DOD = Department of Defense; DOE = Department of Energy; DOI =
Department of the Interior; DOT = Department of Transportation; EPA = Environmental Protection Agency; HHS = Department of Health and Human
Services; NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration; USDA = Department of Agriculture; USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office; VA =
Department of Veterans Affairs.
Note(s):
Data are presented by calendar year. Patents are credited on a whole-count basis (i.e., each participating federal agency on a patent is credited for
the entire patent, regardless of coassignments). Articles are credited on a whole-count basis (i.e., each participating federal agency on an article
receives credit for the entire article, regardless of coauthors). The sum of the individual federal agencies may exceed the total across agencies
because articles may have authors from multiple federal agencies.
Source(s):
Science-Metrix using USPTO data indexed in PatentsView, accessed June 2023; Science-Metrix from data provided in Scopus (Elsevier) database,
accessed May 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Startup Companies and University Knowledge Transfer Activities
Change in the number of business establishments created in a given year is an aspect of business dynamism that reflects
both broad economic factors as well as the impact of technology transfer to the business sector. For example, in several
of the years preceding the global financial crisis, more than 600,000 U.S. establishments were less than 1 year old; that
number of new establishments has not been reached in any year since 2008 (Figure INV-13).

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  33
0 0
Figure INV-13
Annual economywide business startups and startups with licensed university technology: 2000–21

Note(s):
Business startups are establishments born within the last 12 months. University startups are based on a survey question that asks how many
startup companies were formed in a given year that were dependent on the licensing of the institution's technology for initiation. Startup companies
reported by universities in AUTM data refer only to those companies that were formed in the reporting year specifically to develop the technology
being licensed.
Source(s):
Census Bureau, Business Dynamics Statistics, economywide data through 2021, available at https://data.census.gov/table?
q=BDSTIMESERIES.BDSEAGE&tid=BDSTIMESERIES.BDSEAGE&hidePreview=true, accessed October 2023; and AUTM, Statistics Access for
Technology Transfer (STATT) Database, Version 4.2, accessed April 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
A small subset of those startups is formed specifically to develop and license university technology. These startups
represent a technology commercialization component of knowledge transfer by university faculty, staff, and students. In
addition, for many technology-based startups, possession of a patent or an exclusive option to license a patent is an
important factor in attracting external financing. In each year between 2015 and 2021, more than 1,000 businesses were
reported as startups by universities in AUTM data (Figure INV-13). These startup companies reported by universities in
AUTM data refer to companies that were formed in the reporting year specifically to develop the technology being
licensed (AUTM 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  34
Patented inventions can be licensed directly to an external party, or an exclusive option can be granted for licensing rights
at a future date. According to AUTM, U.S. universities issued almost 8,800 new licenses or options in 2021. Increasingly,
university technology licenses or license options are executed by startups and small firms (those with fewer than 500
employees). In 2011, startups and small businesses accounted for 69% of new licenses or options—by 2021, this portion
had increased to 78% (Table INV-3). Most university-related startups are in the home state of the research university
(66%) (Figure INV-14). The number of university-related startups launched annually increased steadily through 2017 and
reached a peak of 1,125 in 2020 before declining slightly in 2021 (Figure INV-14).
Table INV-3
University technology licenses or license options executed, by company characteristic: 2011, 2016, and 2021
(Number)
Company characteristic 2011 2016 2021
All licenses, total active 6,085 7,726 10,409
New licenses or options executed 5,862 7,165 8,769
Startups 898 1,415 1,480
Small companies 3,124 3,598 5,344
Large companies 1,840 2,152 1,945
Note(s):
AUTM collects data on invention and patent-related activities of its member universities and hospitals. Responding institutions may report for any
12-month period ending in the identified year. Startup companies reported by universities in AUTM data refer only to those companies that were
formed in the reporting year specifically to develop the technology being licensed. Counts of licenses to startups and small companies are mutually
exclusive. Small companies are those with fewer than 500 employees.
Source(s):
AUTM, AUTM Licensing Survey (various years), accessed April 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  35
0
Figure INV-14
Startup companies based on licensed university technology, by company location: 1999–2021
Note(s):
The survey question asks how many startup companies were formed in a given year that were dependent on the licensing of the institution's
technology for initiation. Startup companies reported by universities in AUTM data refer only to those companies that were formed in the reporting
year specifically to develop the technology being licensed.
Source(s):
AUTM, Statistics Access for Technology Transfer (STATT) Database, Version 4.2, accessed April 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Federal Government Knowledge Transfer Support
Multiple indicators provide insight into how federal R&D contributes to innovation through knowledge transfer. Federal
laboratories facilitate knowledge transfer in various ways, with several measures reported annually by congressional
mandate. These measures include R&D spending, invention disclosures, patenting, licensing, and peer-reviewed
publications (NIST 2022). Additionally, federal laboratories and federal science-funding agencies support startups in many
ways, including through material transfer agreements and collaborative research. Researchers at these laboratories are
required to report the development of novel techniques and technologies to laboratory management as invention
disclosure. While each federal agency has its own process for determining when a researcher is required to file an
invention disclosure, the disclosure form is designed to provide the laboratories with sufficient notice to file for patent
protection on promising inventions. Two agencies (DOE and National Aeronautics and Space Administration) accounted
for over 60% of federal agency invention disclosures in each year from 2011 to 2020, with collectively more than 3,000
disclosures each year (Figure INV-15).

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  36
0
Figure INV-15
Invention disclosures reported by selected agencies: FYs 2011–20
DOC = Department of Commerce; DOD = Department of Defense; DOE = Department of Energy; HHS = Department of Health and Human Services;
NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration; USDA = Department of Agriculture.
Note(s):
Federal employees are required to report inventions in a reasonable time through the agency’s Invention Disclosure Form. The number of invention
disclosures refers to the number of Invention Disclosure Forms submitted to an agency’s management during the fiscal year.
Source(s):
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Federal Lab Technology Transfer Database, October 2022, and Summary Report on Federal
Laboratory Technology Transfer FY2020, https://www.nist.gov/tpo/reports-and-publications, accessed May 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Collaborative relationships include cooperative R&D agreements (CRADAs), of which the traditional type involves an
agreement between a federal agency or laboratory and one or more nonfederal organizations. The nonfederal
organization (a business, nonprofit, or other government entity) provides some of its own resources for research activity.
In exchange, the nonfederal organization is granted the option for an exclusive license to the resulting technologies, if any.
Nontraditional CRADAs provide material transfer or other forms of federal technical assistance that may result in
protected information. The Department of Commerce (DOC) consistently enters into the highest number of CRADAs
(Figure INV-16) due to the cooperative research activity at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, which
works closely with industry on standards development, metrology techniques, and other research areas with high
commercial relevance (DOC 2020). In addition to the technology transfer metrics described here, federal agencies also
release data sets and open-source software, and they engage in science activities with the public (see sidebar Federal
Support for Open Science and Public Engagement in Science).

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  37
0
Figure INV-16
New CRADAs signed by selected agencies: FYs 2011–20
CRADA = Cooperative Research and Development Agreement; DOC = Department of Commerce; DOD = Department of Defense; DOE = Department
of Energy; HHS = Department of Health and Human Services; NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration; USDA = Department of
Agriculture.
Note(s):
A CRADA is an agreement between a federal laboratory and a nonfederal entity that is executed under the authority of 15 U.S. Code § 3710a and
that includes a research plan or statement of work.
Source(s):
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Federal Lab Technology Transfer Database, October 2022, and Summary Report on Federal
Laboratory Technology Transfer FY2020, https://www.nist.gov/tpo/reports-and-publications, accessed May 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
SIDEBAR FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR OPEN SCIENCE AND PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT IN SCIENCE
Federal Support for Open Science and Public Engagement in Science
The White House and other federal agencies declared 2023 to be a year of open science, highlighting information
about federal activities that share the results of its research and other work (OSTP 2023). In addition to knowledge
creation through publications and patenting, the federal government also shares knowledge it has supported through
access to data sets and to software code. As of October 2023, more than 250,000 data sets have been shared
(Data.gov). The measures reported here are from federal websites; they are not based on mandatory reporting or
comprehensive administrative data. As a result, they can be understood as a limited view of the activity described.
Open-source software provides a form of knowledge transfer through the sharing of digital tools. The U.S. federal
government supports the sharing of software developed by and for the federal government through its federal Source
Code Policy, which provides a framework for government code to be released and reused through open-source
software licensing. This policy allows software created for narrow federal purposes to be reused elsewhere within the

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  38
federal government, multiplying its value to the government, and outside of the federal government, further extending
its impact. In 2009, only the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of Commerce, and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) used open-source platforms to share software with other users; by 2023, 26 federal
departments and agencies did so, based on data at Code.gov.
Federal support for individuals to participate in organized science activity is one way that knowledge about the
conduct of science is transferred to the lay public to use. Public science, or citizen science, is a form of open
collaboration in which individuals or organizations participate as volunteers in scientific progress. Data collected from
the U.S. federal government website CitizenScience.gov (https://www.citizenscience.gov/#) provide the number of
citizen science projects per agency. While the federal government uses the term citizen science as well as
crowdsourcing, this thematic report has adopted the more accurate and inclusive term public science.
In 2023, there were 579 projects sponsored by U.S. federal agencies and departments and reported on
CitizenScience.gov (Table INV-C). With 174 projects, the National Park Service leads federal agencies and
departments in sponsoring public science projects, followed by the National Science Foundation (with 77 projects)
and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (with 60 projects) (Table INV-C). The sharing of data sets
and of open-source software projects comprise another aspect of open science for the government. As of 2020,
NASA has made publicly available more than 32,000 data sets, and DOE has made public almost 2,000 software
projects (Table INV-D).
Table INV-C
Cumulative federally sponsored public science projects on CitizenScience.gov, by federal department or agency: 2022
(Number)
Sponsor Number
Total 579
National Park Service 174
National Science Foundation 77
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 60
Environmental Protection Agency 47
Geological Survey 44
Department of Agriculture 37
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 28
Forest Service 21
Fish and Wildlife Service 16
Smithsonian Institution 14
National Institutes of Health 12
Department of Energy 8
Department of the Interior 8
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 7
Bureau of Land Management 4
All other U.S. federal projects 22
Source(s):
CitizenScience.gov, tabulated by RTI International, April 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  39
Table INV-D
Knowledge products posted by selected federal agencies: 2020
(Number)
Agency Data sets Software code
DOD 378 17
DOE 2,868 1,948
HHS 2,041 179
NASA 32,089 1,257
DOD = Department of Defense; DOE = Department of Energy; HHS = Department of Health and Human Services; NASA = National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.
Note(s):
Data are cumulative as of March 2020. Data are reported for the agencies whose laboratories have the largest R&D budgets.
Source(s):
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2021, Advancing Commercialization of Digital Products from Federal Laboratories,
Table 7.2, https://doi.org/10.17226/26006; Data.gov; Code.gov.
Science and Engineering Indicators
As individual contributors, developers with federal agency or department affiliations have also made extensive
contributions to open-source software, based on information from the GitHub platform (Table SINV-29). The Indicators
2022 report “[2022] Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation” provides more extensive discussion of agency-specific
information on open-source repositories (NSB Indicators 2022: Table INV-4) as well as information about international
collaboration in the development of open-source software (NSB Indicators 2022: Figure INV-A).
1 These affiliations are identified in the documents through a two-step process that starts with automatic assignment
based on unambiguous words, such as “company,” “university,” or “Canada,” followed by a second step that manually
identifies ambiguous entries.
2 The tabulated data for peer-reviewed publications are from the Scopus database used in the State Indicators report
(NSB 2021b). The same taxonomy of disciplines for fields of S&E and the classification of sectors that produce
publications from that report are used here.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  40
Innovation Indicators: Introducing New Products and Processes
 
The implementation of new ideas in the form of products or processes with real-world applications is what separates
innovations from inventions. Access to financing is an essential component of the translation of new knowledge into
innovations. This section presents a range of indicators of innovation output, starting with data on the funding of
innovation through federal programs and through private venture capital. Often, these two kinds of funding work together,
with federal funding providing the earlier stage of financial capital.
High rates of innovation activity in the business sector indicate a dynamic economy, whether at the local, regional, or
national level (Hall and Jaffe 2018). A key indicator of business innovation activity is the proportion of companies within
an industry that introduce new or significantly improved products and processes. Self-reported industry-level data for the
United States are provided on the introduction of new or significantly improved products and processes by U.S.
businesses, from a joint NCSES and Census Bureau survey.
Trademark registrations from the USPTO “capture the moment at which products or services are introduced into the
market, turning inventions into innovations” (von Graevenitz, Graham, and Myers 2022:227–28). Thus, trademarks
represent another direct measure of innovative output by firms. Compared with patenting, trademarking is easier and less
costly, and it does not have the same requirements regarding novelty (Millot 2009); consequently, small and new
businesses apply for trademarks more frequently than they apply for patents (Greenhalgh et al. 2011; Seip, Castaldi, and
Flikkema 2019). Therefore, trademarks can reveal service, marketing, and organizational innovation that would not
otherwise be captured because the source of innovation is not always tied to technological advances (Castaldi, Block, and
Flikkema 2020).
The central role of the business sector in innovation activity has shaped the available data, and most indicators of
innovation address the private sector. Notwithstanding the availability of data, however, a diverse set of actors that span
the economic sectors of the economy contributes to the creation of innovative output, including universities, government
agencies, and public scientists.
Small Business Innovation Research
One type of federal government support is the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program. SBIR was established
in legislation by the Small Business Innovation Development Act of 1982 (P.L. 97-219) to increase the participation of
small firms in federally funded R&D. Federal agencies with over $100 million per year in extramural research spending
must establish an agency-specific SBIR program, under the framework and guidelines set by the Small Business
Administration (SBA). Over time, the program’s objectives have expanded to include the promotion of participation by
women-owned and socially disadvantaged businesses and to encourage the commercialization of innovations developed
with federal R&D funding. In 1992, Congress established a complementary program, the Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) program, which supports small firms seeking to commercialize technologies developed at universities
and other research institutes.
As of FY 2022, each U.S. federal government agency with over $100 million in R&D expenditures is required to spend 3.2%
of its extramural research budget on its SBIR program. There are currently 11 agencies operating SBIR programs, and 5 of
those agencies also have STTR programs. Agencies with over $1 billion in R&D spending per year must also operate an
STTR program, with funding set at 0.45% of that agency’s extramural budget (SBA 2023b).
SBIR funds are awarded at two levels. From the perspective of funding innovation, Phase II awards provide more direct
assistance to firms seeking to get new products and services to market. Through these Phase II SBIR awards, federal
agencies that fund R&D provide direct support for technology development and commercialization to over 1,000 firms per
year. The number of firms receiving Phase II SBIR and STTR awards each year rose from 1,171 in 2012 to 1,870 in 2022
(Figure INV-17). At the agency and department level, the largest share of awardees was funded by DOD (50%) (Figure
INV-18).

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  41
0
Figure INV-17
Firms receiving Phase II SBIR or STTR awards: 2012–22
SBIR = Small Business Innovation Research; STTR = Small Business Technology Transfer.
Note(s):
Firms receiving multiple SBIR or STTR Phase II awards in the same year are counted only once for that year.
Source(s):
Small Business Administration, SBIR/STTR Award database, accessed August 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  42
0
Figure INV-18
Firms receiving Phase II SBIR or STTR awards, by awarding agency: 2012–22
DOC = Department of Commerce; DOD = Department of Defense; DOE = Department of Energy; HHS = Department of Health and Human Services;
NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration; NSF = National Science Foundation; SBIR = Small Business Innovation Research; STTR =
Small Business Technology Transfer; USDA = Department of Agriculture.
Note(s):
Firms receiving multiple SBIR or STTR Phase II awards in the same year are counted only once for that year. "Other" includes awards from
Department of Education, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Transportation, and Environmental Protection Agency.
Source(s):
Small Business Administration, SBIR/STTR Award database, accessed August 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Venture Capital and Innovation
Venture capital is a particularly important indicator of innovation because venture investors tend to invest in companies
with products that they believe have a significant likelihood of achieving market success. Venture capital-backed firms
that become publicly traded are more likely to have recorded R&D expenditures compared to publicly traded firms that
were not originally venture backed (Lerner and Nanda 2020). In this regard, data on venture capital investment trends can
be viewed as leading indicators of the innovative output expected from startups because those funds are used to create
innovations.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  43
0
Venture capital investment primarily funds high-risk and early stage firms. The funding for venture capital flows from large
institutional investors, called limited partners (e.g., pension funds, university endowments, private equity funds, and
foundations), to venture investors, who then select the firms to support. Early stage firms give up equity ownership shares
in exchange for these investments. These equity shares are not easily traded, so the venture investors (and their limited
partners) only receive compensation when the early stage firm has a public stock offering or is acquired by a larger firm.
Since early stage firms have a high rate of failure, venture investors deploy capital across a portfolio of these firms,
expecting that one successful investment will compensate for the many that yield no returns.  
Worldwide, venture capital investments ranged between $300 billion and $400 billion between 2018 and 2020. In 2021,
however, these investments experienced an unprecedented boom. Global venture investments almost doubled between
2020 and 2021, reaching an all-time high of more than $740 billion. This historic increase in 2021 was followed by a
decrease to about $540 billion in 2022, a decline of 27% (Table SINV-31).
Venture capital investments within the United States followed a similar pattern, with about $350 billion invested in 2021,
followed by a 28% decline to $250 billion in 2022. About $150 billion of venture capital invested in U.S. firms in 2022
involved later-stage funding, a 38% decline from the 2021 peak of $240 billion in 2021 (Figure INV-19). Later-stage
investment capital accounted for over 60% of U.S. venture capital funding in 2022 (Figure INV-19). Although a smaller
share of overall venture capital, seed funding increased 30% between 2021 and 2022, reflecting strength in early stage
companies.
Figure INV-19
Venture capital investment received by firms headquartered in the United States, by deal stage: 2003–22
Note(s):
Deal stage is the stage as reported, based on the maturity of the firm receiving the venture investment.
Source(s):
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, special tabulations, accessed September 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  44
0
Science and Engineering Indicators
Geographically, firms in the western United States continued to account for the largest share of firms receiving venture
capital funding in 2021 and 2022 (45% and 43%, respectively), followed by firms in the Northeast (26% and 26%,
respectively) (Figure INV-20). The rapid increase in venture investment activity in the United States did not affect the
overall geographic concentration of that activity.
Figure INV-20
Firms headquartered in the United States receiving venture capital investment, by Census region: 2003–22
Note(s):
Regions are defined by the Census Bureau for the Economic Census. See https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/economic-census/guidance-
geographies/levels.html.
Source(s):
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, special tabulations, accessed September 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
At the industry level, software firms have accounted for the largest share of firms receiving venture capital investments
each year since 2013. These firms accounted for 43% of firms receiving venture capital investment in 2022, representing
an increase in share of 2.4 percentage points compared to 2013 (Figure INV-21). Health care and biomedical firms were
the next highest in terms of share for 2021 and 2022. Overall, the distribution of firms receiving venture capital funding
each year by industry remained roughly similar from 2013 to 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  45
0
Figure INV-21
Firms headquartered in the United States receiving venture capital investment, by industry: 2013–22
Note(s):
Industry categories are aggregates of PitchBook Primary Industry Codes based on product or service markets. See Table SINV-33.
Source(s):
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, special tabulations, accessed September 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Trademarks: U.S. Trends
Products receiving trademark protection provide an indication of industries with high innovation activity. Trademarking
allows firms that engage in R&D and patenting to appropriate greater returns from their innovations, suggesting a useful
and separate innovation indicator from patenting (Dinlersoz et al. 2018; Castaldi, Block, and Flikkema 2020). In 2022, the
USPTO registered 333,000 trademarks to owners across the world, including 172,000 to U.S. owners (Table SINV-35).
Along with other types of invention and innovation, in the pandemic year of 2020 the number of USPTO trademarks
registered dropped 9% from the year before, rebounding in 2021 (Table SINV-35). Across product types, knowledge-
intensive products and services account for high numbers of trademarks; of the 172,000 U.S. registered trademarks in
2022, the highest numbers are in the categories of leisure, education, and training; scientific research, information, and
communication technology; and management, communications, real estate, and financial services (Figure INV-22). Table
SINV-34 through Table SINV-48 provide product level detail. A supplemental workbook released with this report provides
annual county-level data (File USPTO trademarks, by county and product).

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  46
0
Figure INV-22
U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by business sector: 2022
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information and are fractionally allocated to regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion
of residences of all named holders. Trademarks are classified under the Nice Classification of goods and services, which classifies trademarks
under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services; see https://www.wipo.int/classifications/nice/en/. Fractional counts of trademarks
were assigned to each category to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification. See Table
SINV-34 through Table SINV-47 for other years and countries. See Table SINV-35 for detail on the 10 aggregate business sectors.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Trademark activity is unevenly spread across the United States, with more intensive activity along the coasts, the Rocky
Mountain region, parts of Texas, and the Great Lakes region (Figure INV-23). In 2022, almost 75% of all counties had at
least one trademark issued, making trademark activity more geographically disbursed across the interior of the United
States compared with the regional patenting described in this thematic report’s section Invention Indicators: Protecting
Useful Ideas, in which 64% of counties had at least one patent. The top three counties in 2022 for trademark intensity are
Sheridan County in Wyoming, followed by Teton County, also in Wyoming, and then by New York County in New York
State.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  47
Figure INV-23
Registered USPTO trademarks per 1,000 residents, by U.S. county: 2022
USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
USPTO trademarks are allocated according to holder information. U.S. addresses were geocoded to 3,143 U.S. counties according to U.S. states,
U.S. cities, and ZIP Codes appearing in these addresses. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice Classification of goods and
services, which classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned
to each category to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification. These counts are then grouped
under 10 industry sectors following a mapping defined by Edital. See File USPTO trademarks, by county and product for additional detail.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2023.
Population data from the Census Bureau accessed June 2023 at https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest/tables/2020-2022/counties/
totals/co-est2022-pop.xlsx.
Science and Engineering Indicators
At the international level, the internationalization of commerce has coincided with an increasing share of USPTO
trademarks registered to foreign assignees. The number of foreign-registered USPTO trademarks has grown more rapidly
in recent years than the number of USPTO trademarks registered to U.S. assignees (Figure INV-24). While those assigned
to the United States grew by 12% between 2012 and 2022, the number of USPTO trademarks assigned to China grew from
2,810 to 120,004. For South Korea, the growth rate was 185% (Figure INV-24).

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  48
0
Figure INV-24
Registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country, or economy: 2008–22
EU-27 = European Union; USPTO = Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s):
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information. Trademarks are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on
the proportion of residences of all named holders. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice Classification of goods and services,
which classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned to each
category to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification. See Table SINV-48 for additional
countries. Beginning in 2020, the United Kingdom was no longer a member of the EU. China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis), accessed June 2023.
Science and Engineering Indicators
As noted with USPTO utility patents, factors behind the increase in trademark activity in China include government
subsidies that exceed the cost of filing for foreign trademark applications and government mandates requiring an
increase in trademark filing (USPTO 2021).
Business Innovation
The business innovation activity indicator reported here is the proportion of companies within an industry that report
introducing new or significantly improved products, which can be goods or services. The data reported here are based on
the business innovation survey framework of the Oslo Manual (OECD/Eurostat 2018).7

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  49
0
This analysis includes three consecutive survey years of self-reported business product innovation data, allowing for
analysis over time. Time series analysis necessitates narrowing the focus reported on here to product innovation because
process innovation is measured less frequently. Process innovation was included together with product innovation in the
Indicators 2022 report “[2022] Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation” report section “[2022] Innovation Indicators:
Introducing New Products and Processes.”
In the United States, about 9% of companies introduced a product innovation between 2018 and 2020, based on data
reported through the Annual Business Survey (ABS) (Kindlon and Anderson 2023). Companies in the software publishing
industry have among the highest rates of reported innovation; 42% of companies reported introducing a product
innovation between 2018 and 2020 (Figure INV-25). Although industries employ many different technologies and thus
cannot all be matched one to one, Figure INV-25 shows that companies in the semiconductor and other electronic
components industry, where semiconductor technology is situated, have more than twice the overall innovation rate
compared with all industries (22%).
Figure INV-25
Share of U.S. companies reporting product innovation, by selected industry: 2018–20
Note(s):
Industry classification is based on dominant establishment payroll. Statistics are representative of companies located in the United States. Product-
innovating companies are self-reporting, based on having introduced a new or improved product that differs significantly from the firm's previous
products and that has also been introduced on the market or brought into use by the firm. These products may be goods or services.
Source(s):
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics and Census Bureau, 2021 Annual Business Survey: Data Year 2020, Table 26; Kindlon A,
Anderson G, 2023, Product Innovation Trends 2016–18 to 2018–20: Findings from the Annual Business Survey, NSF 23-331, available at https://
www.nsf.gov/statistics/2023/nsf23331/.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  50
0
5
With the 2020 data year, three consistently measured time periods can be compared for self-reported business product
innovation for U.S. companies. Across three annual surveys, the incidence of product innovation decreased from about
19% for the 3-year period ending in 2018 to 9% for the 3-year period ending in 2020 (Figure INV-26). The recent availability
of expanded innovation data from companies with fewer than 10 employees, known as microbusinesses, in the ABS data
allows for deeper analysis into what kind of companies are accounting for this change in product innovation incidence
over time. Statistically significant decreases took place in service-producing companies rather than those that produce
goods. Further, the decrease in the incidence of service innovation has been concentrated in businesses with fewer than
10 employees (Kindlon and Anderson 2023).
Figure INV-26
Share of U.S. companies reporting product innovation: 2016–18, 2017–19, and 2018–20
Note(s):
Product-innovating companies are self-reporting, based on having introduced a new or improved product that differs significantly from the firm's
previous products and that has also been introduced on the market or brought into use by the firm. These products may be goods or services.
Source(s):
Kindlon A, Anderson G, 2023, Product Innovation Trends 2016–18 to 2018–20: Findings from the Annual Business Survey, NSF 23-331, available at
https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2023/nsf23331/.
Science and Engineering Indicators
1 An alternative approach that surveys for business behavior that is consistent with continuous product and process
improvement systems rather than self-reporting of innovation is described in a recent research paper by Tian, Wojan, and
Goetz (2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  51
Conclusion
 
A dynamic system of innovation activities, including invention, the transfer of knowledge, and the introduction of new
products and processes, generates outcomes that range from new vaccines to counter a pandemic to advances in
machine learning. Historically, participation has tended to be limited to higher-income regions, countries, and economies;
within these locations, participation has tended to be limited to higher-income men. These trends are changing.
Intellectual property indicators, such as patenting and trademarks, show where new products and processes are
emerging. Patenting and trademark activity by middle-income countries is increasing. This increasing participation of
middle-income countries in intellectual property registration and other innovation activities results in both collaboration
opportunities and competition challenges. Additionally, with the global supply chain being reliant on international S&E
capacity, this interconnectedness generates widespread risk in terms of national security, transmission of disease, and
disruption in global and domestic economies.
Both international collaboration and collaboration across sectors within and between countries contribute to globally
important innovation activity. Domestically, annual statistics on knowledge transfer at universities and federal laboratories
show that overall growth in research collaborations, technology licensing, and support for startups were slowed during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
The process of innovation, from R&D to invention to the release of a new product, can be a long one, and recent data
suggest that, overall, the incidence of this activity is declining. Based on self-reported company data, the introduction of a
new product that is significantly different from other products by U.S. businesses as assessed over a 3-year period
declined from 19% in 2017 to 9% in 2020.
The regional and demographic differences in invention activities (patenting) and innovation activities (trademarking) show
that these critical activities are unevenly distributed among demographic groups and among geographic regions. Women
also participate throughout the system, although their numbers are fewer than those for men.
Geographically, county data for the United States on patenting and trademark activity show that the intensity of innovation
activities takes place unevenly across the country, with more dense activity in urban and metropolitan areas, along the
East Coast and West Coast, and in the Northeast. This is consistent with patterns from other countries as well, where R&D,
highly skilled workers, and patenting tend to concentrate in metropolitan areas (Planes-Satorra and Paunov 2017).
Concentration supports local growth while other regions, lacking these attributes, grow more slowly. The
underparticipation of large sections of the population provides an opportunity to increase innovation in multiple
dimensions.
The data highlighted in this report also illustrate shifts in the locations and types of R&D activities and associated outputs.
Chief among these shifts is the rise of China as a global contributor to inventive output. Another clear shift is the growing
role of universities in private sector innovation. The last decade has seen a 50% increase in the number of university
licenses and license options to private sector entities. This growth is due to university technology transfer to startups and
other small companies; however, the scale of this activity relative to the overall economy is small. Invention, knowledge
transfer, and innovation are indispensable to improving national and global health, well-being, and security.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  52
Glossary
 
Definitions
Copyright: A legal protection for original works of authorship, including literary, dramatic, musical, architectural,
cartographic, choreographic, pantomimic, pictorial, graphic, sculptural, and audiovisual creations. Definition from
Copyright Office, https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/definitions.html; accessed March 2023.
Design patent: A grant of a property right to an inventor to protect the visual ornamental characteristics of an article of
manufacture.
Economic sectors: Economic activity is organized in national economic accounts into four sectors: business, government,
nonprofits serving households, and households. This organization has also been recommended for innovation statistics
(OECD/Eurostat 2018). In the statistical data in this report, public universities and private nonprofit universities are shown
together as academic institutions. The term individuals refers to the household economic sector.
European Union (EU-27): The EU comprises 27 member nations: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, and Sweden. As of 2020, the United Kingdom is not a
member of the EU.
Innovation: A new or improved product or process (or combination thereof) that differs significantly from the unit’s
previous products or processes and that has been made available to potential users (product) or brought into use by the
unit (process). The unit is a generic term to describe the actor responsible for innovations. It refers to any institutional unit
in any sector, including households and their individual members, according to the Oslo Manual 2018 (OECD/Eurostat
2018).
Intellectual property: Creations of the mind including inventions, literary and artistic works, and symbols, names, images,
and designs used in commerce. Industrial intellectual property includes patents, utility models, trademarks, and industrial
designs. Intellectual property covered by copyright includes literary, artistic, and musical works. Available at https://
www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/; accessed March 2023.
International patents: These are original patents that have been issued by any international jurisdiction, adjusted to count
only the first issuance of a series or family of related patents. The unit of measurement is a patent family that shares a
single original invention in common. All subsequent patents in a family refer to the first patent filed, or priority patent, and
the indicator provides an unduplicated count of original or priority patents in any individual jurisdiction.
Invention: Any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful
improvement thereof (USPTO 2020).
Knowledge transfer: The process by which technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied
and used in another place for the same or a different purpose. This transfer can occur freely or through exchange and be
deliberate or unintentional. Technology transfer represents a specific case of knowledge transfer that involves the
transfer of knowledge embedded in technology.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): An international organization of 34 countries
headquartered in Paris, France. The member countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. Among its many activities, OECD compiles social, economic, and science and
technology statistics for all member and selected nonmember countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  53
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent: As defined by USPTO, a property right granted by the U.S. government to
an inventor “to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention throughout the United States
or importing the invention into the United States” for a limited time in exchange for public disclosure of the invention when
the patent is granted. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/glossary; accessed December 2023.
Patent family: See international patents.
Patenting intensity: Number of patents per population in a geographic location.
Priority patent: The first patent filed in a family of subsequent patents that refers to the original patent. The original filing
may be domestic or from another jurisdiction.
Technical field in patents: Chemistry: Biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, organic fine chemistry, microstructural and
nanotechnology, chemical engineering, macromolecular chemistry and polymers, basic materials chemistry, materials,
metallurgy, surface technology, coating, environmental technology, food chemistry. Electrical engineering: Computer
technology, electrical machinery, apparatus and energy, semiconductors, digital communication, telecommunications,
audio-visual technology, basic communication processes, information technology methods for management. Mechanical
engineering: Other special machines, engines, pumps, and turbines; transport; mechanical elements; machine tools; textile
and paper machines; thermal processes and apparatus; handling. Instruments: Medical technology, measurement,
analysis of biological materials, optics, control. Other categories: Civil engineering, other consumer goods, furniture,
games.
Technology transfer: The process by which technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied
and exploited in another place or for another purpose. In the federal setting, technology transfer is the process by which
existing knowledge, facilities, or capabilities developed under federal research and development funding are used to fulfill
public and private needs.
Trade secret: Information that fulfills all the following requirements, as defined by the Patent and Trademark Office:
“Either actual or potential independent economic value by virtue of not being generally known, has value to others who
cannot legitimately obtain the information, and is subject to reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy.” Available at
https://www.uspto.gov/ip-policy/trade-secret-policy; accessed December 2023.
Trademark: A word, phrase, symbol, design, or a combination thereof, that identifies and distinguishes the source of the
goods of one party from those of others. In this report, trademark refers to both goods and services.
Utility patent: Intellectual property protection for a potentially useful, previously unknown, and nonobvious invention.
Key to Acronyms and Abbreviations
ABS: Annual Business Survey
AI: artificial intelligence
CCAT: climate change adaptation technologies
CCMT: climate change mitigation technologies
COVID-19: Coronavirus Disease 2019
CRADA: cooperative research and development agreement
DOC: Department of Commerce
DOD: Department of Defense
DOE: Department of Energy

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  54
EPO: European Patent Office
EU-27: European Union
HHS: Department of Health and Human Services
KTI: knowledge and technology intensive
NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NCSES: National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
NIST: National Institute of Standards and Technology
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PCT: Patent Cooperation Treaty
R&D: research and development
S&E: science and engineering
SBIR: Small Business Innovation Research
STTR: Small Business Technology Transfer
USDA: Department of Agriculture
USPTO: Patent and Trademark Office
WIPO: World Intellectual Property Organization

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  55
References
 
All Over the Rich World, New Businesses Are Springing to Life. 2022. Economist April 23. Available at https://
www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/04/23/all-over-the-rich-world-new-businesses-are-springing-to-life.
Accessed June 2023.
Arora A, Belenzon S, Sheer L. 2017. Back to Basics: Why Do Firms Invest in Research? Working Paper 23187. Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w23187. Accessed June 2023.
AUTM. 2022. Statistics Access for Technology Transfer Database (Version 4.2). Accessed April 2023.
Bell A, Chetty R, Jaravel X, Petkova N, Van Reenan J. 2018. Who Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of
Exposure to Innovation. Working Paper 24062. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w24062. Accessed June 2023.
Bright New Age of Venture Capital. 2021. Economist November 25. Available at https://www.economist.com/finance-and-
economics/2021/11/23/the-bright-new-age-of-venture-capital/21806438. Accessed June 2023.
Castaldi C, Block J, Flikkema M. 2020. Why and When Do Firms Trademark? Bridging Perspectives from Industrial
Organization, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship. Industry and Innovation 27(1–2):1–10.
Census Bureau. 2021. Business Dynamics Statistics. Available at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/bds.html.
Accessed December 2023.
Congress.gov. 2022. CHIPS and Science Act. Available at https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/
4346. Accessed August 2023.
Cook L, Gerson J, Kuan J. 2021. Closing the Innovation Gap in Pink and Black. Working Paper 29354. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w29354. Accessed June 2023.
Delgado M, Murray F. 2021. Mapping the Regions, Organizations and Individuals That Drive Inclusion in the Innovation
Economy. Working Paper 14571. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/system/
files/chapters/c14571/c14571.pdf. Accessed June 2023.
Delgado M, Murray F. 2022. Faculty as Catalysts for New Inventors: Differential Outcomes for Male and Female PhD
Students. Academy of Management Annual Meeting Proceeding 22(1). https://doi.org/10.5465/
AMBPP.2022.17297abstract. Accessed June 2023.
Department of Commerce (DOC). 2020. Annual Report on Technology Transfer: Approach and Plans, Fiscal Year 2019
Activities and Achievements. Available at https://www.nist.gov/tpo/department-commerce. Accessed 22 May 2023.
Department of the Treasury. 2021. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS). Available at https://
home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/international/the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states-cfius.
Accessed December 2023.
Dinlersoz M, Goldschlag N, Myers A, Zolas N. 2018. An Anatomy of U.S. Firms Seeking Trademark Registration. Working
Paper 25038. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/system/files/
working_papers/w25038/w25038.pdf. Accessed June 2023.
Elsevier. 2023. Scopus Abstract and Citation Database (tabulated by Science-Metrix). Available at https://
www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus. Accessed May 2023.
Fink C, Khan M, Zhou H. 2015. Exploring the Worldwide Patent Surge. Economics of Innovation and New Technology
25(2):114–42.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  56
General Services Administration (GSA). Federal Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Catalog. Available at https://
www.citizenscience.gov/catalog/#. Accessed May 2023.
Greenhalgh C, Rogers M, Schautschick P, Sena V. 2011. Trade Mark Incentives. Research Paper Report No. 2011/1.
Newport, South Wales, United Kingdom: Intellectual Property Office. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2710619. Accessed June 2023.
Grossman G, Helpman E. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hall B, Jaffe A. 2018. Measuring Science, Technology, and Innovation: A Review. Annals of Science and Technology Policy
2(1):1–74.
Haščič I, Migotto M. 2015. Measuring Environmental Innovation Using Patent Data. OECD Environment Working Papers No.
89. Paris, France: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/measuring-environmental-
innovation-using-patent-data_5js009kf48xw-en. Accessed June 2023.
Heigl F, Kieslinger B, Paul J, Uhlik J, Dörler D. 2019. Opinion: Toward an International Definition of Citizen Science.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 116(17):8089–92.
Kindlon A, Anderson G; National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2023. Product Innovation Trends 2016–18
to 2018–20: Findings from the Annual Business Survey. InfoBytes NSF 23-331. Alexandria, VA: National Science
Foundation. https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2023/nsf23331/nsf23331.pdf. Accessed May 2023.
Lerner J, Nanda R. 2020. Venture Capital’s Role in Financing Innovation: What We Know and How Much We Still Need to
Learn. Working Paper 27492. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at http://www.nber.org/
papers/w27492. Accessed September 2023.
Martinez G, Saenz de Juano-i-Ribes H, Yin D, Le Feuvre B, Hamdan-Livramento I, Saito K, Raffo J. 2021. Expanding the
World Gender-Name Dictionary: WGND 2.0. WIPO Economic Research Paper 64. Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.34667/
tind.43980. Accessed April 2023.
Mendoza C. 2022. Fundraising Hit a New Full-Year Record in 2021. Private Equity International January 18. Available at
https://www.privateequityinternational.com/fundraising-hit-a-new-full-year-record-in-2021/. Accessed May 2023.
Millot V. 2009. Trademarks as an Indicator of Product and Marketing Innovations. OECD Science, Technology, and Industry
Working Papers 2009/06. Paris, France: OECD Publishing. Available at https://doi.org/10.1787/224428874418. Accessed
October 2023.
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). 2018. Business Research and Development 2018. Detailed
Statistical Tables NSF 21-312. Alexandria, VA: National Science Foundation. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/
nsf21312.
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). 2023. Annual Business Survey Description. Alexandria, VA:
National Science Foundation.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce. 2022. Federal Laboratory
Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2020: Summary Report to the President and the Congress. Available at https://
www.nist.gov/tpo/federal-laboratory-interagency-technology-transfer-summary-reports. Accessed June 2023.
National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Library of Medicine. N.d. PubMed. Available at https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. Accessed September 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  57
National Science and Technology Council (NSTC). 2022. Critical and Emerging Technologies List Update: A Report by the
Fast Track Action Subcommittee on Critical and Emerging Technologies. Washington, DC: Office of the President of the
United States, NSTC. Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/02-2022-Critical-and-
Emerging-Technologies-List-Update.pdf. Accessed June 2023.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2020. Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation.
Science and Engineering Indicators 2020. NSB-2020-4. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20204.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2021a. Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons. Science and Engineering Indicators 2022. NSB-2021-4. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/
pubs/nsb20214.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2021b. Venture Capital Disbursed per $1 Million of Gross
Domestic Product. Science and Engineering Indicators: State Indicators. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/
indicators/states/indicator/venture-capital-per-1-million-state-gdp.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2022a. Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation.
Science and Engineering Indicators 2022 (Indicators 2022). NSB-2022-4. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20224/.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2022b. Production and Trade of Knowledge- and Technology-
Intensive Industries. Science and Engineering Indicators 2022. NSB-2022-6. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20226/.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2023a. Academic Research and Development. Science and
Engineering Indicators 2024. NSB-2023-26. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb202326/.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2023b. Publications Output: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons. Science and Engineering Indicators 2024. NSB-2023-33. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/
pubs/nsb202333/.
National Science Board (NSB), National Science Foundation. 2024. Research and Development: U.S. Trends and
International Comparisons. Science and Engineering Indicators 2024. NSB-2024-6. Alexandria, VA. Forthcoming.
Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP). 2023. Fact Sheet: Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Actions
to Advance Open and Equitable Research. Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2023/01/11/
fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-new-actions-to-advance-open-and-equitable-research. December
2023.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2010. The OECD Innovation Strategy: Getting a Head
Start on Tomorrow. Paris, France: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/
the-oecd-innovation-strategy_9789264083479-en. Accessed June 2023.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2014. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook
2014. Paris, France: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/oecd-science-
technology-and-industry-outlook-2014_sti_outlook-2014-en. Accessed June 2023.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2019. Declaration on Public Sector Innovation. OECD/
LEGAL/0450. Available at https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0450. Accessed June 2023.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2020. Measuring Public Sector Innovation: Why, When,
How, for Whom and Where To? Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of the European Union and OECD. Available at
https://oecd-opsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Measuring-Public-Sector-Innovation-Part-5b-of-Lifecycle.pdf.
Accessed February 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  58
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2021. OECD Science, Technology and Innovation
Outlook. Paris, France: OECD Publishing. Available at https://doi.org/10.1787/25186167. Accessed September 2023.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Eurostat. 2018. Oslo Manual 2018: Guidelines for
Collecting, Reporting and Using Innovation Data. 4th ed. Paris, France: OECD Publishing; Luxembourg: Eurostat. Available
at https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264304604-en. Accessed May 2023.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2020. 2104 Requirements of 35 U.S.C. 101 [R-10.2019]. Available at https://
www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s2104.html. Accessed August 2023.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2021. Trademarks and Patents in China: The Impact of Non-Market Factors on
Filing Trends and IP Systems. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/USPTO-
TrademarkPatentsInChina.pdf. Accessed September 2023.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2023. PatentsView (tabulated by Science-Metrix). Available at https://
patentsview.org/. Accessed June 2023.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), Office of the Chief Economist. 2020. Progress and Potential: 2020 Update on U.S.
Women Inventor-Patentees. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/OCE-DH-Progress-
Potential-2020.pdf. Accessed September 2023.
PitchBook Data, Inc. 2023. Venture Capital and Private Equity Database. Available at https://pitchbook.com/. Accessed
September 2023.
Planes-Satorra S, Paunov C. 2017. Inclusive Innovation Policies: Lessons from International Case Studies. OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers 2017/02. Paris, France: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/inclusive-innovation-policies_a09a3a5d-en. Accessed June 2023.
Science-Metrix. 2024. Patent and Trademark Indicators for the Science and Engineering Indicators 2024: Technical
Documentation. Available at https://www.science-metrix.com/reports/. Accessed February 2024.
Seip M, Castaldi C, Flikkema M. 2019. A Taxonomy of Firm-Level IPR Application Practices to Inform Policy Debates.
Laboratory of Economics and Management Working Paper 2019/03. Pisa, Italy: Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies.
Available at https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/203093/1/1047757427.pdf. Accessed June 2023.
Shackelford B, Kindlon A; National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES). 2021. Nondisclosure
Agreements, Trade Secrets, and Trademarks Considered Very Important to More U.S. Businesses than Were Patents or
Copyrights in 2017. NSF 22-305. Alexandria, VA: National Science Foundation. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/
nsf22305.
Shneiderman B. 2018. Twin-Win Model: A Human-Centered Approach to Research Success. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 115(50):12590–94. Available at https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1802918115. Accessed June 2023.
Small Business Administration (SBA). 2023a. SBIR-STTR Award Analytic Dashboard. Available at https://www.sbir.gov/
analytics-dashboard?view_by=Year. Accessed June 2023.
Small Business Administration (SBA). 2023b. Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Program. Policy Directive. Available at https://www.sbir.gov/sites/default/files/
SBA%20SBIR_STTR_POLICY_DIRECTIVE_May2023.pdf. Accessed June 2023.
Tian Z, Wojan T, Goetz S. 2022. An Examination of the Informational Value of Self-Reported Innovation Questions. Working
Paper CES-22-46. Washington, DC: Center for Economic Studies, Census Bureau. Available at https://www.census.gov/
library/working-papers/2022/adrm/CES-WP-22-46.html. Accessed June 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  59
Thigpen CL, Funk C. 2020. Younger, More Educated U.S. Adults Are More Likely to Take Part in Citizen Science Research.
Available at https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/06/25/younger-more-educated-u-s-adults-are-more-likely-to-
take-part-in-citizen-science-research/. Accessed June 2023.
Veefkind V, Hurtado-Albir J, Angelucci S, Karachalios K. 2012. A New EPO Classification Scheme for Climate Change
Mitigation Technologies. World Patent Information 34(2):106–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wpi.2011.12.004. Accessed
June 2023.
von Graevenitz G, Graham SJH, Myers AF. 2022. Distance (Still) Hampers Diffusion of Innovations. Regional Studies
56(2):227–41. Available at https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00343404.2021.1918334. Accessed October
2023.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). 2019. WIPO Technology Trends, 2019, Artificial Intelligence. Geneva,
Switzerland: WIPO. Available at https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_1055.pdf. Accessed March 2023.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). 2020. World Intellectual Property Indicators 2020. Available at https://
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_941_2020.pdf. Accessed June 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  60
Notes
 
1 A patent count of less than 1.0, but more than 0.0, can occur when there are two or more different county addresses on
the patent. The patent count is divided across the relevant counties.
2 A patent may be included in more than one category within a dimension and also be classified along more than one
dimension. For example, a patent describing a machine learning-based image processing tool for an autonomous vehicle
will be counted in all three dimensions (i.e., AI technique: machine learning; functional application: computer vision;
application field: transportation).
3 These categories are not mutually exclusive.
4 These analyses are based on algorithms that match names to the usual gender associated with that name, an inexact
but still useful process.
5 These affiliations are identified in the documents through a two-step process that starts with automatic assignment
based on unambiguous words, such as “company,” “university,” or “Canada,” followed by a second step that manually
identifies ambiguous entries.
6 The tabulated data for peer-reviewed publications are from the Scopus database used in the State Indicators report
(NSB 2021b). The same taxonomy of disciplines for fields of S&E and the classification of sectors that produce
publications from that report are used here.
7 An alternative approach that surveys for business behavior that is consistent with continuous product and process
improvement systems rather than self-reporting of innovation is described in a recent research paper by Tian, Wojan, and
Goetz (2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  61
Acknowledgments and Citation
 
Acknowledgments
The National Science Board extends its appreciation to the staff of the National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics (NCSES) and to the many others, too numerous to list individually, who contributed to the preparation of this
report.
This report was produced under the leadership of Emilda B. Rivers, Director, NCSES; Christina Freyman, Deputy Director,
NCSES; and John Finamore, Chief Statistician, NCSES.
The report benefited from extensive contributions from NCSES staff, including Chris Hamel, Audrey Kindlon, and Gary
Anderson. Darius Singpurwalla provided advice on statistical issues. Angela Haskell served in administrative roles.
RTI International assisted with report preparation under the leadership of Dr. Susan Rotermund. Dr. Jeffrey Alexander
provided extensive technical expertise and, along with Emily Decker, conducted data analysis and prepared text; Jon
Boyette prepared graphic displays; Taylor Campbell and Cheyane Mitchell verified estimates cited in the text; August
Gering led the editing team, with composition support from Alex Cone. Deborah Kulik provided project management
support. Staff at Penobscot Bay Media, LLC (PenBay Media), created the report site. The following persons and agencies
reviewed this report:
Thomas Guevara, Paul H. O’Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University
Jennifer Kuan, California State University Monterey Bay
Mercedes Delgado, Copenhagen Business School and MIT Innovation Initiative
Patent and Trademark Office
Bureau of Economic Analysis
National Science Foundation
Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Board is especially grateful to the Committee on National Science and Engineering Policy for overseeing preparation
of the volume and to the National Science Board Office, under the direction of John Veysey, which provided vital
coordination throughout the project. Elizabeth Jeffers led the outreach and dissemination efforts. Amanda Vernon served
as Board Office Liaison to the committee. May Aydin, Steven Deitz, and Anne Emig were the Executive Secretaries.
Citation
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2024. Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation. Science and
Engineering Indicators 2024. NSB-2024-1. Alexandria, VA. Available at Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20241/.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  62
Contact Us
 
To report an issue with the website, please e-mail ncsesweb@nsf.gov. For questions about the National Science
Foundation (NSF), please visit the NSF help page at https://nsf.gov/help/. To see more from the National Science Board,
please visit https://nsf.gov/nsb/.
Report Author
Carol Robbins
Senior Analyst
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
crobbins@nsf.gov
NCSES
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
National Science Foundation
2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite W14200
Alexandria, VA 22314
Tel: (703) 292-8780
FIRS: (800) 877-8339
TDD: (800) 281-8749
ncsesweb@nsf.gov

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2024-1  63
Correction(s)
 
22 May 2025: Due to an automation issue, Table SINV-2 was missing rows. It has been updated to show the full table.
13 March 2024: The titles, descriptions, and callouts of data files SWBINV-1, SWBINV-2, and SWBINV-3 were inadvertently
switched between the three files. These items have been corrected in all locations; the data values within the files are
unchanged.
