
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
NATIONAL SCIENCE BOARD
SCIENCE & ENGINEERING INDICATORS 2020
Innovation
Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation
NSB-2020-4
January 15, 2020
This publication is part of the Science and Engineering Indicators suite of reports. Indicators is a
congressionally mandated report on the state of the U.S. science and engineering enterprise. It is policy
relevant and policy neutral. Indicators is prepared under the guidance of the National Science Board by
the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, a federal statistical agency within the National
Science Foundation. With the 2020 edition, Indicators is changing from a single report to a set of
disaggregated and streamlined reports published on a rolling basis. Detailed data tables will continue to
be available online.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  3
Table of Contents
 
 7Executive Summary
 10Introduction
 11Invention: U.S. and Comparative Global Trends
 12USPTO Patent Activity
 18Global Patent Trends and Cross-National Comparisons
 27Beyond Patents: Trademarks and Plant Varieties
 28USPTO Trademarks
 31Plant Varieties
 32Knowledge Transfer
 32Business Collaboration in Peer-Reviewed Publications
 33Citations of Peer-Reviewed Research in Patents
 34Technology Transfer by Academic Institutions and Federal Labs
 37Federal Policies and Programs to Reduce Barriers to Innovation
 40Global Flows of Payments for Intellectual Property: Trade in Licensing and Fees
 42Innovation Indicators: United States and Other Major Economies
 42Investment in Intangibles
 44Venture Capital
 51Innovation Activities by U.S. Businesses
 54International Comparisons in Innovation Incidence
 56The Diffusion of Innovation: Productivity and Jobs
 59Conclusion
 60Glossary
 60Definitions
 61Key to Acronyms and Abbreviations
 63References

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  4
 67Notes
 68Acknowledgments and Citation
 68Acknowledgments
 68Citation
 69Contact Us
 69Report Authors
 69NCSES
List of Sidebars
 11There Is More to Invention Than Patenting
List of Tables
8-1 32 U.S. business-sector publications with other U.S. sectors and foreign institutions: 2008 and 2018
8-2 35 University technology transfer activity indicators: 2007, 2012, and 2017
8-3 36

Federal laboratory technology transfer activity indicators, by selected agencies: FYs 2006, 2009, 2012, and
2016
8-4 38 SBIR and STTR awards funding, by type of award: Selected years, FYs 1983–2018
8-5 39 Examples of federal policies and programs supporting early-stage technology development and innovation
8-6 47 U.S. venture capital investment in health care, ICT, and transportation industries: 2013 and 2018
8-7 49 China venture capital investment in health care, ICT, and transportation industries: 2013 and 2018
8-8 51

U.S. companies introducing new or significantly improved products or processes, by industry sector: 2014–
16
8-9 55 International comparison of firm innovation rate of product and process, by country: 2012–14
List of Figures
8-1 13 USPTO patents granted to U.S. owners: 2002–18
8-2 14 USPTO patents granted, by selected U.S. industry: 2017
8-3 15 Domestic R&D performance, by selected U.S. industry: 2017
8-4 16 USPTO patents granted to U.S. inventors, by broad technology area: 2000 and 2018
8-5 17 USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. inventors, by selected technology area: 2000 and 2018
8-6 19 WIPO patent applications for top 5 patenting offices worldwide: 1883–2018

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  5
8-7 20 Resident patent applications per $100 billion GDP for the top 10 origins: 2008 and 2018
8-8 21 USPTO utility patents and international patent families granted, by region, country, or economy: 2018
8-9 22

Share of electrical and mechanical engineering patents in selected region's, country's, or economy's
international patent families granted in 2018
8-10 23 USPTO utility patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy: 2000–18
8-11 24 USPTO patents granted to inventors from China, by broad technology area: 2018
8-12 25 USPTO design patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy: 2008–18
8-13 26

USPTO design patents granted to U.S. inventors in recording, communication, or information retrieval
equipment and in furnishings: 2008–18
8-14 27 Total trademark applications, by top five filing offices: 1980–2017
8-15 28 Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by 10 aggregates (Nice classification): 2008 and 2018
8-16 29 Number of registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country, or economy: 2007–18
8-17 30 Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by selected Nice classification: 2008 and 2018
8-18 34 Log scale of citations of U.S. S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by selected sector and S&E field: 2018
8-19 41

Exports and imports of intellectual property (charges for their use), by selected region, country, or economy:
2008–17
8-20 43 U.S. private investment in intangibles, by type, for the manufacturing sector: 1987–2017
8-21 44 U.S. private investment in intangibles, by type, for the nonmanufacturing sector: 1987–2017
8-22 45 Global venture capital investment, by selected country or economy: 2005–18
8-23 46 Chinese investment in U.S. venture capital: 2013–18
8-24 48 U.S. venture capital investment, by selected industry vertical or technology: 2013–18
8-25 49 U.S. investment in Chinese venture capital: 2013–18
8-26 50 China venture capital investment, by selected industry vertical or technology: 2013–18
8-27 52

U.S. companies introducing new or significantly improved products or processes, by industry sector, number
of companies, and percentage of companies: 2014–16
8-28 53

Share of U.S. manufacturing companies reporting product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2014–
16
8-29 54

Share of U.S. nonmanufacturing companies reporting product or process innovation, by selected industry:
2014–16
8-30 56

U.S. labor and multifactor productivity annual growth, multiyear averages, for private business sector: 1948–
2018
8-31 57

Economy-wide growth in multifactor productivity for selected OECD countries, multiyear averages: 1990–
2018

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  6
8-32 58 Share of firms, job creation, and employment from firms 5 years old or younger: 1982–2016

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  7
Executive Summary
 
Key takeaways:
New and improved products and processes emerge from the U.S. science and engineering (S&E) enterprise through an
interconnected system of invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation. This system is characterized by both
competition and collaboration.
Intellectual property registration data, such as patents and trademarks, provide indicators of invention and the
introduction of new products; they are growing in number as digitization increases the importance of intellectual
property protection. Patent and trademark applications more than doubled globally between 2008 and 2017, with
middle-income countries worldwide rapidly increasing their participation in this activity.
Engineering-related patents, both electrical and mechanical, made up about half of all patents granted by the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in 2018. Two areas of information and communication technologies (ICT)—
computer technology and digital communication—grew quickly since 2000 and received particularly large numbers of
patents. Patent-intensive industries in the United States are also research and development (R&D) intensive; that is,
these industries spend higher proportions of their sales on R&D.
Patent family data provide an internationally comparable count of inventions, notwithstanding variations in strategic
interests and patent standards. In 2018, China received about half (334,000) of these global patents, an eightfold
increase over the prior decade. Inventors from the United States, the European Union (EU), Japan, and South Korea
each receive a smaller number of these patents than those from China.
Universities and federal labs invent and patent as well as transfer knowledge and technology through research
collaborations, technology licensing, and support for startups. These activities are aimed at bridging the risky steps of
invention, financing, development, and commercialization.
Venture capital provides external funding to finance the introduction of viable new technologies and products into the
market. The large economies of the United States and China receive the greatest amounts of this funding. The EU and
the rest of Asia receive significantly less.
One in six U.S. firms with five or more employees report having introduced an innovation between 2014 and 2016.
Industries active in the digital economy have an outsized impact on innovation rates. ICT-producing industries report
some of the highest rates of innovation.
Innovation brings new products and technologies into society through an interrelated system of activities by the business
sector, universities, government entities, and individuals. Relationships among institutions underpin the environment in
which ideas become innovations and diffuse through society. This innovation system environment is complex,
encompassing financing, public infrastructure, tax and regulatory policies, intellectual property protection, and social
attitudes toward risk. Three distinct but interrelated components of this environment are invention, knowledge transfer,
and innovation. This report covers the composition and trends of these components. The report primarily uses U.S. and
international statistical and administrative data including data from the USPTO, National Center for Science and
Engineering Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Institute of Standards and Technologies, and, internationally,
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the World Intellectual Property Organization.
Patents are indicators of invention that cover part of inventive activity. Companies choose a variety of strategies to
protect their inventions, including trademarks and trade secrets; many inventions are also shared through open access.
Growth in patenting also reflects both inventive activity and an overall trend toward increased importance of intellectual
property protection, especially for information that can be digitized. Globally, as economies participate in increasingly
digital international trade activity, intellectual property protections in middle-income countries have risen.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  8
The USPTO issued over 300,000 patents in 2018, almost double the amount issued in 2008. Engineering-related patents,
both electrical and mechanical, comprise about half of all USPTO patents. Computer technology and digital
communication, both ICT-related areas within electrical engineering, receive notably large numbers of patents.
Of the 309,000 patents issued by the USPTO in 2018, more than half (53%) were granted to foreign inventors, growing
from about 46% in 2000. Japan and the EU continue to account for the largest numbers of foreign USPTO patent grantees,
followed by South Korea. Although inventors from China account for a relatively small number of USPTO patents, they
have seen a rapid increase in the numbers of these patents granted.
As in the United States, about half of the patents granted in any recognized national or regional jurisdiction (patent
families) worldwide are electrical or mechanical engineering patents. In this global measure, China receives about half of
the patent families issued; inventors from the United States, the EU, Japan, and South Korea receive a smaller number of
these patents than inventors from China.
Trademarks protect the names and symbols used with products in national and regional markets and historically have
primarily been an activity of high-income economies. With the rapid worldwide growth of trademark applications since the
turn of the century, this has changed. Middle-income countries Brazil and China make up much of this growth, with
China’s contribution large and fast growing.
The USPTO registered 273,000 trademarks in 2018, including 184,000 to U.S. assignees. USPTO trademarks to foreign
assignees make up an increasing share of total trademarks; the number of foreign trademarks has grown 37% over the
last decade, compared with a 17% increase in the number of trademarks to U.S. assignees.
Knowledge transfer is a key component of the U.S. innovation system; this takes place through market transactions and
licensing as well as through formal and informal collaboration activities of universities, federal labs, and researchers in the
business community. Technology transfer programs focus on bridging the risky steps of invention, financing,
development, and commercialization.
Researchers from universities and federal labs collaborate with business-sector researchers directly through joint
research and publications; both the number and share of these articles have increased over the last decade. The U.S.
business sector coauthored 27,000 S&E articles with U.S. academics and 7,000 with government authors in 2018. The
number of internationally coauthored articles by U.S. business authors tripled over the same time. Research transfer can
also be less direct: two-thirds of citations to research articles in patent applications are to articles with academic
affiliations.
A second indicator of knowledge transfer is the sharing of university and federally developed technology and inventions
through collaborative agreements and licensing of technology. Universities reported 46,000 active licenses in 2017 as well
as over 1,000 university-affiliated startups using licensed technology. Many startups continue to survive as ongoing
businesses, with universities reporting more than 6,000 startups still in operation in 2017. Federal labs reported almost
9,000 active licenses in FY 2016. Federal agencies directly support technology transfer of their research through awards
to small businesses for innovation, commercialization, and technology transfer; this amounted to over $3 billion to over
5,000 awardees in 2018.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  9
As new technologies develop, venture capital flows play a key role in transforming ideas into innovation—the actual
introduction of new or improved products and processes. Over the last decade, the venture capital market has shifted
from a U.S.-centric structure toward a more globalized market with the Asian region growing rapidly. The United States
received 44% ($119 billion) of total global venture capital funds, followed by China with a global share of 36% ($97 billion).
Within the United States, two-thirds of this venture capital investment is focused in ICT and health care. ICT-producing and
health care–related industries in the United States report introducing new products and processes at a higher rate
compared with the U.S. average of one in six (between 2014 and 2016).
Over time, the overall impact of innovation and S&E knowledge in society extends well beyond innovating firms. In terms
of economic output, new products and processes can increase output or decrease costs for others outside the firm. The
speed and direction of the changes in ratio of outputs to inputs can be measured as multifactor productivity. This
measure has risen more slowly in the United States and other high-income countries in the last decade relative to earlier
decades.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  10
Introduction
 
Invention, knowledge transfer, and innovation are distinct but interrelated components of a complex system for
transforming creativity and knowledge from science and engineering (S&E) into benefits to society and the economy.
Long-term impacts of the innovation process emerge as knowledge, inventions, and innovations diffuse through society.
Major advances such as electricity, engines, sanitation systems, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, and telecommunication
have had widespread benefits where developed as well as around the world (Gordon 2016). The innovation process has
the potential for less desirable outcomes as well, including rapid obsolescence of some job skills, increased inequality
across regions and groups of people, vulnerability of systems to attacks, and ethical issues raised by new technologies.
The innovation process is multidimensional. Forming a complete picture of this process requires indicators on actors as
individuals as well as through institutions including industry, government, academia, and nonprofits. It also requires
indicators of the physical capital and infrastructure, both public and private; intangible capital; and publicly available
knowledge that enable innovation.
This report covers innovation-related activities, such as patenting and registration of trademarks, as well as the creation
of intangible capital, such as software, research and development (R&D), and other creative originals.1 Furthermore, the
report describes university and government efforts to make their technologies available for commercial development and
to support the creation of new businesses. The first section discusses invention and provides patenting data by sector
and technology area as well as an international comparison of patenting activity. Both utility and design patents are
presented. Design patents protect the visual characteristics of an invention, while a utility patent protects the way that the
invention works. The Beyond Patents section covers trademarks. Trademarks protect symbols, words, or designs that
distinguish the source of products.
The next section of the report focuses on knowledge transfer, including technology-transfer activity data for academic
institutions and the federal government. Within the U.S. innovation system, these institutions have a special role creating
basic research insights as well as supporting activities to transfer science and technology (S&T) knowledge into use.
Technology transfer activities include invention disclosures, patenting, licensing, and collaborative R&D agreements.
Citations from patent documents to peer-reviewed literature acknowledge the priority and foundation of S&E knowledge.
Coauthorships between authors affiliated with businesses and authors from other sectors are indicators of collaboration
across sectors. The last section focuses on innovation, with indicators of the emergence of new and improved products,
funding for new businesses through venture capital, and the number and employment effects of small and fast-growing
firms. Changes in productivity provide a longer-term perspective on the technological change that innovation brings about
and its impact on economic growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  11
Invention: U.S. and Comparative Global Trends
 
An invention brings something new into being and has a practical bent. Examples include a design, hybrid flower,
mechanical device, software program, or commercial product. When these inventions are registered as intellectual
property, the resulting records provide useful indicators of invention. For U.S. firms, trade secrets, trademarks, and design
patents are all important for intellectual property protection (Indicators 2018, section “Invention: United States and
Comparative Global Trends.”)
Although there is more to invention than patenting, patents are primary indicators of invention, providing valuable
technological and geographic detail. For patenting purposes, invention is defined as the production of something
potentially useful, previously unknown, and nonobvious. The U.S. patenting system provides inventors with the exclusive
right to make, use, or sell their invention, or in the words of the Patent Act of 1790, “any improvement therein not before
known or used,” so long as the invention is deemed “sufficiently useful and important” (USPTO 2002). USPTO data provide
patenting measures by technology area for all patents registered in the United States, including those patents that are
granted outside of businesses and to foreign entities. (See sidebar There Is More to Invention Than Patenting.)
Utility patents provide protection for the way something works. A design patent protects the way something looks and the
way it is shaped, specifically the visual ornamental characteristics of articles of manufacture (USPTO 2018). For U.S.
inventors, plant patents protect hybridized plants, such as roses. Trademarks protect the symbols used in commercial
activity and often appear in conjunction with new products and processes. For U.S. R&D-performing firms, trademarks are
as important as patents in protecting intellectual property (NCSES 2018).
The Technical Appendix provides more information on the intellectual property data used in this report.
SIDEBAR
Inventors often have economic motivations to keep the details of their inventions secret. The patenting system
provides the legal right for a limited time to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the
invention, in exchange for public disclosure of the technical information in the granted patent. Extensive
publicly available administrative data exist for patents and their inventors, and extensive databases allow for
systematic insights into these patents. In the absence of other comprehensive data on invention, patent data
provide unique and useful insights into the inventions deemed valuable enough to patent. However, analysis of
these data requires caution.
One caveat is that most patented inventions are never commercialized; they are neither representative of all
inventions nor are they measures of innovation. Conversely, many valuable inventions that are commercialized
are not patented. Companies choose a variety of strategies to protect their inventions and intellectual property.
For example, U.S. companies rate trade secrets higher than patents in their importance for protecting
intellectual property, which is true even for R&D-performing firms.
In addition, patent protection may be sought for reasons other than intended commercialization. Privately
owned patents may be obtained to block rivals and negotiate with competitors, to use in lawsuits, or to build
“thickets” of patents to impede or raise others’ costs of R&D and innovation (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh 2000).
Research suggests that some organizations and countries pursue “strategic patenting” to block competitors
and to monetize patents through licensing and other activities (Ernst 2013:1–9). Other firms may respond by
There Is More to Invention Than Patenting

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  12
patenting defensively. New and emerging firms may seek patent protection to help obtain financing because
investors perceive patents as potentially valuable for a firm’s assets and future profitability. Finally, cross-
country analysis indicates that international differences in taxes on corporate and patent income influence the
choice of patent location for multinational firms (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
2016:3). However, within these limitations, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office patent documents tell us when
and in what technology areas inventors have decided to protect their intellectual property with patent
protection. This rich detail, which also includes the name and address of the inventor and assignee, justifies
presentation of the patent documents.
This report provides statistics on the relative extent to which private industry, the federal government
(intramural research facilities and federally funded R&D centers), and higher education institutions account for
a recent year’s U.S. patent awards. There are marked differences in terms of the scale of economic resources
directed toward patenting inventions among these sectors; the private business sector expends significantly
more resources than either the federal government or higher education. Even so, each of these sectors has
evolved substantial capacities for identifying potentially patentable inventions and filing patent applications in
the United States and worldwide. Differences also exist within and across these sectors in the perceived net
benefit of choosing patenting as a principal means of pursuing the further development and commercialization
of inventions.
USPTO Patent Activity
The USPTO awarded 309,000 utility patents in 2018, nearly equally divided between foreign and domestic inventors (Table
S8-1). Among U.S. assignees (those assigned the rights of ownership), businesses received by far the most patents
(131,121 or 85%); individuals (9%), the academic sector (4%), and the government sector (1%) each received a relatively
small share of patents (Figure 8-1).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  13
0
FIGURE 8-1
USPTO patents granted to U.S. owners: 2002–18
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Patents are allocated according to patent ownership information. Patents are credited on a fractional-count basis (i.e., for patents with collaborating
institutions, each institution receives fractional credit on the basis of the proportion of inventors from participating institutions).
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-1.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Among U.S. assignees, businesses have seen a rapid increase since 2009 in the number of patents granted, followed by
more moderate growth after 2014. Patents issued to U.S. firms almost doubled (94%) between 2002 and 2017 (Figure
8-1). This increase in patenting reflects in part an overall trend toward the increased importance of intellectual property
protection, especially for information that can be digitized (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
[OECD] 2017b). To put this in context with the growth in business R&D expenditures in the United States, patenting activity
grew faster. Over the same period, businesses’ domestic R&D expenditures rose 59%, after adjusting for inflation (NCSES
2020).
Patenting by U.S. Industries
The NCSES Business R&D Survey (BRDS) provides information on industry affiliation of U.S. inventors who receive USPTO
patents. Data from BRDS show that the USPTO granted 102,000 utility patents to R&D-performing firms in the United
States in 2017 (Figure 8-2). Firms in the computer and electronics manufacturing industry received the greatest number
of patents, almost 30,000 in 2017 (Figure 8-2). These firms also report the highest level of domestic R&D performance in
2017, about $79 billion (Figure 8-3). In general, high R&D industries have high rates of patenting; the relative ranking

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  14
0 5
differs, however. For example, the computer systems design and related services industry showed relatively high levels of
U.S. patenting, while several other industries outspent it domestically in R&D. Conversely, the scientific R&D services
industry performed more than $17 billion in R&D in 2017 while receiving only a little over 1,100 patents (Figure 8-2 and
Figure 8-3).
FIGURE 8-2
USPTO patents granted, by selected U.S. industry: 2017
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Industry classification is based on the dominant business code for domestic R&D performance, where available. For companies that did not report
business codes, the classification used for sampling was assigned. Statistics are based on companies in the United States that reported to the survey,
regardless of whether they did or did not perform or fund R&D. These statistics do not include an adjustment to the weight to account for unit
nonresponse. For a small number of companies that were issued more than 100 patents by USPTO, survey data were supplemented with counts from
https://www.uspto.gov/. Software publishers includes other publishing.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, and U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D Survey (BRDS), 2017.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  15
0
FIGURE 8-3
Domestic R&D performance, by selected U.S. industry: 2017
Note(s)
Industry classification is based on the dominant business code for domestic R&D performance, where available. For companies that did not report
business codes, the classification used for sampling was assigned. Statistics are based on companies in the United States that reported to the survey,
regardless of whether they did or did not perform or fund R&D. These statistics do not include an adjustment to the weight to account for unit
nonresponse. Software publishers includes other publishing. Medical equipment and supplies manufacturing includes miscellaneous manufacturing.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, and U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D Survey (BRDS), 2017.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Patenting by Universities and Federal Labs
The motivations to patent an invention may differ substantially from the motivations to create other types of knowledge.
Business researchers more frequently engage in experimental development activity, which is directed toward creating or
improving products or processes, than their academic and government counterparts. This increases opportunities for
direct commercial applications of their work.
Relative to the amount of R&D performed, universities and federal labs receive fewer patents. In 2017, businesses
accounted for more than 70% of the R&D performed in the United States; universities performed about 13% and
government labs about 10% (NCSES 2020). Of the USPTO patents assigned to U.S. assignees in that year, academic
institutions accounted for about 4%, and government labs even fewer at 0.8% (these shares were unchanged in the latest
patent data for 2018) (Figure 8-1).

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  16
0
Research at universities and federal labs more frequently yields peer-reviewed articles than commercially oriented
inventions. This disparity between R&D activity and patenting makes sense given the difference among the activities and
goals of universities, federal labs, and businesses. Academic patenting also differs in terms of focus areas. Compared
with other sectors, academic patenting is relatively more focused on pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, and medical
technologies. In 2018, these three technology areas accounted for 41% of USPTO patents awarded to U.S. academic
institutions, compared with 10% of USPTO patents to all sectors (Table S8-2, Table S8-4, Table S8-17, Table S8-19, and
Table S8-20).
Patent Technology Areas and Patent Trends
The USPTO classifies patent data filings based on technology areas, and the detailed technology areas can be aggregated
to analyze trends in patenting focus over time. For example, the electrical engineering technology area includes five
subclasses, which are further subdivided into dozens of detailed categories or fields. This report provides annual data for
USPTO and international patents based on the 35 technical fields described by the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) for international comparisons.2 Figure 8-4 aggregates data on these 35 fields into five broad
technology areas.
FIGURE 8-4
USPTO patents granted to U.S. inventors, by broad technology area: 2000 and 2018
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Civil engineering is included in Other fields. Patents are allocated geographically according to patent inventorship information. They are classified
technologically under the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) classification that is made up of 35 International Patent Classification (IPC)
technical fields. Fractional counts of patents to each technological field assign the weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields. For
instance, a patent that is classified under five different technological fields will contribute 0.2 patent counts to each of its technological fields. Data
across technical fields also sum up to the total number of USPTO-granted patents.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  17
0
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-5 through Table S8-39.
Science and Engineering Indicators
The USPTO patents granted to U.S. inventors can be grouped into engineering-related patents; both electrical and
mechanical engineering patents made up about 60% of USPTO patents in 2018 (Figure 8-4). Patents related to
instruments, chemistry, and other fields made up the remainder of USPTO patents to U.S. inventors in 2018. The number
of electrical engineering patents more than doubled between 2000 and 2018 (Figure 8-4). The role of information and
communication technologies (ICT) is evident here as well; 2 of the 35 technology fields, computer technology and digital
communication, account for a large part of the increase in electrical engineering patents (Figure 8-5).
FIGURE 8-5
USPTO utility patents granted to U.S. inventors, by selected technology area: 2000 and 2018
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Patents are allocated geographically according to patent inventorship information. They are classified technologically under the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO) classification that is made up of 35 International Patent Classification (IPC) technical fields. Fractional counts of patents
to each technological field assign the weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields. For instance, a patent that is classified under five
different technological fields will contribute 0.2 patent counts to each of its technological fields. Data across technical fields also sum up to the total
number of USPTO-granted patents.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-5, Table S8-8, Table S8-10, Table S8-14, Table S8-17, and Table S8-36.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  18
Health and medical inventions contribute to growth across these five broad technology areas; for example, patents in the
analysis of biological materials and in medical technology contribute to the growth in patenting in instruments, and
inventions in biotechnology and pharmaceuticals contribute to the growth in chemistry patenting. Similarly, advances in
autonomous vehicles incorporate inventions in multiple areas, including optics, transport, electrical machinery, and
chemicals.
Global Patent Trends and Cross-National Comparisons
The data in this section present global patenting trends in three complementary ways; all three demonstrate rapid
worldwide growth. First, the WIPO data provide a high-level view of patenting by the most active patent offices globally,
indicating markets where this form of intellectual property protection is increasing over time. Second, international patent
family data provide a more detailed view of emerging patented inventions across geography, based on inventor’s address.
International patent family data count each invention once as a family of related filings based on granting year of the first
underlying invention. Patent families count inventions granted in at least one jurisdiction and count the invention only
once, even if it is later protected elsewhere. Based on inventor addresses, inventors from China patent most frequently at
the global level. Third, this report rounds out the global patent analysis focusing on the technology-level activity of U.S.
and foreign inventors granted USPTO patents. These data show the increasing role of foreign inventors in USPTO
patenting.
WIPO Patents
Historically, patenting grew exponentially in the second half of the 20th century. Figure 8-6 shows patent applications for
the top five offices worldwide: USPTO, National Intellectual Property Administration of the People’s Republic of China,
European Patent Office, Japan Patent Office, and Korean Intellectual Property Office. WIPO compiled these data; it
collects patenting data from national offices and compiles patent statistics internationally. While the USPTO and the
Japan Patent Office previously had the largest number of filings, China now receives the largest number of patent
applications worldwide (WIPO 2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  19
0
FIGURE 8-6
WIPO patent applications for top 5 patenting offices worldwide: 1883–2018
EPO = European Patent Office; WIPO = World Intellectual Property Organization.
Source(s)
WIPO Statistics Database, accessed September 2019.

Science and Engineering Indicators
Patents as a ratio to gross domestic product (GDP) provides a normalization for the size of each economy. On this basis,
South Korea has the largest number of patents, followed by China and Japan, according to the WIPO data (Figure 8-7).
South Korea also has the highest ratio of R&D expenditures to GDP of the top 15 R&D-performing countries and
economies (Indicators 2020 report “Research and Development: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons”).

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  20
0
FIGURE 8-7
Resident patent applications per $100 billion GDP for the top 10 origins: 2008 and 2018
Note(s)
Amounts are in U.S. dollars.
Source(s)
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Statistics Database, compiled by WIPO in processing international applications and registrations
through the Patent Cooperation Treaty and the Madrid and Hague Systems, accessed September 2019.

Science and Engineering Indicators
Patent Families
The patent family data described in this section account for patenting in international jurisdictions without double-
counting. Patent offices register patents from resident inventors as well as foreign inventors; thus, a unique invention may
be registered in more than one jurisdiction. Further, a patent may be modified or extended, adding to the total number of
patents. The patent family statistics presented here count a unique underlying invention as the unit of measurement. Each
patent family covers a group of related patents that have an original invention in common. All subsequent patents in a
family refer to the first patent filed, called a priority patent; the original filing may be domestic or from another jurisdiction.
For example, an invention patented in Japan may refer to an earlier patent in the United States. In this case, both the
Japanese and the U.S. patent would be part of the same patent family. The composition of these patenting data differs
from that of the USPTO data and shows both the breadth and growth of inventive activity around the world. Table S8-4
through Table S8-40 show the patent family data alongside the USPTO data.
In 2018, U.S. inventors received patents on approximately 46,000 international patent families compared with 144,000
separate patents issued by the USPTO (Table S8-4). Figure 8-8 shows the scale of USPTO patents compared with
international patent families for China, the European Union (EU), Japan, South Korea, the United States, and the world.
Overall, China had the largest number (334,000) of international patent families granted in 2018; in 10 years this
represents an increase of almost eightfold (43,500 in 2008) (Table S8-4).

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  21
0
FIGURE 8-8
USPTO utility patents and international patent families granted, by region, country, or economy: 2018
EU = European Union; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
USPTO patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. USPTO patents are fractionally allocated among
regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. International Patent Documentation (INPADOC) patent
families across all patent offices covered in the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) are counted according to the year of the first granted
patent in the patent family. Patent families are allocated according to patent inventorship information found on the priority patent of the INPADOC
families. To account for missing ownership information in PATSTAT for some offices, a method designed by de Rassenfosse et al. (2012) is used to fill
missing information on priority patents using information in successive filings within the families (see technical documentation for details). Patent
families are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. The EU
includes 28 member countries. China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s)
Science-Metrix; PATSTAT; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See Table S8-4.
Science and Engineering Indicators
By technology area, electrical engineering patents make up almost a third (31%) of international patent families;
mechanical engineering patents make up another quarter (Figure 8-9). For inventors from China, electrical engineering
patents comprise almost a third of international patent families granted in 2018 (Figure 8-9). In comparison, electrical
engineering comprised 45% of USPTO patents granted to U.S. inventors in 2018 (Figure 8-4).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  22
0
FIGURE 8-9
Share of electrical and mechanical engineering patents in selected region's, country's, or economy's international patent
families granted in 2018
EU = European Union; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
USPTO patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. USPTO patents are fractionally allocated among
regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. International Patent Documentation (INPADOC) patent
families across all patent offices covered in the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) are counted according to the year of the first granted
patent in the patent family. Patent families are allocated according to patent inventorship information found on the priority patent of the INPADOC
families. To account for missing ownership information in PATSTAT for some offices, a method designed by de Rassenfosse et al. (2012) is used to fill
missing information on priority patents using information in successive filings within the families (see technical documentation for details). Patent
families are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. The EU
includes 28 member countries. China includes Hong Kong. The broad technology areas of electrical and mechanical engineering are defined using
patent technology categories from the World Intellectual Property Organization (2018).
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-4 through Table S8-12 and Table S8-29 through Table S8-36.
Science and Engineering Indicators
USPTO Patents
USPTO patents provide insight into the activities of inventors who choose to bear the cost of protecting their inventions in
the U.S. market. The USPTO grants slightly more than half (53%) of all U.S. patents to foreign inventors, up from 46% in
2000 (Table S8-4). Rising rates of foreign patenting reflect the expansion of commercial activities across international
borders as foreign firms seek patent protection in multiple international jurisdictions (Fink, Khan, and Zhou 2015). Large
multinational companies, including those based outside of the United States, have increasingly sought patent protection
beyond their domestic borders. The EU and Japan continue to account for the largest numbers of foreign USPTO patent

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  23
0
grantees, followed by South Korea (Figure 8-10). Although inventors from China account for a relatively small number of
USPTO patents, over a decade, they have seen almost a 10-fold rise in the number of USPTO patents granted (from 1,600
in 2008 to 15,500 in 2018) (Figure 8-10). Patents related to electrical engineering accounted for the majority (63%) of
USPTO patents granted to inventors from China (Figure 8-11).
FIGURE 8-10
USPTO utility patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy: 2000–18
EU = European Union; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on
the proportion of residences of all named inventors. The EU includes 28 member countries. China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-4.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  24
0
FIGURE 8-11
USPTO patents granted to inventors from China, by broad technology area: 2018
IT = information technology; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Civil engineering is included in Other fields. Patents are allocated geographically according to patent inventorship information.  They are classified
technologically under the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) classification that is made up of 35 International Patent Classification (IPC)
technical fields.  Fractional counts of patents to each technological field assign the weight of a patent to the corresponding technological fields.  For
instance, a patent that is classified under five different technological fields will contribute 0.2 patent counts to each of its technological fields.  Data
across technical fields also sum up to the total number of USPTO-granted patents.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-5 through Table S8-39.
Science and Engineering Indicators
USPTO Design Patents
Patenting of designs is a very important intellectual property protection strategy for about one in six U.S. R&D-funding or
-performing firms (NCSES 2018). In 2018, the USPTO awarded over 16,000 design patents to U.S. inventors or designers
(Figure 8-12). The USPTO granted an additional 14,000 design patents in 2018 to inventors from outside of the United
States (Table S8-43).3 The EU accounts for about 4,600 of these (Figure 8-12). Since 2014, China has rapidly increased its
design patenting in the United States and now patents on a scale comparable to Japan and South Korea (Figure 8-12).4

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  25
0
FIGURE 8-12
USPTO design patents granted, by selected region, country, or economy: 2008–18
EU = European Union; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Design patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies
based on the proportion of residences of all named inventors. The EU includes 28 member countries. China includes Hong Kong.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-43.
Science and Engineering Indicators
By product area, 10 years ago, the largest number of design patents were granted for furnishings (Table S8-44). The focus
has shifted over the last decade to recording, communication, or information retrieval equipment—the category that
includes items like smart phones, keyboards, and computer icons has grown rapidly to become the largest category of
design patenting. Figure 8-13 shows the trend growth for U.S. design patents in this category and in furnishings.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  26
0
FIGURE 8-13
USPTO design patents granted to U.S. inventors in recording, communication, or information retrieval equipment and in
furnishings: 2008–18
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Design patents are allocated according to patent inventorship information. Patents are classified under the USPTO classification of design patents,
which classifies USPTO design patents under 35 design classes. Fractional counts of patents were assigned to each design class on patents to assign
the proper weight of a patent to the corresponding design class under the classification.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed June 2019. See
Table S8-44.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  27
0
Beyond Patents: Trademarks and Plant Varieties
 
The registration of commercially used symbols, images, and names through trademarking can signal the creation of new
products and services. Advances in ICT and digitization drive the development of new products, contributing to the growth
in trademark applications (see Gao and Hitt [2012]). For companies in the United States that either perform or fund R&D,
trademarks are considered as important as utility patents as an intellectual property protection strategy (NCSES 2018).
In the 20th century, intellectual property protection through registration of trademarks was primarily an activity of the
United States, Europe, and Japan. This has changed. Trademark applications worldwide have increased rapidly in recent
years, more than doubling from 5.5 million in 2008 to over 12 million a year in 2017 (WIPO 2019). Middle-income countries
Brazil and China make up much of this growth; in 2017, Brazil’s trademark applications met or surpassed those of Japan
and the European Union Intellectual Property Office (Figure 8-14). As with global patenting, China has registered a rapidly
increasing number of trademarks (Figure 8-14).
FIGURE 8-14
Total trademark applications, by top five filing offices: 1980–2017
EUIPO = European Union Intellectual Property Office.
Source(s)
World Intellectual Property Organization Statistics Database, Total trademark applications (direct and via the Madrid system), accessed 27 September
2019.

Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  28
0
USPTO Trademarks
The USPTO registered 273,000 trademarks in 2018, including 184,000 to U.S. assignees (Table S8-45). While the three
broad categories that make up about half of these trademarks have not changed (Figure 8-15), similar to USPTO patents,
the internationalization of commerce has led to an increasing share of USPTO trademarks registered to foreign assignees.
Over the last decade, the number of foreign-registered USPTO trademarks has grown 137%, compared with 17% growth in
the number of USPTO trademarks registered to U.S. assignees (Figure 8-16).
FIGURE 8-15
Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by 10 aggregates (Nice classification): 2008 and 2018
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information. Trademarks are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the
proportion of residences of all named holders. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice classification of goods and services, which
classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned to each category to
assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis),
accessed April 2019. See Table S8-48 through Table S8-58.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  29
0
FIGURE 8-16
Number of registered USPTO trademarks, by selected region, country, or economy: 2007–18
EU = European Union; USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information. Trademarks are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the
proportion of residences of all named holders. The EU includes 28 member countries. China includes Hong Kong. Trademarks are classified under the
11th edition of the Nice classification of goods and services, which classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services.
Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned to each category to assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the
classification.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis),
accessed April 2019. See Table S8-45.
Science and Engineering Indicators
For U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, education, business services, and scientific apparatus were the largest product
categories in 2018 (Figure 8-17).

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  30
0
FIGURE 8-17
Number of U.S.-registered USPTO trademarks, by selected Nice classification: 2008 and 2018
USPTO = U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Note(s)
Trademarks are allocated according to holder information. Trademarks are fractionally allocated among regions, countries, or economies based on the
proportion of residences of all named holders. Trademarks are classified under the 11th edition of the Nice classification of goods and services, which
classifies trademarks under 34 categories of goods and 11 categories of services. Fractional counts of trademarks were assigned to each category to
assign the proper weight of a trademark to the corresponding category under the classification.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; USPTO data hosted by Reed Tech (LexisNexis),
accessed April 2019. See Table S8-46 and Table S8-47.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  31
Trademarks from China grew nearly 20-fold, and those from the EU maintained a steady presence. One quarter of this
growth from China comes in the broad science-linked category of research and technology (Table S8-56). Trademark data
by detailed category are provided in Table S8-45 through Table S8-58.
Plant Varieties
Plant varieties are another kind of invention protected as intellectual property across national offices and within the EU.
WIPO collects and shares data on these protections in its annual report (WIPO 2019). Plant variety protection covers
nonhybridized plants; these plants must be created by seeds and tubers. Like patenting, this protection grants exclusive
rights to produce the plant for sale for an extended number of years. In 2017, national offices issued over 15,000 plant
variety protections worldwide, compared with 10,500 in 2008 (Table S8-59). The EU alone issued more than half of the
plant variety protections in 2017, of which the Netherlands received nearly 3,700 (Table S8-59). China issued over 1,500
varieties, and Russia issued almost 500 (Table S8-59). The United States issued just over 1,700 varieties in 2017 (Table
S8-59). Hybridized plants can be patented by the USPTO as plant patents; the European Patent Office does not allow this.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  32
Knowledge Transfer
 
Knowledge transfer makes it possible for technology or knowledge developed for one purpose to be applied and used
elsewhere or used for a different purpose. For invention and innovation, the sources of knowledge include direct outputs
of R&D as well as the human capital gained by scientists, engineers, and inventors as they create and develop new and
useful products and processes. Scientific discoveries and inventions suit many uses, and scientists and engineers add to
the stock of knowledge through their discoveries. As knowledge and human capital accumulate and disseminate widely,
new discoveries and innovations build on those that came before. Significant feedback mechanisms (often complex and
numerous) may magnify the ultimate impact of innovation activities.
However, for knowledge to flow into innovation, invention and patenting are not enough; knowledge transfer is critical.
Knowledge transfer takes place through the systematic activities of individual researchers as they collaborate, through the
organized activities of institutions and governments, and through market activities.5 This section presents several
knowledge transfer indicators. First, the section presents two measures based on S&E publication output: (1) coauthoring
of peer-reviewed S&E publications between business-affiliated and academic authors, and (2) the citation of peer-
reviewed publications within patent documents. Both indicate the sharing of S&E research knowledge across sectors of
the economy.
Next, the section presents indicators related to technology transfer as reported by federal agencies and academic
institutions, including technology licensing activities, collaborative agreements, and support for startups. Within the
federal government, the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
programs provide support for startups. As primary producers of research, academic institutions and federal labs have
active technology transfer programs to provide potentially useful research to businesses and others. The section ends
with a market-based measure of technology transfer: global flows of licensing receipts.
Business Collaboration in Peer-Reviewed Publications
Coauthorship on research publications indicates knowledge flow through collaboration between researchers and
institutions. This form of collaboration can represent a range of activities from coauthoring the content to sharing data or
research tools. This collaboration is observable when both collaborators have their names on the publication (Katz and
Martin 1997). Business collaborations with universities have outsized impacts compared with other coauthoring
combinations. A study of publications from 12 high-ranking private universities between 2012 and 2016 found that
publications from research collaborations with businesses had the highest citation impacts (Shneiderman 2018).
The vast majority (84% or 44,053) of U.S. business-sector publications in 2018 have multiple authors (Table 8-1). Of these,
more than half were coauthored with U.S. academic researchers (26,896). Government-coauthored publications
accounted for another 14% (7,113) of business publications. Reflecting the importance of international knowledge flows,
37% (19,430) of the business-sector publications included coauthors from institutions in more than one country (Table
8-1). For more information on scientific publications, see Indicators 2020 report "Publications Output: U.S. Trends and
International Comparisons."
TABLE 8-1
U.S. business-sector publications with other U.S. sectors and foreign institutions: 2008 and 2018
(Number and percent)
Business-sector publications
Number
(2008)
Percent
(2008)
Number
(2018)
Percent
(2018)
All publications 56,793 100.0 52,384 100.0
Total coauthored 43,296 76.2 44,053 84.1

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  33
TABLE 8-1
U.S. business-sector publications with other U.S. sectors and foreign institutions: 2008 and 2018
(Number and percent)
Business-sector publications
Number
(2008)
Percent
(2008)
Number
(2018)
Percent
(2018)
Total coauthored with another U.S. sector (excluding business sector)
and/ or foreign institution 36,973 65.1 39,949 76.3
Coauthored with another institution from business sector 9,836 17.3 8,471 16.2
Coauthored with another U.S. sector 28,874 50.8 30,276 57.8
Coauthored with academic sector 24,847 43.8 26,896 51.3
Coauthored with nonacademic sector 9,306 16.4 10,596 20.2
Coauthored with government 3,248 5.7 7,113 13.6
Coauthored with private nonprofits and other 14,187 25.0 4,448 8.5
Coauthored with foreign institution 6,625 11.7 19,430 37.1
Note(s)
Publications are classified by their publication and are assigned to a sector based on the institutional address(es) listed within. Each publication is
credited to a sector based on the institution type. Each collaborating institution is credited as co-authoring in this table when the listed authors come
from different sectors. The publication is counted as one count in the sector (whole-counting). Publications can be authored by collaborators in multiple
sectors, thus the sum of publications coauthored with various sectors can exceed the total. Publications from unknown U.S. sectors are not shown.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; U.S. Patent and Trademark Office; Elsevier, Scopus
abstract and citation database, accessed June 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Citations of Peer-Reviewed Research in Patents
Patent documents filed with the USPTO include citations to prior art, which refers to published patents and patent
applications as well as to peer-reviewed research and other published documents (nonpatent literature). Citations of S&E
articles in patent documents provide another indicator of knowledge as an input to invention. (See Table S8-60 for
detailed data on the number of citations to S&E publications in USPTO patents by author’s sector and cited field of
science.)
About 45% (290,483) of the citations in USPTO utility patents to peer-reviewed literature in 2018 were to U.S. S&E articles,
and two-thirds (196,003) of these were to articles from the U.S. academic sector (Table S8-60). U.S. S&E articles in
biological and biomedical sciences, along with articles in health sciences, account for more than half of academic
citations in patents (Figure 8-18, shown on a log scale).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  34
FIGURE 8-18
Log scale of citations of U.S. S&E articles in USPTO utility patents, by selected sector and S&E field: 2018
Note(s)
A log scale value of less than 1 represents a citation fractional count of less than 1. This can happen when a paper is coauthored and credit is divided
among the authors.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; Science-Metrix; PatentsView, USPTO, accessed April 2019; Elsevier,
Scopus abstract and citation database, accessed July 2019. See Table S8-60.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Academic institutions and the federal government together perform over a fifth of U.S. R&D (Indicators 2020 report
“Research and Development: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons”). Technology transfer activities help bring
knowledge and technology developed in those settings into the hands of those with abilities to apply, further develop, and
eventually commercialize the research. These activities include licensing of patents, support for startup companies that
use these licenses, cooperative R&D agreements, and other kinds of partnerships.
Alongside patenting and licensing, technology transfer can occur through various other channels, such as scientific
dissemination through publications, conference papers, and working papers; exchanges of lab personnel with outside
organizations that have R&D needs; and collaborative agreements and activities to find dual uses for technologies and
products with both commercial and federal applications.
Technology Transfer by Academic Institutions and Federal Labs
Technology transfer is the way that technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied and
used in another place for the same or different purpose. Scientific discoveries and inventions flow into economic activity
through freely accessible dissemination (e.g., open scientific and technical literature, person-to-person exchanges) and
market-based transactions (e.g., patent licensing, formal collaborative R&D relationships that provide intellectual property
protections, use of copyrighted materials). Organizations in academia, government, business, and nonprofit sectors all

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  35
have policies and activities directed at identifying new knowledge and technology and helping transfer them where they
can be applied, further developed, and eventually commercialized as new products and processes. Most statistics on
technology transfer address university and federal government technology transfer policies, less is known about the
technology transfer that happens within the private or nonprofit sectors.
Universities began to collect and share technology transfer metrics in an organized way following the passage of the
Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, which provided clear guidance on how universities could control their inventions (Choudry and
Ponzio 2019). While patenting is an indicator of invention, the licensing of patented technologies is a key activity for
university technology transfer offices. Both patenting and licensing are key components of the regularly reported data for
universities, along with startups based on university technology (AUTM 2018).
Inventors with academic affiliations received almost 7,000 patents in 2018; this accounted for about 4% of the USPTO
patents granted to U.S. inventors (Figure 8-1).6 Over the last decade, inventions, licensing, and technology-linked startups
at academic institutions have grown rapidly, although from a relatively small base, as shown by the data collected by the
AUTM (Table 8-2).7 As a cumulative indicator, active licenses from universities exceeded 45,000 in 2017 (Table 8-2).
TABLE 8-2
University technology transfer activity indicators: 2007, 2012, and 2017
(Number of activities)
Technology transfer activity 2007 2012 2017
Invention disclosures and patenting      
Inventions disclosed 14,398 19,827 24,998
Patent applications 11,797 14,192 15,335
Patents issued 3,622 5,153 7,459
Licensing      
All licenses, total active in the year 30,351 40,006 45,657
Licenses issued 4,354 5,130 6,283
Startup companies      
Startup companies formed 555 705 1080
Operational startups 3,388 4,002 6,050
Note(s)
AUTM collects data on invention and patent-related activities of its member universities. The number of member universities varies slightly from year to
year. There were 161 in 2007, 165 in 2015, and 167 in 2017. The response rate of the survey in 2017 was 61.9% (AUTM 2018). Responding institutions
may report for any 12-month period ending in the identified year.
Source(s)
AUTM, AUTM Licensing Survey (various years), accessed 5 May 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Seven federal agencies conduct more than $1 billion of R&D annually and account for most of the annual total of federal
technology transfer activities (Indicators 2020 report “Research and Development: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons”). However, nearly all agencies and their associated federal labs promote the transfer of government-
developed inventions with potential for commercial applications. Compared with businesses, patenting occurs less
frequently among federal labs. Of the 153,000 patents granted to U.S. assignees in 2018, just over 1,300 patents had
government assignees (Figure 8-1). Similar to university technology transfer metrics, federal labs use patenting and
licensing statistics as technology transfer metrics; thus, this report presents these activities in this section.
However, technology transfer activities differ in emphasis across agencies (Table 8-3). The Department of Energy, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and Health and Human Services exhibit particularly intensive
licensing activity. The Departments of Commerce and Defense participate in relatively large numbers of cooperative R&D
agreements, while the Department of Agriculture has by far the most other collaborative R&D relationships.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  36
TABLE 8-3
Federal laboratory technology transfer activity indicators, by selected agencies: FYs 2006, 2009, 2012, and 2016
(Number of activities)
Fiscal year and technology transfer activity All federal laboratories DOD HHS DOE NASA USDA DOC DHS
2006
Invention disclosures and patenting                
Inventions disclosed 5,193 1,056 442 1,694 1,749 105 14 NA
Patent applications 1,912 691 166 726 142 83 5 NA
Patents issued 1,284 472 164 438 85 39 7 NA
Licensing                
All licenses, total active in the fiscal year 10,186 444 1,535 5,916 2,856 332 111 NA
Invention licenses 4,163 438 1,213 1,420 308 332 111 NA
New invention licenses in the fiscal year 711 56 253 203 47 25 83 NA
Collaborative relationships for R&D                
CRADAs, total active in the fiscal year 7,268 2,999 164 631 1 195 3,008 NA
Traditional CRADAs 3,666 2,424 92 631 1 163 149 NA
Other collaborative R&D relationships 9,738 0 0 0 4,275 3,477 2,114 NA
2009
Invention disclosures and patenting                
Inventions disclosed 4,450 831 353 1,439 1,412 178 40 32
Patent applications 2,085 690 284 775 141 123 20 2
Patents issued 1,402 404 480 363 93 24 7 2
Licensing                
All licenses, total active in the fiscal year 12,598 432 1,584 5,742 4,181 330 40 63
Invention licenses 3,854 386 1,304 1,452 146 302 40 0
New invention licenses in the fiscal year 492 57 198 139 49 22 11 0
Collaborative relationships for R&D                
CRADAs, total active in the fiscal year 7,740 2,870 457 744 1 243 2,397 23
Traditional CRADAs 4,264 2,247 284 744 1 201 101 22
Other collaborative R&D relationships 17,647 1 0 0 4,507 10,306 2,828 5
2012
Invention disclosures and patenting                
Inventions disclosed 5,347 1,078 352 1,661 1,656 160 60 40
Patent applications 2,576 1,013 233 933 130 122 27 10
Patents issued 2,325 1,048 335 676 131 69 13 0
Licensing                
All licenses, total active in the fiscal year 8,351 520 1,465 5,328 346 384 41 0
Invention licenses 3,893 432 1,090 1,428 296 341 41 0
New invention licenses in the fiscal year 501 44 192 192 28 28 6 0
Collaborative relationships for R&D                
CRADAs, total active in the fiscal year 8,307 2,400 377 742 0 274 2,410 94
Traditional CRADAs 4,293 1,328 245 742 0 211 154 89
Other collaborative R&D relationships 19,537 0 0 0 1,756 14,691 2,782 11
2016
Invention disclosures and patenting                
Inventions disclosed 5,086 874 320 1,760 1,554 244 64 17
Patent applications 2,596 941 269 999 129 109 25 15
Patents issued 2,341 665 579 856 103 60 16 3
Licensing                
All licenses, total active in the fiscal year 8,950 515 1,750 5,410 452 441 57 5
Invention licenses 4,156 358 1,721 943 387 370 57 5
New invention licenses in the fiscal year 572 57 221 145 97 27 15 1
Collaborative relationships for R&D                
CRADAs, total active in the fiscal year 11,644 3,125 590 739 12 238 2,940 343

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  37
TABLE 8-3
Federal laboratory technology transfer activity indicators, by selected agencies: FYs 2006, 2009, 2012, and 2016
(Number of activities)
Fiscal year and technology transfer activity All federal laboratories DOD HHS DOE NASA USDA DOC DHS
Traditional CRADAs 6,720 2,297 391 739 12 161 335 272
Other collaborative R&D relationships 18,472 452 147 0 2,204 11,854 3,273 71
NA = not available.
DOD = Department of Defense; HHS = Department of Health and Human Services; DOE = Department of Energy; NASA = National Aeronautics and Space
Administration; USDA = Department of Agriculture; DOC = Department of Commerce; DHS = Department of Homeland Security; CRADA = Cooperative
R&D Agreement.
Note(s)
The table includes seven federal departments and agencies that reported R&D obligations at or above $1 billion in FY 2014. (The National Science
Foundation was also in this group, but its corresponding data were not available.) Other federal agencies not listed but included in the All federal
laboratories totals are the Department of the Interior, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Environmental
Protection Agency. Invention licenses refer to inventions that are patented or could be patented. CRADAs refers to all agreements executed under
CRADA authority (15 U.S.C. 3710a). Traditional CRADAs are collaborative R&D partnerships between a federal laboratory and one or more nonfederal
organizations. Federal agencies have varying authorities for other kinds of collaborative R&D relationships.
Source(s)
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce, Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2016:
Summary Report to the President and the Congress (2019), Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2013. Summary Report to the President
and the Congress (2015), and Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2010. Summary Report to the President and the Congress (2012);
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce, Federal Lab Technology Transfer Database v.2015. Accessed 10
January 2020.
Beyond invention licensing, NASA has made the release and licensing of NASA-developed software an emphasis of its
technology transfer activities. In addition to the statistics shown in Table 8-3, NASA releases its own statistics on
software. In FY 2016, NASA executed over 2,600 new software usage agreements, more than double the amount executed
in 2011, and it released 550 software products into the public domain (National Institute of Standards and Technology
[NIST] 2019). NIST’s annual reports provide more detail about agency-level focus in technology transfer.
Federal Policies and Programs to Reduce Barriers to Innovation
Over the last 30 years, many national policies and related programs have aimed to support businesses in exploiting new
technologies for commercial applications and implementing innovations, without requiring the government to make
decisions better left to the competitive marketplace. The government has recognized that structural and market barriers—
often termed technological and commercial “valleys of death”—may create difficult-to-bridge gaps for the innovation
process and for otherwise promising new technologies (Branscomb and Auerswald 2002). The government has launched
several federal-wide programs intended to strengthen the development and flow of early-stage technologies into the
commercial marketplace. Other policy initiatives have focused on accelerating the commercial exploitation of academic
R&D and encouraging R&D ideas and technologies with commercial potential by small or minority-owned businesses.
SBIR and STTR
By budget authority, the most substantial federal programs are the longstanding SBIR and STTR programs. These two
programs provide competitively awarded funding to small businesses for stimulating technological innovation, addressing
federal R&D needs, increasing private-sector commercialization of innovations flowing from federal R&D, and fostering
technology transfer through cooperative R&D between small businesses and research institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  38
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) provides overall coordination for both programs, with implementation by
the federal agencies that participate (SBA 2015). Agencies contribute based on their R&D budgets, and both programs
provide awards to firms with fewer than 500 employees. Awardees use the funding to assess the scientific and technical
feasibility of ideas that may have commercial potential. Beginning in 1983 with 785 awards, the SBIR program conferred
over 4,800 awards in 2018, accounting for almost $3 billion in funding in that year (Table 8-4).
TABLE 8-4
SBIR and STTR awards funding, by type of award: Selected years, FYs 1983–2018
(Number of awards and funding in millions of dollars)
Fiscal year
SBIR STTR
Number of awards Funding ($ millions) Number of awards Funding ($ millions)
Total Total Total Total
1983 785 37.9 na na
1985 1,821 192.4 na na
1990 3,189 447.6 na na
1995 4,321 948.0 1 0.1
2000 5,217 1,047.0 404 63.2
2005 6,325 1,862.5 825 236.6
2010 6,306 2,304.9 903 298.7
2011 5,498 2,134.9 709 266.8
2012 5,003 2,047.7 637 222.5
2013 4,486 1,932.4 643 225.5
2014 4,570 2,050.9 703 290.2
2015 4,455 2,210.1 722 285.2
2016 4,610 2,310.7 800 311.5
2017 5,152 2,623.4 847 317.1
2018 4,817 2,727.1 793 382.8
na = not applicable.
SBIR = Small Business Innovation Research; STTR = Small Business Technology Transfer.
Note(s)
The first SBIR program awards were made in FY 1983. The first STTR program award was made in FY 1995. Funding data are awarded amount through
FY 2014; obligated amount in FY 2015 and later.
Source(s)
Small Business Administration, SBIR/STTR official website, accessed 5 June 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Established a decade after the SBIR program, the STTR program facilitates cooperative R&D by small businesses,
universities, and nonprofit research organizations and encourages the transfer of technology developed through such
research by entrepreneurial small businesses. The STTR program had 404 awards in 2000, and in 2018, there were 793
awards with a total funding of $383 million (Table 8-4).
Other Federal Programs
Other federal programs typically have objectives that closely reflect specific agency missions and draw resources at
levels well below SBIR and STTR. Table 8-5 briefly describes several of the larger programs currently run by federal R&D-
performing agencies. Table S8-61 provides greater detail on such federal agency policies and programs.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  39
TABLE 8-5
Examples of federal policies and programs supporting early-stage technology development and innovation
(Summary of program goals and activities for selected federal agencies)
Agency, office, and program
Department of Agriculture
Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics
Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
Program name: Agricultural Research Partnerships (ARP) Network
Program goals: The ARS founded the ARP Network to expand the impact of ARS research and provide resources to help ARS commercial
partners grow.
Program activities: The ARP Network matches business needs with ARS innovations and research capabilities and provides business assistance
services to help companies and startups solve agricultural problems, develop products, and create new jobs. The ARP Network assists ARS in
creating new partnerships and in supporting existing partnerships to advance ARS R&D efforts and subsequent utilization, including
commercialization. Some of the ARP Network activities include matching industry needs with ARS patents and researchers for partnering;
providing access to ARS research expertise, facilities, and equipment; and assisting in identifying sources of funding. The ARP Network is
composed of organizations interested in agriculture-based economic development.
Department of Defense
Department wide
Program name: Manufacturing Technology (ManTech) Program
Program goals: The Defense-Wide ManTech Program was established to address crosscutting, game-changing initiatives that are beyond the
scope of any one military department or defense agency.
Program activities: ManTech seeks to address defense manufacturing needs, transition manufacturing R&D processes into production
applications, attack manufacturing issues, and explore new opportunities.
Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences
Program name: Therapeutics for Rare and Neglected Diseases (TRND)
Program goals: The TRND program supports pre-clinical development of therapeutic candidates intended to treat rare or neglected disorders,
with the goal of enabling an Investigational New Drug (IND) application to the Food and Drug Administration.
Program activities: The TRND program encourages and speeds the development of new treatments for diseases with high unmet medical needs.
The program advances the entire field of therapeutic development by encouraging scientific and technological innovations to improve success
rates in the crucial preclinical stage of development. TRND stimulates therapeutic development research collaborations among NIH and
academic scientists, nonprofit organizations, and pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies working on rare and neglected illnesses. The
program provides NIH's rare and neglected disease drug development capabilities, expertise, clinical resources, and regulatory expertise to
research partners to optimize promising therapeutics and move them through preclinical testing, with the goal to generate sufficient-quality data
to support successful IND applications and first-in-human studies in limited circumstances.
Department of Transportation
Federal Highway Administration
Office of Innovative Program Delivery
Program name: State Transportation Innovation Council (STIC) Incentive Program
Program goals: The STIC Incentive Program offers technical assistance and resources to support the standardization of innovative practices
among state transportation agencies and other public-sector stakeholders.
Program activities: The STIC Incentive Program provides up to $100,000 per state per federal fiscal year to STICs to support or offset the costs of
standardizing innovative practices in a state transportation agency or other public-sector STIC stakeholder. STIC Incentive Program funding may
be used to conduct internal assessments; build capacity; develop guidance, standards, and specifications; implement system process changes;
organize peer exchanges; offset implementation costs; or conduct other activities the STIC identifies to address Technology and Innovation
Deployment Program goals.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate
Advanced Exploration Systems Division
Program name: Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships (NextSTEP)
Program goals: The NextSTEP program is a public-private partnership model that encourages commercial development of deep space
exploration capabilities to support more extensive human spaceflight missions in the proving ground around and beyond cislunar space—the
space near Earth that extends just beyond the moon.
Program activities: NextSTEP stimulates the commercial space industry to help NASA achieve its strategic goals and objectives for expanding
the frontiers of knowledge, capability, and opportunities in space. The NextSTEP partnership model provides an opportunity for NASA and
industry to partner to develop capabilities that meet NASA human space exploration objectives while also supporting industry commercialization
plans. Through these public-private partnerships, NextSTEP partners provide advanced concept studies and technology development projects in
the areas of advanced propulsion, habitation systems, and small satellites.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  40
TABLE 8-5
Examples of federal policies and programs supporting early-stage technology development and innovation
(Summary of program goals and activities for selected federal agencies)
Agency, office, and program
National Science Foundation (NSF)
Directorate for Engineering
Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships
Program name: Innovation Corps (I-Corps™) program (NSF, NIH, the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture all have I-Corps programs.)
Program goals: The I-Corps program aims to foster entrepreneurship that will lead to the commercialization of technology that has been
supported previously by NSF-funded research. The program provides entrepreneurial education for federally funded scientists and engineers,
pairing them with business mentors for an intensive curriculum focused on discovering a demand-driven path from their lab work to a marketable
product.
Program activities: There are three distinct components of I-Corps: Teams, Nodes, and Sites. I-Corps Teams include NSF-funded researchers who
will receive additional support—in the form of mentoring and funding—to accelerate innovation that can attract subsequent third-party funding.
Nodes serve as hubs for education, infrastructure, and research that engage academic scientists and engineers in innovation; they also deliver
the I-Corps Curriculum to I-Corps Teams. I-Corps Sites are academic institutions that catalyze the engagement of multiple, local teams in
technology transition and strengthen local innovation.
Note(s)
The table summarizes examples of policy and program information collected during the spring and fall of 2017 from federal staff for a selected set of
U.S. agencies with major R&D and technology development activities. The table reflects agency responses. For a more comprehensive list of federal
policies and programs see Table S8-61.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation; SRI International, special tabulations of federal program
information (2017). See Table S8-61.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Global Flows of Payments for Intellectual Property: Trade in Licensing and Fees
Licensing allows intellectual property developed within firms to be used externally; globally active businesses transfer
their intellectual property across national boundaries, exploiting opportunities in external markets. This intellectual
property includes the use of proprietary rights—patents, trademarks, copyrights, industrial processes, and designs—and
licenses to reproduce or distribute intellectual property embodied in produced originals, prototypes, live performances,
and televised broadcasts (World Trade Organization 2016).
Income from outside the country that U.S. firms receive for the use of their intellectual property is a component of global
exports of services; thus, it plays an important role in understanding the global balance of trade. (Indicators 2020 report
“Production and Trade of Knowledge- and Technology-Intensive Industries” covers goods trade in R&D-intensive exports
and knowledge-intensive services.) The export revenues from these types of transactions, known as “charges for the use
of intellectual property,” provide a broad indicator of technology flows across the global economy and the value of an
economy’s intellectual property in the international marketplace.
Global export revenues (receipts for the use of intellectual property) totaled $315 billion in 2017 according to the World
Trade Organization, the organization that collects these data from national offices and compiles them internationally
(Figure 8-19). Unlike patenting, which increasingly takes place in middle-income countries, licensing income for
intellectual property continues to be mainly a high-income country source of revenue. The United States is the world’s
largest exporter of these services; exports increased from $102 billion in 2008 to $128 billion in 2017 (Figure 8-19). U.S.
imports also expanded, but the United States maintains a surplus between exports and imports for this category. The EU,
the world’s second-largest exporter, imports more than it exports, resulting in a substantial deficit. Japan, the third-largest

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  41
exporter of intellectual property services, has a substantial trade surplus. Japan’s global export share remained stable
between 2008 and 2017 (Figure 8-19). Outside of high-income countries, receipts for the use of intellectual property are
lower; however, as with USPTO patenting, the U.S. global share of export receipts fell—in this case from 49% in 2008 to
41% in 2017 (Figure 8-19).
FIGURE 8-19
Exports and imports of intellectual property (charges for their use), by selected region, country, or economy: 2008–17
00
EU = European Union; ROW = rest of the world.
Note(s)
These are payments for the use of proprietary rights (such as patents, trademarks, copyrights, industrial processes and designs including trade secrets,
franchises). These rights can arise from research and development, as well as from marketing. These charges also include those for licenses to
reproduce or distribute intellectual property embodied in produced originals or prototypes (such as copyrights on books and manuscripts, computer
software, cinematographic works, and sound recordings) and related rights (such as for live performances and television, cable, or satellite broadcast).
EU exports do not include intra-EU exports. EU imports do not include intra-EU imports.
Source(s)
World Trade Organization, trade and tariff data, accessed 27 September 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  42
Innovation Indicators: United States and Other Major Economies
 
Inventions and knowledge transfer provide the raw material for new and improved commercially viable products and
processes. Despite frequent usage of the term itself, innovation is hard to measure. Business innovation is defined as the
implementation of a new or improved product or business process that differs significantly from previous products or
processes and that has been introduced in the market or brought into use by the firm (OECD/Eurostat 2018).
This section discusses complementary innovation-related indicators that provide information on different aspects of
innovation. For example, innovation indicators aim to measure the way inputs create new value in the economy. Examples
of such indicators include business investment in intangibles, such as software, R&D, and artistic creations; private
funding of innovation; and firm-reported data on the introduction of new and improved products and processes.
Innovation also produces broader economic impacts, such as improved living standards, productivity growth, and the
creation of new firms and new jobs. Broader societal impacts also include improved health outcomes and life expectancy
(Cutler and McClellan 2001; Deaton 2013).
Investment in Intangibles
Intellectual property resulting from knowledge and creative activity includes literary and artistic works as well as symbols,
images, and names used in commerce (WIPO 2019). The assets underlying these protections are often intangible assets.
Some intangibles create benefits for years to come; examples include, but are not limited to, computer software, R&D
activity, and designs and artistic creations. Digitization allows the simultaneous use of many types of intangibles in more
than one location, adding a dimension of use that tangibles, such as machine tools and buildings, do not possess.
Transmitting these intangibles digitally across networks multiplies potential impact. U.S. investment in computer software
and R&D have risen rapidly in the last two decades.
Between 2007 and 2017, U.S. businesses increased their annual investment in these three intangible assets, computer
software, R&D, and artistic originals, by almost 50% to $796 billion. By broad sector, manufacturing and
nonmanufacturing, this intangible investment was $267 and $528 billion (inflation adjusted), respectively (Figure 8-20 and
Figure 8-21).8 Patents, copyrights, and trade secrets are different forms of intellectual property protection that secure
intangible asset owners with the rights of exclusive use.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  43
0
FIGURE 8-20
U.S. private investment in intangibles, by type, for the manufacturing sector: 1987–2017
Note(s)
Investment in artistic originals is not estimated for manufacturing.
Source(s)
Bureau of Labor Statistics, Intellectual Property Products, Private Business Sector, accessed 30 April 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  44
0
FIGURE 8-21
U.S. private investment in intangibles, by type, for the nonmanufacturing sector: 1987–2017
Note(s)
Measured in 2012 constant dollars; farm sector is not included in these measures. Artistic originals include expenditures for the development and
production of theatrical movies, long-lived television programs, books, music, and other artistic originals.
Source(s)
Bureau of Labor Statistics, Intellectual Property Products, Private Business Sector, accessed 30 April 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
As a share of total investment in intangibles, manufacturing invested more in R&D than nonmanufacturing, and
nonmanufacturing invested more in software relative to the manufacturing sector (Figure 8-20 and Figure 8-21). In
addition, there was $80 billion in investment in artistic originals in 2017, all outside of manufacturing (Figure 8-21).
Digitization and networking have enabled the transformation of these originals into downloadable and streaming services;
users increasingly consume such services using personal devices such as laptops, tablets, and cell phones. GDP
statistics for many countries, including the United States, include investment measures for computer software and
databases, R&D expenditures, and artistic originals.
Venture Capital
Access to financing is an essential component of the translation of inventions to innovations, both for new and growing
firms. The difficulty of entrepreneurs obtaining financing contributes to the “valley of death,” the inability of new and
nascent firms to obtain financing to commercialize their inventions and technology. New entrepreneurs and startups rely
on their own funds as well as funds from friends and family, bank loans, venture capital, angel investment, or government
support (OECD 2014:174). Venture capital investment also supports product development and marketing, company
expansion, and acquisition financing.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  45
0
Global venture capital investment, measured in current dollars, reached a historic high of $271 billion in 2018, more than a
50% increase over the 2017 total and nearly four times as high as its level 5 years ago (Figure 8-22). Over the last decade,
the venture capital market has shifted from a U.S.-centric structure toward a more globalized market with the Asian
region, primarily China, as a rapidly growing recipient of investment. As the leading recipient country of venture capital
investment in 2018, the United States received 44% ($119 billion) of total global venture capital funds (Figure 8-22). China,
the second-largest recipient, received $97 billion in venture capital funds representing a global share of 36% (Figure 8-22).
The third-largest recipient, the EU nations, collectively received an 8% share (Figure 8-22). Five Asian countries—India,
Indonesia, Japan, Singapore, and South Korea—collectively received 7% of global venture capital (Table S8-62). ICT-
producing industries and health care industries were the largest recipients of these investments in the United States over
the last several years, according to private-sector data (PitchBook and National Venture Capital Association [NVCA]
2019).
FIGURE 8-22
Global venture capital investment, by selected country or economy: 2005–18
EU = European Union; ROW = rest of the world.
Note(s)
China includes Hong Kong. Other selected Asia includes India, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore, and South Korea.
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019. See Table S8-62.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  46
0
8
0
8
Venture Capital Investment in the United States
Venture capital in the United States has risen overall in the past 5 years. Since 2014, investment in the United States has
surpassed the previous high of $51 billion set during the run-up in venture capital associated with the dot-com bubble in
2000 (Table S8-62). However, during this recent period of robust global investment growth, the U.S. global share dropped
from 68% in 2013 to 44% in 2018; faster growth in the funds received by Asian economies including China, India,
Indonesia, and South Korea accounted for the shift (Table S8-62).
The U.S. corporate sector and Chinese investors have been two important drivers of U.S. venture capital investment over
the last several years. The U.S. corporate share of U.S. venture financing increased from 32% to 51% between 2013 and
2018 (PitchBook and NVCA 2019). U.S. corporations, particularly large Internet and software companies—Alphabet,
Amazon, Facebook, and Microsoft—have made major investments in startups. For example, Alphabet’s venture arm, GV,
has at least $2.4 billion in assets under management and aims to invest $500 million in startups per year (PitchBook and
NVCA 2019).
Investors from China have also contributed to the recent growth of U.S. venture capital, financing 17% of U.S. venture
capital investment in 2018 compared with 3% in 2013 (Figure 8-23). China’s growing wealth and its government’s push to
develop and commercialize technologies, such as artificial intelligence, have prompted increased Chinese investment in
U.S. startups (Dwoskin 2016).
FIGURE 8-23
Chinese investment in U.S. venture capital: 2013–18
Note(s)
China includes Hong Kong. China venture capital investment is defined as investors that have a headquarters in China and participate in venture capital
deals to finance U.S.-based companies.
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  47
Two industry sectors—information and communication, and health care—received the majority of investments over the
last several years. In 2018, investment in these two sectors was a combined $77 billion, accounting for 65% of total U.S.
venture capital investment (Table 8-6 and Table S8-62). Within the information and communication industry sector, the
software industry received $39.8 billion, the largest of any industry (Table 8-6). In the health care sector, the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry received the greatest investment at $18.7 billion (Table 8-6).
TABLE 8-6
U.S. venture capital investment in health care, ICT, and transportation industries: 2013 and 2018
(Millions of dollars)
Industry 2013 2018
Health care 13,271 31,785
Health care devices and supplies 4,917 5,723
Health care technology systems 1,239 4,855
Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology 5,953 18,662
Other health care 1,161 2,545
ICT 20,703 45,697
Communications and networking 1,021 750
Computer hardware 1,054 1,334
Media 1,495 2,198
Software 16,082 39,764
Other ICT 1,050 1,652
Transportation 648 6,645
ICT = information and communications technology.
Note(s)
Other ICT consists of communications and networking, IT services, semiconductors, and other. Other healthcare consists of healthcare devices and
supplies, healthcare services, healthcare technology systems, and other.
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019. See Table S8-64.
Science and Engineering Indicators
According to PitchBook’s market and technology classification, technology areas with significant and rising levels of U.S.
investment included mobile, artificial intelligence, industrials, big data, and financial technology (Figure 8-24 and Table
S8-65).9 These five technology areas comprised 63% of total U.S. venture capital investment in 2018 compared with 39%
in 2013 (Figure 8-24 and Table S8-62). These technology areas rely on software, the industry that has attracted the largest
amount of investment of any U.S. industry. Artificial intelligence had the fastest growth rate among these technologies,
rising sevenfold to reach $16 billion in 2018 (Figure 8-24). Large Internet corporations, including Alphabet, Facebook, and
Microsoft, heavily invest in R&D and venture capital in artificial intelligence startups.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  48
0
5
FIGURE 8-24
U.S. venture capital investment, by selected industry vertical or technology: 2013–18
AI = artificial intelligence.
Note(s)
Industry verticals are groups of firms focused on a technology area. These areas can overlap, thus the sum of investment of these verticals can exceed
total venture capital investment.
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019. See Table S8-65.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Venture Capital Investment in China
Venture capital investment in China has increased rapidly, reaching $97 billion in 2018 (Figure 8-22). Both domestic and
international investors provide venture capital investment in China. In 2018, U.S. investors financed $53 billion of China’s
venture capital, up from $2 billion in 2013 (Figure 8-25).

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  49
0 0
FIGURE 8-25
U.S. investment in Chinese venture capital: 2013–18
Note(s)
China includes Hong Kong. U.S. venture capital investment is defined as investors that have a headquarters in the United States and participate in
venture capital deals to finance Chinese-based companies.
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
According to PitchBook’s primary industry classification, the ICT industry sector was the largest recipient of venture
capital investment in China in 2018 ($54.5 billion), accounting for slightly more than half of total investment (Table 8-7
and Table S8-64). Software received by far the most investment ($45.5 billion) among the seven ICT industries (Table
8-7). The transportation industry received $13.5 billion (14% of total investment), up from less than $200 million in 2013
(Table 8-7 and Table S8-64). The health care sector received $6.2 billion, a far smaller share (6%) of China’s investment
compared with that of the United States (27%) (Table 8-6, Table 8-7, and Table S8-64).
TABLE 8-7
China venture capital investment in health care, ICT, and transportation industries: 2013 and 2018
(Millions of dollars)
Industry 2013 2018
Healthcare 290 6,184
Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology 71 3,206
Other 219 2,978
ICT 1,130 54,489
Computer hardware 2 984
Software 851 45,512

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  50
0
TABLE 8-7
China venture capital investment in health care, ICT, and transportation industries: 2013 and 2018
(Millions of dollars)
Industry 2013 2018
Media 218 4,436
Other ICT 59 3,557
Transportation 144 13,506
ICT = information and communications technology.
Note(s)
Other ICT consists of communications and networking, information technology services, semiconductors, and other. Other health care consists of health
care devices and supplies, health care services, healthcare technology systems, and other.
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019. See Table S8-64.
Science and Engineering Indicators
According to PitchBook’s industry vertical classification, five technology areas—mobile, industrials, mobile commerce,
financial, and e-commerce—were among the top recipients of China’s venture capital investment (Figure 8-26 and Table
S8-65). Investment in each of these areas grew from $1 billion or less in 2013 to $19 billion to $36 billion in 2018 (Figure
8-26 and Table S8-65). Mobile, mobile commerce, financial, and e-commerce all rely on software, which in turn led all
industries in attracting venture capital investment (Table S8-64).
FIGURE 8-26
China venture capital investment, by selected industry vertical or technology: 2013–18
Note(s)
Industry verticals are classified by PitchBook and consist of firms operating in diverse industries focused on a technology area. Firms may be classified
in multiple industries. The sum of industry verticals exceeds the total amount of venture capital investment.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  51
Source(s)
PitchBook, venture capital and private equity database, accessed 21 September 2019. See Table S8-65.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Innovation Activities by U.S. Businesses
Since 2008, the U.S. Census Bureau and the National Science Foundation have collected comprehensive company-level
data on innovation (i.e., counts of new goods and services), as well as counts of improved processes for production and
distribution for U.S. companies (with five or more workers). According to these data, 17% of firms (one in six) introduced a
new product or process from 2014 to 2016; this incidence rate was higher in manufacturing compared with other
industries (Table 8-8 and Figure 8-27). By this measure, a larger number of firms in the nonmanufacturing sector report an
innovation than in the manufacturing sector; as a proportion of all firms, however, 15% of nonmanufacturing firms,
compared with 33% of manufacturing firms, report an innovation (Table 8-8 and Figure 8-27). 
TABLE 8-8
U.S. companies introducing new or significantly improved products or processes, by industry sector: 2014–16
(Number and percent)
Industry
NAICS
code
Companies
(number)
New or significantly improved
products or processes
(percent)
New or significantly
improved products
(percent)
New or significantly
improved processes
(percent)
All industries
21–23,
31–33,
42–81
1,138,671 16.7 9.5 13.1
Manufacturing
industries 31–33 113,066 32.7 22.1 25.5
Nonmanufacturing
industries
21–23,
42–81 1,025,605 14.9 8.1 11.7
NAICS = North American Industry Classification System.
Note(s)
New or significantly improved products include goods or services. Statistics for the number of companies are based only on companies in the United
States responding "Yes" to at least one of the items on the survey relating to new or significantly improved products regardless of whether the company
performed or funded R&D. These statistics do not include an adjustment to the weight to account for unit nonresponse.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, and U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D and Innovation Survey,
2016, Table 64 and Table 65.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  52
FIGURE 8-27
U.S. companies introducing new or significantly improved products or processes, by industry sector, number of companies,
and percentage of companies: 2014–16
0
Note(s)
Statistics for the number of companies are based only on companies in the United States responding "Yes" to at least one of the items on the survey
relating to new or significantly improved products regardless of whether the company performed or funded R&D. These statistics do not include an
adjustment to the weight to account for unit nonresponse.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, and U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D and Innovation Survey
(BRDIS), 2016, Table 68 and Table 69.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Within the manufacturing sector, the chemicals, transportation equipment, and medical equipment and supplies industries
have rates above 35% (Figure 8-28). Research-intensive industries that overlap with technology areas with large public
investments have high rates of innovation, including pharmaceuticals. The navigational, measuring, electromedical, and
control instruments manufacturing industry reports an incidence rate of 60% (Figure 8-28). Outside of manufacturing, in
addition to the ICT-producing industries discussed earlier, health care services; architectural, engineering, and related
services; wholesale trade; and scientific R&D services have incidence rates above the nonmanufacturing average (Figure
8-29).

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  53
0
FIGURE 8-28
Share of U.S. manufacturing companies reporting product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2014–16
Note(s)
The survey asked companies to identify innovations introduced from 2014 to 2016. Electrical equipment and components includes appliances.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS),
2016.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  54
0
FIGURE 8-29
Share of U.S. nonmanufacturing companies reporting product or process innovation, by selected industry: 2014–16
Note(s)
The survey asked companies to identify innovations introduced from 2014 to 2016. Software publishers includes other publishing.
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, and U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D and Innovation Survey
(BRDIS), 2015, Table 68.
Science and Engineering Indicators
ICT-producing industries span the manufacturing, information, and service sectors. They cover computer and electronic
products manufacturing, software publishing, information and data processing, and computer system design. These ICT
industries report among the highest rates of innovation (Figure 8-28 and Figure 8-29).
International Comparisons in Innovation Incidence
Cross-country comparisons of business innovation rates provide a measure distinct from R&D that offers an indication of
international competitiveness. These international comparisons are collected under The Oslo Manual (OECD/Eurostat
2005) and show differences in rates of firm product and process innovation (Table 8-9). Although these statistics exhibit
increasing harmonization across methodology and survey concepts, international comparability may be limited due to
ongoing survey differences.10
Despite differences in how countries measure innovation, broad patterns emerge. Relatively small economies focused on
S&T, such as Finland, Israel, and Switzerland, report some of the highest rates of product and process innovation (Table
8-9). As measured, the United States, Japan, and the United Kingdom rank lower in reported incidence rates (Table 8-9).

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  55
TABLE 8-9
International comparison of firm innovation rate of product and process, by country: 2012–14
(Percent of firms)
Country
Product-innovative firms (regardless of any other type of
innovation)
Process-innovative firms (regardless of any other type of
innovation)
Australia 35.7 31.0
Austria 30.8 32.8
Belgium 31.9 38.8
Brazil 18.5 32.1
Chile 5.1 8.2
China 18.7 20.0
Czechia 25.1 22.4
Denmark 23.2 23.2
Estonia 11.0 13.0
Finland 34.5 32.0
France 27.7 27.1
Germany 34.4 24.1
Greece 23.4 29.6
Hungary 12.0 9.6
Ireland 35.7 37.8
Israel 36.2 34.0
Italy 24.7 24.5
Japan 14.6 19.2
Latvia 8.5 9.7
Lithuania 20.9 31.4
Luxembourg 28.8 25.7
Netherlands 32.5 28.1
New
Zealand 18.1 18.9
Norway 32.9 26.9
Poland 9.5 10.9
Portugal 28.4 35.4
Russia 5.3 NA
Slovakia 12.6 12.9
Slovenia 25.2 22.6
South Korea 16.8 17.3
Spain 11.2 14.8
Sweden 31.4 25.8
Switzerland 42.4 26.1
Turkey 22.7 26.8
United
Kingdom 26.8 17.9
United
States 18.4 19.8
NA = not available.
Note(s)
Where indicated, most recent data are used. The comparison is limited to the sectors and industries that are jointly surveyed, based on the North
American Industry Classification System equivalents of International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities Revision 4. These are:
the European Union Core Coverage: B (mining and quarrying); C (manufacturing); D and E (electricity, gas, steam, water supply, sewerage, waste
management, remediation); G 46 (wholesale trade, except motor vehicles and motorcycles); H (transport and storage); J 58 (publishing); J 61
(telecommunications); J 62 (computer programming, consultancy, and related activities); J 63 (information services); K (finance and insurance); M 71
(architecture, engineering, technical testing and analysis).
Source(s)
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, National Science Foundation, and U.S. Census Bureau, Business R&D and Innovation Survey,
2015; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2015.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  56
Science and Engineering Indicators
The Diffusion of Innovation: Productivity and Jobs
Many countries set the creation of new products and processes through innovation as a key national goal. There is broad
consensus that S&T policy and economic policy at the national level should encourage and support innovation; economic
growth and advancements in knowledge serve as important justifications for increased investment in S&T (OECD 2016).
In addition to products and processes, longer-term impacts of innovation are also often targets of interest. This section
closes with two indicators of the translation of technology into the economy: technology-driven productivity growth and
the growth of small firms in the United States.
Multifactor Productivity
Multifactor productivity (MFP), an internationally comparable indicator of the impact of innovation and technological
change on economic growth, is calculated by dividing output measures by input measures. The source data come from
national production accounts, the source of GDP statistics. The data presented in this section show a moderation of MFP
across several high-income economies. In the United States, MFP grew faster on average between 1995 and 2007
compared with the first half of the 1990s, and growth has slowed since 2007 (Figure 8-30). Labor productivity, which
indicates the amount of output for each unit of labor, has also moderated in the United States since 1995 (Figure 8-30).
FIGURE 8-30
U.S. labor and multifactor productivity annual growth, multiyear averages, for private business sector: 1948–2018
Note(s)
Growth is calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) as the average annual rate of growth between the first year and the last year of each period.
Source(s)
BLS, Productivity Measures (2019), Private Business Sector (Excluding Government Enterprises), accessed 5 May 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  57
This moderation in the MFP growth rate is evident in other high-income economies as well, including France, Germany,
Japan, and the United Kingdom (Figure 8-31). South Korea has seen some moderation in MFP, yet its average growth rate
remains high relative to the rest of OECD (Figure 8-31).
FIGURE 8-31
Economy-wide growth in multifactor productivity for selected OECD countries, multiyear averages: 1990–2018
OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Note(s)
Growth is calculated by the author as the average annual rate of growth between the first year and the last year of each period. Data for Japan run
through 2017.
Source(s)
OECD, Growth in GDP per capita, productivity and ULC, accessed 5 May 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators
Small, Fast-Growing Firms
Innovation also affects the economy through entrepreneurship and firm creation. Firm-level data from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s Business Dynamics Statistics provide information on establishments opening and closing, firm startups and
shutdowns, and associated employment impacts. Based on U.S. Census Bureau data, half of U.S. firms were 5 years old
or younger in 1982; this share has steadily declined, leveling off at about a third between 2012 and 2016 (Figure 8-32).
Young firms accounted for 19% of employment in 1982 but only 10% in 2016 (Figure 8-32).

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  58
0
FIGURE 8-32
Share of firms, job creation, and employment from firms 5 years old or younger: 1982–2016
Source(s)
U.S. Census Bureau, Business Dynamics Statistics, accessed 4 April 2019.
Science and Engineering Indicators

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  59
Conclusion
 
This report focuses on the creation of inventions, knowledge transfer, and innovation through the introduction of new and
improved goods and services. This report’s indicators address these topics with data from a variety of sources that cover
technology areas, industries, and product markets. ICT and related industries, as well as health-related technologies, are
prominent across these indicators. On balance, the indicators show the importance of research, output, invention, and
innovation in the digital economy, and the strong role of engineering activities.
Intellectual property registration provides a useful set of indicators of invention. Although this activity was once
concentrated in upper-income countries, middle-income countries are increasingly participating in intellectual property
registration. This results in both collaboration opportunities and competition challenges. The global supply chain is rooted
in international S&E capacity, while at the same time growing interconnectedness allows security risks to have widespread
impacts. For the digital economy, intellectual property and intangibles play a prominent role. Intellectual property
indicators, such as patenting and trademarks, show where new products and processes are emerging. Patent-intensive
industries spend higher proportions of their sales on R&D, and both electrical and mechanical engineering-related patents
made up about half of all patents granted by the USPTO in 2017. Universities and federal labs transfer knowledge and
technology through research collaborations, technology licensing, and support for startups. One in six U.S. firms (with five
or more employees) reports having introduced a product or process innovation in recent years. Health-related industries
and the digital economy have an outsized impact on innovation rates across the economy, with ICT-producing industries
reporting many of the highest rates of innovation. Many of these same industries perform high levels of R&D and compete
globally.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  60
Glossary
 
Definitions
Design patent: Protects the visual ornamental characteristics of an article of manufacture.
European Union (EU): The EU comprises 28 member nations: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Unless otherwise
noted, data on the EU include all 28 nations.
Federally funded research and development center (FFRDC): R&D-performing organizations that are exclusively or
substantially financed by the federal government to meet a particular R&D objective or, in some instances, to provide
major facilities at universities for research and associated training purposes. Each FFRDC is administered by an industrial
firm, a university, or a nonprofit institution.
Information and communication technologies (ICT): For economic output data, OECD includes industries from
International Standard Industrial Classification Revision Code 4: 26 Computer, electronic, and optical products; 582
Software publishing; 61 Telecommunications; and 62-63 IT and other information services (OECD 2017a). For patent data
technology classes, ICT refers to these technology areas: Computer, electrical machinery, apparatus, energy,
semiconductors, digital communication, telecommunications, audio-visual technology, basic communication processes,
and IT methods for management (Inaba and Squicciarini 2017; OECD 2017b). For PitchBook venture capital data, ICT
refers to computer hardware, software, media, communications and networking, IT services, and semiconductors
industries.
Innovation: The implementation of a new or improved product or business process that differs significantly from previous
products or processes and that has been introduced in the market or brought into use by the firm (OECD/Eurostat 2018).
Intangibles: Nonphysical factors that contribute to or are used to produce goods or services or are intended to generate
future benefits to the entities that control their use (Blair and Wallman 2001).
Intellectual property: Creations of the mind including inventions, literary and artistic works, and symbols, names, images,
and designs used in commerce. Industrial intellectual property includes patents, utility models, trademarks, and industrial
designs. Intellectual property covered by copyright includes literary, artistic, and musical works (WIPO 2019).
International patent family: A group of patents from different national authorities; each member of the family shares a
single initial invention. The organization of these families around a single initial invention means that there may be fewer
patent families than individual patents.
Invention: The development of something new that has a practical bent—potentially useful, previously unknown, and
nonobvious.
Knowledge transfer: The process by which technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied
and used in another place for the same or a different purpose. This transfer can occur freely or through exchange and be
deliberate or unintentional.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): An international organization of 34 countries,
headquartered in Paris, France. The member countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. Among its many activities, OECD compiles social, economic, and S&T
statistics for all member and selected nonmember countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  61
Priority patent: The first patent filed in a family of subsequent patents that refers to the original patent. The original filing
may be domestic or from another jurisdiction.
Technology transfer: The process by which technology or knowledge developed in one place or for one purpose is applied
and exploited in another place for another purpose. In the federal setting, technology transfer is the process by which
existing knowledge, facilities, or capabilities developed under federal R&D funding are used to fulfill public and private
needs.
Trademark: A word, phrase, symbol, design, or a combination thereof, that identifies and distinguishes the source of the
goods of one party from those of others. In this report, trademark refers to both goods and services.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent: A property right granted by the U.S. government to an inventor “to
exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention throughout the United States or importing the
invention into the United States” for a limited time in exchange for public disclosure of the invention when the patent is
granted. (This is the USPTO definition, found on the USPTO website at https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/
glossary, accessed 15 June 2017.)
Utility patent: Intellectual property protection for a potentially useful, previously unknown, and nonobvious invention.
Key to Acronyms and Abbreviations
ARPA-E: Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy
BDS: Business Dynamics Statistics
BEA: Bureau of Economic Analysis
BLS: Bureau of Labor Statistics
BRDIS: Business R&D and Innovation Survey
BRDS: Business Research and Development Survey
CIS: Community Innovation Surveys
CRADA: cooperative R&D agreement
DHS: Department of Homeland Security
DOC: Department of Commerce
DOD: Department of Defense
DOE: Department of Energy
ED: Department of Education
EPO: European Patent Office
EU: European Union
EUIPO: European Union Intellectual Property Office
FFRDC: federally funded research and development center
FY: fiscal year
GDP: gross domestic product

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  62
HHS: Department of Health and Human Services
ICT: information and communication technology
INPADOC: International Patent Documentation
IPC: International Patent Classification
IT: information technology
IUCRC: Industry-University Cooperative Research Centers
MEP: Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership
MFP: multifactor productivity
NAICS: North American Industry Classification System
NASA: National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NIPA: national income and product accounts
NIST: National Institute of Standards and Technology
NPL: nonpatent literature
NSF: National Science Foundation
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PATSTAT: Worldwide Patent Statistical Database
R&D: research and development
ROW: rest of the world
S&E: science and engineering
S&T: science and technology
SBA: U.S. Small Business Administration
SBIR: Small Business Innovation Research
STTR: Small Business Technology Transfer
TFP: total factor productivity
UK: United Kingdom
UPOV: International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants
USDA: U.S. Department of Agriculture
USPTO: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
WIPO: World Intellectual Property Organization

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  63
References
 
Arora A, Cohen W, Walsh J. 2016. The Acquisition and Commercialization of Invention in American Manufacturing:
Incidence and Impact. Research Policy 45:1113–28.
AUTM. 2018. 2017 Licensing Activity Survey. Available at www.autm.net/STATT. Accessed 15 August 2019.
Blair MM, Wallman SMH, editors. 2001. Unseen Wealth: Report of the Brookings Task Force on Intangibles. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Branscomb LM, Auerswald PE. 2002. Between Invention and Innovation: An Analysis of Funding for Early-Stage Technology
Development. NIST GCR 02-841. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Technology Administration, National
Institute of Standards and Technology. Available at https://www.nist.gov/document/gcr02-841pdf. Accessed 2
November 2019.
Choudry V, Ponzio T. 2019. Modernizing Federal Technology Transfer Metrics. Journal of Technology Transfer, January
2019. Available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-018-09713-w. Accessed 9 December 2019.
Cohen W, Nelson R, Walsh J. 2000. Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S.
Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). Working Paper No. 7552. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cutler DM, McClellan M. 2001. Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It? Health Affairs 20(5):11–29.
de Rassenfosse G, Dernis H, Guellec D, Picci L, van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie B. 2012. The Worldwide Count of Priority
Patents: A New Indicator of Inventive Activity. Research Policy 42(3):720–37.
Deaton A. 2013. The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dwoskin E. 2016. China is Flooding Silicon Valley with Cash. Here’s What Can Go Wrong. Washington Post 16 August.
Available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/new-wave-of-chinese-start-up-investments-comes-
with-complications/2016/08/05/2051db0e-505d-11e6-aa14-e0c1087f7583_story.html?utm_term=.09464966f12f.
Accessed 2 November 2019.
Ernst D. 2013. Standards, Innovation, and Latecomer Economic Development—A Conceptual Framework. East-West
Working Papers, Economic Series, No. 134. Honolulu, HI: East-West Center. Available at https://www.eastwestcenter.org/
publications/standards-innovation-and-latecomer-economic-development%E2%80%94-conceptual-framework. Accessed
1 October 2019.
Fink C, Khan M, Zhou H. 2015. Exploring the Worldwide Patent Surge. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 25(2):
114–42.
Gao G, Hitt LM. 2012. Information Technology and Trademarks: Implications for Product Variety. Management Science
58(6):1211–26.
Gordon R. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living Since the Civil War. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  64
Gravelle JG. 2010. Tax Havens: International Tax Avoidance and Evasion. Congressional Research Service Report for
Congress 7-5700. Available at https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R40623.pdf. Accessed 2 November 2019.
Inaba T, Squicciarini M. 2017. ICT: A New Taxonomy Based on the International Patent Classification. OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2017/01. Paris: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/ict-a-new-taxonomy-based-on-the-international-patent-classification_ab16c396-en.
Accessed 16 August 2019.
Katz JS, Martin B. 1997. What Is Research Collaboration? Research Policy 26(1):1–18.
Mutti JH, Grubert H. 2007. The Effect of Taxes on Royalties and the Migration of Intangible Assets Abroad. NBER Working
Paper 13248. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/
w13248. Accessed 2 November 2019.
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES), National Science Foundation. 2018. Business R&D and
Innovation: 2015. Detailed Statistical Tables NSF 18-308. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://www.nsf.gov/ncses/
nsf18313/. Accessed 8 December 2019.
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES), National Science Foundation. 2020. National Patterns of
R&D Resources: 2017–18 Data Update. Detailed Statistical Tables NSF 20-307. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf20307/.  Accessed 10 January 2020.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2012. Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2010.
Summary Report to the President and the Congress. Gaithersburg, MD: U.S. Department of Commerce. Available at https://
www.nist.gov/document/fed-lab-ttfinal2010pdf. Accessed 11 January 2020.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2015. Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2013.
Summary Report to the President and the Congress. Gaithersburg, MD: U.S. Department of Commerce. Available at https://
www.nist.gov/document/fy2013fedtechtransfreportfinal-4jnpdf. Accessed 11 January 2020.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2019. Federal Laboratory Technology Transfer, Fiscal Year 2016.
Summary Report to the President and the Congress. Gaithersburg, MD: U.S. Department of Commerce. Available at https://
www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2019/10/30/fy2016_fed_lab_tech_transfer_rept_fina_9-10-19.pdf. Accessed 8
December 2019.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of Commerce, Federal Lab Technology Transfer
Database v.2015. Available at https://www.nist.gov/document/federallabttdatabasev2015xlsx. Accessed 10 January
2020.
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2018. Science and Engineering Indicators 2018. NSB-2018-1.
Alexandria, VA. Available at https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/report/sections/invention-knowledge-
transfer-and-innovation/invention-united-states-and-comparative-global-trends. Accessed 9 December 2019.
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2020. Research and Development: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons. Science and Engineering Indicators 2020. NSB-2020-3. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/
pubs/nsb20203.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  65
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2020. Production and Trade of Knowledge- and Technology-
Intensive Industries. Science and Engineering Indicators 2020. NSB-2020-5. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20205.
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2020. Publication Output: U.S. Trends and International
Comparisons. Science and Engineering Indicators 2020. NSB-2020-6. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/
pubs/nsb20206.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2014. Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2014.
Paris: OECD Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/oecd-science-technology-
and-industry-outlook-2014_sti_outlook-2014-en. Accessed 16 August 2019.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2016. G20 Innovation Report 2016. Paris: OECD
Publishing. Available at https://www.oecd.org/china/G20-innovation-report-2016.pdf. Accessed 16 August 2019.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2017a. OECD Compendium of Productivity Indicators
2017. Paris: OECD Publishing. https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/oecd-compendium-of-productivity-
indicators-2017_pdtvy-2017-en. Accessed 16 August 2019.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2017b. OECD Digital Economy Outlook 2017. Paris:
OECD Publishing.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Eurostat. 2005. Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting,
Reporting and Using Innovation Data. 3rd ed. Paris: OECD Publishing; Luxembourg: Eurostat.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Eurostat. 2018. Oslo Manual 2018: Guidelines for
Collecting, Reporting and Using Innovation Data. 4th ed. Paris: OECD Publishing; Luxembourg: Eurostat.
PitchBook Data, Inc., National Venture Capital Association (NVCA). 2019. Venture Monitor 4Q 2018. Seattle, WA:
PitchBook Data, Inc. Available at https://pitchbook.com/news/reports/4q-2018-pitchbook-nvca-venture-monitor.
Accessed 14 March 2019.
Shneiderman B. 2018. Twin-Win Model: A Human-Centered Approach to Research Success. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 115(50):12590–94. Available at https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1802918115. Accessed 8 December
2019.
Soloveichik R, Wasshausen D. 2013. Copyright-Protected Assets in the National Accounts. Washington, DC: Bureau of
Economic Analysis. Available at https://sites.nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/pgasite/documents/webpage/
pga_063401.pdf. Accessed 16 August 2019.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2002. The U.S. Patent System Celebrates 212 Years. Press Release #02-26.
Alexandria, VA. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/about-us/news-updates/us-patent-system-celebrates-212-years.
Accessed 10 June 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  66
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2015. General Information Concerning Patents. Available at https://
www.uspto.gov/patents-getting-started/general-information-concerning-patents#heading-31. Accessed 3 November
2019.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). 2018. Section 1502: Definition of a Design. In Manual of Patent Examining
Procedure (MPEP). 9th ed., Revision 08.2017. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/
s1502.html#d0e150263. Accessed 15 August 2019.
U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA). 2015. About SBIR. Available at https://www.sbir.gov/about/about-sbir.
Accessed 26 October 2019.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). 2019. World Intellectual Property Indicators 2019. Available at https://
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_941_2019.pdf. Accessed 2 October 2019.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2016. Composition, Definitions & Methodology. In World Trade Statistical Review 2016,
pp. 70–87. Available at https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/wts2016_e/WTO_Chapter_08_e.pdf. Accessed 16
August 2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  67
Notes
 
1 Innovation activities are described in the 2018 Oslo Manual (OECD/Eurostat 2018).
2 For this report, Table S8-2 lists the 35 WIPO technical fields, Table S8-3 provides the regions, countries, and economies
covered by USPTO patent and international patent family patent data, and Table S8-4 through Table S8-42 present utility
patent data. The tables cover USPTO patents and international patent family patents from 1998 to 2018. Table S8-2
contains USPTO academic patenting data by the 35 technical fields mentioned above.
3 The design classes that make up design patents registered to U.S. designers are also shown (Table S8-44).
4 Table S8-43 and Table S8-44 show the number of U.S. design patents granted since 2000 and 1998, respectively, by
region, country, or economy and by design class.
5 For example, 49% of U.S. manufacturing firms reported that the invention underlying their most recent innovation came
from outside the firm (Arora, Cohen, and Walsh 2016).
6 This percentage is calculated from Table S8-1.
7 AUTM collects data on invention and patent-related activities of its member universities. The number of member
universities varies slightly from year to year. There were 161 in 2013, 165 in 2015, and 167 in 2017. The response rate of
the survey in 2017 was 61.9% (AUTM 2018).
8 These are measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (Soloveichik and Wasshausen 2013) and tabulated by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics as part of its measurement of productivity.
9 PitchBook classifies venture-backed firms based on their primary industry. See Table S8-63 for a description of
PitchBook’s industry and technology classification. PitchBook further classifies these industries into technology-focused
groups, such as health technology, nanotechnology, and artificial intelligence.
10 The Oslo Manual was revised in 2018. The data included in this report, however, were gathered under the guidance of
the 2005 Oslo Manual.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  68
Acknowledgments and Citation
 
Acknowledgments
The National Science Board extends its appreciation to the staff of the National Science Foundation and to the many
others who contributed to the preparation of this report.
Beethika Khan, Program Director, Science and Engineering Indicators Program of the National Center for Science and
Engineering Statistics (NCSES), had primary responsibility for the report under the leadership of Emilda B. Rivers, Director,
NCSES, and Arthur W. Lupia, Assistant Director of the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Directorate.
The report benefited from extensive contributions from NCSES staff. Matt Williams provided advice on statistical issues.
Carol Robbins and Karen White served in administrative roles. May Aydin, Catherine Corlies, and Rajinder Raut coordinated
the report’s publication process and managed the development of its digital platform. Christine Hamel and Tanya Gore
conducted editorial and composition review.
SRI International, Center for Innovation Strategy and Policy assisted with report preparation. Jessica Avery of SRI provided
substantial ongoing contributions to the report. Science-Metrix provided data preparation and content analysis. RTI
International provided editing services. Staff at Penobscot Bay Media, LLC (PenBay Media), created the report site. The
following persons and agencies reviewed this report:
Carolina Castaldi, Eindhoven University of Technology
Rolf Lehming, retired, National Science Foundation
Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland
Sacha Wunsch-Vincent, World Intellectual Property Organization
Bureau of Economic Analysis
Bureau of Labor Statistics
National Science Foundation
Office of Science and Technology Policy
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
The National Science Board is especially grateful to the Committee on National Science and Engineering Policy for
overseeing preparation of the volume and to the National Science Board Office, under the direction of John Veysey, which
provided vital coordination throughout the project. Nadine Lymn led the outreach and dissemination efforts. Matthew
Wilson and Reba Bandyopadhyay served as Board Office Liaisons to the committee. Beethika Khan, Carol Robbins, and
Anne Emig were the Executive Secretaries.
Citation
National Science Board, National Science Foundation. 2020. Invention, Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation. Science and
Engineering Indicators 2020. NSB-2020-4. Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20204/.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
National Science Board  |  Science & Engineering Indicators | NSB-2020-4  69
Contact Us
 
To report an issue with the website, please e-mail ncsesweb@nsf.gov. For questions about the National Science
Foundation (NSF), please visit the NSF help page at https://nsf.gov/help/. To see more from the National Science Board,
please visit https://nsf.gov/nsb/.
Report Authors
Carol Robbins
Senior Analyst
Science & Engineering Indicators Program
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
crobbins@nsf.gov
Derek Hill
Senior Analyst
Science & Engineering Indicators Program
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
dhill@nsf.gov
Mark Boroush
Senior Analyst
R&D Statistics Program
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
mboroush@nsf.gov
NCSES
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
National Science Foundation
2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite W14200
Alexandria, VA 22314
Tel: (703) 292-8780
FIRS: (800) 877-8339
TDD: (800) 281-8749
ncsesweb@nsf.gov
