
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES
TO FOSTER HIGH-
RISK/HIGH-REWARD
RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
May 2021 No. 112

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  1
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

This paper was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee on Scientific
and Technological Policy on 04/05/2021 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2021)4/REV1/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.
© OECD 2021
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
2  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Foreword
This report analyses policies and research funding mechanisms, designed to foster high-risk high-reward
(HRHR) research, and their effectiveness, taking into account contextual factors. It is aimed at
policymakers and the research funding community interested in fostering more risk-taking in scientific
research portfolios. It identifies gaps in existing data on HRHR research, and explores promising practices
for fostering HRHR research in a variety of contexts. It also proposes policy recommendations.
The project that forms the basis for this report was initiated by the OECD Global Science Forum (GSF) in
2019. It builds on earlier GSF work, particularly a project on Effective Operation of Competitive Research
Funding Systems (OECD, 2018[1]). This project has proceeded simultaneously with other related projects
on transdisciplinary research (OECD, 2020[2]) and mission-oriented research policies (Larrue, 2021[3])..
The main element of this project was a survey of individual HRHR research funding schemes in different
countries, complemented by targeted interviews. This was supplemented by an analysis of HRHR
research-oriented programmes reported in the OECD STIP Compass Database 1. An internatio nal
workshop organised in April 2020 provided expert input on the major issu es and challenges faced by
funders in supporting HRHR research. This workshop, originally planned for Brussels, Belgium, became a
virtual workshop 2 because of the C OVID-19 pandemic. Findings from the survey, data, workshop,
interviews, a literature review, and supporting data were analysed together to produce this report.
The emergence of the global COVID-19 pandemic necessitated some modifications to the project design
and focus. In addition to shifting a planned physical workshop to an online workshop, t he Expert Group
collected examples of rapid -response research funding programmes designed to support immediate
research responses to the pandemic. Some of these programmes are intended to explore high -risk high-
reward approaches to the pandemic and are inc luded in this report; other rapid -response funding
mechanisms are discussed in separate OECD publications on tackling COVID-193.
The project has been overseen by an international Expert Group whose members (appendix 1) were
nominated by the Global Science Forum. This Group was chaired by Jessica Robin (United States) and
Heug-Deung Hong (Korea) and assisted by consultants Kei Koizumi and Diogo Machado. This report was
drafted primarily by Kei Koizumi and the OECD GSF Secretariat – Frédéric Sgard – with input from all
Expert Group members.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  3
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table of contents
Foreword ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 2
Executive summary................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 6
Recommendations ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 8
Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 9
Background and history ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 9
What is High-Risk/High-Reward Research? ................................ ................................ ...... 11
Methodology and final report ................................ ................................ ............................. 13
Findings and analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 14
 Overview ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 14
 Funding Mechanisms ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15
 Dedicated or Secondary HRHR Research Funding Mechanisms ......................... 15
Source: authors’ analysis ................................ ................................ ............................... 16
 Calls for Proposals ................................ ................................ ............................... 16
 Evaluation and funding allocation mechanisms ................................ .................... 17
Source: authors’ analysis ................................ ................................ ............................... 17
 Project Management and Duration in HRHR Research ................................ ........ 22
 ‘People-based’ awards as a HRHR research strategy ................................ .......... 23
 Nongovernmental Organisations and HRHR Research Funding .......................... 24
 Scientific prizes and HRHR ................................ ................................ .................. 24
 Importance of a Portfolio Approach ................................ ................................ ...... 25
 Internal or Institutional Funding to Support HRHR Research ................................ 26
 Impact Evaluation of HRHR Research Programmes ................................ .......... 27
 Contextual Factors and Supporting Policies ................................ ............................... 28
 Political Support for Risk-Taking and Long-Term Orientation ............................... 29
 Tenure, Promotion, and Advancement Policies at Research Institutions .............. 30
Indicators for HRHR Research ................................ ................................ .......................... 31
Conclusion and Recommendations ................................ ................................ ................... 33
Endnotes ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 36
References ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 40
Appendix 1. Expert Group Members ................................ ................................ ................. 42
Appendix 2. Survey questionnaire ................................ ................................ ..................... 43
Purpose ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 44
Selection criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 44
Selection process ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 44
Effectiveness, and evaluation of programme meeting its goals of supporting high risk
high reward research ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 45
Supportive policies and programmes ................................ ................................ ................ 45
Other relevant information ................................ ................................ ................................ . 46

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
4  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Research Responses to Covid-19 ................................ ................................ ..................... 46
Appendix 3. HRHR Research Inventory Inventory of High-Risk/High-Reward Research
Programmes ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 48

Tables
Table 1. HRHR research funding mechanism categories 16
Table 2. HRHR research proposal evaluation processes and criteria 17
Table 3. Project Management and Duration in HRHR Research 22

Figures
Figure 1. Impact of research stakeholders on HRHR research 34

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  5
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

This report analyses policies and research funding mechanisms designed
to foster high-risk high-reward (HRHR) research, and explores promising
practices for fostering HRHR research in a variety of contexts. The
underlying concern is that failure to encourage and support research on
risky, ‘out-of-the-box’ ideas may jeopardise a country’s longer-term ability to
compete economically, harness science for solving national and global
challenges, and contribute to the progress of science as a whole.
The analysis in this paper is primarily based on a survey of individual
HRHR research funding schemes in different countries, complemented by
targeted interviews. This survey was supplemented by an analysis of
HRHR research-oriented programmes and by the feedback from an
international workshop that included all relevant stakeholders.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
6  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Executive summary
An increasing concern of the scientific community in recent years is that research funding
processes have become too conservative and encourage only incremental advances in science
and technology. As a result, there have been a number of calls for a change in funding processes
and increased funding to support high-risk/high-reward (HRHR) research. The underlying concern,
from a policy perspective, is that failure to encourage and support research on risky, ‘out of the
box’ ideas may jeopardi se a country’s longer -term ability to compete economically, to harness
science for solving national and global challenges, and to contribute to the progress of science as
a whole.
This report explores “Effective Policies to foster High-Risk/High-Reward research”. Five key policy
questions for HRHR research frame the work, namely:
1. What different funding instruments are used and what are their advantages and
disadvantages?
2. What evidence (if any) exists of the effectiveness of these different instruments?
3. What is the most appropriate instrument to use in a particular context?
4. Are t here alternative and/or complementary non -funding policies that can be
implemented, and in what context?
5. What are the roles, responsibilities and constraints of different actors in promoting
high-risk research?
To explore these issues, HRHR research was analysed through two main lens : first, research
funding mechanisms, and second, contextual factors and supporting policies outside core research
funding mechanisms that have been utilised to help foster HRHR research.
HRHR research funding mechanisms
There are many research funding mechanisms designed to foster HRHR research and much policy
experimentation is taking place in this area. There are thus a diversity of options for policymakers
to consider when seeking to foster HRHR research , each relying o n different working and
management processes.
One key distinction is the degree to which funding mechanisms centre on HRHR research . Four
main funding categories can be identified:
 Funding mechanisms specifically designed to sup port HRHR research and that are
supporting such research as a primary goal;
 Funding mechanisms that have HRHR research as their primary mission within a broader
set of objectives;
 Funding mechanisms in which supporting HRHR research is a secondary goal or an
important consideration in the proposal evaluation process;
 Funding mechanisms geared toward supporting scientific research with multiple possible
goals including advancing scientific knowledge, achieving economic outcomes, or
advancing societal outcomes, although there are no clear criteria for fostering HRHR
research.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  7
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

In addition to these four predominant categories, several other less prevalent but interesting
mechanisms were identified, such as “people-based” awards, scientific prizes, and internal funding
from research institutions, which can all play an important role in fostering HRHR research.
Studying the working and management processes of these funding mechanisms reveals the
importance of taking a portfolio management approach to supporting HRHR research. This places
considerations of risk and reward at the research portfolio level rather than the individual project
level.
Contextual Factors and Supporting Policies
In addition to funding, certain contextual factors and non -funding policies can be conducive to
HRHR research. While insufficient by themselves to foster HRHR research in the absence of the
necessary research funding, they are important to ensure the success of targeted research funding
schemes.
Key contextual factors and policies include:
 Political support for risk-taking and long-term commitment. This was found to be probably
the most important factor for success but also the most challenging;
 Tenure, promotion, and advancement policies at research institutions. There are powerful
incentives in the current system for researchers, especially early-career researchers, to be
conservative in their research in order to be more certain of securing the publication
outputs against which they will be evaluated. Promoting HRHR research requires a change
in the human resource policies of research institutions and in research assessment more
broadly;
 Indicators for HRHR research. While traditional research indicators tend to promote
conservatism, more novel and appropriate indicators do exist and can , w hen used
judiciously, help to foster HRHR research by quantifying the ‘riskiness’ of a research
project or portfolio, allowing researchers, research managers, and others to adjust risk to
an appropriate level . This report includes a specific proof of pract ice case study for one
such novelty indicator.
Conclusions
The study finds that there is no “one -size-fits-all” funding instrument, with the most efficient
approach depending on the context. While this report puts forward an inventory of HRHR research
programmes, these differ along several dimensions and decision makers have several options to
choose from in designing a HRHR research funding scheme. Being clear on the strategic objective
of the programme can however help narrow down the options.
Drawing lessons and recommendations is difficult, as many HRHR research programmes have not
been evaluated rigorously because of their relative newness. Those that have been evaluated have
used expert panels and a mix of traditional quantitative indicators or qualitative evidence. There
are, however, growing options for indicators of novelty to help evaluate HRHR research
programmes.
To complement funding, enabling actions at the level of research institutions, such as revision of
tenure and promotion policies, can be valuable. Policymakers can also provide political long-term
support for risk -taking and long -time horizons for research . Science funding agencies can
experiment with different approaches for fostering HRHR research within competitive funding
processes; and research institutions can nurture researcher careers by rewarding risk -taking and
providing seed or bridge funding to incentivise HRHR research.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
8  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Recommendations
The findings of the report underline the complexity of research systems and the need for complementary
policies and actions from different stakeholders. Policy action to foster HRHR research is required from
governments, research funders and research performing institutions, ideally working in together and in
synergy. These actions fall into six main areas as follows:
1. Research funders are encouraged to experiment with existing and new approaches to foster
HRHR research . This report offers several ideas for research funders to consider, both for
designing new programmes or re-designing existing ones to foster HRHR research.
2. Research funders and government policymakers are encouraged to implement a portfolio
approach in the management and evaluation of HRHR research . Using a portfolio approach
allows for a better risk -management at all levels, and can increase incentives for funding
management, evaluation panels and individual researchers to take risks.
3. Research funders, government policymakers, and research institution decision makers are
encouraged to implement contextual policies and practices to encourage researchers to
take scientific risks . This includes: adopting a long -term vision, both for funding and
expectations; redesigning individual evaluation and promotion policies at research institutions to
provide researchers with environments more conducive to HRHR research.
4. As newly established HRHR research programmes mature, research funders are
encouraged to evaluate their impacts rigorously, not only their scientific, societal, and
economic impacts but also evaluating the programmes’ impact in fostering or discouraging
HRHR research. Although most funders are likely to rely primarily on expert (peer review) post -
hoc evaluation, funders are also encouraged to develop and utilize quantitative indicators in their
evaluations as well. Funders are encouraged to share novel approaches for evaluating impact with
the broader community.
5. Interested countries and researchers are invited to furth er research, develop, and utilis e
indicators for evaluating the riskiness of research, especially in impact evaluation of HRHR
and other research . Despite the increasing number of programmes intended to foster HRHR
research inventoried in this report, there are few useable indicators for evaluating the riskiness of
research proposals or results.
6. Funding agencies are encouraged to collect and share data on HRHR research programmes
that enables their comparison to more-traditional research programmes. Additional data and
research on some important issues would be useful, such as knowing whether the recipien ts of
HRHR research funds are the same as recipients of traditional grants and if not how they vary in
terms of gender, career stage, or other variables. It would also be important to understand in more
depth how specific HRHR research funds or policies di ffer from traditional research funds/policies
in their design and their impact. Among funding mechanisms, there is a shortage of literature on
the effectiveness of prizes, challenges, and other alternatives to peer-reviewed research grants in
fostering HRHR research.
Examples of good practices, including an analysis of the pros and cons of different funding allocation and
management approaches, are provided throughout this report (see for, example, tables 2 and 3).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  9
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Introduction
Background and history
An increasing concern in recent years is that research funding processes have become too conservative
and encourage only incremental advances in science and technology (Montgomery et al., 2014 [4];
American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2008[5]). As a result, there have been calls for a change in these
processes and increased funding to support high-risk/high-reward (HRHR) research. Supporting research,
however, is not just a question of funding. At the research system level, disciplinary and institutional
structures, research careers and precarity, cultural norms in the science community, research evaluation
systems, and strategic prioritization processes all have an impact on the type of research that is conducted.
An underlying concern is that failure to encourage and to support research on risky, ‘out-of-the-box’ ideas
may jeopardize a country’s longer-term ability to innovate and compete economically, to harness science
toward solving national and global challenges, and to contribute to the progress of science as a whole.
This concern was already articulated in a 2007 report from the US National Academies titled “Rising Above
the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future.” (Committee on
Prospering in the Global Economy of the 21st Century: An Agenda for American Science and Technology
et al., 2007[6]) The report identified, at the request of the US Congress, factors that contribute to the United
States’ eroding competitiveness in the global economy . The decline in support of “high -risk or
transformative research,” particularly in the physical sciences, engineering, mathematics, and information
sciences was identified as one such factor. The report states that “reducing the risk for individual research
projects increases the likelihood that breakthrough, ‘disruptive’ technologies will not be found —the kinds
of discoveries that yield huge returns.” The report, subsequently influential in US science policy making,
calls on the US government to institute policy measures specifically to foster more high -risk, high-reward
research. This led to legislation including the America COMPETES Act of 2007 and a congressional
hearing in 2009 to enco urage US science funding agencies to foster HRHR research (US Government,
2009[7]).
Other regions and nations have also expressed concerns over increasing conservatism in research and
have implemented policies to counteract the trend. As early as 2005, the European Commission acted
through its New and Emerging Science and Technology (NEST) initiative, within the Sixth Framework
Programme (FP6), specifically to “support unconventional and visionary research with the potential to open
new fields for European science and technology, as well as research on potential problems uncovered by
science.” 4 EU member nations individually also started similar programmes: the German Research
Foundation (Deutsche For schungsgemeinschaft, DFG) established the Reinhart Koselleck Projects in
2008 to encourage researchers to pursue “innovative, high -risk projects.” 5 Likewise, the Japanese
government in 2009 formed the Funding Program me for World-Leading Innovative R&D on S cience and
Technology (FIRST Program me) to advance ‘leading -edge research and development’ to counteract the
tendency of Japanese researchers to avoid risk in their projects6.
Throughout the world, then, concerns about conservatism in research choices have manifested not only in
reports and dialogue, but have also led to experimentation in policies to foster and encourage high -risk,
high-reward research.
Both scientific and political considerations may lead to underfunding of HRHR research. There are three
main considerations in this regard. First, as suggested in a recent study of NIH funding mechanisms

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
10  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

(Packalen and Bhattacharya, 2018 [8]), because research funding agencies visibly spend public mo ney,
they need to show (promising) results, manifestations of improvements for society, as well as technological
breakthroughs, arising from the research they support (Hegde and Sampat, 2015 [9]). This consideration
leads to a preference for supporting ideas that have already shown promise rather than ideas for which
promise cannot be foreseen. Second, scientific review panels, for reasons related to their composition,
remit and process, tend to reward projects that are evidently feasible over projects that carry the risk of not
achieving their initial objectives (e.g. (Nicholson and Ioannidis, 2012 [10]). Third, vested interests from
influential indiv iduals or parties may also undermine the development of original avenues of research
(Azoulay, Fons-Rosen and Zivin, 2019[11]).
Traditionally, high-risk research was expected to be funded through core institutional funding mechanisms
which, not being allocated to specific projects and not directly linked to the need for results, are thought to
allow greater latitude to scientists for risk -taking. Competitive research mechanisms have also been
developed since the 1950’s specifically for this purpose. The now 60+ -year-old US Department of
Defense’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is often cited as a longstan ding
successful high -risk, high-reward program me model. At the time of its foundin g it supported then risky
computer science research on packet switching that led decades later to the high -reward outcome of the
Internet. Several program mes have subsequently attempted to replicate DARPA’s model (the US
Department of Energy’s ARPA-E to advance energy research is a recent high-risk, high-reward programme
modelled on DARPA7). These have been joined by a variety of other programmes that use peer review for
competitive proposals focused on supporting high-risk high-reward research (Gewin, 2012[12]).
Such competitive mechanisms have also been developed across the World . The European Research
Council, for example, was established in 2007 to support bottom -up research without predetermined
priorities and with the aim of inviting risk-taking from applicants. In the United Kingdom, the Economic and
Social Research Council has developed a dedicated “Transformative Research Call.” In Germany, the
DFG supports Reinhart Koselleck Projects that are sp ecifically targeted at outstanding researchers who
wish to carry out exceptionally innovative or high -risk research. And in Japan, the more applied funding
programme for “Impulsing Paradigm Change through Disruptive Technologies” (ImPACT) was developed
to foster disruptive innovation and encourage research with lower probability of success (high-risk) but with
potentially high impact, as well as to foster an entrepreneurial climate.
Different programmes operate with distinct philosophies o f how to best fun d and manage high -risk
research. DARPA, for example, traditionally funds project ‐based assignments that are aimed at
overcoming a defined challenge. Funding recipients are judged on whether they have met specific
milestones and funding can be cut if those milestones are not met. At the other end of the spectrum, the
NIH Director’s Pioneer Award (NDPA) looks to select awardees based on the calibre of the scientists who
apply, with little to no focus on the actual project they propo se to undertake with the fu nds. There are a
number of recent experiments with institutional funding mechanisms and ‘hybrid’ institutional -competitive
funding mechanisms to encourage HRHR research. In addition, the perception that traditional funding
processes are not supporting tran sformative ideas has also led many non -governmental organizations
(charities, private foundations, associations , etc.) to develop their own methodologies to support HRHR
research related to their specific interests.
Despite the experimentation that is tak ing place and the near‐consensus that high ‐risk high -reward
research is an essential component of a national R&D portfolio, there has been little study on the range
and effectiveness of mechanisms for funding such research and ‘best practices’ on how to ma nage these
research programmes. Likewise, there is limited analysis of policies that could foster research
environments favourable to HRHR research. In addition, there exist few indicators or tools to manage high-
risk research portfolios. There are also no routine indicators for scientific or other risk or indicators of
transformation and there is recent evidence that traditional bibliometric measures of scientific excellence
do not always correlate with novelty (Wang, Veugelers and Stephan, 2017[13]).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  11
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

What is High-Risk/High-Reward Research?
There is no standard definition of high -risk, high-reward research or transformative research. High-risk
research may also be referred to interchangeably as high-risk, high-reward (HRHR) research or high-risk,
high-payoff research or high-risk, high-gain research.
High-risk, high -reward research, as defined by the US National Institutes for Health (NIH), consists of
“ideas that have the potential for high impact, but that may be too novel, span too diverse a range of
disciplines, or be at a stage too early to fare well in the traditional peer review process.” 8 The risk in
question, then, is that the research will not produce sci entific results leading to societal or economic or
knowledge impacts because of its novelty, its position outside of established disciplinary paradigms, or its
ambition in tackling challenging questions. Implicit in this definition is a critique of the traditional peer review
process as favouring the established over the novel, and favouring work to answer the next logical question
in a sequence over ambitious attempts to leapfrog over lines of inquiry.
The US America COMPETES Act of 2007 (US Congress, 2007 [14]) defines HRHR research as research
projects that: “1) meet fundamental technological or scientific challenges; 2) involve multidisciplinary work;
and 3) involve a high degree of novelty.” In the literature, however, there are few other definitions of
high-risk research. Often, the term and associated terms are used without being defined explicitly. Even in
the definitions above, the meaning of high impact or high reward is not explicit, although implicitly the
impacts or rewards that are being sought fall into three categories: scientific impacts through knowledge
creation; economic impacts through technological breakthroughs and innovation embodied in new value -
added goods and services ; and, societal impacts through the tr anslation of new knowledge and/or
technologies to solve societal challenges. Achieving high impact on any of these three dimensions implicitly
requires transformation of existing knowledge, paradigms, technologies, and structures.
Transformative research is often used interchangeably with the terms potentially transformative research
(PTR) or transformational research. The US National Science Foundation defines transformative research
as research that "involves ideas, discoveries, or tools that radically c hange our understanding of an
important existing scientific or engineering concept or educational practice or leads to the creation of a
new paradigm or field of science, engineering, or education. Such research challenges current
understanding or provides pathways to new frontiers.” (National Science Foundation, 2007 [15]) Implicit in
this definition is that such transformation is necessarily high impact. It should be noted that NSF, as a
basic-research funding agency with a scientific mission, is concerned primarily with scientific impacts rather
than economic or societal impacts, but the definition can expand to include economic and societal impacts
through transformational technologies, radical changes to technological/economi c sectors, or paradigm
shifts in framing solutions to societal challenges.
There are few other explicit definitions of transformative research in the literature and those that do exist
align closely to the National Science Foundation definition (Trevors et al., 2012 [16]). The definition of
transformative research thus appears largely similar to that of high -risk high-reward research save for a
slightly stronger semantic emphasis in transformative research on the potential impact on (and rewards
from) knowledge, technologies or society. Conversely, there is an emphasis on the risk of failure to achieve
the initial goals of the project for high-risk, high-reward research. Although risk is not explicitly a part of the
NSF definition for transformative research, risk is implic it because research seeking radical changes in
understanding carries more risk of failure than incremental research.
It is also worth noting that high -risk, high -reward/transformative research is conceptually distinct from
interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary research. Although crossing or transcending disciplinary boundaries is
part of some definitions of HRHR or transformative research, inter -/trans-disciplinarity alone is not a
prerequisite for HRHR/transformative research since high-risk disciplinary research can also result in new

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
12  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

(scientific) paradigms/concepts. Moreover, not all inter- or trans-disciplinary research is necessarily high -
risk and high reward.
It is also important to make a distinction between HRHR research and high -risk research in t he medical
context, understood to mean medical research that puts humans at risk of adverse health impacts 9.
Obviously, HRHR research is intended to be a positive good, while medical research at high risk of adverse
human health impacts is to be managed appropriately.
There are other definitions and policy documents relevant to the task of defining HRHR research. At the
cross-national level, the Global Research Council (GRC) has articulated a set of principles for supporting
scientific breakthroughs which, although falling short of defining HRHR research, nevertheless encourages
nations to support risk taking in research, specifically urging nations to “Encourage risk-taking and tolerate
failure in research activities.” (Global Research Council, 2015[17]).
What is high reward? As already indicated, most of the discussion around HRHR research focuses on the
high-risk portion, relatively little on the high -reward portion. This may be because research rewards are
perceived as better understood than research risks, and also because there are multiple categories of
reward, from scientific to economic to societal to financial. Whether the reward can be measured by
scientific publications, citations, patents, economic activity, demonstrab le progress toward a national
challenge, or even anecdotal success stories, there is better understanding of the potential rewards of
research, and better indicators for evaluating no reward vs. low reward vs. high reward. HRHR research,
if successful, can be expected to result in a variety of rewa rds, which might include highly -cited papers,
technological innovations with market impact, or breakthrough solutions to longstanding problems that are
greater than the rewards from more-incremental research approaches.
Some of the programmes considered in this report do not define HRHR research for what it is, but rather
what it is not. The Netherlands’ Off Road programme aims to support ‘out-of-the-box’ research but defines
it primarily by what it is not: “Out o f the box is NOT research that: is a continuation within an existing line
of research; applies a proven therapy/technique to a new but related problem; is in line with existing model;
doesn't really have a new angle; repeats what others have done in a not the same but similar setting.”10
Canada in stituted its New Frontiers in Research Fund (NFRF) in 2018 to support research that is
interdisciplinary, international, fast -breaking and high -risk. The NFRF has three streams: Exploration,
Transformation and International. The Exploration and Transformation streams have a particular focus on
high-risk research. Exploration provides smaller -scale awards and emphasizes support for research that
proposes unique directions, challenges current paradigms, and which seeks to enhance understanding of
complex and challenging issues. Transformation provides larger -scale aw ards a nd factors in risk
considering why a proposed project is novel as it relates to the latest methods, concepts, information, and
techniques. Exploration does not define HRHR research but rather states, “The following elements are
considered to be indicative of projects that do not meet programme expectations with regard to high risk,
and are therefore discouraged: research that is the obvious next step; data collection without interpreting
underlying mechanisms; professional practice or consulting services (contract research); the set -up and
operational management of an institute or a formal or informal group of researchers (network); curriculum
development; organis ation of a conference or workshop; digitization of a collection or creation of a
database; the application of existing technology or the commercialization of a product/process; routine
analyses; and/or the acquisition and maintenance of scientific equipment.”11 In addition, high risk is further
characterised as defined by elements such as, but not limited to:
 proposing unique directions;
 challenging current research paradigms;
 enhancing understanding of complex and challenging issues;

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  13
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 bringing new disciplines together with different perspectives, to use novel approaches for solving
existing problems; and/or
 developing or adapting frameworks, methods and techniques.
For the purposes of this project, then, it is useful to consider many terms s urrounding risk and
transformation as being to a large extent interchangeable. This is implicit in the 2007 US report’s framing
of high-risk or transformative research and also in many other policies, documents, and even legislation
that leave key terms vaguely defined. HRHR research, as used in this report, encompasses several other
terms: high -risk research; high -risk, high -reward research; high, ri sk, high -payoff research; high -risk,
high-gain research; transformative research; potentially transformative research; and transformational
research.
Building on definitions and usage of the above terms in the literature policy documents, and funding
announcements, the following working definition of high -risk or transformative research was adopted to
guide this project and report:
“High-risk, high -reward (HRHR) research is research that 1) strives to understand or support
solutions to ambitious scientific, technological, or societal challenges; 2) strives to cross
scientific, technological, or societal paradigms in a revolutionary way; 3) involves a high degree of
novelty; and 4) carries a high risk of not realizing its full ambition as well as the potential for high,
transformational impact on a scientific, technological, or societal challenge.”
Methodology and final report
This project has been overseen by an international Expert Group whose members were nominated by
national OECD Global Science Forum delegations (see Appendix 1).
The project began with a review of existin g literature on high -risk, high -reward research, past HRHR
research programmes, and generic national research funding information collected by Expert Group
members.
This report also used the 2018 OECD competitive research funding (OECD, 2018[1]) report as a launch
point. That report states:
“Development of mechanisms for interdisciplinary and breakthrough/transformative research seem to be
particular challenges. In particular, the challenge seems to be how to create and then maintain processes
that r ecognise interdisciplinarity or transformative research in the face of strong disciplinary and
conservative tendencies in the existing system… With respect to encouraging transformative research, the
challenge is the difficulty of identifying ex ante which proposed research will ultimately have transformative
impacts. In addition to specifically identifying such potential as a criterion that reviewers should look for,
systems have experimented with various methods designed to protect such proposals from the possibly
adverse effects of ‘highly transformative’ being seen by some reviewers as risky or unlikely to succeed.”
The report develops the insights from the 2018 repo rt in discussing high -risk high-reward or potentially
transformative research and how fun ding agencies and policymakers have addressed the challenge
through policies and experiments.
Five key policy questions for HRHR research that helped to shape this project from the outset include:
 What different funding instruments are being used and what are their advantages and
disadvantages?
 What evidence (if any) exists of the effectiveness of these different instruments?
 What is the most appropriate instrument to use in a particular context?

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
14  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Are there alternative and/or complementary non -funding p olicies that can be
implemented, and in what context?
 What are the roles, responsibilities and constraints of different actors in promoting
high-risk research?
In constructing an inventory of H RHR research programmes ( Appendix 3), the Expert Group drew f rom
programmes identified as at least partially connected to HRHR research in the OECD STIP Compass
Database12. The Expert Group used its judgment, referring to further information sources as necessary, to
select programmes that have fostering HRHR research as a major focus and supplemented these with
additional programmes not found in OECD STIP Compass.
Survey questionnaires were sent to select ed funders with identified HRHR research programmes (See
Appendix 2 for the survey questionnaire and the funding schemes that were analysed.) The questionnaire
collected information on: basic programme aims and functioning ; selection criteria for research funding
awards; the selection process; the effectiveness of the programme in meeting its goals of supporting high-
risk high-reward research; supportive policies assisting the programme in meeting its goals; other relevant
issues. An additional question was included to collect information on COVID -19 rapid-response research
funding mechanisms – some of which also encouraged HRHR.
To supplement the survey questionnaire, Expert Group members and OECD staff conducted 8 in-depth
interviews with HRHR research programme managers and research providers (appendix 3), with particular
attention to the contextual factors that support government research funding schemes in fostering HRHR
research.
The Expert Group held six meetings between January 2019 and September 2020 and also organised an
international workshop in April 2020. Originally scheduled to be held in Brussels, Belgium, the workshop ,
which examined many aspects of HRHR research based on concrete case studies, was conducted virtually
in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The workshop included members of the Expert Group, international
panels o f invited experts, GSF and CSTP Delegates, heads of research funding agencies and
programmes, and members of the OECD Secretariat (full details and videos available at
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560).
The goal of this report is to identify useful policy options for government science policymakers, science
funders and research-performing institutions. It includes an analysis of the relative effectiveness of different
policy mechanisms for fostering HRHR research while fully considering the inherent trade -offs among
differing policy approaches.
Findings and analysis
 Overview
This chapter presents an integrated analysis of: the supporting literature on individual HRHR research-
related programmes (see inventory in Appendix 3); the responses to the questionnaire from 16 selected
programmes (see Appendix 2); stakeholder interviews; and, presentations and discussions from the
April 2020 workshop. The different themes of the analysis are organis ed in two groups: first, funding
mechanisms to foster HRHR research, and second, contextual factors and supporting policies, aside from
dedicated research funding mechanisms, that have been utilized to help foster HRHR research.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  15
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Funding Mechanisms
Across the world, there are many research funding mechanisms designed to foster HRHR research (see
Appendix 3). There has been much policy experimentation in this area, offering robust options for
policymakers to consider when seeking to promote HRHR research.
 Dedicated or Secondary HRHR Research Funding Mechanisms
Although this project initially aimed to develop a typology of HRHR research programmes, it quickly
became clear that developing a useful and consistent typology would not be possible, because of the wide
variation in approaches used to foster HRHR research. Nevertheless some general distinctions can be
made among funding mechanisms to foster HRHR research. One key feature is the degree to which a
funding mechanism is focussed on HRHR research.
A first category of funding mechanism is the dedicated high-risk/high-reward research programme. This is
specifically designed to support HRHR research and has supporting such research as a primary goal.
Among the programmes considered in this project (see Appen dix 3), such dedicated programmes are in
the minority. They include the US National Institutes of Health’s High Risk High Reward Research portfolio
of programmes, each of which supports a slightly different group of researchers. Similarly, France’s OH
Risque programme, from the ANR (Agence Nationale de la Recherche) is dedicated to research, “involving
a very high level of scientific risk but with strong potential for scientific, technological and possibly economic
impacts.”13 The United Kingdom’s UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) Tools and Resources Development
Fund (TRDF): Transformative Research Opportunities is another example of a dedicated HRHR research
programme, explicitly designed to support “’high-risk high reward’ pilot studies.”14
Although not as explicit in their title, o ther programmes have nevertheless become synonymous with
supporting HRHR research . As mentioned in the introduction, these include the US Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), which has been supporting such research f or over 60years, and
other US ‘ARPA’s.
A second category of programmes has supporting HRHR research as part of their primary mission within
a broader set of objectives. This is, for example, the case for the Japan Moonshot Research and
Development initiative, for which the programme solicitation includes numerous references to “high -risk
high-impact R&D” and also calls for “destructive innovation” with researchers encouraged to aim for
“ambitious projects that are more than just extensions of conventional technology.” This initiative is actually
seven distinct programmes aimed at different societal goals overseen by four agencies; HRHR research
is the unifying theme.15
The US National Science Foundation’s RAISE program me is another example of a research programme
that aims at supporting “bold, interdisciplinary” projects . RAISE requires that research efforts include two
or more intellectually distinct disciplines, with the expectation that combining different lines of research will
generate transformational advances.
A third category comprises research funding mechanisms in which supporting HRHR research is a
secondary goal or an important consideration in the proposal evaluation process. This is perhaps the most
common category for the programmes in this report’s inventory. The European Research Council’s
Consolidator Grants are one example of this category, as are programmes such as the US National
Science Foundation’s EArly G rants for Exploratory Research (EAGER). The Science Foundation of
Ireland’s Frontiers for the Future programme has frontier knowledge as a primary goal, but high-risk high-
reward research is an important consideration in the proposal evaluation process. S imilarly, Poland’s
MAESTRO programme is another basic -research programme with supporting HRHR research as a
secondary element16.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
16  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The Research Council of Norway’s ENERGIX program me is an interesting example. The program me’s
primary goal is to foster energy breakthroughs, but a key strategy for the programme is to pursue “ground-
breaking innovation for the development of entirely new energy concepts.” ENERGIX activities “are to
promote radical and ground-breaking solutions – novel approaches and radically inno vative technologies
that may result in major leaps in improvement in efficiency, use or cost levels throughout the energy chain,
from energy resources to energy consumption.”17 It appears, then, that although promoting HRHR research
is not a goal in itself for this program me, fostering such research is core to achieving the program me’s
primary energy goal. Another one of RCN’s program mes, AQUACULTURE, takes a similar approach of
fostering HRHR research toward the primary goal of enhancing the aquaculture industry.
A potential fourth category is research funding mechanisms geared toward supporting scientific research
with multiple possible goals including advancing scientific knowledge, achieving economic outcomes, or
advancing societal outcomes, in which researchers are encouraged to pursue high risk or potentially
transformative approaches . Such mechanisms often have no clear criteria for HRHR research. One
example is the Czech Republic’s EXPRO, a programme to support excellence in basic research that began
in 2018. This program me has multiple objectives, including helping Czech researchers become more
competitive in European Research Council program mes. Peer reviewers of proposals are asked to
evaluate the riskiness of the project and the potential significance of the project’s impa ct as part of their
proposal evaluations.18
Table 1. HRHR research funding mechanism categories
HRHR focus Examples
HRHR primary focus/dedicated programme US NIH HRHR programme, France ANR OH Risque programme,
Switzerland SNRF Sinergia, Germany DFG Reinhart Koselleck Projects
HRHR one of the main foci Japan Moonshot R&D programme, US NSF Raise programme, Canada
NFRF Exploration programme, Ireland SFI Frontiers for the Future
Programme
HRHR secondary goal/among many criteria Europe ERC grant programme, US NSF EAGER programme, Poland
MAESTRO programme
HRHR not an explicit criteria but risk-taking/transformative research is
encouraged
Czech EXPRO programme, Portugal exploratory Research projects,
Korea Alchemist project
Source: authors’ analysis
 Calls for Proposals
Although this may seem obvious, the Expert Group found that calls for proposals for program mes aimed
at fostering HRHR research normally indicate that judgments of risk-taking and potential for transformation
will be central to the proposal evaluation process. NIH’s Pioneer Award, for example, states to potential
applicants, “Successful NIH Director's Pioneer Award applicants are expected to propose highly
innovative, and hence inherently risky, approaches to a ddress or solve exceptionally important problems
of relevance to NIH. While a new research direction may have as its foundation the applicant’s prior work
and expertise, it cannot simply be an obvious extension or scaling up of a research enterprise. Rathe r, a
new research direction must reflect a fundamental new insight into the solution of a problem, which may
derive from the development of exceptionally innovative approaches and/or from the posing of radically
unconventional hypotheses.” Japan’s Moonshot programme stresses in multiple ways that funded projects
must be HRHR: proposals “must be based on a bolder ideas than conventional ones and be challenging
and innovative, with a strong impact expected on future industry and/or society.” 19
Other programmes state clearly at the outset to potential applicants that HRHR research approaches are
strongly preferred or mandatory. These c riteria extend not only to projects but also to people. Although it
was a one-time solicitation, France’s OH Risque programme in 2014 had a call for proposals “offering bold

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  17
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

researchers the necessary funds to start exploring innovative concepts or new paradigms with very high
potential.”
 Evaluation and funding allocation mechanisms
This report’s inventory of HRHR research progra mmes is mostly comprised of government programmes
to support research with awards being granted through a competitive process, Various methods of
evaluating and allocating funds are used for HRHR research programmes, as summarised in Table 2.
Table 2. HRHR research proposal evaluation processes and criteria
Options Description/rationale Pros and cons Examples
Traditional peer review
based on scientific
excellence
External expert panel reviews
proposals
Pro: Established mechanism
Con: can encourage conservatism
European Research
Council Consolidator
Grants
Traditional peer review
with requirement for
collaborative,
interdisciplinary, or
breakthrough research
ideas in all proposals
These types of research tend
to be more HRHR
Pro: Easy to write in proposal
solicitations
Con: Collaborative, interdisciplinary,
and breakthrough do not equal
HRHR
Swiss National Science
Foundation Sinergia
Traditional peer review
making HRHR research
an explicit selection
criterion
HRHR research needs to be
defined for both applicants and
reviewers
Pro: Allows focus on HRHR research
Con: Reviewers may need to be
trained to evaluate HRHR in research
proposals
NIH HRHR research
programmes
Canada NFRF
Exploration
Peer review/anonymised Double-blind' peer review
means reviewers do not know
the identities of applicants,
and vice versa
Pro: Reduces bias against certain
categories of applicants (early-career
researchers, women, members of
minority groups)
Con: Reduces information available
to reviewers, including track record
Swiss National Science
Foundation Sinergia
Peer review/golden vote Peer review panel with each
panel member a “gold” vote to
allow them to protect a
promising proposal even if
other panel members rate it
negatively
Pro: Encourages proposals that may
be outside the mainstream or attract
very varied ratings
Con: Discourages reviewer
consensus
China National Natural
Science Foundation
Multistage Can use a combination of
panel review, mail review,
programme-manager review,
and interview
Pro: Allows one stage specifically to
focus on high-risk high-reward nature
of proposal; initial stages can triage
out unpromising ideas
Con: Labour and time intensive
Research Council of
Norway ENRGIX
Netherlands Off Road
Segmenting competitions
by career stage
Separate programmes for
early-career, mid-career, and
established researchers can
encourage earlier-career
researchers to take risks in
research proposals
Pro: Early-career researchers may be
more inclined to take risks yet fear
career repercussions for doing so
Con: Not directly connected to HRHR
research
ERC starting vs
advanced Grants
Programme
manager/director
Programme manager/director
reviews and selects proposals
internally
Pro: Reduces burden, removes
conservative tendencies of peer
review
Con: Limits expertise to one manager
US DARPA
US NSF RAISE
Japan Moonshot R&D
Programme
Source: authors’ analysis

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
18  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Peer Review in Proposal Evaluations
The traditional mechanism used for project selection and research funding is peer -review. Most of the
HRHR research programmes considered in this project use peer -review evaluation to make funding
allocations decision but take steps to ensure that peer -review panels do not discourage HRHR research
approaches. The Swiss National Science Fou ndation’s S inergia programme, bega n as a collaborative
research programme and reformulated in 2016 to foster transformative research. It uses several strategies
within its peer -review processes to ensure HRHR research is supported: requiring collaborative,
interdisciplinary, and breakthrough research in all proposals; promoting the inclusion of early -career
applicants as leads or team members. A dedicated standing peer-review panel has been set up to preserve
a “Sinergia culture” f or advancing the programme’s aims, and a special emphasis is put on fostering the
out-of-the-box aspects of proposals.20
The European Research Council incorporates considerations for fostering HRHR research in its peer-
reviewed research grants. This project focused on analysis of the ERC’s Co nsolidator Grants for mid -
career researcher, but similar features are present for ERC’s Starting Grants (early -career researchers)
and Advanced Grants (for established researchers). The ERC designs its schemes with the following
features to encourage HRHR research: 1. applicants know that, in order to be successful they must
propose a truly ambitious project; 2. evaluators are strongly advised to reward risks; and 3. grants are
substantial with a mean duration of 5 years. 21 ERC has a number of successful grantees who were
previously rejected by their national funding agencies because their proposals were considered too risky.
NIH’s HRHR research programmes explicitly cite the high-risk, high-reward nature of research proposals
as a selection criterion in p eer review. NIH’s New Innovator Award programme, for example, states as a
selection criterion: “The reviewers are looking for convincing evidence that the applicant is an exceptionally
creative Early Stage Investigator who is proposing a bold new approach that has the potential to produce
a major impact on a broad area of research relevant to NIH.” In the Pioneer Award programme, applicants
are told, “Particular emphasis will be given to the investigator's track record of creativity and impact, the
innovativeness of the research approaches, and the potential of the project, if successful, to have a
significant impact on an important research problem relevant to NIH.” It should be noted that the peer
review process differs within the four different NIH HRHR programmes: the Pioneer Award utilizes a three-
stage evaluation process, the first two steps a traditional mail peer review followed by a peer-review panel
and a third stage that includes an in -person panel interview; the New Innovator award and Early
Independence award have a traditional mail peer review followed by a -review panel and a third stage
review by a “Council of Councils” of high -level NIH personnel; and the Transformative Research Award
uses anonymised review in the first two stages of mail and panel review, with biographical information then
being included for 3rd panel review.
Multiple stages of review, as emplo yed in NIH’s HRHR research programmes are a common strategy for
dedicated HRHR research programmes. Other programmes also use multiple review stages: the Research
Council of Norway’s ENERGIX programme uses a peer -review panel for the first stage, and in -person
interviews for the second stage before an international referee panel. The same is true for the
Netherlands’Off Road programme, the interview in this case taking the form of a ‘pitch’ or presentation by
the applicants on their proposal, in which they are specifically questioned about the novelty or ‘out-of-the-
box’ character of the work. Poland’s MAESTRO programme also uses two stages, the first a proposal
evaluation by peer reviewers and the second an interview.22
Canada’s NFRF has five selection criteria for peer review panels to consider: interdisciplinarity, equity,
diversity and inclusion (EDI); high risk; high reward; and feasibility. While criteria weighting varies between
the Exploration and Transformation streams, each stream assigns the high -risk and high -reward criteria
the heaviest weights. In three competitions since 2018, Exploration assigned weights o f 40% each of the
overall score to high -risk and high -reward, with project feasibility accounting for 20% and the two other

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  19
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

criteria – interdisciplinary and equity, diversity and inclusion – being assessed on a pass or fail basis. In
comparison, the first Transformation competition will conclude in 2021 and weighted high reward at 60%,
and high risk and feasibility at 20% each. EDI and interdisciplinarity were again pass or fail. Similarly, the
Netherlands’ Off Road programme makes a judgment on the ‘out -of-the-box’ character and originality of
the research an explicit evaluation criterion, and weights it at 50% of the evaluation score.
UKRI’s TRDF: Transformative Research Opportunities has 8 primary selection criteria, of which one relates
to HRHR research: novelty of research. The Scientific Excellence criterion explicitly includes novelty and
also significant potential for broader impact.23 Poland’s MAESTRO programme has “pioneering/ innovative
nature of the research problem addressed” as one of 10 criteria.
There may be additional considerations for government funding schemes that promote HRHR research to
address societal challenges. Here, relevance of potential research impact to making progress toward
solving challenges is an additional factor in proposal evaluation, although this potential impact may be
difficult to evaluate. HRHR research may complement other research that supports incremental progress
towards defined challenges. Because expectations are high, support for research on “Societal challenges”
can tend to favour ‘what we already know’ or ‘more of the same’” and therefore funding agencies face
additional challenges in established HRHR approaches alongside more -incremental approaches. 24
Complex societal challenges, such as the Sustainabl e Development Goals, require transdisciplinary
research that combines perspectives from different disciplines and different stakeholders, in a process that
is inherently high-risk with potential for high return. Such research has particular requirements in terms of
funding and support that overlap and extend beyond those required for other types of HRHR (see (OECD,
2020[2]).
The OECD 2018 Competitive Research Funding report described some strategies for proposal-evaluation
panels to protect highly transformative ideas from being dismissed as too risky or unlikely to succeed
(OECD, 2018 [1]). One is to combine referee scores in ways t hat can assist risky proposals [ such as
discarding low score(s)]. Another mechanism is to allocate each panel member a “gold” vote to allow them
to protect a promising proposal even if other panel members think it would be too risky. The National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) uses this approa ch, such that if a proposed project is
deemed not suitable for funding by the majority of external reviewers, it may nevertheless be funded if it is
recommended by 2 or more panel review experts on the basis of novelty. Other programmes have
experimented with a “go/no-go” or stage-gate system in which projects evaluated as risky are funded for
an initial trial period (a year) and must show some promise before receiving full funding.
One challenge identified by the 2018 report is counteracting the so -called “Matthew effect,” in which peer
review proposal evaluations rely on applicants’ previous grant and publishing success rather than the
merits of the proposal. This effect makes it difficult for new investigators with new ideas to be funded.
In response, some funders are experimenting by conducting proposal reviews without reference to CVs or
researcher biographical information, putting the emphasis on the idea and not the person. The Swiss
National Science Foundation, responding to challenges that became apparent in supporting HRHR
research through its Sinergia programme, established the Spark programme in 2019 with the aim of
supporting HRHR research specifically through innovative approaches. The main innovation in its peer -
review panel system is the format of the application: it consists of a project plan only and is fully anonymized
without CVs or other personal identifiers.25 Another innovation is there is no panel discussion, only the
aggregation of individual scores to discourage regression to the mean in individual reviewers’ scores after
group discussions. So far, there have been some practical challenges in implementation, including the
difficulty in assuring that reviews are truly ‘blind’ and the challenge of reconciling discordant reviews. There
is also an apparent gender bias (favouring male applicants), but nevertheless the early results are
promising in terms of identifying and supporting HRHR research applications.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
20  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Even within a traditional peer-review process, there are actions that can be taken to foster HRHR research.
At a minimum, funding agencies can instruct reviewers to reward or not overtly penalise risky proposals.
The reviewers of RCN’s AQUACULTURE programme are instructed to reward riskiness in their proposal
reviews and not to be negatively influenced by high risk. Despite this guidance , programme managers
found that it was difficult for international reviewers to support riskiness. 26 Overall, t here is a notable
absence of initiatives, in which reviewers have been explicitly trained in how to evaluate research proposals
to reward risk, or assess potential high -reward impacts. Such training, if available, would be a useful
complement to other efforts to ameliorate review processes.
One approach that the report does not specifically examine but that could be considered is raising success
rates. If conservatism in peer review and discouragement of HRHR research is one result of low success
rates, then it follows that raising success rates could be a mitigation strategy. But since the most
straightforward way to increase success rates is to increase the total amount of funding available, as a
strategy it is difficult to execute when budgets are limited.
There are other strategies to increase success rates, such as limiting the number o f proposals or
discouraging applications, but those are difficult to implement unless they involve a real dialogue between
potential applicants and the funding programme management . Many of the HRHR research programmes
considered for this report have succe ss rates that are not substantially different from other research
programmes. The four NIH HRHR research programmes, for example, have success rates that range from
10% to 24 %, similar to the overall 19 percent NIH -wide success rate. Research Council of No rway’s
ENERGIX programme reports a success rate of 14%.27
The COVID -19 pandemic represented a serious and novel challenge to research proposal evaluation
mechanisms. The pandemic spread rapidly and required an immediate response from researchers.
Incremental approaches, looking for “low -hanging fruits”, were often favoured in order to test existing
solutions to this new disease. However, traditional peer-review mechanisms often proved to be inadequate
in this emergency context and fast -tracked reviewing proc esses were implemented by most research
funders. In parallel, the novelty of the disease and scale of the challenge encouraged some research
funders and institutions to pursue HRHR using crowd -sourcing initiatives aimed at attracting ideas and
input from research teams outside traditional research community silos (OECD, 2021 [18]). Although the
current activity did not analyse the new funding mechanisms that have been established, t he lessons
learned from the crisis may have a long -term influence on the way funders assess research proposals,
including for HRHR research.
The programme manager review model
One approach to allocating funds while fostering HRHR research is to bypass peer review and rely on the
judgment of fu nding-agency programme managers. The iconic example is US DARPA, which has relied
on programme manager evaluation of competitive proposals for decades specifically to foster risk -taking
approaches to mostly technological challenges . DARPA, whose model date s back to the late 1950s,
selects programme managers, mostly on rotation from outside the government sector for 3 -5 year terms,
and empowers them to allocate research funding based on their own expert judgment rather than through
a peer review process. Alt hough there are internal reviews of allocation decisions at various levels of the
organisation, there really is no external peer review of DARPA funding decisions, and often not even open
calls for project proposals. Instead, simplified calls for ideas and concepts in short white papers tend to be
used.
Perhaps surprisingly, although DARPA supports HRHR research , the agency is not especially long term
in orientation. DARPA programme managers themselves rotate continually, so there is little institutional
support for long -term projects. DARPA is known to prefer ‘fast failures’ to long -term successes, and
therefore programme managers have the power to ask funded investigators to try different approaches or

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  21
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

even to terminate funding and redirect it to another investigator if a risky idea turns out to be unpromising.
DARPA is thus prepared to accept unusually high short-term risk in allocating funding but tends not to have
patience with research that does not quickly show at least some reward and fulfil intermed iate, near-term
technical milestones.
The DARPA model of a strong programme manager has been inspirational for HRHR research
programmes around the world, most obviously in the US where other ARPAs including ARPA -E (energy),
IARPA (national -security) intel ligence, and BARDA (biological countermeasures) have followed. The
model has been taken up in other nations. One notable example is Japan’s ImPACT programme, which
like DARPA recruits programme managers from industry or academia for up to 5 -year secondments and
empowers them to create and fund research teams to work on ambitious national challenges requiring
risky research and technological breakthrough to solve.
For the Moonshot Research and Development Program me, which is a successor to th e ImPACT
programme, the equivalents to the DARPA programme managers are known as Program me Directors
(PDs). The PDs in turn build a research portfolio (3 to 13 projects per PD 28), respective projects being
managed by Project Managers (PMs). PMs are granted authority and flexibility to promote their respective
projects.29 The PDs are appointed by the respective government agency, and the PMs are selected by the
by the respective government agency in consultation with the PDs through open call process from
academia and industry. Key to both PMs’ and PDs’ success is a wide social network of researchers inside
and outside Japan with specialized knowledge relevant to the project, and the project management skills
necessary to bring together and lead a diverse project team.
This programme-manager model can also be used by funding agencies that otherwise rely on peer review
as a core proposal evaluation strategy. The US National Science Foundation (NSF), while holding to
competitive peer review evaluation for most of its proposals, has introduced smaller programmes relying
on programme-manager evaluation for making funding awards. One, the EArly -concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) programme, specifically aims to encourage “… exploratory work in its
early stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or approaches. EAGER awards
are evaluated according to the same criteria as all NSF awards – intellectual merit and broader impacts –
in which one of the questions is “To what extent does th e proposed activity suggest and explore creative,
original, or potentially transformative concepts?” but programme managers also evaluate additionally and
specifically the transformative and/or high risk/high reward nature of the concept.
The EAGER programme has the added benefit of reducing burden, both through simplifying proposals and
removing the need to convene peer review panels (although programme managers have the authority to
commission external reviews). Another burden -reduction strategy comes fro m its high success rate
(generally about ~70%) which is related to an informal preselection mechanism: investigators must discuss
their ideas with a programme manager before submitting a proposal. Another benefit is time: proposals
can be reviewed and either rejected or funded in a fraction of the time of regular peer review.30 The median
length of awarded funding in the EAGER programme is 2 years, shorter than many of the other
mechanisms discussed in this report and shorter than the 3-year median for all NSF awards.
The NSF also sponsors a related programme, the NSF Rapid Response Research Program (RAPID)
which, is designed to support projects requiring rapid fund ing and thus has an expe dited merit review
process. The programme is specifically for projects “having a severe urgency with regard to availability of,
or access to data, facilities or specialis ed equipment, including quick -response research on natural or
anthropogenic disasters and similar unanticipated events.” The RAPID mechanism is the primar y
mechanism by which NSF respond ed to the need to fund Covid -19-related research in 2020; this
mechanism allows ideas to move from solicitation to proposal to evaluation to funding decision in a few
weeks.31

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
22  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

This program me-manager-evaluation model is also used in the NSF Research Advanced by
Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering (RAISE) programme to support interdisciplinary research. All
RAISE awards must be HRHR research , as well as interdisciplinary. It is intended to foster bold
interdisciplinary research and the projects are larger (up to USD 1 million) and longer (5 years) than
EAGER awards.
 Project Management and Duration in HRHR Research
There is a preference for longer than normal research awards among the HRHR research program mes
identified in this report. The rationale is to take the pressure off investigators to quickly produce published
papers or other outputs or to apply for follow-on research grants, instead offering them the opportunity to
take riskier approaches that may not produce short-term results.
All four of NIH’s HRHR research programmes, for example, provide 5-year awards, in contrast to average
award length of 3 years in NIH’s standard portfolio. The recently -launched Japan Moonshot program me
also envisions 5-year projects (though with the possibility of projects as long as 10 years), as do DFG (the
German Research Foundation Reinhart Koselleck Projects ). Consequently, these program mes tend to
offer larger total awards than other schemes, with the Reinhart Koselle ck Projects offering u p to
EUR 1.25 million, or EUR 250 000 per year.32 NIH’s Transformative Research Award (TRA) has a 5 -year
standard award length and in addition states “No limit on budget.” 33 DARPA’s awards are 3 to 5 years in
length for projects showing satisfactory progress.
Table 3. Project Management and Duration in HRHR Research
Options Description/rationale Pros and cons Examples
Longer-term
support
~5-year awards rather than the
standard 3 years, to offer investigators
the opportunity to take riskier
approaches that may not produce
immediate results
Pro: Eases pressure on
investigators to produce immediate
results or write follow-on proposals
Con: large resource commitment
for agencies
– NIH HRHR research
programmes
– Germany DFG
Reinhart Koselleck
Projects
Short-term support,
or seed funding
6 months to 2 years; Used primarily to
de-risk a promising research idea in
advance of a potential full funding
proposal
Pro: Seed funding can support
exploratory work on ideas without a
full commitment of resources
Con: If successful, requires further
funding
– Netherlands Off Road
UKRI TRDF:
Transformative
Research Opportunities
Hands-off project
management by
funders
Offer more flexibility to investigators in
HRHR research programmes by
reducing the number of progress or
project reports, reducing required
paperwork, and otherwise reducing
burden
Pro: Allows researchers to focus on
research
Con: Active management can be
helpful to researchers
– NIH HRHR research
programmes

Active programme
management
Intense discussions and continual
communications between programme
staff and researchers
Pro: Allows for elaboration of ideas,
problem solving around obstacles
Con: Time and resource-intensive
– US DARPA
– Japan Moonshot R&D
Programme
Source: authors’ analysis
Other programmes have taken slightly different approaches to extend the length of promising projects .
France’s OH Risque programme had a 2 x 2 year system in which successful applicants’ projects were
initially funded for two years, but with a Go/No-Go decision at that time leading potentially to two additional
years of funding. The Go / No Go stage gate made it possible to minimize the financial risk for projects
which, at the end of the second year, showed gaps or had encountered obstacles. DARPA’s programme
managers use similar approaches, periodically evaluating the progress of projects and making go/no-go
decisions.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  23
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

That said, other HRHR res earch programmes have shorter awards, although these programmes tend to
be for exploratory research grants or seed funding . They provide small amounts of funding for a short
period of time primarily to de-risk promising research ideas in advance of potential full funding proposal s.
The Netherlands’ Off Road program me is an example; awards typically last for 12 -18 months, with a cap
of EUR 100 000 in funding. UKRI’s TRDF: Transformative Research Opportunities provides funding for 6
to 18 months to develop early-stage ideas. In response to the Covid -19 pandemic, the US Department of
Defense launched a HRHR research Newton Award for Transformative Ideas, which awarded
6-month, 50 000 USD awards to develop novel conceptual frameworks or the ory-based approaches
related to the pandemic. The expectation was that some of these Newton awards would lead to fully-funded
research projects at a later stage.34
Among HRHR research programmes that use peer review, there is a tendency for program me managers
to take a hands -off approach to project management. Funders have consciously tried to offer more
flexibility to investigators in HRHR research program mes by reducing the number of progress or project
reports, reducing required paperwork, and otherwise reducing the administrative burden. For example,
NIH’s four HRHR research program mes do not, unlike NIH’s standard research grants, require detailed
budgets as part of the proposal and therefore do not involve program me managers in detailed project
management, following timelines, evaluating expenditures against budgets, etc.
Of course, for programme-manager review models the tendency is for programme managers to be highly
active in project management. DARPA’ s hands-on project management style is legendar y, involving
monthly calls between managers and funded researchers, and more -frequent communication s with
intensive information exchange. Japan’s recently -launched Moonshot R&D program me envisions an
"elaboration period" to refine the proposed R&D projects through intense discussion between programme
directors and selected project managers. This period will involve: refinement and elaboration of project
ideas with scenarios; consideration of ethical, legal, and societal implications of research; and ,
specification of requirements for organizational and research infrastructures. Although less intense, the
consultation is expected to continue throughout the entire project performance period.
 ‘People-based’ awards as a HRHR research strategy
Despite concerns about bias and exclusion , the balance of evidence suggests that the Matthew effect is
at least partially due to the fact that many successful researchers are innately creative and risk taking and
therefore come up with creative new ideas (Bol, de Vaan and van de Rijt, 2018 [19]). Therefore, it is not
surprising that the approach of funding solely the idea and not the person is not a strategy that is widely
adopted by HRHR research programmes.
Rather, it is not uncommon for HRHR research programmes to support the person rather than the idea or
project on the basis that project -based funding may discourage risk taking. The pressure to package a
researcher’s ideas into a discrete, 3 year fundable project fa vours established ideas or projects that are
the logical extension of past research. Moreover, a project proposal creates the expectation that the
researcher will strictly follow what has been proposed over the funded period, without allowing for the
uptake of new ideas and approaches that may emerge over the course of the work.
‘People-based’ research awards give the recipients the freedom to be creative, sometimes for a longer
time period than traditional project-based research awards, and allow researchers the flexibility to change
course midstream in response to emerging research topics or even to recover from failed experiments.
They also have the virtue of reducing paperwork and proposal-preparation burden; without descriptions of
budgets, project mil estones, and other features of a project proposal, people -based award applications
can be shorter than a standard project proposal. One NIH HRHR research programme, the Pioneer Award,
has a 5 -page limit for its core research proposal section to be complete d with a description of an
investigator’s suitability for an award, innovativeness, and ideas rather than details of a specific project.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
24  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

NIH’s other HRHR research programme applications are shorter also than standard NIH awards and focus
on the investigator’s qualifications, innovativeness, and ideas rather than on a specific project.35
Germany’s Reinhart Koselleck Project scheme is midway between a project -based and people -based
approach. Proposals are a maximum of 5 pages in length, and reviewers are asked to look for evidence
that the PI(s) are capable of executing the HRHR research idea.
 Nongovernmental Organisations and HRHR Research Funding
While governmental organisations provide the large majority of the resources allocated to HRHR research,
non-government organisations, and particularly private foundations, can also play an important and
complementary role. Nongovernmental organisations often have more freedom in defining their objectives
and developing their operating procedures, and do not have the same financial accountability requirements
as public organisations. This can lead them to be more risk -tolerant and/or be more prone to support
research in unchartered territories provided that the research contributes to their overall mission.
In the United States, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) has been a leader in supporting
research that may be too high risk for government funding agencies to support and has been successful
enough that the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) has copied the HHMI approach in establishing its
dedicated HRHR program mes. HHMI is a pioneer in placing ‘big bets’ on outstanding scientists and for
supporting ‘people not projects.’ 36 Although the exact funding mechanism of HHM I - hiring most of its
funded investigators as HHMI staff while allowing them to either remain at their home institutions or work
from the HHMI campus - may not be replicable widely , the theory that such an approach would allow
investigators to take on ris ky scientific ideas without fitting them into a defined -term project has worked
well.37 Other ingredients necessary to make people-based awards possible, including longer-term funding
averaging 7 years at a time, have also proved to be durable. HHMI investi gators are regularly evaluated
in seminars and other presentations to HHMI staff.
Denmark’s Lundbeck Foundation, recognising some of the previously mentioned limitations of peer review,
has set aside 10% of its research funding on alternatives to classical peer review evaluation to identify the
most-deserving innovative grants. This funding has allowed for experiments in proposal evaluation ,
including: use of anonymous proposals to force reviewers to focus on the idea not the person or CV;
allowing review panel members one decisive ‘golden vote; and, a combined peer review and lottery system
for some competitions, the lottery serving to reduce both proposer and reviewer burden .38
Nongovernmental organisations supported by public funds also support HRHR research. One example is
the Human Frontier Science Programme (HFSP), which has been established and financially supported
by national governments as “an international collaboration in frontier life sciences research” with a specific
remit to support “high -risk, interdisciplinary, intercontinental, collaborative, fundamental life science
research.” and “transformative and paradigm shifting research”. 39 The HFSP distributes research grants
and postdoctoral fellowships through a peer -review process that takes into account the riskiness or
potentially transformative nature of research proposals.40
 Scientific prizes and HRHR
Another potential way of allocating research funds is the use of incentive prizes or challenges. This is a
promising approach with long histori cal roots. In the 18th century, the original incentive prize was offered
by Great Britain’s Parliament for an accurate method of determining a ship’s longitude to any inventor who
could provide a solution. Incentive prizes, where a cash reward is offered t o a scientist or other inventor
who can provide the solution to a scientific or technological challenge, have been used by national
governments and other funders since then.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  25
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

In recent years, governments have expanded the uses of prizes and challenges specifically to foster more
high-risk, high -reward approaches to solve societal and scientific problems. The United States, in
legislation enacted in 2010, granted all US science agencies the authority to conduct prize competitions to
spur innovation.41 A progress report on the legislation states: “Prize competitions and challenges have an
established record of spurring innovation in the private and philanthropic sectors. This progress report
details examples of how well -designed prize competitions and challenges, integrated into a broader
innovation strategy, have enabled Federal agencies to: pay only for success and establish an ambitious
goal without having to predict which team or approach is most likely to succeed; Reach beyond the “usual
suspects” to increase the number of solvers tackling a problem; and to identify novel approaches, without
bearing high levels of risk…”42
The progress report points out one advantage for funding agencies in using incentive prizes for fostering
HRHR research: it is low risk for the funding agency because the risk is borne by competitors for the prize,
and the agency pays out only if there is a successful result. But it is high risk for competitors because they
bear all the financial costs of conducting research toward a prize, with no guarantee of being compensated.
As such, this tool is not applicable in many circumstances, and is primarily useful for well-defined scientific
and technical challenges where competitors have the possibility of recouping some costs (through patents,
new commercial products) even if they are not successful in the competition. But the other advantages are
potentially compelling for funding agencies: paying only for success, reaching a broader community than
an agency’s usual funded researchers, and identifying potentially novel approaches by specifying a desired
result without specifying an approach.
HRHR research -oriented agencies such as DARPA have used incentive prizes (such as the series of
DARPA Grand Challenges)43 to engage a broader community of researchers than the traditional applicant
pool for scientific research grants, and to encour age ‘out -of-the-box’ ideas that might not be reviewed
favourably in peer review. Nongovernment organizations such as the X Prize Foundation also use incentive
prizes to encourage high -risk high -reward approaches to solving scientific and technical problems,
including a recent prize competition for developing rapid covid -19 testing solutions. 44 The X Prize
Foundation in particular has longstanding experienc e in using incentive prizes, dating back to 1994.
Funding agencies are already experimenting with mixed grant/prize models for fostering HRHR research.
Ireland’s Future Innovator Prize, for example, operates mostly as a standard multi -stage research grant
competition to foster HRHR research, with winners of the first competition stage receiving a small
starter/idea/validation grant followed by a smaller group of second -stage competition winners receiving a
larger research grant.45 But the innovation is that one team receives a ‘prize’ of additional research funding
to further develop their idea at the end of the second -stage period. Thus, this model incorporates the
competition element that is key to incentive prizes along with peer -review selection to identify proposals
for funding.
 Importance of a Portfolio Approach
The study heard repeatedly from program me managers and policymakers on the importance of taking a
portfolio approach to supporting HRHR research, so that considerations of risk and reward are pl aced at
the research portfolio level rather than the individual project level.
The portfolio approach to managing science is an imperfect analogue to managing investment portfolios,
where multiple investments are grouped together for analysis and financial return (as well as investment
risk) is evaluated at the portfolio level rather than analysing each individual investment. For financial
investments, a portfolio approach is a tool for managing risk and maximizing financial returns. Similarly,
when research projects are grouped together and evaluated as a portfolio, then both the high-risk part and
the high-reward part of HRHR research can be managed. If high -risk high-reward research projects are
risky enough that, for example, one in ten projects will rea lly produce new knowledge or a significant

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
26  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

impact, then there is unlikely to be political support for continuing a research program me in which 90% of
projects are not delivering expected breakthrough, and there will be pressure to reduce the riskiness of
research projects. But if program me managers build portfolios of projects, then a portfolio of 10 projects
would, in the same example, be likely to yield at least one major success, and if the HRHR research
projects are truly high-reward then the successful knowledge or impact of the one project could more than
justify the investment in 10 projects.
Managing at the portf olio level enables risk -taking and allows impacts from successful projects to be
balanced against less successful projects. It also allows programme managers to place ‘bets’ on multiple
potential approaches to a challenge or scientific question and to consider these multiple approaches as a
systemic whole instead of a collection of individual projects (Wallace and Rafols, 2015[20]).
A portfolio approach can actually be used at different levels of the system:
 At the program me level, as described above, to spread the risk over different research
projects; this often means that the program me management or evaluation panel requires
a certain level of discretionary power to support a percentage of HRHR proposals;
 At the agency level, to have a mix of traditional and HRHR funding schemes, the latter
often having a different selection process;
 At the national/strategic level, to allow for mission -oriented or priority program mes on
selected areas in which a country wishes to foster breakthroughs and is ready to accept
higher risk in the use of public funding.
The interest of having a portfolio approach was underlined by several experts at the project workshop, both
to ensure support in a political system adverse to perceived failures and to allow program me managers
and researchers to support risky research ideas in reaching for ambitious impacts.
Finally, a portfolio approach may also be of interest in the impact assessment of HRHR research funding
schemes. While traditional research funding programmes tend to be evaluated through the use of
bibliometric indicators applied for every and each of t he funded projects, this methodology has little
meaning for HRHR research programmes, as each individual project has a higher risk of not delivering the
expected results on time. However, when considered together, a portfolio of HRHR research projects may
be delivering higher -impact publications (with greater novelty – see ahead section 2.4) than a similar
portfolio of ‘standard’ projects.
 Internal or Institutional Funding to Support HRHR Research
There is potentially an important role for core or non -competitive institutional funding in supporting HRHR
research. Traditionally, core funding - such as the research funding provided by universities to their
investigators on the basis of a standard formula or as part of recurrent annual research support provi ded
without competition - has served as a guarantee d source of stability for generations of researchers. The
thinking is that such core funding allows researchers to pursue their risky, innovative, or potentially
transformative ideas without fear that a failure would cost them the next competitive research grant or, for
non-tenured researchers, their job. But it is equally plausible that formula funding entrenches conservatism
by allowing researchers to keep pursuing the next incremental steps of their ongo ing research without
external accountability. Unfortunately, there is little research indicating which effect predominates in core
funding.
Core funding can also encourage comp etition and HRHR research if a share is allocated to specifically
encourage HRHR research. The University of California Irvine (UCI), for example, provides internal funding
(supplemented when available by unrestricted philanthropic research funding) to faculty researchers
through a competitive process in which faculty research ideas are peer reviewed by internal faculty -led

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  27
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

teams. These relatively modest awards (in comparison to US federal research awards) allow funded faculty
teams to do preliminary work on research ideas, which serve to de -risk new ideas and may eventually
lead to full-scale research awards from federal research funding agencies.
Other US universities have similar programmes: the University of Michigan, for example, in summer 2020
concluded a 7 -year MCubed program me to use internal funds to seed teams for prelimina ry de-risking
research on high-risk research ideas.46 An intriguing feature of this programme is that a proposal required
at least three researchers from at least two different university departments; thus, in addition to fostering
HRHR research it also fostered interdisciplinary research.
Similarly, in France, competitive research funding schemes provided at the national or European level are
not generally considered to be supportive of HRHR research, and neither are evaluation policies and career
incentives for laboratories and researchers. Paris Sorbonne University, like UCI, finds institutional core
funding alone too limited to adequately support HRHR research throughout the whole university, as most
core resources go to basic operations of laboratories. This is why Sorbonne University decided to set aside
enough resources for its own internal seed-funding mechanism for HRHR research (Emergence) and at
the same time suppor ted the creation of multidisciplinary institutes which have, among other goals, the
objective to foster innovative solutions related to societal challenges. The Emergence program me is
limited to 100,000 euros per project, enough for seed funding to de -risk an idea but not to carry out a
complete project, and limited in time to 24 months, again not sufficient for a full project.
Although these examples demonstrate that internal core funding can be deployed to support HRHR
research, many research institutions face a difficult challenge as these resources are increasingly used to
cover fixed costs. There is often little left to support risky projects, even if researchers often prefer this type
of funding with no strings attached which, in theory, allows for m ore risk taking. Rather than using core
resources spread over all their research units to support HRHR research, research providers may be able
to better foster HRHR research using a competitive process for allocating their limited “free” internal funds
in order to provide a critical mass to specific projects.
 Impact Evaluation of HRHR Research Programmes
An underdeveloped aspect of HRHR research funding mechanisms, and indeed research funding in
general, is imp act evaluation. This study found few examples of HRHR research program mes that have
been rigorously evaluated to assess whether they have indeed fostered risk -taking or have helped to
produce higher rewards or more significant impacts than other approaches. Many of the programmes that
were surveyed r eported that they were established too recently to conduct an impact evaluation,
recognizing that research impacts are often apparent only over the longer term, especially for fundamental
research and other research at the (risky) frontiers of knowledge. I ndeed, a significant proportion of the
programmes in the inventory have been established in the past decade, meaning that for 5 -year project
funded after a 1 or 2-year start-up period the scientific and other impacts are only now beginning to appear.
Some longstanding HRHR research programmes have conducted impact evaluations, looking at not only
scientific, economic, and societal impacts but also at the program mes’ capacity to foster risk taking in
research. The ERC has evaluated its program mes annually i n recent years, using both qualitative and
quantitative measures with specific questions in the qualitative impact evaluation on whether funded
projects were HRHR research projects and whether the risk component influenced the research results. 47
The NIH H RHR research programmes have been repeatedly evaluated and found to foster not only
enhanced impacts but also to foster researchers’ willingness and ability to move beyond incremental
research toward high -risk research. 48 US DARPA’s portfolios have been con tinually evaluated over the
decades of DARPA’s existence with a rigor made possible by DARPA’s defenc e mission , permitting
DARPA program me managers to set and track progress toward ambitious yet well -defined technical

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
28  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

targets (Reed, 1990[21]) (Carpenter, 2008 [22]). Norway’s AQUACULTURE is notable in that its home
agency, the Research Council of Norway , has undergone numerous external evaluations 49 which have
demonstrated that RCN systems for eva luating projects for funding were too conservative, fostered
incremental research, and did not support radical changes. In response, AQUACULTURE and FRIPRO,
another Norwegian HRHR research programme, were developed to foster HRHR research.
There appears to be little consistency in impact evaluation methodologies. There is no standard ‘formula’
for evaluating HRHR research’ success in fostering either high risk or high reward. One reason for the lack
of a standard is, as stated previously, the lack of a standard category of “HRHR research” , of standard
proposal evaluation procedures and programme management, or of a standard impact objective among
programmes aiming for a variety of scientific, technical, economic, or societal outcomes. The main
consistency among impact evaluations , where they have been conducted, is the commissioning of an
(internal or external or combination) expert panel to evaluate program me impacts50. Expert judgment, a
standard feature of peer review whether of papers, proposals, or program mes, is a de facto best practice
as it is the only consistent practice. There are a few exceptions to this, where contract evaluators or
programme staff have conducted evaluations.
There are other forms of programme assessment. The US NSF commissioned an ass essment of its
INSPIRE programme51. Though not an impact evaluation per se, it did evaluate whether projects submitted,
reviewed, and awarded under the pilot were different than those under other NSF funding opportunities.
The majority (70 percent) of INSPI RE PIs reported that they had not submitted their INSPIRE project to
another funding mechanism and thought that it was unlikely or very unlikely that their project would have
been funded outside of INSPIRE. Eighty percent of INSPIRE PIs indicated that they proposed their most
high-risk, high-reward research ideas to the INSPIRE programme. In addition to an analysis of the awards
and a comparison of these awards with similar, non-INSPIRE interdisciplinary awards, this analysis sought
input from a panel of e xperts who reviewed INSPIRE and non -INSPIRE awards to assess whether
INSPIRE funded interdisciplinary and potentially transformative awards differently than other NSF
programmes. The expert reviewers scored INSPIRE summaries significantly higher for high -risk and out-
of-the-box/original characteristics, although they were indistinguishable on the characteristics related to
interdisciplinarity.
Evaluation panels do not rely solely on e xpert judgment. Such panels often rely on data collected or
compiled by programme managers to assist in panel deliberations, including but not limited to bibliometric
data on funded projects, researcher bibliometric and other data, investigator reporting on project outputs
and outcomes. Occasionally in -person interviews with, or presentations by, funded investigators are also
organised.
These data are not specific to riskiness or reward, and so they may be helpful but not determinative in
evaluating whether a program me fostered HRHR research. There is room to improve the methodologies
for evaluating the high risk and high reward aspects of research program mes, with one priority being to
develop standard indicators that could be used by evaluators (see ahead 2.4).
 Contextual Factors and Supporting Policies
In addition to policies for funding research, this project also examined contextual factors that result in a
supportive environment for HRHR research and non -funding policies that have been instituted in order to
create a more conducive environment to perform HRHR research. These contextual factors and supporting
policies, although insufficient by themselves to foster HRHR research in the absence of the necessary
research funding, are important for ensuring the success of HRHR research funding schemes.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  29
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Political Support for Risk-Taking and Long-Term Orientation
Perhaps the most important contextual factor underpinning public investment in HRHR research is long -
term political support for risk -taking in research. Long -term support requires patience, which may be in
short supply among policymakers who are eager for tangible results to justify public investments in
research. Long-term support also requires a tolerance for failure, the nature of high -risk research being
that m any projects will ‘fail’ in the sense that they will not produce highly-cited published results, or
economic or societal impacts. Again, failure tolerance (or risk tolerance) is often a challenge for
policymakers who are well aware of the political price t o be paid from supporting public investments that
yield no tangible outcomes.
In addition to the iconic example of US DARPA programme, there are several striking examples of
successful HRHR research requiring long-term patience and risk tolerance among policymakers. One such
example is the US NSF’s decades-long support of research, infrastructure, and facility operations at LIGO
(the Laser Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory), two laser-based scientific facilities designed to
explore the existence of gravitational waves as predicted by Albert Einstein nearly a century ago.
NSF support for LIGO began in the late 1980’s when the project was truly risky and the technologies
needed to detect gravitational waves did not exist and had to be developed specifically for the project. The
high reward came only in 2015 when the LIGO fac ility, in its early operations, detected and thus proved
the existence of gravitational waves, thereby confirming a key part of Einstein’s General Theory of
Relativity and creating an enormous impact on our understanding of the universe. At numerous times over
the preced ing decades, US policymakers came close to cancelling or curtailing the LIGO project, but
patient and risk-tolerant political support was just strong enough to see the project to completion52.
Another similar example is the decades of international support for CERN to build and operate the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) despite the risk that the LHC would not discover anything. Fortunately, the new
LHC in its early research operations provided the reward and discovered the Higgs Boson, another
predicted and important part of our understanding of the universe.
Such long-term support is not easy for governments to provide. Around the world, the political context is
that high reward is attractive to governments, but high risk is challenging because public organisations
have a strong accountability pressure on their expenditures of public funds. Long -term political support
may be provided by government or institutional policies. They can take the form of legislation, official
statements by research funders and national research ministries, and declarations by national academies,
or statements by multinational bodies such as the Global Research Council. Examples of such policies
and statements can be found throughout this report. They signal commitment by nations and funders to
support HRHR research, and although such signals are insufficient to foster HRHR research without other
policies and practices they are nevertheless guides for program me managers, researchers, university
administrators, and others involved in supporting and conducting research.
One potential contextual policy that has not proved to be useful however is setting numerical targets for
HRHR research. This activity could find no evidence that any nation other than the United States h as
attempted to set numerical targets, perhaps because the US experience is widely regarded as
unsuccessful. The America COMPETES Act of 2007, in addition to defining HRHR research also, as
summarised by the US Government Accountability Office (GAO), “expr esses the sense of Congress that
each executive agency conducting research in STEM fields should strive to support and promote
innovation by setting a goal of allocating an appropriate percentage of its basic research budget toward
funding high-risk, high-reward research”.53 The report calls for US funding agencies to devote at least 8%
of research budgets to high-risk research. It also requires US federal science agencies to provide annual

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
30  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

reports to the Congress on progress toward setting and meeting the g oal. Three years after enactment of
the legislation, the GAO found that agencies did not consistently set funding goals for HRHR research and
did not consistently report on progress. In subsequent years, agencies did not make further progress.
Similar numerical targets were not adopted by other US science agencies or by other national research
funding systems.
 Tenure, Promotion, and Advancement Policies at Research Institutions
In the interviews that were conducted for this report, it was repeatedly stated that tenure, promotion, and
career advancement policies at academic research institutions are an important contextual policy
influencing HRHR research. As academic researchers are evaluated primarily on research
accomplishments as defined by funding and research publicatio ns or bibliometric indices such as the
H-index, there are powerful incentives for such researchers to be conservative in their research in order to
be more certain of securing these easily-quantified outputs. This effect appears to be particularly important
for early career researchers (OECD, 2021[18]).
To counteract these incentives, academic research institutions have the opportunity to adjust their tenure
and promotion policies to encourage researchers to pursue high -risk high -reward research. In the
Netherlands, for example, the Dutch Protocol for Research Assessment was revised in 2020 to shift away
from traditional indicators toward new elements, including an emphasis on quality (rather than quantity) of
work, focus on team performances, open science, and academic leadership 54. Although not motivated
solely, or even primarily, to foster HRHR research, this shift in assessment is expected to have a positive
impact on HRHR research.
Some Universities and research providers have de -emphasized publications and publication indices in
evaluating their faculty specifically to encourage more risk taking in research. Others have established
internal funding schemes, discussed in the previous section, to specifically support research projects that
may be too risky for national funding agencies to support. The University of California Irvine (UCI),
assuming that frontier and risky research is increasingly done by teams instead of lone investigators and
that faculty need training to work well in teams, has established a Team Scholarship Accelerator Lab 55,
which brings together team research experts, best practices in problem solving, a web site, and other
resources. One important tool this lab has developed is a template for articulating individual contributions
to team science. This tool then becomes important for the promotion and tenure system by focusing
evaluations of researchers on actual contributions rather than quantitative i ndicators or other simplistic
metrics that may discourage HRHR research.
There is widespread dissatisfaction with current tenure, evaluation, and promotion systems. Indicators for
the evaluation of both labs and researchers do not reward risk -taking. There is a recognis ed need and
demand for updating current evaluation criteria. In France, to take just one example, research assessment
is largely conducted by external bodies (HCERES 56 for labs and institutions, CNU 57 for university staff)
using traditional criteria for research excellence that do not take into account HRHR research, technology
transfer, and other valuable research outputs. It is only when French laboratories are assessed explicitly
as to whether they are at the frontier of research that they may be rewarded to some extent for doing
HRHR research that has proved to be successful.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  31
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Indicators for HRHR Research
Appropriate indicators, when used judiciously, can also help to foster HRHR research by quantifying the
‘riskiness’ of a research project or portfolio, allowing researchers, research managers, and others to adjust
risk to an appropriate level. As risk indicators in the financial sector allow financial managers to balance
risk among investments in a portfolio or determine the riskiness of a sp ecific investment, scientific risk
indicators can help research managers and policy makers to estimate, increase or decrease desired risk
at the project, portfolio, or programme level. Scientific riskiness indicators have long been sought by
policymakers (Koizumi, 2011[23]), and in 2020 they are becoming more robust and usable thanks to a n
increasingly active ‘research-on-research’ community.
There have been recent advances in building quantitative indicators for HRHR research. For example, to
identify transformative innovations, Funk and Owen-Smith developed a measure known as the CD index.
This index uses networks of citations to describe the degree to which ideas (embedded in papers or
patents) consolidate or destabilize the scientific or technological status quo (Funk and Owen -Smith,
2017[24]).
Similar research is underway to determine the potential transformation of a given research project based
on a quantitative measu re of intellectual distance from existing work derived from citation and other
research-output data. As yet, these advances and ongoing experiments are retrospective and can be
utilised only after a research project has resulted in an output such as a publ ication or patent. There are
no proven tools in the literature for identifying a priori the potential for transformation of a research idea, or
of identifying the riskiness of a proposal. Even the retrospective measures are not yet robust enough to
fully evaluate the effectiveness of research funding schemes at encouraging risk taking in research or
delivering transformative results , but they do provide better information on these criteria than traditional
bibliographic indicators.
Quantitative indicators o f scientific novelty can support policymakers in assessing whether policies are
successfully promoting HRHR research. In this regard, the indicator of scientific novelty explored in Wang,
Veugelers and Stephan (2017[25]) has potential to capture both the “high-risk” and “high-reward” elements
research. Researchers take high risks when trying to explore novel scientific ideas and many of those
novel ideas tend to fail. However, some will be succe ssful and become major hits with potential to
completely revolutionise the scientific paradigm. HRHR research outputs are likely to be associated with
multiple knowledge characteristics, but novelty is particularly well -suited capture the essence of HRHR.
Articles scoring high on novelty according to this indicator presented higher variance in terms of citations ,
suggesting that while many novel articles have a low number of citations, a small fraction of them come to
be recognised as scientific breakthroughs with high levels of citations.
A test to further assess the potential of novelty indicators for science policy was carried out during this
study (see Box 1 and Machado, 2021). The novelty indicator used by Wang, Veugelers and Stephan
(2017[25]) was computed at micro level and aggregated per country, year and scientific discipline. The goal
was to test the utility of the indicator to assess countries’ performance stimulating risk taking and highly
novel research.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
32  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 1. Proof-of-concept: Novelty indicator to assess HRHR research performance
In this study, a novelty indicator was computed at the level of scientific articles and aggregated at the
level of scientific fields, countries and years. Each article had a unique novelty score based on how it is
combining different knowledge fields in unexpected/unusual ways. Knowledge fields were represented
in terms of scientific journals, which are an imperfect but commonly used proxy . Following the same
methodology as in Wang, Veugelers and Stephan (2017[25]), the patterns of journal citations contained
in articles’ references were explored to measure the extent to which articles are combining knowledge
fields in more exploratory/risky ways, the computation making use of SCOPUS Custom Data, Elsevier,
Version 5.2019.
Using this method, results showed that for all the considered years, more than 50% of all articles score
zero or one in terms of novelty, reflecting the fact that most articles d o not attempt to make novel
combinations of knowledge fields. Just a very small minority score very high (10 or higher) on the novelty
indicator. On average, for the period of 2005 -2017, the countries with the highest share of articles
scoring among the to p 10% most novel in the world were the Netherlands, Switzerland and Denmark
followed by the United States and the United Kingdom.
These are also countries that tend to score very high in terms of scientific impact measured through
citations. In order to further investigate the relationship between novelty and impact at the country level,
the share of articles scoring among the 10% highest novelty against the share of articles scoring among
the 10% top cited was analysed. This showed that taking high -risks by making novel combinations of
knowledge fields seems to be associated with high -reward, the relationship between novelty and
impact, measured with forward citations being positive and strong. The citation performance within
articles scoring very high on novelty presented higher levels of variance, with many of the highly novel
articles receiving no or very low numbers of citations and others becoming the most highly cited. The
overall citation performance of highly novel articles is similar shortly after publication, but increases over
time and becomes substantially superior when considering a longer time window. Further details on the
methodology used for this case study and on the results generated can be found in the working paper
developed in parallel to this activity (Machado, 2021).
While this novelty metric is not a substitute to citation -based indicators, it is a valuable complement.
Citation-based indicators such as JIF and H-indexes should not be used in the short-term because they
can be biased a gainst novelty and risk -taking, but this novelty indicator is of short -term nature — the
indicator can be computed at the time an article is published (or at the research proposal stage if the
key references are available). When taking a long -term perspective, the novelty indicator is positively
related with citations. Thus, combining the two indicators has potential to help manage risk and reward
in portfolios of research projects, making sure that enough risky projects get funded (highly novel) and
that i n the long -term the portfolio delivers the expected level of reward/research impact (citation
performance).

Such indicators are still new, and face challenges including the need for large data sets and high
computational intensity. Like most publication-based indicators, they are also mostly retrospective, with
time lags inherent between award and research and publication. While not perfect for making ex ante
decisions such as proposal evaluation, they could nevertheless provide useful informa tion on the novelty
character of earlier work performed by applicants, and thus be more informative than traditional bibliometric
indicators. Furthermore, they can be a useful tool for ex post evaluations of high-risk high-reward research
to evaluate whether a funding mechanism or policy has indeed fostered this kind of research.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  33
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Conclusion and Recommendations
In this conclusion, it is useful to return to the initial questions driving this project.
In response to the question 1) “What different funding in struments are being used and what are their
advantages and disadvantages?” this report puts forward an inventory of HRHR research programmes
with differences among multiple dimensions. Key differences lie in:
 the degree to which funding programmes centre HRHR research, with supporting high risk, high
reward research either as a primary objective in a dedicated programme, a secondary objective,
or as one of many objectives;
 the use of peer review or a programme manager in evaluating proposals;
 for peer review, the use of a standard peer review panel or alternate approaches;
 different durations of awards; and
 the use of people-based or project-based awards.
Within these funding instruments, there are few one -size-fits-all solutions and no clear a dvantages or
disadvantages. Rather, the most advantageous approach depends crucially on context. For award
duration, for example, this report finds that larger, longer awards (~5 years) can support long -term,
ambitious proje cts rather than the standard ~3 year award and may be advantageous in allowing
investigators to take more risks and a more long -term orientation in their research. Shorter and smaller
awards of less than two years can be useful to support proof-of-concept research and to ‘de-risk’ high-risk
proposals, which can then be supported by standard awards.
To the question 2) “What evidence (if any) exists of the effectiveness of these different instruments?” here
the evidence is largely lacking. Although a number of HRHR research programmes have been evaluated,
many have not been evaluated rigorously because of their relative newness, and the ones that have been
evaluated have been evaluated by expert panels with a mixed record of utilizing quantitative or qualitative
evidence. That said, in the near future there will be more of an evaluation literature on HRHR research
programmes as experimental programmes from the past decade are evaluated. And there are growing
options for indicators to help evaluate HRHR research programmes.
To the question 3) “What is the most appropriate instrument to use in a particular context?” the report
makes clear that there is no single appropriate instrument to use in a particular context; rather, decision
makers have several options to choose from in designing a HRH R research funding scheme, along the
multiple dimensions listed above. Being clear on the strategic objective of the programme should help
narrow down the options.
To the question 4) “Are there alternative and/or complementary non -funding policies that c an be
implemented, and in what context?” this report highlights a few ideas for complementary policy
approaches. Those include research institutions policies such as revised tenure and promotion policies.
For the final question 5) “What are the roles, responsibilities and constraints of different actors in promoting
high-risk research?” the answers appear clearer:
 policymakers can provide political long -term support for risk --taking and long -time horizons for
research, in addition of course to robust funding of scientific research;
 Science funding agencies can implement dedicated HRHR research funding programmes that
support HRHR research as their principal aim, and adjust other funding schemes so that they
encourage rather than discourage HRHR research. There are many opportunities to build on
existing experience and experiment with different approaches for fostering HRHR research within
competitive funding processes; and

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
34  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Research institutions can nurture careers for innovative researchers by rewarding risk-taking rather
than conservatism and provide seed or bridge funding to incentivize HRHR research.
Promoting HRHR research is a shared responsibility between governments, research institutions and
funders. This report offers multiple ideas and good practices for each of these actors to promote HRHR
research. A summary of the potential role and influence of the different stakeholders is presented figure 1.
Figure 1. Impact of research stakeholders on HRHR research

From this report’s findings, the Expert Group offers some recommendations for further study and action to
extend this project’s findings, with the caveat that linking the evidence to recommendations is not
straightforward as evidence for many programmes’ effectiveness at fostering HRHR research is lacking.
These recommendations are detailed at the beginning of this report and can be summarised as follows:
1. Research funders are encouraged to experiment with existing and new approaches to foster HRHR
research, e.g. adjusting reviewing processes and evaluation criteria.
2. Government policymakers and research funders are encouraged to implement a portfolio approach
in the management and evaluation of HRHR research.
3. Government policymakers, research funders, and research institutions are encouraged to
implement contextual/institutional policies and practices to encourage researchers to take scientific
risks.
4. As newly established HRHR research programmes mature, research funders are encouraged to
evaluate their impacts rigorously, not only their scientific, societal, and economic impacts but also
evaluating the programmes’ impact at fostering HRHR research.
5. Interested authorities and researchers are invited to further research, develop, and test indicators
for evaluating the riskiness of research.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  35
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

6. Funding agencies are encouraged to collect and share efficiency and process information on
HRHR research programmes in comparison to more-traditional research programmes
In summary, there is growing interest among nations in designing policies and programmes to foster HRHR
research and many lessons to be learned from existing practices. The findings in this report should aid
nations and research institutions in formulating policies and strategies for fostering HRHR research and in
maximising impact and evaluation.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
36  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Endnotes

1 https://stip.oecd.org/stip.html. STIP Compass is a joint initiative of the European
Commission and the OECD that aims to collect together in one place quantitative and
qualitative data on national trends in science, technology and innovation (STI) policy.
2 Virtual workshop on “Effective Policies to foster High-Risk/High-Reward research”, OECD
Global Scien ce Forum, 22 April 2020. Presentations and summaries can be found at
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
3 https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/policy-responses.
4 European Commission, Enterprise and Industry Directorate-General. “New and Emerging
Science and Technology (NEST) Programme.” 2005,
https://slideplayer.com/slide/2267295/ .
5 Response from DFG to the Expert Group survey questionnaire.
6 https://www.jsps.go.jp/english/e-first/index.html.
7 https://arpa-e.energy.gov/.
8 US National Institutes of Health, “High -Risk, High -Reward Research Program,”
https://commonfund.nih.gov/highrisk.
9 One example is National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC),
the Australian Research Council (ARC) and Universities Australia (UA), National
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human Research (2007) updated 2018
https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/about-us/publications/australian-code-responsible-conduct-
research-2018.
10 Response from the Off Road programme to the Expert Group survey questionnaire.
11 See program web site at: http://www.sshrc-crsh.gc.ca/funding-financement/nfrf-
fnfr/index-eng.aspx. This description is for the NFRF Exploration program.
12 https://stip.oecd.org/stip.html. STIP C ompass is a joint initiative of the European
Commission and the OECD that aims to collect together in one place quantitative and
qualitative data on national trends in science, technology and innovation (STI) policy.
13 https://anr.fr/en/call-for-proposals-details/call/oh-risk/.
14 Response from UKRI to the Expert Group survey questionnaire.
15 https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/moonshot/top.html
16 Response from the National Science Centre Poland to the Expert Group survey
questionnaire
17 Response from the ENERGIX programme to the Expert Group survey questionnaire
18 https://gacr.cz/en/types-of-grant-projects/
19 https://www.jst.go.jp/moonshot/en/application/202002/pdf/presentation_e.pdf .

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  37
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

20 “From traditional funding schemes toward more out of the box research,” presentation by
Marc Zbinden, Swiss National Science Foundat ion, for the OECD workshop April 2020,
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
21 “The E uropean Research Council (ERC) ,” presentation by Jean -Pierre Bourguignon,
former president of the European Research Council, at the April 2020 OECD workshop ,
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
22 https://www.ncn.gov.pl/ogloszenia/konkursy/maestro12?language=en.
23 [ARCHIVED CONTENT] TRDF: Transformative Research Technologies - BBSRC
(nationalarchives.gov.uk)
24 “High Risk / High Reward Research, HRHR programmes on societal challenges ”,
presentation by Professor Jens Oddershede, Former Chairman of the Danish Council for
Research and Innovation Policy, for the OECD workshop April 2020 ,
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
25 “From traditional funding schemes toward more out of the box research,” presentation by
Marc Zbinden, Swiss National Science Foundat ion, for the OECD workshop April 2020,
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
26 Response from RCN Aquaculture to the Expert group survey questionnaire
27 https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/about-the-research-council/programmes/energix/
28 https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/moonshot/top.html
29 https://www.jst.go.jp/moonshot/en/application/202002/pdf/presentation_e.pdf
30 Response from NSF EAGER programme to the Expert Group survey questionnaire. See
also NSF’s Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide
https://nsf.gov/pubs/policydocs/pappg19_1/pappg_2.jsp#IIE2
31 https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2020/nsf20052/nsf20052.jsp
32
https://www.dfg.de/en/research_funding/programmes/individual/reinhart_koselleck_projec
ts/.
33 https://commonfund.nih.gov/highrisk/table.
34 https://basicresearch.defense.gov/News/Articles/News-Display/Article/2273610/dod-
announces-recipients-of-the-newton-award-for-transformative-ideas-during-th/
35 National Institutes of Health, High -Risk High -Reward Research Program,
https://commonfund.nih.gov/highrisk
36 See Howard Hughes Medical Institute, https://www.hhmi.org/
37 See Howard Hughes Medical Institute, HHMI: Catalyst for Discovery , November 2017.
https://www.hhmi.org/sites/default/files/about/hhmi-vision-2017.pdf.
38 “Let us experiment with how to identify and support innovative research! ”, presentation
by Thomas Sinkjær, Professor, Head of Talent Programme, Lundbeck Foundation,
Denmark, for the OECD workshop April 2020, https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-
170560.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
38  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

39 See https://www.hfsp.org/
40 The HFSP has an interesting approach to ‘risk’: “Many applicants do not appreciate what
HFSP understands by ‘risk’. It is not simply that « It's risky because it may or may not work
». A hand waving « but we hope it will », followed by a few vaguely described experiments,
will not convince the reviewers of a full application. What is expected is that according to
the team's calculations there is a reasonable chance that it will work - i.e is feasible. This
might involve a discussion of the current limiting parameters of a technique, and the nove l
methods proposed that might bring improvements. Another project might start from
observations from a different system to estimate the frequency of events that will be critical
for the project. For data analysis it might mean providing an estimate of the number and
nature of data points to be collected and a discussion of the appropriateness of a
computational tool to handle such a dataset.” https://www.hfsp.org/funding/hfsp-
funding/research-grants.
41 America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010, Section 105. Public Law 111 -358.
https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ358/PLAW-111publ358.pdf.
42 Office of Science and Technology Policy, Implementation of Federal Prize Authority:
Fiscal Year 2015 Progress Report, August 2016.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/fy2015_competes_prizes_report.
pdf
43 https://www.grandchallenge.org/
44 https://www.xprize.org/prizes/covidtesting
45 Science Foundation Ireland, https://www.sfi.ie/challenges/future-innovator-prize-18/
46 https://research.umich.edu/mcubed
47 “The European Research Council (ERC) ,” presentation by Jean -Pierre Bourguignon,
former president of the European Research Council, for the April 2020 OECD workshop ,
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
48 For the most recent evaluations, see
https://commonfund.nih.gov/pioneer/programevaluation;
https://commonfund.nih.gov/newinnovator/programevaluation;
https://commonfund.nih.gov/TRA/programevaluation;
https://commonfund.nih.gov/earlyindependence/programevaluation
49
https://www.forskningsradet.no/contentassets/ea9db93ed204480fa15a61682ed66d9e/ev
aluering_av_biotek2021.pdf
50 For example, the US NSF EAGER program is part of the regular Committee of Visitors
assessment process for NSF (https://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/activities/cov/covs.jsp)
51 https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2016/nsf16023/nsf16023.pdf
52 “LIGO: HRHR Success Story ”, presentation by Michael S. Turner, Kavli Foundation,
former Assistant Director for Mathematical & Physical Sciences, National Science
Foundation, for the OECD workshop April 2020 , https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-
170560.
53 https://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11127r.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  39
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

54 “Researcher evaluation and career development: Room for everyone's talent, Towards
a new balance in the recognition and rewards of academics ”, presentation by Johan
Huysse, Association of Universities in the Netherlands, for the 2020 workshop OECD April,
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-170560.
55 https://tsal.uci.edu/ Team Scholarship Accelerator Lab at University of California Irvine
56https://www.hceres.fr/fr
57 Conseil national des universités.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
40  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

References

American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2008), Investing in Early-Career Scientists and High-
Risk, High-Reward Research,
https://www.amacad.org/sites/default/files/publication/downloads/ariseReport.pdf .
[5]
Azoulay, P., C. Fons-Rosen and J. Zivin (2019), “Does Science Advance One Funeral at a
Time?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 109/8, pp. 2889-2920,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.20161574.
[11]
Bol, T., M. de Vaan and A. van de Rijt (2018), “The Matthew effect in science funding”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 115/19, pp. 4887-4890,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1719557115.
[19]
Carpenter, R. (ed.) (2008), DARPA: 50 Years of Bridging the Gap, United States. Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency, https://issuu.com/faircountmedia/docs/darpa50.
[22]
Committee on Prospering in the Global Economy of the 21st Century: An Agenda for American
Science and Technology et al. (2007), Rising Above the Gathering Storm, National Academies
Press, Washington, D.C., http://dx.doi.org/10.17226/11463.
[6]
Funk, R. and J. Owen-Smith (2017), “A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological Change”,
Management Science, Vol. 63/3, pp. 791-817, http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2366.
[24]
Gewin, V. (2012), “Risky research: The sky’s the limit”, Nature, Vol. 487/7407, pp. 395-397,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nj7407-395a.
[12]
Global Research Council (2015), Statement of Principles for Funding Scientific Breakthroughs,
https://www.globalresearchcouncil.org/fileadmin//documents/GRC_Publications/Statement_of_
Principles_for_Funding_Scientific_Breakthrough.pdf.
[17]
Hegde, D. and B. Sampat (2015), “Can Private Money Buy Public Science? Disease Group
Lobbying and Federal Funding for Biomedical Research”, Management Science, Vol. 61/10,
pp. 2281-2298, http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.2107.
[9]
Kaye Husbands Fealing, J. (ed.) (2011), Science of Science Policy, a Handbook, Standford
Business Books, https://www.scribd.com/book/348519540/The-Science-of-Science-Policy-A-
Handbook.
[23]
Larrue, P. (2021), “The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges”, OECD Science, Technology and
Industry Policy Papers, No. 100, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-
en.
[3]

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  41
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Montgomery, J. et al. (2014), The culture of scientific research in the UK,
https://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/assets/pdfs/The-culture-of-scientific-research-report.pdf.
[4]
National Science Foundation (2007), Enhancing Support of Transformative Research at the
National Science Foundation, National Science Foundation,
https://www.nsf.gov/nsb/documents/2007/tr_report.pdf.
[15]
Nicholson, J. and J. Ioannidis (2012), “Conform and be funded”, Nature, Vol. 492/7427, pp. 34-36,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/492034a.
[10]
OECD (2021), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021: Times of Crisis and
Opportunity, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/75f79015-en.
[18]
OECD (2020), “Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 88, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/0ca0ca45-en.
[2]
OECD (2018), “Effective operation of competitive research funding systems” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 57, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2ae8c0dc-en.
[1]
Packalen, M. and J. Bhattacharya (2018), Does the NIH Fund Edge Science?, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, http://dx.doi.org/10.3386/w24860.
[8]
Reed, S. (1990), DARPA Technical Accomplishments, An Historlsal Review of Selected DARPA
Projects, Institute for Defense Analyses, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a239925.pdf.
[21]
Trevors, J. et al. (2012), “Transformative research: definitions, approaches and consequences”,
Theory in Biosciences, Vol. 131/2, pp. 117-123, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12064-012-0154-3.
[16]
US Congress (2007), AMERICA COMPETES ACT, Public Law 110–69,
https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ69/PLAW-110publ69.pdf.
[14]
US Government (2009), Investing in High-Risk, High-Reward Research,
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-111hhrg52484/pdf/CHRG-111hhrg52484.pdf.
[7]
Wallace, M. and I. Rafols (2015), “Research Portfolio Analysis in Science Policy: Moving from
Financial Returns to Societal Benefits”, Minerva, Vol. 53/2, pp. 89-115,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11024-015-9271-8.
[20]
Wang, J., R. Veugelers and P. Stephan (2017), “Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale
for users of bibliometric indicators”, Research Policy, Vol. 46/8, pp. 1416-1436,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.06.006.
[13]
Wang, J., R. Veugelers and P. Stephan (2017), “Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale
for users of bibliometric indicators”, Research Policy,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.06.006.
[25]

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
42  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 1. Expert Group Members
Country Name Affiliation
Belgium Véronique Halloin FNRS
Olivier Boehme FWO
France Dominique Dunon-Bluteau Head, Biology-Health Department, Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR)
Germany Burkhard Jahnen Group leader of the mathematics/engineering sciences group, DFG
Anke Reinhardt Deputy group leader of the information management group, DFG
Ireland Lisa Higgins Head of Challenge research, Science Foundation Ireland
Japan Tateo Arimoto Principal Fellow, Center for Research and Development Strategy (CRDS), Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST)/ Visiting Professor, National Graduate Institute
for Policy Studies (GRIPS)
Kazuhito Oyamada Fellow, Center for Research and Development Strategy (CRDS), Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST)
Korea Kiwoo Chun Senior Researcher, National Research Foundation of Korea
Seon-HeeSeo Principal Researcher
Center for Underground Physics
Institute for Basic Science
Sun Kun Oh GSF vice-chair

Netherlands
Judith de Kroon Senior policy advisor to the board of the Dutch Research Council (NWO)
Norway Marianne Grønsleth Special Adviser, Department of Open Researcher Arena, Research Council of
Norway
United
Kingdom
Jeremy Neathey Deputy Director for Research and International, Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC), UK Research and Innovation
United States Jessica Robin Directorate for Geosciences (GEO), National Science Foundation (NSF)
OECD Kei Koizumi GSF consultant
Diogo Machado GSF consultant
Yoshiaki Tamura GSF secretariat
Frédéric Sgard GSF secretariat
Carthage Smith GSF secretariat

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  43
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 2. Survey questionnaire
OECD Global Science Forum
Activity on “Effective policies to foster transformative/high-risk research”

Request for Information April 2020

The focus of this inquiry is funding programmes and supporting policies to foster potentially transformative
scientific research, or high-risk, high-reward (HRHR) research.
Addition 1 April: In response to the global COVID -19 pandemic, the OECD in late March fielded a
survey on STI (science, technology, and innovation) Policy Responses to Covid -19 to OECD
member economies. In support of that effort, this survey has added a fe w questions on COVID-19
policy responses, including rapid-response research funding mechanisms for COVID-19, in the last
section of the survey. We would appreciate your inputs to this new section.
The goal of the activity is to characterize how these programmes and policies are structured and operated
in different countries, to synthesize existing evidence on the relative performance of different mechanisms
to foster HRHR research in the context of particular policy objectives, and to gather and synthesise
available qualitative and quantitative evidence on impacts of different HRHR research funding mechanisms
and supporting policies both on the goal of fostering HRHR research and of achieving other national goals
including scientific excellence, economic competitiveness, and societal objectives.
For the purposes of this survey and project, we are using the following definition:
“High-risk, high -reward (HRHR) research is research that (1) strives to understand or support
solutions to ambitious scientific, te chnological, or societal challenges; (2) strives to cross
scientific, technological, or societal paradigms in a revolutionary way; (3) involves a high degree
of novelty; and (4) carries a high risk of not realizing its full ambition as well as the potential for
high, transformational impact on a scientific, technological, or societal challenge.”
For the purposes of this project, it is useful to consider the following terms as being to a large extent
interchangeable: high risk research; high-risk, high-reward research; high, risk, high-payoff research; high-
risk, high-gain research; transformative research; potentially transformative research; and transformational
research.
The purpose of this questionnaire is to collect basic information on the existence and structure of relevant
high-risk/high-reward research funding programmes and supporting policies in participating countries, as
well as on the existence of any evaluation st udies that may have been carried out with respect to these
programmes and policies. This information will be synthesized to provide a preliminary baseline of
information that will be enriched by more in-depth information collection on specific elements.
Please provide information on the programme or policy we are contacting you about. Some information
has been pre-filled from your country’s response to the OECD STIP Database.
Feel free to skip questions that are not relevant in particular instances.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
44  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Please provide information on the HRHR research programme
Name of programme/policy
Responsible organization
Approximate annual total of research funding granted (local
currency or equivalent in € or $)

Terminology used (high-risk/high-reward research,
transformative research, etc.)

Start date (year)
Definition (of HRHR research or similar concept) used, if
defined

Does this programme utilize a competitive call for proposals?
If yes, approximate annual number of proposals received
If yes, Approximate annual number of awards funded / % of
success

Funding unit (project, person, team, center, institution, or other)
Mean duration of funding per award
Web site(s)
Purpose
What are the policy objectives of the Programme?
(besides fostering HRHR research; please check (X) all that apply)
Frontier knowledge/exploring new scientific domains
Scientific excellence
International collaboration
Responding to societal challenges (which one(s)?)
Economic competitiveness
Capacity building (infrastructures, human resources…)
Other (please specify)
Selection criteria
What are the selection criteria for making awards?
Are indicators of ‘riskiness’ or ‘potential for transformation’ used
in selection? If yes, please describe.

Selection process
Selection mechanism, competitive or not? Which mechanism
(peer review panel, programme manager, funding formula,
other, or combination; please elaborate as needed)?

Please provide other relevant information on the selection
process, especially with regard to the riskiness or potential for
transformation of research.

Once selected, please describe how selected projects are
managed and the role, if any, of a programme manager in
managing the programme.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  45
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Effectiveness, and evaluation of programme meeting its goals of supporting high
risk high reward research
If there is a website that describes the impact or
effectiveness evaluation process for this
programme, please provide the URL

Please indicate which of the following evaluation mechanisms are used
Quantitative indicators on the effectiveness of
the programme in achieving goals, including
fostering HRHR research
If used, please describe the quantitative
indicators used, especially indicators on the
effectiveness of the programme in fostering
HRHR research (or provide URLs)

Qualitative indicators on the effectiveness of the
programme in achieving indicators, including
fostering HRHR research

If used, please describe the qualitative indicators
used, especially indicators on the effectiveness
of the programme in fostering HRHR research

External reviews of programme impact, including
impact at fostering HRHR research

If yes, please describe and provide the URL of a
recent external review report

Please describe in general terms how the
programme is evaluated, using which
metrics/indicators, and against which goals
(scientific excellence, economic competitiveness,
societal objectives, etc.).

Have any formal or informal studies or
evaluations been undertaken to evaluate how
well the programme works specifically to foster
HRHR research?
If so, please provide a copy of any reports from
such studies.

Supportive policies and programmes
What policies are helpful in supporting both the funding of and
effectiveness of HRHR research? For example, academic promotion,
scientific publishing, reward systems in academia and industry, and
research evaluation frameworks.

Are there similar funding mechanisms to encourage HRHR research in
other government funding agencies, other funding bodies, companies,
or foundations in your country? Does this programme have regular
dialogue with them? Are data from this programme merged with data
from other programmes in national reporting? If so, please provide.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
46  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Other relevant information
If there is any other information you would like to provide, please do so below. Thank you.

Research Responses to Covid-19
In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, on 19 March the OECD Committee on Science and Technology Policy (CSTP)
fielded a OECD member survey “STI policy responses to Covid-19”. In support of this survey and other OECD efforts, we are
seeking information on government scientific research funding responses to Covid-19. We would appreciate your help in providing
government or other national research-based responses to Covid-19, including rapid-response research funding mechanisms that
may have been announced in recent weeks. The data will be made available as quickly as possible to national STI policy makers
charged with designing and implementing policy responses to Covid-19.
Has your agency or organisation introduced specific funding calls or programmes for rapid-response research funding in response
to the Covid-19 crisis? Or taken measures to accelerate the clinical testing of diagnostics, therapies and vaccines for COVID-19
and taken steps to facilitate the entry into market of results? Etc.

Please describe the main features of these new funding mechanisms (time of introduction, funding amount, source and instrument
type (grant, prize, etc.)) and provide a website.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  47
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Questionnaire responses:

Country Funding scheme
Czech Republic Grant projects of excellence in basic research - EXPRO
France OH Risque
United States National Science Foundation EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
Canada New Frontiers in Research Fund (NFRF)
Japan Moonshot R&D Programme
Norway ENERGIX – New concepts
European Commission European Research Council (ERC) Consolidator Grants
Norway FRIPRO
Netherlands Off Road
Germany Reinhart Koselleck Projects
Ireland Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) Frontiers for the Future
United Kingdom UKRI TRDF: Transformative Research Opportunities
United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) High Risk High Reward Research Programmes (4 programmes)
Norway Aquaculture
Poland MAESTRO

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
48  EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 3. HRHR Research Inventory
Inventory of High-Risk/High-Reward Research Programmes
Country Funding scheme
Argentina STRATEGIC PROJECTS
Australia NEXT GENERATION TECHNOLOGIES FUND
Australia ARC CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE
Austria Innovation Fund: Research, Science and Society
Canada Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
Canada NEW FRONTIERS IN RESEARCH FUND
Chile MILLENNIUM SCIENCE INITIATIVE
Cyprus1 RESTART EXCELLENCE HUBS PROGRAMME
Czech Republic GRANT PROJECTS OF EXCELLENCE IN BASIC RESEARCH
Denmark GRANTS AND PROFESSORSHIPS FROM THE DANISH NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION
Denmark INDEPENDENT RESEARCH FUND DENMARK
European Union FUTURE AND EMERGING SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGIES OPEN
European Union EUROPEAN RESEARCH COUNCIL RESEARCH GRANTS – Consolidator Grants
Finland
ACADEMY OF FINLAND FLAGSHIP PROGRAMME FOR TOP-LEVEL, HIGH-IMPACT
RESEARCH CLUSTERS
France OH Risque
Germany Reinhart Koselleck Projects
Greece HELLENIC FOUNDATION FOR RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
Ireland SFI FRONTIERS FOR THE FUTURE PROGRAMME
Japan Funding Programme for World-Leading Innovative R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST)
Japan Impulsing Paradigm Change through Disruptive Technologies Programme (ImPACT)
Japan Moonshot Research and Development Programme
Korea Strategy for Advanced National R&D System
Korea Future convergence technology pioneer programme
Korea Alchemist Project
Netherlands Off Road
Netherlands Diabetes II Breakthrough
Netherlands Open Mind
Netherlands Ideas Generator
Netherlands Open Competition ENW-XS
New Zealand MARSDEN FUND
New Zealand STRATEGIC SCIENCE INVESTMENT FUND
New Zealand ENDEAVOUR FUND
Norway EnergiX
Norway FRIPRO
Norway Aquaculture
Poland [NCN] MAESTRO ADVANCED GRANTS
Poland [NCN] Research programmes for advanced researchers
Portugal EXPLORATORY RESEARCH PROJECTS
Slovenia ERC COMPLEMENTARY SCHEME
Spain PROJECTS "EXPLORE SCIENCE" AND "EXPLORE TECHNOLOGY"
United Kingdom Transformative Research and Development Fund
United States Early-concepts for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
United States
National Science Foundation RAISE (Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and
Engineering)
United States National Institutes of Health HRHR Research Programs: Pioneer Award
United States National Institutes of Health HRHR Research Programs: New Innovator Award
United States National Institutes of Health HRHR Research Programs: Transformative Research Award
United States National Institutes of Health HRHR Research Programs: Early Independence Award
United States ARPA-E

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
EFFECTIVE POLICIES TO FOSTER HIGH-RISK/HIGH-REWARD RESEARCH  49
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
United States National Science Foundation Special Creativity Extensions
United States National Science Foundation Ideas Lab
United States IARPA Better Extraction from Text Towards Enhanced Retrieval (BETTER)
United States DOD Newton Award for Transformative Ideas during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Foundation (Switzerland) NOMIS Foundation
Foundation (United States) Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI)
List of experts interviewed
Funders (including policymakers):
 Seth Cohen (US); Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) programme manager
 Takao Kuramochi (Japan); Deputy Director General of Center for Research and Development Strategy , Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST)
 Shinsuke Okada (Japan); Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)
 Cosima Crawford (Switzerland); NOMIS Foundation
Performing organisations (including university researchers):
 Pramod Khargonekar (US); University of California – Irvine
 Shin'ichi Kobayashi (Japan); Research Institute for Higher Education, Hiroshima University
 William H. Janeway (United Kingdom); University of Cambridge
 Nathalie Drach-Temam (France); Sorbonne University

1 Note by Turkey:
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is no single authority representing both Turkish and
Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Turkey recognises the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within
the context of the United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue”.

Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union:
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey. The information in this document relates to the area
under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
