
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH
POLICY ACROSS
THE OECD
ORGANISED?
INSIGHTS FROM A NEW
POLICY DATABASE
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
October 2018 No. 55

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

This pape r was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee for Scientific and
Technological Policy (CSTP) on 18 June 2018 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:

This document is also available on ONE M&P under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/TIP(2017)10/REV3

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.

The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities.
The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem
and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.

© OECD 2018

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documen ts, presentations, blogs,
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and
copyright owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to
rights@oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 3

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table of contents

KEY FINDINGS .................................................................................................................................... 5
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ............................................................................................. 8
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................... 11
1. INSTITUTIONS IN CHARGE OF PRIORITY SETTING, BUDGET ALLOCATION
AND EVALUATION .......................................................................................................................... 13
1.1. Setting of scientific priorities ...................................................................................................... 13
1.2. Allocating budgets ...................................................................................................................... 15
1.3. Performance contracts and other reforms to increase performance incentives ........................... 19
1.4. Setting evaluation criteria, conducting evaluations and monitoring performance ...................... 23
2. POLICY CO-ORDINATION MECHANISMS ............................................................................ 25
2.1. Research and innovation councils ............................................................................................... 25
2.2. STI plans or strategies ................................................................................................................. 29
2.3. Inter-agency programming .......................................................................................................... 33
3. EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS INVOLVEMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL
AUTONOMY ....................................................................................................................................... 34
3.1. Participation in councils and university boards .......................................................................... 34
3.2. Online public consultations and temporary stakeholder consultation processes ........................ 36
3.3. HEIs’ and PRIs’ autonomy ......................................................................................................... 38
4. CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................................ 42
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................... 44
ANNEX: METHODOLOGY ............................................................................................................. 47

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED?
INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
Martin Borowiecki* and Caroline Paunov*

ABSTRACT
Building on a newly created policy indicator database, this paper provides a first
systematic comparison of the governance of public research policy across 35 OECD
countries from 2005 to 2017. The database was obtained following a three -year process
that involved the development of an ontology of the governance of public research policy
as well as data collection and validation by national authorities. The data show diverse
institutions and mechanisms of policy action regarding higher educ ation institutions
(HEIs) and public research institutes (PRIs) are in place across the 35 OECD countries.
The data also shows an increasing use of project funding, performance contracts and
performance evaluations for HEIs and PRIs. In many countries, HEI s and PRIs are
autonomous regarding their relations with industry, budget allocation but less frequently
regarding salaries. Recent reforms have strengthened external stakeholders' participation
in their governance, reflecting efforts to open research institutions.
The database is publicly available on the following webpage: https://stip.oecd.org/resgov.

Keywords: Innovation and research policy, higher education institutions (HEIs) and
public research institutes (PRIs), governance of research policy, cross -country policy
indicators, OECD countries

JEL codes: H11, I23, I28, O38

Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful to Cynthia Lavison for research assistance
as well as to Andrés Barreneche, Diogo Machado, Evgeny Moiseichev, Tadanori
Moriguchi, Sandra Planes Satorra, Akira Tachibana , and Malte Tötzke for help with the
data collection. Detailed feedback on the policy questionnaire from experts and delegates
of the OECD Working Party on Innovation and Technology Policy (TIP) and the OECD
Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP) are gratefully acknowledged.
The authors would also like to thank Dominique Guellec, Michael Keenan, Philippe Larrue,
and Blandine Serve for their insightful comments and Sylvain Fraccola for his help in
building the database website.
*OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 5

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

KEY FINDINGS
1. Institutions in charge of priority setting, budget allocation and evaluation
The following observations can be made regarding the institutions in charge of setting key
priorities, budget allocations and evaluations:
National ministries and agencies are in charge of setting key policy priorities for HEIs
and PRIs policy. In 11 of 34 countries (or 32%), a single ministry decides on research and
innovation agendas, while there are separate ministries for research and innovation in 6 of
34 countries (or 18%) and 2 regions in Belgium. Agencies, which are public entities in
charge of pol icy implementation regarding public research, or research and innovation
councils, i.e. public institutions outside ministries with the mandate to support the
governance of public research, set policy priorities in 11 of 34 (32%) countries.
National agencies decide on allocations of project -based funding for HEIs in 31 (or
89%) of 35 OECD countries, while in most countries ministries provide institutional
block funding (32 of 35 for HEIs, 27 of 34 for PRIs). 9 countries have created agencies to
allocate pro ject-based funding between 2005 and 201 7, such as the National Research
Agency (ANR) in France (created in 2006), the Innovation Fund Denmark (IFD) (created
in 2014), or the Spanish Agency of Research (AEI) (created in 2015).
Funding arrangements differ: While i n 1 2 of 31 OECD countries where agencies
provide project-based funding there is a single agency , the remaining 19 have more
than one agency. These agencies are specialised in specific research fields in 2 out of 19
countries with agencies (or 11%) (i.e. in Australia, Canada) or cover separately research
and innovation tasks (12 of 1 9 or 6 3%). In 5 countries (or 2 6%), agencies that cover
separately research and innovation tasks and agencies specialised in specific research fields
co-exist. Over 2007-17, several countries including Denmark and Estonia have reduced the
number of funding agencies, in some cases to simplify funding applications (creating a
“one-stop-shop”), to increase efficiency and in others to reduce the fragmentation of
funding.
Agencies specialised in evaluating and monitoring the performance of HEIs and PRIs
are also increasingly important. 19 of 34 countries (59%) and Wallonia in Belgium have
such agencies. Examples of recently established agencies and independent committees for
evaluation and monitoring include the Agency for Assessment and Accreditation of Higher
Education (A3ES) in Portugal (2007), the Independent Review Committee in the
Netherlands (2012) and the National Agency for Evaluation of Universities and Research
Institutes (ANVUR) in Italy in 2010. In most cases the same agency is not in charge of
allocation of funding and evaluation of performance.
Performance contracts and performance -based funding instruments have gained in
importance, illustrating the move towards s tronger performance and evaluation.
Performance contracts that bind future funding of HEIs and PRIs to pre-defined targets are
in place in 13 of 35 (37%) OECD countries and in a number of regions/federal states, (e.g.
Scotland in the UK; Baden Wurttemberg, Brandenburg, and North -Rhine Westphalia
among other federal states in Germany). In 9 countries, performance contracts were
introduced in the past decade. Another 7 countries that do not have performance contracts
introduced performance indicators in the f ormula that is used to allocate institutional
funding to HEIs.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2. Policy co-ordination mechanisms
The following observations can be made on different national approaches to co -ordinate
policy action regarding HEIs and PRIs:
Councils for research and innovation (referred to as councils from this section onwards)
are common across the OECD. Councils are public institutions outside of ministries and
agencies and whose mandate includes priority setting, policy advice and policy
coordination regarding HEIs and PRIs. They are in place in 31 of 35 (89%) OECD countries
and 15 were created since 2007.
Councils have different mandates. In 28 of 31 countries (90%) with councils, the councils
provide policy advice and for 8 of them, those of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Germany, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Sweden, this is their c ore role. In 23 of
31 countries with councils (or 74%), the council also develops national strategic priorities
and in 15 of 31 (48%) councils, the councils evaluate policy ref orms. Councils also differ
with regards to their staff and budget and the stakeholders involved (see below).
Science, technology, and innovation ( STI) strategies or plans are in place in most
countries (33 of 35, 94%). These commonly define STI strategies to address major societal
challenges (30 of 33, 91%). Key themes include sustainable growth, health, and efficient
transportation systems. STI strategies and plans also define specific scientific research,
technologies or economic fields of national priority (31 of 33, 94%). In 23 of 32 countries
(72%), STI strategies address specific sub -national priorities for specific federal states or
regions, reflecting for EU member states and partner countries Smart Specialisation
strategies.
National STI strategies often include quantifiable targets. In 21 of 33 countries (61%)
and in the Brussels -Capital Region, the Flemish Region and the Walloon Region in
Belgium, national STI strategies include such quantitative targets. All 21 countries with
quantitative targets and the Brussels-Capital Region, the Flemish Region and the Walloon
Region in Belgium list R&D spending targets. Other targets include increasing funding for
doctoral students (7 of 33 and the Brussels-Capital Region in Belgium) or job placements
of researchers and PhDs in industry (5 of 33 and the Brussels-Capital Region in Belgium).
3. External stakeholder involvement and autonomy of HEIs and PRIs
The following observations can be made on different national approaches to the autonomy
of HEIs and PRIs and external stakeholder involvement:
Regarding external stakeholder consultations in councils, private sector
representation is widespread in research policy councils. While civil society – including
members of labour unions and non-profit organisations (NGOs) - are active in 15 of 31 (or
48%) of councils, private sector representatives – often large firms but also in some cases
SMEs - are present in 26 councils (or 84%).
Foreign experts participate in 6 of 31 (19%) OECD c ountries with councils (Austria,
France, Germany, Greece, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom). Foreign experts are
mostly from academia and, in a few cases, including Austria and the United Kingdom, from
industry or the public sector.
External stakeholder involvement at the level of HEIs is also important, particularly
with increased autonomy of HEIs and PRIs. University boards have stakeholder
representation from outside universities in 28 of 34 countries (82%). 25 of these 28 (or

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 7

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

90%) countries have private sector representatives and 23 of 28 (82%) countries have civil
society representatives. In Portugal and France, external stakeholder participation was
introduced over the past decade (in 2007 and 2013 respectively).
In a large number of countries HEIs and PRIs are autonomous regarding industry
relations, budget allocation, recruitment, and promotions of researchers. In 29 of
34 (85%) OECD countries, HEIs are free to create legal entities, such as technology offices
and spinoffs, and decide on the conditions of collaboration with industry. In 23 of 34 (68%)
countries, HEIs are free to decide on how they allocate their block funding internally.
Restrictions to autonomy apply mostly for salaries. HEIs can decide on the salaries of
their academic staff in 1 2 of 34 (35%) OECD countries. In some countries, national laws
regulate salary bands for academic personnel (e.g. Denmark and France), while in others
collective bargaining agreements are in place at the national and industry level (e.g. Austria
and the Netherlands).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Country and region abbreviations
AUS Australia
AUT Austria
BEL Belgium
BEL-BC Brussels-Capital Region (Belgium)
BEL-FL Flemish Region (Belgium)
BEL-FR French Community (Belgium)
BEL-WA Walloon Region (Belgium)
CAN Canada
CHL Chile
CZE Czech Republic
DNK Denmark
EST Estonia
FIN Finland
FRA France
DEU Germany
DEU-BB Brandenburg (Germany)
DEU-BW Baden Württemberg (Germany)
DEU-NW North Rhine-Westphalia (Germany)
GRC Greece
HUN Hungary
ISL Iceland
IRL Ireland
ISR Israel
ITA Italy
JPN Japan
KOR Korea
LVA Latvia
LUX Luxembourg
MEX Mexico
NLD Netherlands
NZL New Zealand
NOR Norway
POL Poland
PRT Portugal
SVK Slovak Republic
SVN Slovenia
ESP Spain
SWE Sweden
CHE Switzerland
TUR Turkey
GBR United Kingdom
USA United States
USA-CA California (United States)
USA-MA Massachusetts (United States)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 9

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Other abbreviations and acronyms
AEI State Research Agency (Agencia Estatal de Invesitgación) (Spain)
ANR National Research Agency (l’Agence Nationale de la Recherche) (France)
ANVUR National Agency for the Evaluation of Universities and Research Institutes
(l’Agenzia Nazionale di Valutazione del Sistema Universitario e della Ricerca)
(Italy)
AOI Agency for Entrepreneurship and Innovation (Belgium)
AQ Agency for Quality Assurance and Accreditation Austria (Agentur für
Qualitätssicherung und Akkreditierung Austria)
BMWFW Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economics (Bundesministerium für
Wissenschaft, Forschung und Wirtschaft) (Austria)
CDTI Centre for the Development of Industrial Technology (Centro para el Desarollo
Tecnológico Industrial) (Spain)
CIHR Canadian Institutes of Health Research
CNRS National Center for Scientific Research (Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique) (France)
CPCTI Council, the Council for Scientific, Technological and Innovation Policies (Consejo
de Política Científica, Tecnológica y de Innovación) (Spain)
CRDI Council for Research, Development and Innovation (Czech Republic)
CSEM Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology (Centre Suisse d’Electronique
et de Microtechnique)
CSIC National Research Council (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas)
(Spain)
CSTI Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (Japan)
DFG German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft)
DLO Agricultural Research Service (Dienst Landbouwkundig Onderzoek) (Netherlands)
EC European Commission
ECN Energy Centre of the Netherlands (Energieonderzoek Centrum Nederland)
ERA European Research Area
ERC European Research Council
ERDF European Regional Development Fund
EU European Union
FCT Foundation for Science and Technology (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia)
(Portugal)
FFG Research Promotion Agency (Forschungförderungsgesellschaft) (Austria)
FWF Austrian Science Fund (Fonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaft und
 Forschung)
FWO Research Foundation Flanders (Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek) (Belgium)
HCERES High Council for the Evaluation of Research and Higher Education (Le Haut
Conseil de l'Évaluation de la Recherche et de l'Enseignement Supérieur) (France)
HEA Higher Education Authority (Ireland)
HEI Higher education institution
ICT Information and communication technologies
IFD Innovation Fund Denmark (Innovationsfonden)
ISCIII Institute of Health Carlos III (Instituto de Salud Carlos III) (Spain)
NGO Non-governmental organisation
Marin Maritime Research Institute of the Netherlands (Maritiem Research Instituut
Nederland)

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

MBIE Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (New Zealand)
MEC Ministry of Education and Culture (Suomen opetus - ja kulttuuriministeriö)
(Finland)
NHMRC National Health and Medical Research Council (Australia)
NLR National Aerospace Laboratory (Nationaal Lucht - en Ruimtevaartlaboratorium)
(Netherlands)
NRP National Reform Programme
NSERC Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (Canada)
NSF National Science Foundation (United States)
PRI Public research institution
QQI Quality and Qualifications Ireland
RIS Research and Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation
SciSIP Science of Science and Innovation Policy (United States)
SIO Strategic Innovation Areas (Strategiska Innovationsområden) (Sweden)
SME Small and medium-sized enterprise
SoSP Interagency Working Group on the Science of Science Policy (United States)
SSC Swiss Science Council (Schweizerischer Wissenschaftsrat)
SSHRC Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
STEM Science, technology, engineering and mathematics
STI Science, Technology and Innovation
TNO Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (Nederlandse
Organisatie voor Toegepast-Natuurwetenschappelijk Onderzoek)
TO2 Applied Research Institutions (Toegepast Onderzoek Organisaties) (Netherlands)
TÜBİTAK Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey
UPRO Umbrella Public Research Organisation
VINNOVA Government Agency for Innovation Systems (Verket för Innovationssystem)
(Sweden)

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 11

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

INTRODUCTION
The contributions of research conducted by universitie s (or higher education institut ions,
HEIs) and public research institutions (PRIs) to innovation are well recognised as is the
need for public support for such research. To avoid underinvestment in public research, a
battery of policy instruments is deployed not only on finance but also optimise the
contributions of HEIs and PRIs to the economy and society. These policy mixes are shaped
by a set of policy mechanisms and institutional arrangements that are quite different across
countries, including the degree of autonomy of universities, the role of councils in charge
of research and innovation, STI strategies as well as the type of funding arrangements of
HEIs and PRIs. Together, policy mechanism and institutions constitute the governance
system surrounding HEIs and PRIs. Continued policy support for publicly-funded research
at HEIs and PRIs require cross -country evidence on governance of public research. Yet,
systematic comparisons across countries were limited to qualitative compariso ns of
selected characteristics or selected countries, rendering an understanding of common trends
and differences impossible.
This paper provides a first systematic mapping of the governance of publicly -funded
research conducted in higher research institutions and public research institutions across all
35 OECD countries for the period 2005 to 2017 using a new policy database. The mapping
builds on an ontology developed to compare countries with regards to how various
governmental bodies (ministries, councils, and agencies), HEIs, PRIs and private actors are
involved in the design and implementation of policies regarding publicly -funded research
conducted in HEIs and PRIs. Three dimensions are covered: i) the institutions in charge of
setting scientific and thematic priori ties, the allocation of public funding and funding
arrangements (such as performance contracts) as well as the monitoring and evaluation of
HEI/PRI performance ; ii) mechanisms to co -ordinate policies aimed at supporting the
contributions of HEIs and PRIs to innovation, including research and innovation councils,
national research and innovation strategies or plans and inter -agency joint programming;
iii) external stakeholder involvement in policy making, including HEIs and PRIs
themselves and their autonomy as well as involvement of the private sector, NGOs among
others.
The paper describes a new database that was created following a three-year process that
involved the development of an ontology of governance of public research and in-depth
data collection and validation. Information on country policies was collected using a policy
survey and the data quality was validated in interaction with country delegates and experts
of the OECD Committee of Science and Technology Policy (CSTP) and the OECD
Technology and Innovation Policy (TIP) Working Party between Marc h 2017 and
May 2018. The sources used include the European Commission/OECD International
Survey on Science, Technology and Innovation Policies and the OECD Country Innovation
Policy Reviews. Where additional information was needed, national legislative texts,
strategic policy documents, and other such official documents (statements on the status of
councils, committees, etc.) were used.
The evidence collected shows that diverse mechanisms of policy action regarding HEIs and
PRIs across countries are i n place. The data across the 35 OECD countries shows an
increasing use of project funding, performance contracts and evaluations of performance
for HEIs and PRIs. In many countries, HEIs and PRIs a re autonomous regarding industry
relations, budget allocation (including research funds) but less so regarding salaries. Recent

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

reforms have strengthened external stakeholder participation, reflecting efforts to open
research institutions. The database is publicly available for policy analysis on the following
webpage: https://stip.oecd.org/resgov.
This paper contributes to the wider set of projects that develop cross-country indicators of
policies for systemat ic comparison . This includes the World Bank’ s Doing Business
(World Bank, 2018) and the OECD’s Product Market Regulation (Koske et al, 2015) and
Services-trade Restrictiveness i ndicators (Grosso et al., 2015 ). An earlier example for
patent protection is the work by Ginarte and Park (1997) with a data update provided by
Park (2008). This paper is a first attempt a t providing such indicators within the set of
research and innovation policies. A notable exception is the European University
Autonomy survey of the European University Association (Estermann, Nokkala, and
Steinel, 2015) that describes systematically for 29 European countries the degree autonomy
of universities. The EC-OECD STIP survey (OECD, 2018) is a step forward with regards
to providing policy indicators for the wider set of STI policies once relevant ontologies
have been developed.
This paper also builds on a rich literature that has discussed the governance of public
research. This includes in particular studies that have investigated the institutional
arrangements that shape the design and implementation of the innovation policy mix from
a cross-country perspective (e.g. Borrás and Edquist 2013; Borras and Edler, 2014). Other
studies have focused on in-depth analyses of specific governance dimensions, such as the
organisation of funding agencies and the type of funding arrangements in the United States
(e.g. Breznitz, 2007 ; Fuchs, 2010). In the absence of data, there i s little cross -country
analysis of the impacts of differences in governance. An exception is the study of Aghion
et al. (2010) that uses data on 197 European universities in 2006 to investigate the role of
university autonomy for university performance.
This large-scale cross-country comparison has important limitations. A number of factors
cannot be captured by this exercise , including the role of individuals in key position and
institutional practice that may differ from roles as set out in laws and regulations. Moreover,
while every effort was made to avoid possible ambiguities with regard to the terms used
for the ontology, the diversity of country conditions has not in all cases allowed avoiding
them for all countries. Challenges apply in particular to countries with strong sub-national
governance structures of public research. Where this is the case, information o n regional
structures is also provided.
Rather than aiming at a full representation of country practice, these indicators offer a rough
characterisation that allows for more systematic analysis of key aspects of governance
across countries and their impact . This is valuable to develop policy adv ice as it is well-
known that “one size does not fit all”. Avenues for future research on the basis of this
evidence include identifying cluster of countries characterised by similar governance
practices and understanding how these may fit country character istics relevant for public
research. Regression-based approaches, as applied widely to the policy indicators described
above (as e.g. Ginarte and Park, 1997 and Park, 2008) can also be applied, using either
specific or combinations of the indicators described here.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 provides findings on
institutions in charge of priority setting, budget allocation and evaluation across the OECD,
while Section 2 provides an overview of policy co-ordination arrangements and Section 3
describes different stakeholder consultation arrangements and levels of institutional
autonomy. Section 4 concludes. The annex discusses the methodology to develop the
framework and the data gathering process. It also presents the ontology that was developed.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 13

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

1. INSTITUTIONS IN CHARGE OF PRIORITY SETTING, BUDGET
ALLOCATION AND EV ALUATION
This section describes institutions that take decisions on national scientific priorities (1.1),
funding of research and innovation (1.2) including performance contracts for HEIs (1.3),
and evaluation of HEI and PRI performance (1.4).
1.1. Setting of scientific priorities
Different institutions are in charge of setting policy priorities for HEIs and PRIs across the
OECD, including national Ministries of Education, Research, and/or Innovation as well as
specialised agencies, which are public institutions in charge of policy implementation, and
councils, which are public institutions outside of ministries and agencies with a mandate to
steer research policy. Data shows that the same institution generally sets priorities for both
HEIs and PRIs (27 of 34 or 79% of countries).1
Most commonly, Ministries of Education, Research, and/or Innovation take decisions on
national scientific and thematic pr iorities for HEIs and PRIs (Figure 1). Funding of HEIs
and PRIs is used as a criterion to identify who is in charge of setting scientific, sectoral
and/or thematic priorities. To illustrate the decision criterion: If competitive funding from
an agency represents more than 50% of university funds and if the funding agency allocates
funds to pre -determined themes, scientific fields or sectors that it has set itself, then the
agency is identified as the actor who takes decisions on scientific, sectoral and/or thematic
priorities. In 11 of 34 countries (or 32%), there is a single ministry that decides on research
and innovation agendas for HEIs , while more than one ministries decide research and
innovation agendas in 6 of 34 countries (or 18%) and in 2 Belgian regions (Austria,
Belgium-Flemish Community, Belgium -French Community, Finland, Italy, Poland,
Portugal, and the Slovak Republic). Agencies, which are public entities in charge of policy
implementation regarding public research, set policy priorities for HEIs in 4 of 34 countries
(or 12%) and the Capital Region Brussels in Belgium (32%). Research and innovation
councils, i.e. public institutions outside ministries with the mandate to support the
governance of public research, set policy priorities for HEIs in 7 of 34 countries (or 21%)
Federal systems have decentralised governance structures. In Belgium, Germany, Spain,
Switzerland and the United States, regional or federal state ministries and agencies take
decisions on national or regional scientific and thematic priorities. In Spain, regional
authorities (Comunidades Autónomas) set priorities for regional PRIs. The Spanish
National Research Council , the main national -level PRIs in Spain, decides itself on its
scientific and thematic priorities. In Switzerland, Cantonal ministries set priorities for PRIs
in coordination with the institution such as e.g. the Swiss Center for Electronics and
Microtechnology (CSEM). In Belgium, research and innovation agendas that apply for
HEIs and PRIs are set by the Depart ment of Economy, Science and Innovation of the
Flemish Community, the Ministry for Higher Education, Research and Medias along with
the Directorate General for Non -Compulsory Education and Scientific Research
(DGENORS) of the French Community, the Operatio nal Directorate General for the
Economy, Employment and Research (DGO6) of the Walloon Region and Innoviris and
the Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels of
the Brussels-Capital Region. The Federal Government has competence for ten federal PRIs
(EC, 2015, p. 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 1. Number of ministries in charge of defining scientific and thematic priorities of
HEIs and PRIs

Note: This figure corresponds to question 1.1.a and 1.1.b (“Who mainly decides on the scientific, sectoral and/or
thematic priorities of HEIs and PRIs?”). Information on HEIs is missing for New Zealand. Information on PRIs
is missing for Australia and New Zealand.
1 In Denmark, the GTS-institutes (public research institutes) propose projects bottom up that the Danish Agency
for Institutions and Educational Grants then evaluates and funds. However, the funding of the institutes requires
the approval from the Ministry of Higher Education and Science.
2 In Austria, the regional level sets priorities in some cases.
3 In the Netherlands, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Environment and the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science set the agenda except for PRIs , which have
their priorities set at the national agency level. Regarding HEIs, institutions themselves also play an important
role in agenda setting.
4 In Belgium the Federal science policy office (BELSPO) sets priorities for federal PRIs, community and
regional ministries and agencies set priorities for community PRIs and regional institutions.
5 In Spain, the regional level sets priorities for PRIs of Autonomous Communities.
Interpretation of the figure: First row, second column shows that in 9 countries scientifi c priorities for both
HEIs and PRIs are decided by a single national Ministry.
Even where the final decision on national research and innovation priorities is taken by
ministries and agencies, decision-taking with regards to research and innovation policy is
not necessarily a top-down process:
 In Sweden, for instance, university -industry consortia, the Strategic Innovation
Areas (Strategiska Innovationsområden, SIOs) were established in 2012 to jointly
set scientific, sectoral and thematic strategic priorities that guide research funding.
Research organisations and industry form research consortia around research topics
of strategic interest to them. Jointly, they apply for the status of a strategic
innovation area which receives public funding. The consort ia jointly apply for
public funding and if it is granted, they themselves allocate public funds to

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 15

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

individual research projects. SIO funds are managed by Sweden’s innovation
agency VINNOVA (OECD, 2016b). Its programme “Internet of Things”, for
instance, includes Uppsala University as leading institution and programme officer,
large companies such as Ericsson, and SMEs such as Sigma Connectivity, and Teyi
Services, and a number of other HEIs and actors from government and civil society
(e.g. Teknikföretagen, the Royal Institute of Technology, Malmö University, and
the Swedish Electronics Trade Association).
 In some countries national priorities for research and innovation account only for a
share of funding. In Luxembourg, for instance, institutional block f unding, which
represents 77% of the university budget and 63% of PRIs’ budget is not allocated
on the basis of specific research agenda but of performance indicators (OECD,
2016c).
There are considerable differences with regard to PRIs governance arrangements. Different
types of PRIs exist within countries (OECD, 2011). PRIs can be organised as associations
of public research institutions (i.e. Umbrella Public Research Organisation, UPROs) that
set their own research and innovation agendas within broadly d efined fields of national
research policy, such as e.g. health. This is the case in 4 of the 3 3 OECD countries (or
12%). The Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique CNRS in France, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas ( CSIC) in Spain, the Fraunhofer-Society and the
Max-Planck Society in Germany , and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences are such
UPROs.
Other PRIs are government-owned or run by government departments or ministries at the
national and sub -national levels. Often, national or regio nal ministries set scientific
priorities for PRIs. In Finland, PRIs were established on a sectoral basis to serve the needs
of sectoral ministries. Their role has traditionally been to undertake research in specific
sectors but during the past 10 years their research has become more international and cross-
sectoral. In Spain, scientific and thematic priorities of PRIs other than the CSIC are set out
in regional-level science and technology plans , in their own mission statements or by the
informal mandates set out by regional political authorities (OECD, 2011, p. 87).
1.2. Allocating budgets
1.2.1. Block funding
Institutional block funding is public funding allocated to HEIs or PRIs for their education,
research and innovation activities with only general provisions as to how it is spent.
Generally national ministries provide institutional block funding (block grants) in 32 of
35 OECD countries (or 91%) for HEIs, whil e they do so in 27 of the 34 OECD countries
(or 79%) for PRIs2 (Figure 2).

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 2. Institutions in charge of allocating block funding to HEIs and PRIs

Note: This figure corresponds to question 1.2.a and 1.2.b (“Who allocates institutional block funding to HEIs
and PRIs?”). Information on PRIs is missing for Iceland.
1 In Austria some institutions receive funding from the regional level.
2 In Switzerland, the federal government is in charge of the supervision of the federal HE Is, while the cantons
are in charge of the supervision of the cantonal universities.
3 In Denmark, the GTS-institutes (public research institutes) propose projects bottom up that the Danish Agency
for Institutions and Educational Grants then evaluates and funds. However, the funding of the institutes requires
the approval from the Ministry of Higher Education and Science.
4 In Spain, some regional institutions receive funding from the regional level.
Interpretation of the figure: First row, first column sh ows that in 20 countries national Ministries allocate
institutional block funding to both HEIs and PRIs.
Funding arrangements for PRIs differ from those of HEIs. In 9 of 34 countries (26%), PRI
funding is managed by dedicated agencies or PRIs themselves. I n the Netherlands,
responsibilities for PRI funding were changed in 2007 to strengthen the contributions of
PRIs to the top sectors strategy (Box 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 17

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 1. PRI funding reforms in the Netherlands
In 2007, the Netherlands introduced a funding reform of their PRIs that aimed to better
align research of PRIs to the demands of society and business. Before the reforms, the
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science allocated block funding to PRIs which was
not subject to sectoral priorities. After the reforms, funding requires PRIs to support the
nine national strategic sectors (so-called “top sectors”): (1) horticulture and propagation
materials, (2) agri-food, (3) water, (4) life sciences and health, (5) chemicals, (6) high
tech, (7) energy, (8) logistics, and (9) creative industries.
In order to better align strategic research of PRIs with the nine sector , the Applied
Research Institutions (Toegepast Onderzoek Organisaties, TO2) were created in 2010
as a consortium of the six largest PRIs: The Netherlands Organisation for Applied
Scientific Research (TNO), the Agricultural Research Service (DLO), Deltares, the
Energy Centre of the Netherlands (ECN), the National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR),
and the Mar itime Research Institute of the Netherlands (Marin). The T02 consortium
co-ordinates research activities under the strategic research sectors.
Source: OECD (2014b), “Innovation actors in the Netherlands” in OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy:
Netherlands, OECD Publishing, Paris, pp. 164-167.
In federal systems, institutional block funding of HEIs is handled by Federal State
(regional) governments. In Belgium, Canada, Germany, Spain, and Switzerland regional
Ministries of Education, Research, and/or Innovation provide university funds. In
Switzerland, Cantonal Departments of Education such as e.g. the Hochschulamt Kanton
Zürich are responsible .3 In the United Kingdom and the United States, Federal State
(regional) agencies allocate block grants. In th e United Kingdom, Higher Education
Funding Councils exist in England, Scotland, and Wales. The United States have dedicated
agencies at the level of Federal States that manage public HEIs funds, such as e.g. the Board
of Higher Education in the State of Massachusetts.
1.2.2. Agencies and project-based funding
The other important component of HEI and PRI funding aside from block funding is
project-based funding, i.e. which is funding that is attributed to a research group or a
researcher to perform a specifi c research and/or innovation activity. In most
countries project-based funding for HEIs and PRIs is managed by funding agencies (in
31 of 35 OECD countries, 89%). 10 of these institutions have been created after 2005. In
France, for instance, the French Na tional Research Agency (L'Agence nationale de la
recherche, ANR) was created in 2006 to allocate project -based funding to the public
research sector where such funding now represents 4% of total public budget for research
in France (OECD, 2014a).
Ministries of Education, Research and/or Innovation continue to allocate project based
funding in Greece, Italy, Japan, and New Zealand. In the case of New Zealand, the Ministry
of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) provides project -based funding
following the merger of the Ministry of Research, Science and Technology and the funding
agency Foundation for Research, Science and Technology in 2011.
The number of public funding agencies differs across countries. While in 1 2 of 31 OECD
countries where agencies provide project -based funding there is a single agency in place,
the remaining 19 have more than one agency (Figure 3). These agencies cover separately

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

research and innovation tasks in 12 out of 19 countries (63%), or are specialised in specific
research fields in 2 out of 1 9 countries with national agencies in place (or 11%). In 5
countries (or 26%), both agencies that cover separately research and innovation tasks and
agencies that are specialised in specific research fields are in place. Specialised agencies
also reflect federal governance structures as in the case of the Flemish-Region in Belgium.
Figure 3. Number of public agencies in charge of project-based funding allocations in 31
OECD countries with agencies in place

Note: The figure corresponds to question 1.3.c (“Name of the institution in charge of project-based funding”).
Information is displayed for 31 countries for which project based funding is allocated by at least one national
agency.
* The Swiss funding agency Innosuisse started operating only in 2018.
There are various reasons for a division of tasks between agencies. In Belgium, 5 regional
funding agencies provide project -based funding due to the country’s federal structure. In
other countries there are agencies that are specialised in specific research fields. In
Australia, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) is specialised in
managing funds for health and medical research while the Australian Research C ouncil
handles competitive calls for all other research fields. Canada has several of such
specialised agencies, including the National Research Council, the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the Canadian Institutes of Health Resea rch
(CIHR), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC).
Agencies specialise also by type of research and innovation activity they fund. In Austria,
Austrian Science Fund (FWF) is responsible for basic research while the Austrian Research
Promotion Agency (FFG) and the CDG-Christian Doppler Research Association provides
funding for applied research. In Flanders (Belgium), the Research Foundation Flanders
(FWO) allocates project-based funding for research while the Agency for Entrepreneurship
and Innovation (AOI) funds innovation activities. In Spain, the State Research Agency
(AEI) is responsible for funding basic research, while the Centre for the Development of
Industrial Technologies (CDTI) funds applied research and business innovation. Spain also

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 19

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

has the Institute of Health Carlos III ( ISCIII), which provides funding for health and
biomedical research.
Denmark and Estonia have reduced the number of funding agencies over the period 2007-
17. Single agencies were established, in some cases to simplify funding applications for
institutions (creating a “one -stop-shop”) and to reduce fragmentation of funding support,
and in others to increase efficiency. Denmark created the Innovation Fund Denmark (IFD)
in 2014 from the merger of the Danish Council for Strategic Research, the Danish National
Advanced Technology Foundation and the Danish Council for Technology and Innovation.
The objective of the merger was to simplify grant applications for researchers and
businesses. In Estonia, t he Estonian Research Council was created in 2012 as the single
agency in charge of project-based funding by consolidating the functions of three agencies
in order to reduce the fragmentation of public research funding.
In countries with federal structures, there is a division of tasks between national level and
the Federal State or subnational -level with regard to education, on the one hand, and
research and innovation, on the other hand. An exception is Belgium that has regional
agencies in place. In Germ any, for instance, project -based funds for research and
innovation projects are allocated by the German Research Foundation (DFG) and partly
from the Federal Ministry of Education and Research while universities receive their
budgets from Federal State Min istries of Education. In Spain, while the Autonomous
Communities (regional authorities) allocate block funding to public universities, the
national-level State Agency for Research is the main source of project-based funding.
1.3. Performance contracts and other reforms to increase performance incentives
Performance contracts have gained in importance to reward performance of HEIs across
the OECD. Performance contracts set performance targets for HEIs and in most cases bind
a share or their block funding all ocation. They are in place in 13 countries (37%, 13 of
35 OECD countries) and in a number of regions/federal states (Scotland in the UK;
Louisiana and Tennessee in the USA; Baden Wurttemberg, Brandenburg, and North-Rhine
Westphalia among other Federal States in Germany). Australia, Denmark and France have
performance contracts in place that do not directly bind funding.
8 of the 13 OECD countries with performance contracts in place and Scotland in the United
Kingdom have introduced them in the last decade (Figure 4). Australia (2011) and France
(2015) introduced performance contracts that do not bind funding of universities. Slovenia
is currently in the process of introducing performance contracts. Norway is currently rolling
out a pilot exercise with 5 HEIs and aims to have a performance contracts system in place
in 2019. Finland is an early adopter; the Ministry of Education and Culture (MEC) has had
performance contracts with HEIs since 1994.
There are differences across countries on a number of aspects of performance contracts,
including the shares of HEI budgets that are subject to performance contracts. Among the
9 countries and 4 regions/federal states for which such information was provided, the shares
subject to performance contracts vary from very 0% in Australia and France, 1 % in
Denmark, 7% in Latvia and the Netherlands to much larger shares of 94-96% in Austria
and 100% in Finland and Korea. At regional/federal level, in Scotland, for instance,
performance contracts bind 50% of institutional fundin g of HEIs. In the case of German
Federal States for which information is available, performance contracts apply to 2% of
HEIs’ institutional funding in the Federal State of Brandenburg and 23% of block funding
of HEIs in North-Rhine Westphalia.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 4. Year of introduction of performance contracts and shares of HEI institutional
block funding involved*

Note: This figure corresponds to question 1. 3.a (“Do performance contracts determine institutional block
funding of HEIs?”) and 1.3.b. (“Share of HEI budget subject to performance contracts”). Values in parentheses
show the share of HEIs’ institutional block funding subject to performance contracts. Information on the share
of HEIs’ budget subject to performance contracts is missin g for Estonia , Japan, and New Zealand. At the
regional/Federal State level, Scotland in the United Kingdom, Louisiana and Tennessee in the United States,
and several German Federal States including Baden Wurttemberg, Brandenburg, and North-Rhine Westphalia
have performance contracts in place.
* Performance contracts are in place in most Federal States in Germany, e.g. Brandenburg and North -Rhine
Westphalia. Some Federal States introduced them in the 2000s while others had introduced them earlier. The
share of HEI institutional block funding involved also varies, e.g. 2% in Brandenburg and 23% in North-Rhine
Westphalia.
Other differences in performance contracts relate to the targets they define and the way
they do so. Among the countries that provided infor mation on targets, 12 countries and 2
regions (Scotland in the United Kingdom and the German state of North-Rhine Westphalia)
included education and research performance indicators, such as target numbers for Master
and PhD degrees to be awarded, the share of graduates employed one year after graduation,
and the number of scientific publications in international journals.
In addition, 10 countries and 2 regions (Scotland in the United Kingdom and the German
state of North -Rhine Westphalia) put emphasis on HEIs’ role in support of business
innovation. Innovation-related indicators include the number of patents filed by researchers
and/or the university (Australia, Korea and Luxembourg), revenues from licencing
intellectual property and contract research (Australia, Korea, Luxembourg, and Scotland in
the United Kingdom), industry -funded R&D (Estonia, Finland, and North Rhine -
Westphalia in Germany), the number of spin -offs of students and researchers (Australia,
Denmark, Ireland, Korea, Luxembourg, and New Zeal and), the number of collaborations
with industry (Australia, Denmark and Ireland), and the number of innovation vouchers for
particular science to business collaborations (Scotland in the United Kingdom).
Moreover, 5 countries (Australia, Denmark, France, Korea, and Luxembourg) and Scotland
(UK) require HEIs to contribute to address societal challenges such as facilitating access
of underrepresented groups to higher education and improving research contributions in

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 21

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

support of sustainability . Australian and Scottish performance contracts for HEIs, for
instance, target the number of students from underrepresented groups and from poor
background. Performance contracts in Scotland state the goal to reduce energy emissions
per student. Denmark asks HEIs to fund interdisciplinary research centres to tackle research
of relevance to society. Topics include addressing growing inequalities, challenges brought
by the digital transformation, and achieving more sustainable growth.
Finally, there are differences in how targets are defined. Some countries also specify a
diversity of targets while others focus on a narrower set of targets. Australian, French,
Korean, Luxembourgian and Scottish performance contracts, for instance, set targets
regarding business innovation and support to the local economy and to addressing societal
challenges. There are also differences in type of indicator. I n some countries, qualitative
indicators are used while others rely more on quantitative indicators.
Countries also differ with regard to the degree of involvement of HEIs in formula ting
performance targets. Table 1 describes the cases of Austria, Finland and Scotland (United
Kingdom) as examples.
Performance contracts are relatively new policy instruments and have been subject to
extensive policy experimentation. In Austria, performance contracts are in place since 2007
while several evaluation studies advocate for improving the current structure of
performance agreements. The Austrian Science Council (2016) and De Boer et al. (2015)
recommend using performance-based funding only for activities that support strengths of
individual universities. Currently, the ability of performance contracts to strategically steer
universities to specialise according to their s trengths is limited because most funding is
used by the institutions to cover their basic operations, especially personnel costs and
existing infrastructure. Developments plans that are jointly created by universities and the
Ministry set out strengths of each university such as e.g. research, teaching, or linkages to
local industry. Stampfer (2017) argues that university budgets should be tied to concrete
output activities instead of current lump sum allocations. Sanction mechanisms in cases
where targets are not met would improve the steering function of performance contracts,
while rewarding institutions that have met their targets.
Performance contracts are only one measured introduced over the past decade. Other
reforms include the introduction of performance indicators in the formula for the allocation
of university block grants. 7 countries introduced performance indicators since 2005
(Belgium, Czech Republic, Italy, Norway, Poland, Sweden, and Turkey).
Also, several countries strengthened programmes for research excellence. Germany , for
instance, established the “Initiative for Excellence” in 2005. The Initiative for Excellence
was a competition among German research universities for top-up funds from the Federal
Government. It aimed to make German un iversities more competitive internationally. In
2007, three “excellence universities” were selected based on criteria of research excellence.
Each university received USD 25.6 million (EUR 21 million) annually. Another
18 universities received funding to set up international graduate schools and “excellence
clusters”, i.e. research hubs that bring together different research groups from within and
across universities in the region. Its se cond round in 2012 expanded funding to 11 elite
universities. In 2018, the Initiative for Excellence was continued under a new name, the
“Excellence Strategy”, providing support only for existing excellence clusters and the
selected excellence universities.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 1. Performance contracts in Austria, Finland and Scotland (United Kingdom)
Country Targets Process
Finland Regarding education, quantitative indicators include
● the number of bachelor’s, master’s and PhD degrees awarded
● the percentage of students who have been awarded more than
55 study credits per academic year
● the number of employed graduates.

For research, indicators include
● scientific publications
● the percentage of competitive funding in total funding of the
institution.

A number of indicators focus specifically on the degree of
internationalisation, including
● the number of international teaching and research personnel
● the number of master’s degrees awarded to foreign nationals
● student mobility to and from Finland.

Indicators of other education and science policy considerations account for
28% and include strategic development efforts, field -specific funding and
contributions to “national duties” (e.g. teacher training schools).
A different formula applies for universities of applied science with criteria
focusing on education (79%), R&D (15%) and strategic development (6%).
A funding formula serves as a basis for each
university to negotiate its performance agreement
with the Ministry of Education and Culture (MEC)
at the beginning of every four -year term. Each
performance agree ment contains institution
specific targets. Universities participate in the
monitoring and evaluation process. The
evaluation process also involves on -site visits by
staff from the Ministry. Performance reviews are
conducted jointly by representatives from the
MEC and individual institutions. To enable the
Ministry to monitor performance, HEIs provide
information to a central statistical database that is
maintained by MEC. Every year an assessment of
HEIs’ performance is published.
Austria Qualitative and quantitative criteria used in performance contracts set
targets for universities: education, research and innovation. Indicators for
education include the number of students that complete full credits per
academic year; the number of graduates; and the quality of teaching.

Regarding universities’ research role, specific attention is paid to the
generation of basic research; as well as to the career paths of young
academics.

Regarding innovation outcomes, indicators vary across institution s. The
University of Vienna, for instance, commits to increase the number of
patents and to provide courses on technology transfer (University of Vienna,
2015).
Specific performance agreements are signed with
each of the 22 Austrian institutions for a period of
three years. They are based on institutional
development plans. The National Development
Plan for Higher Education formulated by the
Federal Ministry of Science, Research and
Economics (BMWFW) for a period of six years
sets national objectives that i nforms the
universities’ development plans. Goals include
progress in the number of students in different
disciplines, improvement in the number of
graduates and improvements in student -staff
ratios. The University Act (2002) also fixes a set
of issues to be addressed in institutional plans
such as strategic goals, co -operation with other
universities and knowledge transfers.
Scotland
(UK)
Qualitative and quantitative criteria used in performance contracts include:
 equality: Admission targets for student s from diverse backgrounds.
Innovation: The number of research grants and contract income
received; the share of UK competitive research council income; and the
use of innovation vouchers for particular science to business
collaborations
 graduates employability: The number of first degree qualifiers; the
number of undergraduate entrants in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) courses; the development of an on -campus
“employability and enterprise hub”; and the development of an
employability award as part of an alumni mentoring programme.
Outcome agreements run for three years and are
made between the Scottish Funding Council and
individual HEIs. The outcome agreements also
set annual targets for priority areas that apply to
institutions. In 2014 –15, there were four main
priority areas: equality (opportunity), innovation,
graduate employability and enterprise, as well as
sustainable institutions. Universities have defined
quantitative indicators for the purpose of
monitoring their performance.
Source: De Boer, H., B. Jongbloed, P. Benneworth, L. Cremonini, R. Kolster, A. Kottmann, K. Lemmens -
Krug, and H. Vossensteyn (2015), “Performance -based Funding and Performance Agreements in Fourteen
Higher Education Systems: Report for the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science”, Center for Higher
Education Policy Studies, No. C15HdB014I, Enschede, Available at:
http://doc.utwente.nl/93619/7/jongbloed%20ea%20performance-based-funding-and-performance-
agreements-in-fourteen-higher-education-systems.pdf (Accessed: 18 October 2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 23

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

1.4. Setting evaluation criteria, conducting evaluations and monitoring performance
Another important component of governance of public research relates to the setting of
evaluation criteria and the conduct of ex ante and ex post evaluations and monitoring of
performance of HEIs and PRIs. In 23 of 34 (68%) OECD countries, national or regional
Ministries of Education, Research and/or Innovation set criteria for assessing HEI
performance. 10 (or 34%) of those national Ministries and Ministries in the Flemish Region
in Belgium are also responsible for conducting evaluations and monitoring of performance.
The other 1 2 countries have Ministries that set criteria while other bodies such as e.g.
agencies, councils or institutions conduct evaluations. In Belgium and Germany, regional
ministries set criteria for evaluations while in the United States regional agenci es are
responsible here (Figure 5).
Dedicated agencies are increasingly important for systematic evaluation and monitoring of
performance of HEIs and PRIs. 19 of 34 countries (59%) and Wallonia in Belgium have
such dedicated agencies to conduct evaluations and monitor HEIs’ and PRIs’ performance
in place. In 10 countries (29%), the same agency also sets the criteria to be used for
evaluations. Independent evaluation agencies are in place in Austria, Canada, the Czech
Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United Kingdom.
Austria (2012), France (2006), Ireland (2012), Italy (2010), and Portugal (2007) have
recently established such agencies or replaced existing agencies with new ones.
Examples of evaluation agencies include the High Council for the Evaluation of Research
and Higher Education (HCERES) in France and the Higher Education Authority (HEA)
and the Quality and Qualif ications Ireland (QQI) in Ireland. In Ireland, the QQI oversees
quality assurance while the HEA is the agency in charge of system governance and
institutional block funding for HEIs’. Both the HEA and QQI conduct quality and strategic
evaluations of HEIs and PRIs based on criteria set by the State. In the Czech Republic, the
Council for Research and Development, the main advisory body for the Czech government
with regard to research, development and innovation (RDI) policy, is in charge of setting
criteria, evaluating, and monitoring HEIs. In the Netherlands, although HEIs conduct
evaluations of their performance mainly themselves, the independent Higher Education and
Research Review Committee carries out evaluation of performance targets established in
performance contracts that bind 7% of HEIs’ budget.
Regarding monitoring, i.e. supervising the progress of HEIs/PRIs in meeting established
targets, the same ministry or agency that conducts evaluation is also responsible for
monitoring performance in all but one country. In 20 of 34 (59%) OECD countries, national
or regional agencies monitor HEI performance, while in 12 of 34 (35%) countries national
or regional ministries do so (Figure 5). In Austria, for instance, the Ministry of Science,
Research, and the Economy conducts monitoring of institutions while the agency AQ
Austria (Agentur für Qualitätssicherung und Akkreditierung Austria) conducts evaluations
of institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 5. Institutions in charge of setting evaluating criteria, and evaluating and monitoring
performance of HEIs

Note: This figure corresponds to questions 1.4.a to 1.4.c (“Who decides on the following key evaluation criteria
of HEIs and PRIs? a) Setting criteria to use when evaluating performance of HEIs, b) Evaluating HEIs’
performance, and c) Monitoring HEIs’ performance”). Information is missing for Iceland.
1 In Estonia, independent panels of scientists, e.g. foreign experts, evaluate HEIs on behalf of a Ministry.
2 In the Czech Republic, the Council for Research and Development is responsible.
3 In Austria, evaluations of HEIs are conducted by an independent agency, while the Ministry for Science,
Research, and the Economy monitors the progress of HEIs towards achieving performance targets.
4 In Denmark, criteria are set by the by the Ministry of Higher Education and Science in close cooperation with
the institutions, while institutions themselves conduct their evaluations. The Danish Agency for Institutions and
Educational Grants monitors the progress of HEIs towards achieving performance targets.
Interpretation of the figure: First row, first column shows that in 10 countries the national ministry level sets
criteria to use when evaluating HEI performance but also conducts those evaluations and monitors HEIs’
performance.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 25

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2. POLICY CO-ORDINATION MECHANISMS
This section describes the following institutional arrangements that are in place across
OECD countries to co-ordinate policy action regarding HEIs and PRIs: i) research and
innovation councils (2.1); ii) national research and innovation strategies or plans (2.2); and
iii) inter-agency joint programming in research and innovation that describes arrangements
between implementing agencies that result in joint action (2.3).
2.1. Research and innovation councils
Many countries have research and innovation councils, i.e. non -temporary public bodies
outside of ministries and agencies that have explicit mandates to engage in one or several
of the following activities: provide policy advice or oversee policy evaluation, co-ordinate
policy areas relative to public research, set policy priorities and/or engage in joint policy
planning regarding HEI and PRI policies. 31 of 35 OECD countries (or 89%) have such
institutions. 15 countries have created their current councils after 2007, a reflection of the
importance these bodies are given by policy (Table 2). Germany has several major councils
that advice on matters relevant to research.4 Aside from its Federal Science Policy Council,
Belgium also has three regional councils. In most countries, the current council replaced
an older council of different characteristics. In Demark, for instance, the Council for
Research and Innovation Policy that was created in 2014 replaced the Danish Council for
Research Policy of 2003. In Finland , the Research and Innovation Council of 1987 was
dissolved in 2016 and replaced by a new Research and Innovation Council with different
mandate and composition in the same year.
Councils differ in their mandate. In 28 of the 31 countries (90%) with councils, the councils
provide policy advice and for 6 of them, those of Australia, Canada, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Portugal and Sweden, this is their core role. In 23 of 31 countries with
councils (or 74%), the council also develops strategic priorities. 15 of 31 (48%) councils,
the councils conducts evaluation of policy reforms. In 15 of 31 (48%) countries, the council
is also tasked with policy co -ordination between within government and with non -state
stakeholders (Figure 6). The councils in Czech Republic, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico and
Turkey have broader mandates than others as they also decide how budgets are allocated.
Ireland, Italy, New Zealand and Norway do not have research and innovation councils but
use other forms of horizontal co -ordination. In the case of Norway 8 temporary sectoral
strategy committees for STI called “21 Forums” were created. The committees include
representatives from the private sector, academia and the government. They provide policy
advice, formulate strategies that they submit to the government and serve as stakeholders
forums for policy consultation. Since 2014, Norway also holds annual summits on specific
STI policy themes. The summits gather stakeholders from the p rivate sector, academia,
civil society and the public sector and aim at stimulating the policy debate and co -
ordination on topics related to the national long -term plan for research and higher
education. They are chaired by the Prime Minister and ministers participate.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 2. Main research and innovation councils and their year of creation
Country Main research and innovation councils Year of
creation
Australia Commonwealth Science Council 2014
Austria Austrian Council for Research and Technology Development 2000
Belgium Federal Council for Science Policy 1997
Belgium - Brussels-Capital Region Council of Science Policy n.a.
Belgium - Flemish Community Flemish Council for Science and Innovation n.a.
Belgium – Walloon Region Science Policy Pole n.a.
Canada Technology and Innovation Council 2007
Chile National Innovation Council for Development 2005
Czech Republic Council for Research, Development and Innovation 2009
Denmark Council for Research and Innovation Policy 2014
Estonia National Science and Technology Council 2002
Finland1 Research and Innovation Council (dissolved) 1987-2016
 Research and Innovation Council (new) 2016
France Strategic Research Council 2013
Germany Innovation Dialogue 2010
 Council of Science and Humanities 1957
 Expert Commission for Research and Innovation 2007
Greece National Council for Research and Innovation 1984
Hungary Research Council, Innovation Council 2015
Iceland Science and Technology Policy Council 2003
Israel Higher Education Council 1958
Japan Council for Science, Technology and Innovation 2001
Korea National Science and Technology Council 1973
Latvia Latvian Science and Innovation Strategic Council 2014
Luxembourg 2 Superior Committee for Research and Innovation 2008-14
Mexico General Council for Scientific Research, Technological Development and Innovation 2002
Netherlands Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation n.a.
Poland Council for Innovation 2016
Portugal3 National Council for Science and Technology, National Council for Entrepreneurship
and Innovation
2012
Slovak Republic Government Council of the Slovak Republic for Science, Technology and Innovation 2011
Slovenia National Science and Technology Council 2002
Spain Council for Scientific, Technological and Innovation Policies 2012
Sweden National Council for Innovation and Quality in the Public Sector 2015
Switzerland Swiss Science Council 1965
Turkey Supreme Council for Science and Technology 1983
United Kingdom The British Council for Science and Technology 2005
United States President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 1990
Note: Ireland, Italy, New Zealand and Norway have no research and innovation council as defined in this report.
Information is not available on the year of establishment of councils in the Belgium-Capital Region, the Flemish
Community in Belgium, and the Walloo n Region in Belgium. Information for all three German Councils is
used for the cross-country comparison.
1 The Finnish Research and Innovation Council had been dissolved in 2016 and a new Council was established
under the same name in the same year. Due to changes to the composition and mandate of the Council this
analysis treats them as two separate entities.
2 In Luxembourg, the Superior Committee for Research and Innovation is inactive since 2014.
3 In Portugal, the National Council for Science and Technology and the National Council for Entrepreneurship
and Innovation are inactive since 2015.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 27

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 6. Mandates of the research and innovation councils

Note: This figure corresponds to questions 2.2.a – 2.2.e (“Does the Research and Innovation Council’s mandate
explicitly include: a) Policy coordination, b) Preparation of strategic priorities, c) Decision -making on
budgetary allocations, d) Evaluation of policies’ implementation (including their enforcement), e) Provision of
policy advice?”). There is no Council in Ireland, Italy, Norway and New Zealand. Percentages are expressed as
a share of the countries with a council in place (N=31).
1 Germany has three main Councils: The Council of Science and Humanities, the Expert Commiss ion for
Research and Innovation and the Innovation Dialogue. Information for all three councils was used for the cross-
country comparison. All three councils' mandates include policy coordination and provision of policy advice.
The mandates of the Council of Science and Humanities and the Expert Commission for Research and
Innovation also include development of strategic priorities and policy evaluation.
2 Belgium has a Council for the Brussels-Capital Region (Council of Science Policy), a Council for the Flemish
Community (Flemish Council for Science and Innovation) and a Council for the Walloon Region (Science
Policy Pole) and a Federal Council (Federal Science Policy Council).
3 The Finnish Research and Innovation Council had been dissolved in 2016 and a new Council was established
under the same name in the same year. Due to changes to the composition and mandate of the Council this
analysis treats them as two separate entities.
4 In Luxembourg, the Superior Committee for Research and Innovation has not convened since 2014.
5 Spain’s Council for Scientific, Technological and Innovation Policies is responsible for the coordination of
national and regional science, technology and innovation policies. Policy Advice is provided by a dedicated
Advisory Council.
6 Portugal has two main councils: The National Council for Science and Technology, and the National Council
for Entrepreneurship and Innovation. They have not convened since 2015.
Interpretation of the figure: First row shows that in all countries except for France, Iceland, and Spain the
research and innovation council has a mandate for policy advice, among others.
Councils also differ with regard to their staff and budgets. In 14 of 30 (or 47%) countries
for which information is available , councils have own staff (i.e. secretariat). Of these
councils, aside from Japan all have 20 or less staff members and 15 have no direct staff
(Figure 7). 10 out of 29 councils (or 34%) for which information is available and the
Councils of the Brussels -Capital Region and the Flemish Region in Belgium have their
own budget. The size of the annual budget available differs. The councils in Austria, Chile,
Israel, Japan and the Netherlands have annual budgets of USD 1.3 million (EUR 1 million)
or more, while the councils in Belgium-Brussels, Belgium-Flanders, Denmark, the German
Expert Commission for Research and Innovation have budgets of below USD 1.3 million
(EUR 1 million) per year.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 7. Number of staff of research and innovation councils

Note: The figure corresponds to question 2.4.a (“Does the Council have its own staff? If so, please indicate the
number of staff”) and showcases only countries where the Council has its own staff. The Council has its own
staff in Canada but no information on the number of staff is available. Information on staff numbers is not
available for Canada, Iceland, Luxembourg, and the United Kingdom. Information on budget numbers is not
available for Belgium, Finland, Iceland, Luxembourg, and the United States. In Luxembourg, the Superior
Committee for Research and Innovation is inactive since 2014. There is no Council in Ireland, Italy,
New Zealand, and Norway.
* The Finnish Research and Innovation Council had been dissolved in 2016 and a new Council was established
under the same name in the same year. Due to changes to the composition and mandate of the Council this
analysis treats them as two separate entities.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 29

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2.2. STI plans or strategies
An alternative mechanism for co -ordination across different stakeholders for research
policy is STI plans or strategies that outline a common strategy. Most countries (33 of 35,
94%) have national STI strategies or plans (that have larger coverage than industry and
research specific strategies. 5 Of these, 22 are EU member countries or participants in
Horizon 2020 and the European Commission’s Framework Programmes for whom having
such plans is a requirement (see discussion below). Most countries also have additional STI
strategies in place (33 of 35, 94%), often with a more specific regional, sectoral, thematic
or transnational focus (e.g. participation in international research infrastructure projects, or
increase in the number of European Research Council grants received) . Hungary, for
instance, has a national STI strategy and also a Research and Innovation Strategy for Smart
Specialisation. Scientific and thematic priorities are inclu ded in the latter strategy . The
EU’s strategic agenda also have an important impact on EU countries and participants (Box
2).
In most countries, STI strategies address major societal challenges including demographic
change, health, environment, and smart transport and cities (30 of 33 countries or 91% and
the Belgian Brussels-Capital Region, the Flemish Region and the Walloon Region). 25 of
33 countries or 76%, the Brussels -Capital Region and the Walloon Region in Belgium
stress in their STI strategy the need for research and innovation to d evelop a sustainable
economy. 13 of 33 countries (or 40%) emphasise in their strategy the importance of STI to
help address demographic change. The STI strategies of 15 of 33 countries (or 45%) also
refer to investing in STI to help improve transport systems.
Strategies also generally identify specific scientific research, technologies or economic
fields (31 of 33 countries or 94% and the Belgian Brussels -Capital Region, the Flemish
Region and the Walloon Region), mentioning energy and energy technologies, health and
life sciences, information and communication technologies (ICT), nanotechnolo gy and
advanced materials. In 29 of 33 countries (or 88%), in the Belgian Brussels-Capital Region,
and in the Flemish Region in Belgium, national plans focus on the digital economy (Guellec
and Paunov, 2018).
In 23 of 32 countries (72%) that provided such information , STI strategies also address
priorities for specific Federal States or regions, i.e. regional Research and Innovation
Strategy for Smart Specialisation (RIS). To develop a RIS is a prerequisite in order to
receive funding from the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), which
constitutes an important funding source from the European Union to European regions.
These local STI strategies identify diverse scientific, research, technology and innovation
priorities across regions. The Smart Specialisation strategy of the Walloon Region in
Belgium, for instance, addresses STI priorities for aeronautics, green technologies, health,
mechanical engineering, a s well as transport and logistics, while the Norte Region in
Portugal focuses on STI in automotive, cultural and creative industries as well as the ICT
sector. Smart Specialisation strategies have also been taken up at country level in Estonia,
Hungary, Luxembourg and Slovenia.
Some non-EU member regions also participate in the Framework Programme and have RIS
strategies, notably Norway and Turkey. Dedicated strategies for regional development are
also in place in Australia, Canada, Japan, and Mexico. For example, Mexico has adopted
three Regiona l Agendas for Innovation and 32 Agendas for Innovation at the level of
Federal States since 2014. These regional strategies in Mexico were developed following
the EU’s RIS methodology.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

National STI strategies also include quantifiable targets that make it possible to assess
whether policy has met them or not. In 21 of 33 countries (64%) and in the Brussels-Capital
Region, the Flemish Region and the Walloon Region in Belgium , national STI strategies
include such quantitative targets. National STI strategies of EU Member countries refer
explicitly to the Horizon 2020 objective, which is to raise expenditures on R&D to 3% of
GDP. Note that the European Council has recommended that EU Membe r States set their
own targets for R&D investment. 2 1 out of 33 countries (or 64%) with national STI
strategies and the Brussels-Capital Region, the Flemish Region and the Walloon Region in
Belgium list the R&D spending target.
The data also shows that 12 (or 36%) of national STI strategies and the STI strategy of
Brussels-Capital Region in Belgium include targets for HEIs and PRIs . Th ese include
raising funding for doctoral students (7 of 33 and the Brussels-Capital Region in Belgium),
and job placements for researchers and PhDs in industry (5 of 33 and the Brussels-Capital
Region in Belgium) (Figure 8). In Japan and Ireland, the national STI strategy sets
quantitative benchmarks for knowledge transfer between universities and industry
including raising th e private funding of university research , the amount of collaborative
research funds received from industry, and the number of license agreements on university
patents. Japan’s 5 th Science and Technology Basic Plan for 2016-20 includes targets to
increase the number of tenure positions for young researchers at universities and to raise
the share of female researchers among new hired university personnel. In Iceland, the main
STI strategy, the “Science and Technology Policy and Action Plan 2014-16” includes plans
to increase of competitive funding as a share of funding of HEIs and PRIs to one third of
total funding.
Figure 8. Quantitative targets included in national STI strategies

Note: The figure corresponds to question 2.6.e (“Does the national STI strategy or plan address any of the
following priorities? Quantitative targets for monitoring and evaluation (e.g. setting as targets a certain level of
R&D spending for public research etc.)?) and showcases only countries where the national STI strategies have
quantitative targets. Information is missing for Australia, the Slovak Republic, and the United Kingdom. Israel
and Luxembourg do not have national STI strategies. Flanders also targets an increase R&D spending (as a
share of GDP).

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 31

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 2. The EU strategies for growth and innovation
Europe 2020 is EU’s strategic agenda for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth
and job creation. Europe 2020 sets five quantitative objectives; one of them refers
to STI explicitly: setting as objective the need to raise investment in R&D to 3%
of GDP by 2020. Specific national targets that reflect these goals were adopted
by all EU member countries via their respective National Reform Programmes
(NRP). These goals are also reflected in many EU countries’ STI strategies.
Regarding innovation, the Innovation Union is a flagship initiative of the Europe
2020 Strategy. Horizon 2020 is one of the main funding programming of Europe
2020. Horizon 2020 aims to enhanc e the competitiveness of Europe’s research,
remove barriers to innovation, facilitate public -private partnerships for
innovation and address social challenges. It contributes to the integration of the
European Research area (ERA).
The non-EU member countr ies, Israel, Norway and Turkey also participate in
Horizon 2020. Norway has included Horizon 2020 objectives in its national STI
strategic plan. Norway also has a bilateral arrangement for participation in
interregional programmes under the EU’s Regional Policy. Israel participates in
the Horizon 2020 programme and signed the agreement with the EU in 2014.
Turkey is associated with the European Commission (EC) Framework
Programme since 2003 and the Horizon 2020 programme since 2014.
Source: European Commiss ion (2016 a), “European Structural & Investment Funds”,
http://ec.europa.eu/contracts_grants/funds_en.htm (accessed on 16 November 2016); European
commission (2016 b), “Horizon 2020 – the EU Framework Programme for Research and
Innovation”, https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/ (accessed on 16 November 2016);
European Commission (2016 c), “Regist ered countries and regions in the S3 Platform”,
http://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/s3-platform-registered-regions (accessed on
16 November 2016); European Commission (2015 a), “EU 2020 Targets”,
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/europe-2020-in-a-nutshell/targets/index_en.htm (accessed on 16
November 2016); European Commission (2014), Turk ey joins Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-631_en.htm (accessed on 5
March 2017). European Commission ( 2016e), “Smart Specialisat ion”,
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/research-topic/smart-specialisation (accessed 16 November 2016); The
Norwegian Mission to the EU (2016), “Norway’s participation in EU programmes and agencies”,
www.eu-norway.org/eu/Coopperation-in-programmes-and-agencies/#.WCxKrMlUsXh (accessed
on 16 November 2016). Delegation of the European Union to Israel (N.D.), “Scientific
cooperation”,
http://eeas.europa.eu/archives/delegations/israel/eu_israel/scientific_cooperation/index_en.htm
(accessed on 16 November 2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 3. Names and year of establishment of main national STI strategies
Country Main national STI strategies Period
Australia National Innovation and Science Agenda since 2015
Austria Austrian National RTI Strategy "Becoming an Innovation Leader" 2011-20
Belgium Federal Government Agreement since 2014
Belgium - Brussels-Capital
Region
Regional Innovation Plan 2016-20
Belgium - Flemish Community Flanders Reform Programme EU 2020, Flanders Pact 2020 2008-20
Belgium – Walloon Region Wallonia Marshal Plan 4.0 2015-19 2015-19
Canada Seizing Canada's Moment: Moving Forward in Science, Technology and
Innovation (2014), Canada’s Innovation and Skills Plan (2017)
2014-25
Chile Science, Technology and Innovation for a New Pact of Sustainable and
Inclusive Development
2017-30
Czech Republic International Competitiveness Strategy 2012-20 2012-20
Denmark Denmark – Ready to seize future opportunities: The Government’s
objectives for Danish research and innovation
since 2018
Estonia The Estonian Research and Development and Innovation Strategy
“Knowledge-based Estonia” 2014-20
2014-20
Finland Research and Innovation Policy Guidelines 2015-20 (2014), Research
and Innovation Council’s Vision and Roadmap for 2030 (2017)
2014/17-20/30
France National Research Strategy 2015-20
Germany High-Tech Strategy since 2014
(updated)
Greece National Research and Innovation Strategy For Smart Specialization
2014-20
2015-20
Hungary National Research, Development and Innovation Strategy 2013-20 -
Investment in the Future
2013-20
Iceland Research and Development Policy and Action Plan 2017-19 2017-19
Ireland Innovation 2020: Excellence Talent Impact 2015-20
Italy National Research Plan (NRP) for 2014-20; Horizon 2020 Italia (2014-20);
and the National Smart Specialization Strategy (2014-20)
2014-20
Japan The Fifth Science and Technology Basic Plan 2016-20 2016-20
Korea The Fourth Science and Technology Basic Plan 2018-22 2017-22
Latvia Guidelines for the Development of Science, Technology and Innovations
2014-20.
2014-20
Mexico The Special Programme for Science, Technology and Innovation 2014-18 2014-18
Netherlands Enterprise Policy “To the Top” (2013), National Research Vision (2014),
“Working Together for Renewal” (2015), Strategic Agenda for Higher
Education, Research and Science (2015), and National Research Agenda
(2015)
2013/15-20/25
New Zealand National Statement of Science Investment (NSSI) 2015-25
Norway Long -term plan for research and higher education 2015–24 2014-24
Poland National Reform Programme (2011), National Research Programme
(2011), Strategy for Responsible Development (2017)
2017-20
Portugal National Research and Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation,
National Plan for Science, Technology and Innovation 2017-20
2018-30
Slovak Republic Research and Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation 2014-20 2014-20
Slovenia Research and Innovation Strategy of Slovenia 2011-20 (2011), Slovenia’s
Smart Specialisation Strategy (2015), Digital Slovenia 2020 (2016)
2011-20
Spain Spanish Strategy for Science, Technology and Innovation 2013-20 2013-20
Sweden National Innovation Strategy (2012); Government Bill Research and
Innovation (2016)
2016-20
Switzerland Education, Research and Innovation Policy Dispatch of the Federal
Council 2017-20
2016-20
Turkey National Science, Technology and Innovation Strategy 2011-16 2011-16
United Kingdom Our Plan for Growth: Science and Innovation since 2014
United States Driving towards Sustainable Growth and Quality Jobs since 2015
(updated)

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 33

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2.3. Inter-agency programming
Inter-agency programming, i.e. formal arrangements between agencies that result in joint
action, is a new policy instruments to co-ordinate policy action at the level of implementing
agencies. Examples are funding programmes between funding agencies. In Sweden,
VINNOVA, the Swedish Energy Agency and the Swedish Research Council Formas jointly
implemented the Swedish Strategic Innovation Are a (SIO) initiative in 2012 (OECD,
2016b). Under the initiative, the three agencies jointly selected and funded research projects
that have to be submitted by university -industry consortia. I n the United States, the
Interagency Working Group on the Science of Science Policy (SoSP) coordinates
evaluation and impact assessment efforts of several agencies (Box 3).
Box 3. Co-ordination of science policy between US government agencies and the academic
community
The Interagency Working Group on the Science of Science Policy (SoSP) is
responsible for setting -up evaluation standards and joint data infrastructure for
impact assessments of publicly -funded research across U.S. government
departments and agencies. The SoSP’s activities include:
 Developing jointly tools, theories, methodologies, and collect and exchange data
to evaluate projects where federal agencies can collaborate and join efforts.
 Developing a federal STI policy information infrastructure (STAR METRICS)
to enable the SoSP comm unity to assess the impacts of STI programmes and
federal policies.
 Developing a central, government -wide profile of federal government
researchers and for other researchers funded by science agencies to document,
publicise, and measure the attainment of f ederal goals associated with STI
activities.
 Conducting workshops with recipients of grants from the National Science
Foundation (NSF)’s Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP)
programme.
Participating institutions of the SoSP include the Departm ents of Agriculture,
Commerce, Defence, Education, Energy, Health and Hum an Services, Homeland
Security, Interior, Transportation, Veterans Affairs, the State Department, the
Environmental Protection Agency, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), and the National Science Foundation (NSF). Organisations
in the Executive Office of the President are also represented in the Working Group
(Office of Management and Budget, and the Office of Science and Technology
Policy). SoSP is co-chaired by the Department of Energy and the NSF.
Source: OECD (2016a); SoSP (2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

3. EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS INVOLVEMENT AND
INSTITUTIONAL AUTONOMY
This section describes how the private sector, civil society and HEIs and PRIs are involved
in the public -research policy-making process in their representation in councils and
university boards (3.1), and discusses online consultation platforms as new mechanisms to
engage stakeholders in policy making (3.2). It also discusses the institutional autonomy of
HEIs and PRIs (3.3) which critically determines HEIs/PRIs own role in policy design and
implementation.
3.1. Participation in councils and university boards
Participation in the research and innovation councils shapes the involvement of external
stakeholders – defined as stakeholders outside of government - in policy design. 29 of 31
(94%) of countries involve HEIs and/or their associations, while 24 (77%) involve PRIs
and/or their associations. Private sector representation in councils is widespread across the
OECD and more common than civil society representation: 26 countries (or 84%) include
private sector representatives in their main councils. Representatives from civil society and
citizen associations (NGOs, unions) are involved in 15 of 31 (48%) countries. (Figure 9).
Foreign experts only participate in 6 of 31 (19%) OECD countries with councils (Austria,
France, Germany, Greece, Switzerland and the United Kingdom). In most cases these
experts are academics but this is not always the case. The A ustrian Council, for instance,
includes a British entrepreneur and a representative from the Swedish Government Agency
for Innovation Systems (VINNOVA).
With regards to government representation, 16 of 31 (84%) countries have government
representatives in at least one of their councils. The head of state or prime minister are
council members in 1 3 of 31 (39%) of countries, and ministers in 21 of 31 (68%) of
countries.
A number of countries have councils with non-governmental representatives only, notably
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Hungary, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the United
States. This includes HEI and PRI representatives, private sector representatives and/or
civil society organisations.
Federal State/regional governments are represented in 8 of 31 countries (26%, i.e. Belgium,
Canada, France, Germany, Greece, Latvia, Spain and the United Kingdom) and 5 of those
are countries with federal structure. In these country contexts, the councils play a role in
policy co -ordination regarding HEIs and PRIs between national government and
subnational authorities. Spain’s Council, the Council for Scientific, Technological and
Innovation Policies (CPCTI), for instance, is responsible for policy coordination between
the national government and the Autonomou s Communities. In the Spanish case, policy
advice is provided by a specific Advisory Council, which involves representatives of main
stakeholders from science and industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 35

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 9. Who formally participates in the research and innovation council?

Note: This figure corresponds to question 2.3. (“Who formally participates in the Research and Innovation
Council?"). There is no research and innovation council in Ireland, Italy, Norway and New Zealand.
Percentages are expressed as a share of countries with a council in place (N=31).
1 The Finnish Research and Innovation Council had been dissolved in 2016 and a new Council was established
under the same name in the same year. Due to changes to the composition and mandate of the Council this
analysis treats them as two separate entities.
2 Germany has three main Councils: The Council of Science and Humanities, the Expert Commission for
Research and Innovation and the Innovation Dialogue. Information of all three councils was used for the cross-
country comparison. All three councils’ mandates include policy coordination and provision of policy advice.
The mandates of the Council of Science and Humanities and the Expert Commission for Research and
Innovation also include development of strategic priorities and policy evaluation.
3 In Luxembourg, the Superior Committee for Research and Innovation has not convened since 2014.
4 Portugal has two main councils: The National Council for Science and Technology, and the National Council
for Entrepreneurship and Innovation. They have not convened since 2015.
5 Belgium has a federal Council (Federal Science Policy Council) Council for the Brussels -Capital Region
(Council of Science Policy), a Council for the Flemish Community (Flemish Council for Sci ence and
Innovation) and a Council for the Walloon Region (Science Policy Pole).The Federal Science Policy council is
composed of experts participating in their own capacity but they are issued from the academia, the private
sector or policy circles.
Interpretation of the figure: First row shows that in Sweden, Latvia, Finland, France, Japan, Estonia, Australia,
Iceland, Mexico, Slovak Republic, Turkey, and in Germany the Research and Innovation Council includes the
head of state (i.e. president or prime minister), among others.
Stakeholder involvement at the HEI level is also an important element for stakeholder
consultation, particularly with increased autonomy of HEIs. In most OECD countries,
universities’ governance structure is made of a board or senate (referred to as board here).
The university board is the main decision-making body and it is in charge of priority setting.
The private sector participates in governing boards of HEIs in 25 of 34 countries (74%). In
most cases, business representatives a re from large firms, but some countries such as
Iceland and Ireland also include representatives from small and medium sized enterprises
(SMEs). 23 of 34 (68%) have civil society – i.e. citizens, NGOs and foundations –

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

represented in university councils. 32% of countries (11 of 34) have both private sector and
civil society representatives in university councils. 10 countries have foreign experts in
their university boards (29%). In 3 countries (or 9%), only the private sector is represented.
In Italy and K orea, only civil society is present. 6 countries (18%) do not have external
stakeholders represented (Figure 10).
External stakeholder representation has started recently in some countries. For instance, in
Portugal university reforms of 2007 introduced their representation in the governing boards
of HEIs. In France, the representation of business, labour unions and local actors in
governing bodies of HEIs and PRIs was introduced by the Law on Higher Education and
Research in 2013. In Switzerland, university councils are the main executive body of HEIs
and take decisions on strategic issues informing their thematic and scientific priorities.
They only include external members: representatives from industry, HEIs, PRIs, and civil
society.
Figure 10. Who formally participates in public university boards?

Note: This figure corresponds to question 3.1.b (“Do stakeholders participate as formal members in governing
boards of HEIs?”) Information is missing for Estonia. There is no formal stakeholder participation in HEI
boards in Chile, Czech Republic, Luxembourg, Latvia, Mexico, and Turkey. Information on participation in
university boards is missing for Estonia. Percentages are expressed as a share of countries with information on
the composition of HEI boards (N=34).
Interpretation of the figure: The first row shows that in all countries except Italy, Korea, Greece, Chile, Czech
Republic, Luxembourg, Latvia, Mexico, and Turkey the private sector is represented in boards of HEIs.
3.2. Online public consultations and temporary stakeholder consultation processes
Online public consultations are a new policy instruments used to include civil society more
in policy formulation processes. Online platforms were used to develop national STI plans
in Australia (2016 National Research Infrastructure Roadmap), France (National Research
Strategy, 2015), Japan (Fifth Science and Technology Basic Plan 2016 -20), Mexico
(National Development Plan 2013 -18) and the Netherlands (2015 consultation for the
Dutch National Research Agenda, Box 4). In 2016, the United Kingdom’s Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy issued an online consultation in preparation for
the National Innovation Strategy. In 2017, Finland introduced online consultation to
develop a national vision and roadmap “Vision for Higher Education and Res earch in
2030”. In Denmark, 100 stakeholders from business, academia, civil society including trade
unions and non -profit organisations, municipalities, and regional authorities contributed
with 476 inputs on new research priorities for the RESEARCH2025 catalogue that provides
a collection of political priorities for strategic research in the coming years. In Greece,

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 37

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

several online consultation platforms were established to identify thematic priorities for the
Regional Smart Specialisation Strategy more aimed at getting inputs from HEIs, PRIs and
industry than the public at large.
In the United Kingdom several online consultation platforms are in place whereby
ministries and regional governments issue regular calls on specific policy matters,
including those targeting HEIs and PRIs. The online consultation platforms are in general
open to the public. Examples of such platforms include the Consultation Hub of the
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy on which the innovation strategy
consultation was held in 2016, along with other consultations on themes related to
education and research (e.g. a consultation on the development of a “Teaching Excellence
Framework”) (Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Consultation Hub,
2017). The Department for Education also has an online consultation platform in place
(Department for Education Consultation Hub, 2016). The Scottish Government’s online
consultation platform issues questions on various policy matters some of which regard
HEIs such as e.g. college governance (Scottish Government Consultation Hub, 2017).
Other more traditional forms of involving stakeholders that continue to be important
include working groups, roundtables and calls for inputs. For example, Turkey introduced
committees for coordination of STI programme design in 2010 (High-Level Prioritization
Meetings and Focus Groups). These committees were introduced by the funding agency
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK). They aim to
facilitate a bottom-up process of identification of sectoral priorities and include the private
sector and academia and members from the research and innovation council (the Supreme
Council for Science and Technology, SCST). TÜBITAK also carried out an open ended
survey to identify priorities in the biomedical technology sector, gathering upwards of 1
200 ideas from 300 researchers and experts. On the basis of these inputs technology
roadmaps and policy programme were developed (OECD, 2016a).
Similarly, stakeholders participated in the preparation of Estonia’s “Research and
Development and Innovation Strategy 2014 -20 - Knowledge-based Estonia”. A Strategy
Preparation Committee was formed by the Ministry of Education and Research that
gathered representatives from the private sector, universities, research institutions, and state
authorities. Additionally, over 200 specialists from the research, business (including
entrepreneurs) and state sectors were involved in the preparation of the strategy.
Also, in the Czech Republic, for instance, private sector representatives were consulted via
working groups to identify national priority fields for research. The working groups
provided inputs to the main national council (i.e. Czech Council for Research and
Development) but al so supported work on national and regional Smart Specialisation
Strategy.
Like online consultations, these temporary stakeholder involvement methods allow for
broader consultation and for sectoral targeting. They complement more permanent
consultations such as participation in research councils.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

3.3. HEIs’ and PRIs’ autonomy
This section uses data on the autonomy of universities from the 2015 University Autonomy
in Europe Scorecard (Estermann et al., 2015). The data covers 21 EU Member countries,
Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, and Turkey. To complement, additional data where gathered
for PRIs’ autonomy for all OECD countries and for HEIs’ autonomy for Australia, Canada,
Chile, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, and the United States to cover all OECD
countries.
The extent to which HEIS and PRIs are autonomous in taking decisions over their budget,
human resources and industry relations shapes the role of these institutions in the design of
research policy. Figure 11 show s that HEIs (Panel A) and PRI s (Panel B) are very
autonomous across the OECD with PRIs having autonomy in more countries across all
dimensions.
Regarding industry relations, Panel A shows that 26 of 34 countries (or 76%) report HEIs
can decide about the creation of academic departme nts (e.g. research centres in specific
fields) and functional units (e.g. technology tra nsfer offices), and in 29 of 34 countries
(85%) they can create legal entities (e.g. for-profit spin-offs) and industry partnerships (e.g.
joint R&D units). A similar picture emerges for PRIs (Panel B). 24 of 27 countries (or 89%)
report PRIs can decide about the cr eation of academic departments and functional units
such as technology transfer offices, and in 25 of 27 countries (93 %) PRIs can create legal
entities and industry partnerships.
In terms of budget decisions, Panel A shows that in 23 of 34 (68%) OECD countries, public
HEIs decide themselves about allocations of institutional block funding to teaching,
research, and innovation ac tivities. In the other 11 countries (32%), national laws or
guidelines restrict the internal allocation of funds across budget items, such as e.g.
personnel costs and capital expenditures. Regarding PRIs, in 23 of 29 (79%) countries PRIs
can allocate their budget allocations freely while 6 countries (21%) report nationally
binding laws or guidelines (Panel B).
Figure 11. HEIs’ and PRIs’ autonomy across the OECD-35
Panel A: Autonomy of HEIs

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 39

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Panel B: Autonomy of PRIs

Note: The figure corresponds to question 3.4.a and b (“Who decides about allocations of institutional block
funding for teaching, research and innovation activities in HEIs \PRIs?”), 3.5.a and b (“Who decides about
recruitment of academic staff in HEIs \PRIs?”), 3.5.c and d (“Who decides about salaries of academic staff in
HEIs\PRIs?”), 3.5.e and f (“Who decides about reassignments and promotions of academic staff in
HEIs\PRIs?”), 3.6.a and b (“Who decides about the creation of academic departments, such as research centres
in specific fields, and functional units, e.g. technology transfer offices, in HEIs\PRIs?”), and 3.6.c and d (“Who
decides about the creation of legal entities and industry partnerships in HEIs? \PRIs”). Information on HEIs’
autonomy is missing for New Zealand. Information on PRIs’ autonomy is missing for Australia, Iceland, Japan,
New Zealand, and the United States. Information on PRIs’ autonomy with regard to block funding allocations
is missing for the United Kingdom. Information on PRIs’ autonomy with regard to recruitment is missing for
Turkey. Information on PRIs’ autonomy with regard to salaries and promotions is missing for Estonia,
Luxembourg and Turkey. Information on PRIs’ autonomy with regard to internal structures and legal entities
is missing for the Netherlands, Turkey, and the United Kingdom.
Source: Data on university autonomy for Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany (Brandenburg, Hesse and North Rhine Westphalia), Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom is based on a survey conducted by the European University
Association between 2010 and 2011. The answers were provided by Secretaries General of national rectors’
conferences and can be found in the report by the European University Association (Estermann et al., 2015) at
www.eua.be/Libraries/publications/University_Autonomy_in_Europe_II_-_The_Scorecard.pdf?sfvrsn=2.
Data on university autonomy for Australia, Canada, Chile, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, and the
United States as well as data on PRIs’ autonomy was collected by authors using a survey.
Looking specifically at federal systems, HEIs are free to allocate institutional block funding
to different activities. In Canada, provinces and territories are responsible to provide base
funding to HEIs, and how this is allocated internally for teaching and other purposes varies
from province to province, territory to territory and institution to institution. The picture is
more complex for PRIs in federal systems. In Canada, Germany, Switzerland and the
United States, leading PRIs are mostly funded by the Federal governments while Belgium
and Spain have national and regional PRIs that receive respectively funding from the
national governments and regional government.
HEIs have gained more independence from national ministries in a number of countries. In
France, HEIs are free to establish their own for-profit entities and joint R&D with industry
since 2011 (Freedom and Responsibilities for Universities Act 2011). In Portugal, HEIs
were granted more autonomy by the Law 62/2007 of 10 September 2007 on Higher

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Education Institutes (RJIES). In Austria, they gained full autonomy over financial and
organisational affairs in 2002 (University Act).
In terms of hiring and promoting staff, public HEIs are free to decide about recruitment of
academic staff in 30 of 34 (88%) OECD countries, and in 29 of 34 countries (or 85%) they
decide freely about promotions (Panel A). PRIs are free to decide about recruitment in 29
of 30 countries (97%), and about promotions in 26 of 27 countries (96%) (Panel B).
HEIs and PRIs enjoy less autonomy with regard to salaries: Panel A shows that only in 12
of 35 countries (or 35%) HEIs can freely set the salaries of academic staff while Panel B
shows that PRIs are free to decide about the level of salaries in 12 of 34 countries (44%).
The way these salaries are set differs quite substantially. In some countries national laws
set salary bands for academic staff, while others have collective bargaining arrangements
in place at the national level (Box 4).
Box 4. Examples of decentralisation of decisions about salaries of academic staff
Sweden: HEIs and PRIs in Sweden are free to hire academic staff, to set salaries, and
they can promote and reassign staff freely. National guidelines and laws exist that require
institutions to publish open positions or the composition of the selection committee. In
Sweden, professorial vacancies generally have to be publicly announced. However, a
vacancy may be filled without public notification if a person holding very specific and
unique competencies is directly invited to take up the post or if a post is filled for a fixed
period only.
UK: With regard to the decisions about salaries of academic staff at HEIs and PRIs,
national guidelines exist and salaries for all senior academic staff ar e negotiated with
other parties. For most academic staff, universities tend to adhere to a nationally agreed
51-point pay scale. Imperial College and the University of Northumbria, which do not
follow the scale, have nevertheless adopted similar pay structures. It is important to note
that these are only guidelines. Within the minimum and maximum salaries, universities
have autonomy over their salary grading structure. For example, an institution may
choose to use ten or 20 instead of 51 points, and, crucia lly, it can freely decide on the
appropriate qualifying criteria for the various scales. In addition, the nationally agreed
pay scale normally does not apply to the professorial level or to senior management staff,
including the executive head. In these ca ses, salaries above the GBP 58 258 maximum
mark can be determined freely by the institution.
Source: Estermann et al. (2015).
Countries also differ with regard to revenues that researchers may receive from intellectual
property (IP) at HEIs, such as pat ent license income. In 16 of 33 countries for which
information is available , HEIs themselves set those revenue schemes and there exist a
considerable degree of variation across universities. In 17 countries, national guidelines set
the share that research ers receive (Figure 12). In Denmark, common practice across
institutions establishes revenue sharing of 30% for researchers, 30% for the research unit
or laboratory within the HEI/PRI, and 30% for the HEIs/PRIs. Where national guidelines
exist, the share f or researchers is often set between 33% and 50%. Sweden is a notable
exception and grants 100%, a practice referred to as professor’s privilege. In contrast, 100%
of revenue accrues to universities in Latvia.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 41

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Some changes to revenue schemes are fairly rec ent. Turkey just introduced the new
Industrial Property Law (Law No. 6769 of 10 January 2017) that designates ownership of
IP from publicly funded research to universities. Researchers are entitled to receive at least
one third of the revenue from revenues of their IP. Before the reforms the revenue shares
were not regulated.
Figure 12. Who earns what share of revenues stemming from IP created from publicly
funded research at HEIs?

Note: This figure corresponds to question 3.7.a (“Who earns what share of revenues stemming from IP (patents,
trademarks, design rights, etc.) created from publicly funded research in HEIs?”). The countries reported have
national obligations or guidelines in place on revenue shares.
HEIs set their own schemes in Australia, Chile, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, Japan, Mexico, Norway, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Information was not available for Iceland and New Zealand.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

4. CONCLUSION
This paper provides a first systematic mapping of the governance of public research across
all 35 OECD countries for the period 2005 -17. The mapping describes the institutional
arrangements that define how various governmental bodies (minis tries, councils, and
agencies), HEIs, PRIs and private actors are involved in the design and implementation of
policies regarding publicl y-funded research conducted in HEIs and PRIs. A number of
interesting perspectives on differences in the governance and on trends across the OECD
emerge, raising questions for further more in -depth analysis. In particular, ex ploring the
database to investigate the determinants of governance structures and their impacts, for
instance by using cross -country regre ssion frameworks, would be interesting. Another
application of the data is to investigate how governance relates to the performance of HEIs
and PRIs. Moreover, developing a more comprehensive set of indicators of research and
innovation policies will also be valuable.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 43

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

ENDNOTES
1 The information pro vided here and in a few other sections is for fewer than 35 OECD countries
because of missing information.
2 Information on block grants for public research institutes in Iceland is missing.
3 In Switzerland, the federal government is in charge of the supervision of the federal HEIs
(Eidgenössische Technische Hochschulen, ETHs), while the cantons are in charge of the supervision
of the cantonal universities. Both have equal rights in their respective domains. Cantons have their
own governance structures, which are in general comparable to the national structures.
4 In Germany, while the Innovation Dialogue specialises on information and communication
technologies (ICT) and digitalisation, the Expert Commission for Research and Innovation is
responsible for innovation p olicy advice. The Council of Science and Humanities specialises on
higher education and research policy. The characterisation of the functions of councils below
focuses on the main council in charge (i.e. in the case of Germany the Council of Science and
Humanities is characterised).
5 Israel does not have a national STI strategy in place but uses a series of national reports and STI
related policy documents in specific scientific research, technologies and economic fields to set
priorities. These address societal challenges (demographic change, digital transformation, the green
economy, and health) and specific technologies (energy technologies, ICT, and nanotechnologies).
In Luxembourg, several sector-specific priority lists and strategies are in place.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

REFERENCES
Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Hoxby, C., Mas-Colell, A., Sapir, A., and B. Jacobs (2010), “The governance
and performance of universities: Evidence from Europe and the US”, Economic Policy, Vol. 25, pp. 7-
59.
Alemani, E., Klein, C., Koske, I., Vitale, C., and I. Wanner, (2013), “New indicators of competition law
and policy in 2013 for OECD and non -OECD Countries”, OECD Economics Department Working
Papers, No. 1104, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5k3ttg4r657h-en.
Austrian Science Council (2016), “Analyse der Leistungsvereinbarungen 2016–2018 und
Empfehlungen”, (Analysis of the Performance Agreements 2016-2018 and Recommendations),
Vienna, Austria,
http://www.wissenschaftsrat.ac.at/news/Endversion_Leistungsvereinbarungen%202016_2018.pdf
(accessed 16 February 2017).
Borrás, S., and J. Edler (2014), “Introduction: On Governance, Systems and Change”, i n Borrás, S., and
Edler, J. (eds .), The Governance of Socio-Technical Systems: Explaining Change , pp. 1-22, Edward
Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham.
Borrás, S., and C. Edquist (2013), “The choice of innovation policy instruments”, Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 80, pp. 1513-1522.
Breznitz, D. (2007), Innovation and the State, Yale University Press, New Haven.
Center for Higher Education Policy Studies (2015), “Performance -based funding and performance
agreements in fourteen higher education systems”, pp. 111 -122 and pp. 127 -148, Enschede,
http://doc.utwente.nl/93619/7/jongbloed%20ea%20performance-based-funding-and-performance-
agreements-in-fourteen-higher-education-systems.pdf (accessed 18 October 2016).
De Boer, H., B. Jongbloed, P. Benneworth, L. Cremonini, R. Kolster, A. Kottmann, K. Lemmens -Krug,
and H. Vossensteyn (2015), “Performance -based Funding and Performance Agreements in Fourteen
Higher Education Systems: Report for the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science”, Center for
Higher Education Policy Studies, No. C15HdB014I, Enschede,
http://doc.utwente.nl/93619/7/jongbloed%20ea%20performance-based-funding-and-performance-
agreements-in-fourteen-higher-education-systems.pdf (accessed 05 October 2016).
Delegation of the European Unio n to Israel (20 16), “Scientific cooperation”, website,
http://eeas.europa.eu/archives/delegations/israel/eu_israel/scientific_cooperation/index_en.htm
(accessed 16 November 2016).
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Consultation Hub (2017) , website,
https://beisgovuk.citizenspace.com/ (accessed 07 May 2017).
Department for Education Consultation Hub (2016) , website, https://consult.education.gov.uk/ (accessed
22 October 2016).
Dutch National Research Agenda (2016), “From Vision for Science to Dutch National Research Agenda
in 365 days”, website, www.wetenschapsagenda.nl/publicatie/from-vision-for-science-to-dutch-
national-research-agenda-in-365-days/?lang=en (accessed 18 November 2016).

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 45

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Estermann, T., T. Nokkala, M., and M., Steinel (2015), “University Autonomy in Europe II The Scorecard.
Brussels: European University Association”,
http://www.eua.be/Libraries/publications/University_Autonomy_in_Europe_II_-
_The_Scorecard.pdf?sfvrsn=2 (accessed 19 September 2016).
European Commission (2016 a), “European Structural and Investment Funds”, website,
http://ec.europa.eu/contracts_grants/funds_en.htm (accessed 16 November 2016).
European Commission (2016 b), “Horizon 2020 – the EU Framework Programme for Research and
Innovation”, website, https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/ (accessed
16 November 2016).
European Commission (2016 c), “Registered countries and regions in the S3 Platform”, website,
http://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/s3-platform-registered-regions (accessed 16 November 2016).
European Commission (2016d), “Rio Country Report 2015: Slovak Rep ublic”, p 14, Report EUR 27860
EN, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, Sevilla, Spain,
https://rio.jrc.ec.europa.eu/en/country-analysis/Slovakia/country-report (accessed 08 March 2017).
European Commission (2016 e), “Smart Specialisation”, website, https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/research-
topic/smart-specialisation (accessed 16 November 2016).
European Commission (2015 a), “EU 2020 Targets”, website, http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/europe-
2020-in-a-nutshell/targets/index_en.htm (accessed 16 November 2016).
European Commission (2015 b), “RIO Country Report Belgium 2014”, Report EUR 27294 EN, Joint
Research Centre, Institute for Prospective Technological S tudies, Sevilla, Spain,
https://rio.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/riowatch_country_report/RIO%20Country%20Report%2
02014_Belgium.pdf (accessed 02 February 2017).
European Commission (2014), Turkey joins Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, website,
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-631_en.htm (accessed 05 May 2017).
Fuchs, E.R.H. (2010), “Rethinking the role of the state in technology development: DARPA and the case
for embedded network governance”, Research Policy, Vol. 39, pp. 1133-1147.
Ginarte, J.C., and W.G., Park, (1997), “ Determinants of patent rights: A cross -national study”, Research
Policy, Vol. (26), pp. 283-301.
Grosso, G.M., Gonzales, F., Miroudot, S., Nordås, H.K., Rouzet, D., and A. Uenoi (2015), “Services in
trade restrictiveness index (STRI): Scoring and weighting methodology", OECD Trade Policy Papers,
No. 177, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js7n8wbtk9r-en.
Guellec and Paunov (2018), “Innovation Policies in the Digital Age“, in OECD Science, Technology, and
Innovation Outlook 2018, OECD Publishing, Paris, forthcoming.
Koske, I., Wanner, I., Bitetti, R., and O. Barbiero (2015), “The 2013 update of the OECD product market
regulation indicators: policy insights for OECD and non -OECD countries”, OECD Economics
Department Working Papers, No. 1200. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/18151973.
OECD (2018), “STIP Compass”, European Commission OECD STI Compass: International Database on
STI Policies (database), https://stip.oecd.org/stip.html (accessed 19 July 2018).
OECD (2016a), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2016 , OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/25186167.
OECD (2016b), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Sweden 2016 , OECD Publishing, Paris ,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264250000-en.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD (2016c), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Luxembourg 2016 , OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264232297-en.
OECD (2015), Frascati Manual: Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Res earch and
Experimental Development, Paris, OECD Publishing, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264239012-en.
OECD (2014a), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: France 2014 , OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264214026-en.
OECD (2014b), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Netherlands 2014 , OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264213159-en.
OECD (2011), Public Research Institutions: Mapping Sector Trends , OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264119505-en.
Park, W.G. (2008), “International patent protection: 1960-2005”, Research Policy, Vol. 37, pp. 761-766.
Scottish Government Consultation Hub (2017), website, https://consult.scotland.gov.uk/ (accessed 7 May
2017).
SoSP (2016), About the Interagency Working Group on Science of Science Policy , website,
http://www.scienceofsciencepolicy.net/page/about-interagency-working-group-science-science-
policy-sosp-iwg (accessed 27 October 2016).
Stampfer (2017), “Performance Agreements in Austria: A Case Of Simultaneous Under - And Over -
Steering”, in Austrian Council for Research and Technology Development (ed.), Prospects and Future
Tasks of Universities, pp. 161-173, Lit Verlag, Zürich.
The Norwegian Mission to the EU (2016), Norway’s participation in EU programmes and agencies,
website www.eu-norway.org/eu/Coopperation-in-programmes-and-agencies/#.WCxKrMlUsXh
(accessed 16 November 2016).
University of Vienna (2015), Performance agreement of the University of Vienna (Leistungsvereinbarung
2016–2018), website (German), https://www.univie.ac.at/mtbl02/02_pdf/20151222.pdf (accessed 22
November 2016).
World Bank (2018), Doing Business 2018: Reforming to Create Jobs, World Bank Group, Washington.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 47

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

ANNEX: METHODOLOGY
A.1. Ontology development and policy mapping across OECD countries
A.1.1. Ontology development
The mapping of the governance of public research presented in this paper is based on the
development of an ontology of the governance of public research . The set of indicator
questions included in the ontology were evaluated on the basis of complying with the
following 4 criteria, which was adapted from the comparable policy analysis of Alemani,
E., et al. (2013):
1. Analytical soundness/coverage: Clearly de fined and understandable questions that
characterise core dimensions of the governance of public research
2. Coverage: Questions allowing for cross -country responses, excluding questions on
rarely used policy approaches adopted by few countries only
3. Measurability: Objective and fact-based questions for clearly specified time periods,
excluding questions on respondents’ perceptions
4. Explanatory value: Questions capture key features of country policy approaches at
sufficient level of granularity to describe different policy practice where they exist
The ontology was developed based on an in -depth review of the relevant literature on the
governance of public research, resulting in the selection of 3 policy dimensions: i)
institutions in charge of priority setting, budget allocation and evaluation (e.g. Breznitz,
2007; Fuchs, 2010; Borrás and Edquist 2013), ii) policy co -ordination mechanisms (e.g.
Borras and Edler, 2014) and iii) external stakeholder involvement and university autonomy
(e.g. Aghion et al., 2010).
An intensive consultation and testing process was used to obtain the final ontology to
ensure all indicator questions complied with the 4 criteria. A draft ontology was validated
by country delegates and experts of the OECD Technology and Innovation Policy (TIP)
Working Party, resulting also in the development of a common taxonomy for analyt ical
soundness/coverage (see A.3).
On the basis of comments received, a revised questionnaire was used to gather information
for a selection of countries. The exercise allowed identifying questions that were in some
country contexts difficult to respond to, leading to a risk of subjective responses. Some
questions did not allow capturing cross-country differences.
A.1.2. Policy Mapping
Data on country policies was collected by means of an indicator questionnaire (presented
in section A.3 of this Annex). Data sources used for collecting the policy information
include the European Commission/OECD International Survey on Science, Technology
and Innovation Policies (and its predecessor, the OECD Policy Questionnaire on the STI
Outlook (OECD, 2016a) and the OECD Country Innovation Policy Reviews (OECD,
2014a; 2014b; 2016b; 2016c). Where additional information was needed, national
legislative texts (including labour laws, decrees and other legal documents), strategic policy
documents (such as strategic frameworks), statements of purpose and other such official
documents (such as statements on the status of councils, committees, etc.) were used.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The policy information was validated in extensive consultation with national delegates of
the OECD Committee of Science and Technology Policy (CSTP), delegates of the OECD
Technology and Innovation Policy (TIP) Working Party, and national authorities between
March 2017 and March 2018. Delegations from 29 OECD countr ies provided detailed
feedback: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Detailed feedback for Luxembourg was
provided by a country expert who participated in the OECD Innovation policy Review of
Luxembourg in 2016.
A.2. Questionnaire
A.2.1. Dimension 1: Institutions in charge of priority setting, budget allocation
and evaluation
Dimension 1 covers the institutions in charge of priority setting, budget allocation and
evaluation (vertical governance). Governance can be “top-down” where national ministries
and agencies target government -based research and firm subsidies, or take the form of
“bottom-up” decentralized arrangements that where agencies, councils, and associations of
universities and pub lic research institutions decide among themselves (Breznitz, 2007;
Fuchs, 2010). Funding arrangements also form part of vertical governance, i.e. performance
contracts that bind institutional funding to pre -defined goals with the ministry/agency in
charge.
Table A1. Questions on institutions in charge of priority setting, budget allocation and
evaluation
Institutions in charge of priority setting
Q.1.1. Who mainly decides
on the scientific, sectoral
and/or thematic priorities
of HEIs and PRIs?

* This is also the case
when there is no top-down
priority setting by
ministries or funding
agencies and HEIs, PRIs,
and research groups apply
for research and
innovation funding through
open calls (e.g.
Switzerland, Sweden).
National ministry
(e.g. Ministry of Education, Higher
Education and Research)
National agency
(e.g. Funding Agency for Innovation)
Research and Innovation
Council/Committee
Federal state and/or regional
ministry (e.g. Bavarian State Ministry
of Education and Cultural Affairs,
Research and Culture)
Federal state and/or regional
agencies(e.g. Research Foundation
Flanders FWO)
Institutions themselves*
(i.e. institutions decide on programme
priorities and the State transfers funds
directly to institutions.)
Not applicable
Source:
Check the relevant boxes [multiple responses not possible, check only
the main body]

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 49

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

a) Decisions on scientific,
sectoral and/or thematic
priorities of budget
allocations for HEIs

Please provide further
information if responses
differ for research and
innovation programmes.

a_1) Name of institution(s)
b) Decisions on scientific,
sectoral and/or thematic
priorities of budget
allocations for PRIs

b_1) Name of institution(s)
c) Which are the main
mechanisms in place to
decide on scientific,
sectoral and/or thematic
priorities of national
importance, e.g. digital
transition, sustainability?
Please describe who is
involved and who decides
on the priorities (e.g.,
government, research and
innovation councils,
sector-specific platforms
including industry and
science, etc.).

Scientific priorities refer to
scientific disciplines, e.g.
biotechnology;
Sectoral priorities refer to
industries, e.g.
pharmaceuticals;
Thematic priorities refer to
broader social themes,
e.g. digital transition,
sustainability, etc.

d) From 2005-17, were
any significant changes
introduced as to how
decisions on scientific,
sectoral and/or thematic
orientation of major
programmes are taken?
(e.g. establishment of
agencies that decide on
content of programmes)
Please indicate these reform(s) No changes
made
Source:

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Institutions in charge of budget allocation
Q.1.2. Who allocates
public funding to HEIs and
PRIs?

Allocations are direct
transfers to HEIs and PRIs
once the public budget has
been approved and
transferred to the
responsible ministries
and/or funding agencies.
National ministry
(e.g. Ministry of Education, Higher Education and
Research)
National agency
(e.g. Funding Agency for Innovation)
Research and Innovation Council/Committee
Federal state and/or regional ministries
(e.g. Bavarian State Ministry of Education and Cultural
Affairs, Research and Culture)
Federal state and/or regional agencies
(e.g. Research Foundation Flanders FWO)
Institutions themselves
(i.e. State transfers budget directly to institutions and they
are responsible for programme development and budget
allocations)
Not applicable
Source:
Check the relevant boxes [multiple responses not possible, check only
the main body]
a) Institutional block
funding for HEIs

Institutional block funds (or
to general university
funds) support institutions
and are usually transferred
directly from the
government budget.

a_1) Name of institution(s)
b) Institutional block
funding for PRIs

b_1) Name of institution(s

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 51

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

c) Project-based funding
of research and/or
innovation for HEIs and
PRIs

Project-based funding
provides support for
research and innovation
activities on the basis of
competitive bids.
Funding for research
supports research
personnel, basic and
applied research
activities, research
infrastructure and/or
equipment.
Funding for innovation
supports technology
development, research
commercialisation,
technology transfer,
research
commercialisation, and/or
joint R&D between PRIs
and industry.

c_1) Name of
institution(s)

d) Is there a transnational
body that provides
funding to HEIs and PRIs
(e.g. the European
Research Council)?
Yes No Source:

d_1) Name of
transnational body that
provides funding to HEIs
and PRIs

e) What is the importance
of such funding relative to
national funding support?
(Share of public R&D
funding)

f) From 2005-17, were
any changes made to
way programmes are
developed and funding is
allocated to HEIs and
PRIs?
(e.g. merger of agencies,
devolution of programme
management from
ministries to agencies)
Please indicate which reform(s) No changes
made
Source:

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Q.1.3. Do performance
contracts determine
funding of HEIs*?

* In case performance
contracts are in place that
bind funding of PRIs,
please provide information
about them.

Institutional block funds
can be partly or wholly
distributed based on
performance.
Performance contracts
define goals agreed
between ministry/agency
and HEIs/PRIs and link it
to future block funding of
HEIs and PRIs.
Yes No Source:
a) Institutional block
funding of HEIs?

b) Share of HEI budget
subject to performance
contract
Please indicate percentage No
performance
contracts exist
Source:

c) Do performance
contracts include
quantitative indicators for
monitoring and
evaluation?
Yes No No
performance
contracts exist
Source:

d) Which, if any,
performance aside from
research and education is
set out in performance
contracts?
Innovation-
related
Socio-economic
challenges
Local economy
support
No
performance
contracts exist
Source:

d_1) Please specify which
performance indicators…

e) Do HEIs participate in
the formulation of main
priorities and criteria used
in performance contracts?
Yes No No
performance
contracts exist
Source:

f) Do the same priorities
and criteria set in
performance contracts
apply to all HEIs?
All HEIs Individual HEIs No
performance
contracts exist
Source:

g) Are any other
mechanisms in place to
allocate funding to HEIs
and PRIs? Please
specify…

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 53

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

h) From 2005-17, were
any changes made to
funding of HEIs and PRIs?
Please indicate which reform(s) No changes
made
Source:

Institutions in charge of evaluation
Q.1.4. Who decides on the
following key evaluation
criteria of HEIs and PRIs?
National ministry
(e.g. Ministry of Education, Higher
Education and Research)
National agency
(e.g. Funding Agency for Innovation)
Research and Innovation
Council/Committee
Federal state and/or regional
ministries
Federal states and/or regional
agencies
(e.g. Research Foundation Flanders
FWO)
Institutions themselves
Others
(e.g. external consultancy firms)
Not applicable
Source:
Check (X) the relevant boxes [multiple responses not possible,
check only the main body]

a) Setting criteria to use
when evaluating
performance of HEIs

a_1) Name of institution(s)
b) Evaluating HEIs’
performance

b_1) Name of institution(s)
c) Monitoring HEIs’
performance

c_1) Name of institution(s)
d) Setting criteria to use
when evaluating
performance of PRIs

d_1) Name of institution(s)
e) Evaluating PRIs’
performance

e_1) Name of institution(s)
f) Monitoring PRIs’
performance

f_1) Name of institution(s)
g) From 2005-17, was any
institution created for
evaluating HEIs and PRIs
or were any changes made
to criteria applied for
evaluations of HEIs and
PRIs?
Please indicate which institutions or reform(s) No changes made Source
for
answer:

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Q.1.5. Which recent
reforms to vertical
governance structures of
HEIs and PRIs were
particularly important?

Comments:
a) In case of multiple levels being responsible for the above listed policy-making decisions, indicate which
institutions have higher responsibilities than others, e.g., final decision making power or veto power?
b) Please indicate if any of the answers a bove are difficult to provide and, if so, why (e.g. because governance is
shared by several institutions).
c) Please indicate if different Federal States/regions within a country have their own vertical governance
arrangements and how these differ.
A.2.2. Dimension 2: Co-ordination of policy
Dimension 2 describes policy co-ordination (or “whole-of-government” approaches i.e. a
variety of institutional arrangements that ensure that different actors involved in research
policy are co -ordinated. Research and innovation councils/committees may mediate
between different ministries and agencies, provide policy advice, set policy priorities
and/or oversee policy evaluation. National research and innovation strategies or plans may
also serve policy co -ordination. At the operational level, programmes that are jointly
managed by various agencies may foster coordination between agencies. Agencies
themselves may also take on a coordinating role in the system.
Table A2. Questions on co-ordination of policy
Research and Innovation Councils
Q.2.1. Research and Innovation
Councils/Committees
Yes No Source:
a) Is there a Research and
Innovation Council, i.e. non-
temporary public body that takes
decisions concerning HEI and
PRI policy, and that has explicit
mandates by law or in its statutes
to either
 provide policy advice (i.e.
produce reports);
 and/or oversee policy
evaluation;
 and/or coordinate policy areas
relevant to public research
(e.g. across ministries and
agencies);
 and/or set policy priorities (i.e.
strategy development, policy
guidelines);
 and/or joint policy planning
(e.g. joint cross-ministry
preparation of budgetary
allocations)?

b) What is the name of the main
research and/or innovation
Council/Committee?
Name of institution(s) No such
body/bodies
exist(s)

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 55

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

c) Are there any other research
Councils/Committees?

Q.2.2. With reference to Q.2.1.b.,
does the Council’s mandate
explicitly include…
Yes No No such
body/bodies
exist(s)
Source:
Please check (X) the relevant
boxes
a) Policy coordination
(e.g. coordinating inter-
governmental activities and policy
domains)

b) Preparation of strategic
priorities

c) Decision-making on budgetary
allocations

d) Evaluation of policies’
implementation (including their
enforcement)

e) Provision of policy advice
Q.2.3. With reference to Q.2.1.b.,
who formally participates in the
Council?
Yes No No such
body/bodies
exist(s)
Source:
Please check (X) the relevant
boxes
a) Head of State
b) Ministers
c) Government officials
(civil servants and other
representatives of ministries,
agencies and implementing
bodies)

d) Funding agency
representatives

e) Local and regional government
representatives

f) HEI representatives
g) PRI representatives
h) Private sector
i) Civil society
j) Foreign experts
Q.2.4. With reference to Q.2.1.b.,
does the Council have …
Yes No No such
body/bodies
exist(s)
Source:
a) Its own staff?
a_1) If so, please indicate number
of staff…
b) Its own budget?
b_1) If so, please indicate amount
of annual budget available…

c) From 2005-17, were any
changes made to the mandate of
the Council, its functions, the
composition of the Council, the
budget and/or the Council’s
secretariat? Was the Council
created during the time period?
Please indicate which
reform(s)
No changes to Council
made
Source:

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

STI Strategy or Plan
Q.2.5. National STI strategies. Yes No Source
:
a) Is there a national non-sectoral STI
strategy or plan?

b) What is the name of the main national
STI strategy or plan?
Name of STI strategy No such strategy exists

Q.2.6. Does the national STI strategy or
plan address any of the following priorities?
Specify if another more dedicated strategy
(e.g. a specific plan) covers these topics?
Please refer to the main STI strategy. If
additional strategies address the following
issues, please provide further information
on them.
Please check (X) the
relevant boxes
There is no such strategic
framework
Source
:
a) Specific themes and/or societal
challenges
(e.g. Industry 4.0; “green innovation”;
health; environment; demographic change
and wellbeing; efficient energy; climate
action)

a_1) Which of the
following themes
and/or societal
challenges are
addressed?
Demographic change
(i.e. ageing populations, etc.)
Digital economy
(e.g. big data, digitalisation,
industry 4.0)
Green economy
(e.g. natural resources,
energy, environment, climate
change)
Health
(e.g. Bioeconomy, life
science)
Mobility
(e.g. transport, smart
integrated transport systems,
e-mobility)
Smart cities
(e.g. sustainable urban
systems urban development)
No such strategy exists
Source
:
Please check (X) the relevant boxes

a_2) Please specify which priorities …
b) Specific scientific research, technologies
and economic fields
(e.g. ICT; nanotechnologies; biotechnology)

b_1) Which of the
following scientific
research,
technologies and
economic fields are
addressed?
Agriculture and
agricultural technologies
Energy and energy
technologies
(e.g. energy storage,
environmental technologies)
Health and life sciences
(e.g. biotechnology, medical
technologies)
ICT
(e.g. big data, digital
platforms, data privacy)

Nanotechnology and
advanced manufacturing
(e.g. robotics, autonomous
systems)
No such strategy exists
Source
:
Please check (X) the relevant boxes

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 57

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

b_2) Please specify which priorities …
c) Specific Federal States/regions
(e.g. smart specialisation strategies)

c_1) Please specify which priorities…
d) Supranational or transnational objectives
set by transnational institutions
(for instance related to European Horizon
2020)

d_1) Please specify which priorities …
e) Quantitative targets for monitoring and
evaluation
(e.g. setting as targets a certain level of
R&D spending for public research etc.)

f) From 2005-17, was any STI strategy
introduced or were any changes made
existing STI strategies?
Please indicate which
reform(s)
No changes to strategic
frameworks
Source
:

Q.2.7. What reforms to policy co-ordination
regarding STI strategies and plans have
had particular impact on public research
policy?

Inter-agency programming and role of agencies and ministries
Q.2.8. Does inter-agency joint programming
contribute to the co-ordination of HEI and
PRI policy?

Inter-agency joint programming refers to
formal arrangements that result in joint
action by implementing agencies, such as
e.g. sectoral funding programmes or other
joint policy instrument initiatives between
funding agencies

Yes No Source:

Q.2.9.a) Is co-ordination within the mandate
of agencies? What tasks are performed that
help co-ordination? Please specify.

b) From 2005-17, were any changes made
to the mandates of agencies tasked with
regards to inter-agency programming?
Were new agencies created with the task to
coordinate programming during the time
period?

Please indicate
reform(s)
No changes made Source:

Q.2.10. What reforms of the institutional
context have had impacts on public
research policy?

Comments:
a) In the event of differences in the way the above listed co-ordination activities target public/private HEIs and
PRIs, please indicate these differences.
b) Please indicate if any of the above answers are difficult to provide and, if so, why.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

A.2.3. Dimension 3: Stakeholders consultation and institutional autonomy
Dimension 3 refers to external stakeholders – HEIs/PRIs themselves, the private sector,
NGOs and citizens – can be involved to varying degree in governance, namely through
their participation as formal members in research and innovation councils as well as in
councils or governing boards of HEIs. Public consultation exercises (e.g. online
consultation platforms) are a means to involve diverse stakeholders, including civil society.
Autonomy of HEIs and PRIs refers to their operating freedom with regard to internal
allocation of funding, human resources policies (including recruitment of academic staff,
salaries, reassignments and promotions), and industry relations (including the creation of
legal entities and industry partnerships and revenue sharing of IP transactions).
Table A3. Questions on stakeholder consultation
Participation in councils and university boards
Q.3.1. Do
stakeholders
participate as formal
members in the
following key
consultation
processes?
Private
sector

Civil society
(citizens/
NGOs/
foundations)
HEIs / PRIs
and/or their
associations
Foreign
experts
No formal
consultation
Source:
a) Research and
Innovation Councils:

(i.e. Formal
membership as
provided by statutes of
Council)

a_1) Please specify
the type of stakeholder
e.g. for private sector
the name and whether
it is a large enterprise,
small and medium
enterprise, industry
association or other…

b) Council/governing
boards of HEIs

(i.e. Formal
membership of
external stakeholders
as provided by
statutes of HEIs)

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 59

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

b_1) Please specify
the type of stakeholder
e.g. for private sector
the name and whether
it is a large enterprise,
small and medium
enterprise, industry
association or other…

Online public consultations and temporary stakeholder consultation processes
Q.3.2.a) Are there online consultation
platforms in place to request inputs
regarding HEI and PRI policy?
Yes No Not applicable Source:

b) Which aspects do these online
platforms address?
Please provide examples, e.g. open
data, open science.

c) From 2005-17, were any reforms
made to widen inclusion of
stakeholders and/or to improve
consultations, including online
platforms?
Please indicate which
reform(s)
No changes made Source:

Q.3.3. Which reforms to consultation
processes have proven particularly
important?

Comments: Indicate if any of the answers above is difficult to provide and, if so, why this is the case.
Table A4. Questions on institutional autonomy
Budget autonomy

National level
(e.g. Ministry of National Education,
Higher Education and Research;
Funding Agency for Innovation)
Federal states and/or regional level
(e.g. Bavarian State Ministry of
Education and Cultural Affairs,
Research and Culture)
Institutions themselves
(e.g. governing body/council of
HEIs/PRIs)
Others
(e.g. departments within HEIs)
Not applicable
Source:
Q.3.4.a) Who decides about
allocations of institutional block
funding for teaching, research and
innovation activities in HEIs?

National/regional level: If HEIs face
national constraints on using block
funds, i.e. funds cannot be moved
between categories such as
teaching, research, infrastructure,
operational costs, etc. This option

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

also applies if the ministry pre-
allocates budgets for universities to
cost items, and HEIs are unable to
distribute their funds between
these.

Institutions themselves: If HEIs are
entirely free to use their block
grants.
b) Who decides about allocations
of institutional block funding for
teaching, research and innovation
activities in PRIs?

Human resources and autonomy
Q.3.5.a) Who decides about
recruitment of academic staff in
HEIs?

National/regional level: If
recruitment needs to be confirmed
by an external national/regional
authority; if the number of posts is
regulated by an external authority;
or if candidates require prior
accreditation. This option also
applies if there are
national/regional laws or guidelines
regarding the selection procedure
or basic qualifications for senior
academic staff.

Institutions themselves: If HEIs are
free to hire academic staff. This
option also applies to cases where
laws or guidelines require the
institutions to publish open
positions or the composition of the
selection committees which are not
a constraint on the hiring decision
itself.

b) Who decides about recruitment
of academic staff in PRIs?

c) Who decides about salaries of
academic staff in HEIs?

National/regional level: If salary
bands are negotiated with other
parties, if national civil servant or
public sector status/law applies; or
if external authority sets salary
bands.

Institutions themselves: If HEIs are
free to set salaries, except
minimum wage.

d) Who decides about salaries of
academic staff in PRIs?

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 61

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

e) Who decides about
reassignments and promotions of
academic staff in HEIs?

National/regional level: If
promotions are only possible in
case of an open post at a higher
level; if a promotion committee
whose composition is regulated by
law has to approve the promotion;
if there are requirements on
minimum years of service in
academia; if automatic promotions
apply after certain years in office,
or if there are promotion quotas.

Institutions themselves: If HEIs can
promote and reassign staff freely.

f) Who decides about
reassignments and promotions of
academic staff in PRIs?

Industry relations and autonomy
Q.3.6.a) Who decides about the
creation of academic departments
(such as research centres in
specific fields) and functional units
(e.g. technology transfer offices) in
HEIs?

National/regional level: If there are
national guidelines or laws on the
competencies, names, or
governing bodies of internal
structures, such as departments or
if prior accreditation is required for
the opening, closure, restructuring
of departments, faculties,
technology offices, etc.

Institutions themselves: If HEIs are
free to determine internal
structures, including the opening,
closure, restructuring of
departments, faculties, technology
offices, etc.

b) Who decides about the creation
of academic departments (such as
research centres in specific fields)
and functional units (e.g.
technology transfer offices) in
PRIs?

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

c) Who decides about the creation
of legal entities and industry
partnerships in HEIs?

National/regional level: If there are
restrictions on legal entities,
including opening, closure, and
restructuring thereof; if restrictions
apply on profit and scope of activity
of non-profit organisations, for-
profit spin-offs, joint R&D, etc.

Institutions themselves: If HEIs are
free to create non-profit
organisations, for-profit spin-offs,
joint R&D, etc.

d) Who decides about the creation
of legal entities and industry
partnerships in PRIs?

Q.3.7.a) Who earns what share of
revenues stemming from IP
(patents, trademarks, design rights,
etc.) created from publicly funded
research in HEIs?
Please indicate the
relative percentage
(confirm that the
percentages add up to
100%)
HEIs set their own schemes Source:
HEI
Research unit / laboratory within
HEI

Researchers
Other
b) Who earns what share of
revenues stemming from IP
(patents, trademarks, design rights,
etc.) created from publicly funded
research in PRIs?
Please indicate the
relative percentage
(confirm that the
percentages add up to
100%)
PRIs set schemes themselves Source:
PRI
 Research unit / laboratory within
PRI

Researchers
Other
c) From 2005-17, were any
reforms introduced that affected
the institutional autonomy of HEIs
and PRIs?
Please indicate which
reform(s)
No changes made Source:

Q.3.8. Which reforms to
institutional autonomy have been
important to enhance the impacts
of public research?

Comments: Indicate if any of the answers above are difficult to provide and, if so, why. Please describe how much
scope HEIs/PRIs themselves have with regard to defining these conditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE │ 63

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

A.3. Taxonomy
Budget allocations are direct transfers to HEIs and PRIs once the public budget has been
approved and transferred to the responsible ministries and/or funding agencies.
Funding instruments are specific mechanisms to allocate public research funding to
performers or groups of performers. The identification of funding instruments is principally
based on the following criteria: Their visibility as a unique funding instrument for research,
like a clearly distinguishable programme managed by a research funding organisation; the
internal consistency in terms of the allocation mechanism and criteria, as well as concerning
the allocation mode (see project-based or institutional funding).
Higher education institutions (HEIs) are organisations whose main mission is to offer
education at the tertiary level (ISCED levels 5 to 8), as well as to perform R&D. HEIs are
generally funded through a core State attribution – institutional funding that covers
generally jointly funding for education and research. Recently, higher education
institutions have been adding commercialisation and support of socio -economic
development (e.g. innovation) as a third mission.
Institutional autonomy refers to the capability for institutions to take independent action,
in other words being self-governed.
Institutional funding means funding attributed to HEIs or PRIs for their running activities
and, usually, for an unlimited period (the yearly amount might vary). Institutional funding
is usually not earmarked to specific activities and to organisational subunits, but the internal
allocation is left to the performing institution (e.g., block grant to public higher education
institutions). These funding streams may also be performance based but not competitive.
Inter-agency joint programming refers to formal arrangements that result in joint action
by implementing agencies, such as e.g. sectoral funding programmes or other joint policy
instrument initiatives between funding agencies.
Performance contracts define goals agreed between ministry/agency and HEIs/PRIs and
link it to the institutional funding of HEIs and PRIs.
Public research institutions (PRIs) are public-sector organisations which perform R&D
activities as one of their core missions. PRIs can be broadly characterized in five types:
 Associations of public research organizations (“Umbrella public research
organizations”, UPROs, e.g., Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique CNRS
in France, Fraunhofer -Gesellschaft and Max -Planck Gesellschaft in Germany,
National Institutes of Health in the U.S.) are national -level organisations with the
mission of organising research activities in a specific domain. They mostly host
research laboratories distributed over the whole national territory and they are
delegated by the State to manage a specific field of national research policy. UPROs
in many cases have a dual function, i.e. to directly manage laboratories and
scientists’ careers on the one hand, and to provide competitive projects funds on
the other hand.
 Traditional mission-oriented centres (MOCs) that are government owned and in
some cases run by government departments or ministries at the national and sub -
national levels. Their role is to undertake research in specific topics or sectors in
order to provide knowledge and technological capabilities to support policy -
making.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64 │ HOW IS RESEARCH POLICY ACROSS THE OECD ORGANISED? INSIGHTS FROM A NEW POLICY DATABASE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Public research centres and councils (PRCs) perform (and in some cases fund)
basic and applied research in several fields. These overarching institutions tend to
be of considerable size in several countries representing a significant share of the
national R&D capabilities.
 Research technology organisations (RTOs), also known as industrial research
institutes, are mainly dedicated to the development and transfer of science and
technology to the private sector and society. Although some of them are owned by
government, in general, the administrative links of RTOs with governments tend to
be looser than those of the other types of PRIs. RTOs often operate in the semi -
public sphere and in the non-profit sector or even in the business enterprise sector
(NACE 72) according to the Frascati manual (OECD, 2015).
 Independent research institutes (IRIs) perform basic and applied research focused
on specific “issues” or “problems” (e.g. societal challenges such as mobility) rather
than just fields. In many cases IRIs may be term ed as “semi -public” as they are
founded under different legal forms and work at the boundaries between public and
private, but develop their activities with substantial public support and/or
participation of public representatives in their governance.
Public institution: an institution is classified as public if it is controlled and managed
directly by a public education authority or agency, or is controlled and managed either by
a government agency directly or by a governing body (Council, Committee etc.), most of
whose members are appointed by a public authority or elected by public franchise.
Private institution: an institution is classified as private if it is controlled and managed by
a non-governmental organisation (e.g. a Church, Trade Union or busine ss enterprise), or
with a Governing Board consisting mostly of members not selected by a public agency.
Project-based funding are funds that are attributed to a group or an individual to perform
a research activity limited in scope, budget and time. Project-based funding can be
distinguished from institutional funding based on three main characteristics: a) funds are
attributed directly to research groups and not to a whole organisation; b) funds are limited
in the scope of the research supported and its du ration; and c) funds are attributed by a
research funding organisation outside the performing organisation to which the beneficiary
belongs. Funding for research supports research personnel, basic and applied research
activities, research infrastructure an d/or equipment. Funding for innovation supports
technology development, technology transfer, research commercialisation, and/or joint
R&D between PRIs and industry.
Research and innovation council/committee is any non-temporary public body that takes
decisions concerning HEI and PRI policy, and that has explicit mandates by law or in its
statutes to either provide policy advice (i.e. produce reports); oversee policy evaluation;
coordinate policy areas relevant to public research (e.g. across ministries and agencies); set
policy priorities (i.e. strategy development, policy guidelines); and/or joint policy planning
(e.g. joint cross-ministry preparation of budgetary allocations).
