REFERENCE
FRAMEWORK FOR
ASSESSING THE
SCIENTIFIC AND
SOCIO-ECONOMIC
IMPACT OF RESEARCH
INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
March 2019  No. 65

2 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
REFERENCE FRAMEWORK FOR ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND
SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

STI POLICY PAPER

This paper was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee for
Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP)  on 21 March 2019 and prepared for
publication by the OECD Secretariat.
Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on OLIS under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2019)1/FINAL
This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to
the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers
and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant
Israeli authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of
the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms
of international law.

© OECD 2019

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs,
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright
owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to
rights@oecd.org.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 3

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
1.  Foreword
This report follows and complements recent work by the OECD Global Science Forum on  “The Impacts
of Large Research Infrastructures on Economic Innovation and on Society” (2014), a case study of the
European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN), and on “ Strengthening the Effectiveness and
Sustainability of International Research Infrastructures ” (20 17). Th e latter publication  addressed the
challenges faced by research infrastructure funders, managers and operators throughout the different
phases of the research infrastructure life-cycle.
Research Infrastructures (RIs) represent an increasingly large share of research investment. Policy makers,
funding agencies and RI management are increasingly expected to develop and adopt systematic and
transparent procedures for making key decisions about implementing new projects or investing in existing
ones.
This report proposes a “Framework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic impact of Research
Infrastructures”. It aims to provide funders, decision-makers and RI managers with a generic and versatile
tool, based on current community practices, to evaluate the achievement of scientific and socio-economic
objectives in a realistic way.  This tool should facilitate the communication and reporting between different
RI stakeholders.
The framework includes a list of Core Impact Indicators (CIIs), which can be used for most RIs whatever
their type, discipline or life cycle phase, and which were identified through an in-depth survey of existing
practices among RI managements and RI stakeholders (local and national authorities, funders, RI hosts).
The CIIs are complemented by a more detailed list of standard indicators which can supplement these CIIs
as needed.  Information on how to use the framework is provided at the end of this report.
This report was co -written by the GSF Expert Group chair Vincent Mangematin, GSF consultants
Frédéric Bally and Jean Moulin and the GSF secretariat (Frédéric Sgard), with extensive input from Expert
Group members.
We hope that this report will be informative and useful and we would be interested in receiving comments
from readers. The Global Science Forum staff can be contacted at gsforum@oecd.org.

4 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Table of contents
1. Foreword ............................................................................................................................................ 3
2. Glossary .............................................................................................................................................. 5
3. Abstract .............................................................................................................................................. 7
4. Executive Summary .......................................................................................................................... 8
5. Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 10
5.1. Background and Aims................................................................................................................. 10
5.2. Challenges for RI impact assessment.......................................................................................... 10
5.3. The Impact Assessment Model ................................................................................................... 12
5.4. Methodology ............................................................................................................................... 14
6. The Reference Framework ............................................................................................................. 17
6.1. Core Impact Indicators ................................................................................................................ 17
6.2. Comprehensive List of Indicators ............................................................................................... 22
6.3. Using the framework................................................................................................................... 27
7. Conclusions ...................................................................................................................................... 35
8. References ........................................................................................................................................ 38
9. Appendices ....................................................................................................................................... 42
9.1. Appendix 1. Expert Group Members .......................................................................................... 42
9.2. Appendix 2. Research infrastructures surveyed .......................................................................... 44
9.3. Appendix 3. Core Impact Indicators and their relevance according to RIs’ lifecycle and types 46
9.4. Appendix 4. Indicators sorted by strategic objectives ................................................................ 49

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 5

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
2.  Glossary
Key terms as they are used in this document are defined below.
Continental: Refers to one of the large “world regions” (e.g. Europe, North America,
Eastern Asia, etc.).
Core Impact Indicators (CIIs): Limited group of impact indicators that provide a general
picture of the socio -economic impact of a RI. They are often more generic than other
indicators as they need to be more versatile. CIIs can be used by most RIs, whatever their
structure, role and scientific domain. They can be integrated into Key Performan ce
Indictors (KPIs) to better manage RI activities and to include impact assessment in regular
management and decision-making processes.
Economic impact : The economic impact refers to the direct and indirect economic
activities and returns created by the RI or its presence at a defined scale.
Lifecycle phases: The different phases of a RI’s lifecycle, i.e. preparatory, construction,
operation, upgrade and decommission.
Impact: Intended and unintended effects of the RIs’ activities and outputs over its lifecycle.
Impact pathway : An impact pathway is a mechanism by which causal links between
inputs, activities, outputs and outcomes, and their intended impacts can be mapped.
Indicator: Quantity or value of a RIs’ activities and outputs, which provides an indication
of its impact. Indicators are a way to measure if the intended outcomes have been
realised/achieved. An indicator relies on being able to collect adequate data to be
meaningful.
Input: These are the resources mobilised by the RI to perform its activities relatives to an
objective. Resources may come from multiple sources and include in-kind support.
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs): KPIs are project-management tools used to monitor
the performance of an RI, vis-à-vis its objectives and the efficient use of resources. They
may include a diversity of indicators including many that are not directly linked to impact
(for example on how the budget is respected, on safety records, etc.).
Local: Immediate geographical area around an RI, i.e. an administrative region.
Mission of an RI : The mission defines the purposes and activities of an RI, the services
and products delivered and which communities of users are served. The mission is normally
described in the statutes of an organization and provides the framework or context within
which the RI’s strategy and strategic objectives are formulated.
Output: RI’s products attributable to an activity. In this document, outputs are considered
as deliverables that help fulfil strategic objectives.
Qualitative indicator : People’s perceptions and judgements on a selected topic.
Qualitative indicators are non-numerical and are assessed through case studies, surveys and
in-depth interviews.
Quantitative indicator: Measure of quantities or amount based on objective and available
data. Quantitative indicators can be a number, an index, a ratio or a percentage.

6 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Regional: Refers to one or several administrative/geographical subnational entities within
the territory of a country or partly covering several neighbouring countries.
Research Infrastructure (RI): An organisational structure dedicated to facilitate or
conduct research, provide scientific equipment, data or services for use in basic or applied
research.
Scoreboard: Graphical representation of the progress  over time of the RI  toward a
specified goal. Scoreboards can be used to track performance indicators and are designed
to provide a framework to manage resources.
Social and societal impact: The effect of the RI’s activity respectively, on the social fabric
and well-being of communities, individuals and families, and on society as a whole.
Strategic objective of a RI: The strategic objectives are what a RI aims to achieve in the
medium or long-term future. Strategic objectives guide current and future courses of action.
Structuring effects : The effects of the RIs’ activity on networking, collaborations,
community building, etc.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 7

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
3.  Abstract
Research Infrastructures ( RIs) are indispensable for enabling and developing research in
almost all scientific domains  and represent an increasingly large s hare of research
investment. As policy makers, funding agencies and RI management are increasingly
expected to justify key decisions about implementing new projects or investing in existing
ones, there is a demand for credible methodologies for assessing the overall impact of RIs.
This report proposes a “Framework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic impact
of research infrastructures”. It aims to provide funders, decision-makers and RI managers
with a generic and versatile tool, based on current community practice s, to evaluat e the
achievement of scientific and socio-economic objectives in a realistic way. The framework
can be adapted for different types of RIs and different stages in the RI lifecycle. This tool
should facilitate the communication and reporting between different RI stakeholders.
Keywords: research infrastruc tures, scientific impact, socio -economic impact, impact
assessment.

8 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
4.  Executive Summary
Research Infrastructures (RIs) are organisational structures dedicated to facilitating or conducting
research, providing scientific equipment, data or services for use in basic or applied research.
Although RIs are designed to support research needs, their impact goes beyond the production of
scientific results and knowledge. Th eir conception, construction and operation can involve and
require unique technological developments, data management systems and highly-skilled staff. RIs
offer opportunities for innovation and market development, can attract investments and contribute
broadly to socio -economic development. In some cases they can constitute a focal point for the
development of an innovation ecosystem.
Because RIs are largely funded by public resources, there is a logical demand for understanding
and evaluation of the return on investment of these facilities to support informed decision-making.
Furthermore, while impact assessment represents an investment in terms of financial cost and
human resources, it also provides RI management with useful information for negotiations w ith
funders. However, socio-economic impact is difficult to assess using conventional methodologies.
RIs are extremely diverse, and can have a very broad range of direct and indirect impacts, which
themselves will vary along the life cycle of the RIs.
This report proposes “A Reference Framework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic
impact of Research Infrastructures”, i.e . a tool to help RIs of different scale, types and at
different steps of their lifecycle, to assess the impact of their activities.
The focus of this framework is impact assessment and not performance evaluation . These terms
overlap but are distinct: performance relates to the efficient use of resources; impact relates to the
transformative effect of  an RI. The Reference Framework prioritis es impact assessment even
though performance and impact can be linked, and some of the impact indicators can be used by
RI management to evaluate performance  [i.e. and may even be considered as Key Performance
Indicators (KPI)].
A single framework cannot cover all types of impacts and include every existing indicator. The
proposed tool includes a subset of indicators based on community consultation. It is flexible and
should be adapted (and even expanded) to address the specific needs of a particular RI.
Two indicator categories are included in the framework:
 Core Impact Indicators (CIIs): this is a restricted list of indicators which can provide a
general picture of the socio-economic impact of an RI at a given time.
 A more complete list of standard indicators. These indicators are representative of what
is traditionally used by the RIs surveyed during this work and have been partially reworked
to be more standard and generic.
Each RI can define with its stakeholders the indicators which are most relevant for its particular
situation and specific missions.
A number of considerations have to be taken into account for an optimal use of this assessment
framework:
 The link between strategic objectives and indicators is one of the major c ontributions of
this work: The aim is it show how an RI achieves its goal through its whole set of activities.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 9

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
 Although this report provides a number of representative indicators commonly used by
RIs, none of these are mandatory. Each indicator should be carefully selected and adapted,
as necessary, to the RI objectives and context, and the framework itself can be adapted and
expanded as required.
 This framework is not designed for direct comparative assessment of different RIs. Even
similar types of RIs m ay have different strategic ob jectives and missions and
socio-economic impact is context-specific.
 Impacts often results from cumulative effects over time. As indicators usually only provide
snapshot information at a given time, a more precise impact asse ssment can be generated
by pooling data series, hence the need to use consistent indicators over time.
 Quantitative indicators, which constitute the majority of indicators included in this
framework, can only provide a partial view of impact. They should b e complemented
whenever possible with more qualitative indicators and narratives which can help illustrate
the diversity of impacts generated by each RI.
Based on the findings of this work, the following recommendations are proposed for various RI
stakeholders:
 RI communities are encouraged to adopt and refine this assessment framework as a basis
for impact assessment. They should seek consensus on the indicators which are most
relevant for their RIs (and co -design new indicators if required) and on the spe cific data
that could best inform each indicator.
 RI management should define early in the RI life -cycle, their impact assessment
framework and its future uses. Definition of data sources and collection processes is an
important aspect of this as consistent data series are important for accuracy.
 RI stakeholders are invited to work with RI managers to define their needs for specific
indicator data as well as the use in decision-making processes. Feasibility of data collection
is an important consideration d uring this ‘co -design’ process. Where necessary (e.g. for
small and medium -size RIs), funders should provide the necessary support for the data
collection required to conduct robust impact assessment exercises.

10 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
5.  Introduction
5.1. Background and Aims
Research Infrastructures (RIs) are long-term enterprises, often operating for several decades. They
represent strategic investments which are indispensable for enabling and developing research in
almost all scientific domains , and play a major role in innovation a nd science (Jacob and
Hallonsten, 2012; Hallonsten and Heinze, 2012; Hallonstein, 2014). RIs have a societal value and
their impacts are not limited to fostering scientific knowledge for the benefit of scientists; they also
impact their environment socially and economically.
RIs represent an increasingly large share of research investment, and policy makers, funding
agencies and RI management are increasingly looking for systematic and transparent procedures
for making key decisions about implementing new projects or investing in existing ones.
Furthermore, the willingness of the policy-makers and taxpayers to support RIs is partially based
on their expected societal value  (Florio and Sirtori, 2014). Hence, there is a demand for credible
methodologies for assessing the socio -economic impact of RIs  (Hallonsten and Christensson,
2017).
In 2014, the Global Science Forum (GSF) set up an Expert Group to examine potential priorities
for RI policy that should be addressed at the international (global) level. One of the top priorities
was the development of a framework for assessment of the impact of research infrastructures. To
explore this further, an international workshop was organised in 2015 in Paris. The scientific and
policy experts attending this workshop  underlined the need for a common approach to impact
assessment, with the understanding that evaluation of scientific, economic and social impact should
be addressed in a consistent way. A project to develop “A Reference Framework for assessing the
scientific and socio-economic impact of Research Infrastructures” was therefore initiated in 2016
and carried out by a group of international experts nominated by interested national delegations
(Appendix 1).
The objective of the Reference Framework presented in this report is to provide RI managers and
stakeholders with a versatile tool, based on current community practices, to help in the selection of
indicators and collection of data that is necessary to  evaluate the achievement of scientific and
socio-economic objectives in a realistic way. The framework can be adapted for different types of
RI (distributed, single -sited, virtual , etc. ) and different stages in the RI lifecycle (preparatory,
construction, operation, etc.). What this framework does not include, is specification of detailed
methodologies to analyse collected data, which was beyond the scope of the study.
5.2. Challenges for RI impact assessment
Each RI has its own objectives and performs specif ic activities. Their impact cannot always be
assessed solely in traditional ways – with an exclusive focus on scientific activities or financial
return on investment. A report from the Rathenau Institute’s (Horling et al., 2012) emphasised the
difficulty o f identifying adjunctive societal impact for big science facilities using traditional
methodologies such as cost-benefit analysis, which have been used on some large RIs (Bianchi-
Streit et al., 1984 ; Cost Office, 2010 ; Drèze and Stern, 1987; Gramlich, 1994 ; SWQ Consulting,
2007; Florio et al., 2016). Although large-scale RIs do show evidence of the creation of networks
and communities, social impact is difficult to quantify. Traditional impact assessment
methodologies often have a limited scope  and they require considerable expertise and resources.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 11

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Such assessments tend to involve a lot of ad hoc data collection. They are usually retrospective and
non-periodical (they are performed on request).
In Europe, the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI) is encouraging the
development of a related framework model that could provide comparisons between different types
of RIs ”while recognising the great diversity in scientific domains and characters, the wide range
of benefits they b estow on society, and different national environments” (ESFRI, 2017).  Whilst
such comparisons may be intuitively attractive, it was recognised by the expert group that, even in
the same field of science, creating a standard model allowing comparison betwee n RIs would be
extremely challenging. The Reference Framework proposed here is therefore not designed for
comparative assessment of different RIs.
To assess the impacts of RIs, indicators need to be determined that can be used as proxies for
various types of impact. Defining (and communicating) these indicators can be a way for different
stakeholders to build a common vision and objectives Indicators may then be used both for internal
management and for reporting to external stakeholders.
Table 1. Stakeholders’ interests in RI impact assessment
Interested stakeholders Main interest
National authorities  Justify large investment to finance ministry and to other
political authorities (parliament…). Demonstrate, maintain or
develop leadership and attractiveness at national/international
level. National authorities are usually interested in a limited
number of generic indicators which provide an overall picture
of the impact, in particular the “scientific and economic return
on public investment”.
Regional/local authorities Justify investment; increased attractiveness of the area;
benefit to local businesses and the development of
local/regional innovation ecosystems; raise attractiveness and
quality of local higher education institutions.
RI funders Value for money; maximise return on investment. Top priority
is usually the scientific and technological impact but funders
often require RIs to demonstrate additional benefits.
RI initiators (individuals and institutions at the origin of the RI) Ex ante  assessment to demonstrate potential impact for
funders, national authorities and local authorities and help
raise funding.
RI management Monitor impact on a regular basis to improve performance and
gather information to make the case to funders when upgrades
are required.
RI hosts Demonstrate the value of the RI in terms of scientific
attractiveness, training and education.
Scientific community Advocate for new ( ex ante  assessment) or updated RIs to
foster new scientific knowledge and developments.
Civil society/general public Value for money, new scientific knowledge, general benefit to
society (e.g. health, energy, environmental topics). On case by
case basis, impact on the environment and/or on local
populations.

12 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Assessing the impact of RIs is challenging for several reasons:
 RIs’ raison d’être is to  deliver quality services that facilitate cutting edge science to
the scientific community. Impact is difficult to fully evaluate as many outcomes are
indirect and not directly produced by the RI itself but rather by its users.
 RIs have multiple stakeholders with different strategic visions and objectives, and even
similar RIs may have different mission statements . There are also  different
expectations from different audiences (see Table 1).
 Research outcomes can be uncertain and non-linear. In addition scientific results may
be dependent on more than one RI. Therefore, it can be difficult to assess the specific
effects of the knowledge produced within a specific RI.
 Research is subject to time lags: there can be a long time between an experiment and
a discovery, and even a longer time between a discovery and its application in society.
This is especially true for curiosity-driven basic research.
 RIs’ socio-economic impact is both direct and indirect (via causal chains), can include
many different elements (capacity building, attractiveness for a local area , etc.) and
may be cumulative (impact may increase over time).
 RIs are extremely diverse and their impact may chang e during their lifecycle (see
appendix 3); this needs to be accounted for when deciding prospectively on indicators.
 Societal impacts may be very broad and may be difficult to capture.  There are also
societal impacts derived from scientific, technological  and economic outputs as well
as dedicated outreach and education activities.
The Reference Framework proposed in this report addresses these challenges, by providing
a consensus set of commonly used and reportedly useful indicators.
5.3. The Impact Assessment Model
The philosophy at the outset underpinning the development of the Reference Framework
is the following:
 While high quality scientific output remains the most important strategic goal of all
RIs, their socio -economic impact is broader. It includes c ultural, educational,
economic and social impact as well as structuring effects of the RI. The Reference
Framework addresses this broader scope.
 Potential users of the Reference Framework  are both RI management wishing to
monitor the impact of their facil ity and external stakeholders interested in evaluating
RI impact for a variety of objectives.
 Impact assessment must be connected to the strategic objectives and mission of each
RI.
 To be useful, indicators have to be easy to measure or easy to collect, u ser-friendly,
reliable and meaningful. Comparable data should ideally be collected over several
years in a consistent manner in order to compare progress over time.
 Economic impacts indicators are practical and selected from among commonly
recognised indicators (induced turnover, innovation, start -ups, direct and indirect
employment, etc.).

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 13

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
 Social/societal impact indicators are more difficult to design and to interpret and
require more in-depth validation or coupling with narratives.
Performance evaluation and impact assessment are not identical: Performance relates to
the efficient use of resources. Impact relates to the transformative effect of  an RI. The
Reference Framework prioritises impact assessment even though performance and impact
can be linked and some of the impact indicators can be used by RI management to evaluate
their RI’s performance.
A single framework cannot cover all types of impacts and include every existing indicator.
The proposed tool includes a  subset of indicators based on community consultation. It is
flexible and should be adapted (and even expanded) to address the specific needs of any
particular RI.
Indicators as proxies for impact
In the impact assessment framework, indicators are determined as a means to evaluate RI
impacts. Data to implement the indicators proposed in this framework may be drawn from
inputs, activities or outputs (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. The logic model – how to measure impacts

Source: Adapted from CSIRO (Barratt, Wang and Binney, 2016).
 Inputs: These are the resources mobilised by the RI to perform its activities. Resources
may come from multiple sources and in-kind support can be an important input.
 Activities: These are what RIs do. They are enabling science and technology, they may
have targeted economic and social activities and they also develop the skills and
competencies of human resources.
 Outputs: These are the results of RI activities: scientific, educational, collaborative and
economic.

14 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
 Impacts: Intended and unintended effects of the RIs’ activities and outputs  over its
lifecycle. Activities and outputs can lead to long terms impacts on different aspects of
society and the economy
5.4. Methodology
To identify relevant indicators, common practices and information on the evolution of
impact assessment methodologies, the expert group first conducted an extensive literature
review. This revealed that a large diversity of methodologies were being used, mostly on a
case by case basis, but did not provide consistent information on the rationale for the use
of the different indicators and methods. The expert group therefore carried out surveys to
obtain more detai led information on the current practices and stakeholder expectations.
Case studies were then conducted to validate the information obtained during the surveys
in different contexts.
Surveys
Two in-depth surveys [see https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-146803 and
https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-146804] were carried out using detailed
questionnaires followed by extensive interviews to gat her information on the impact
assessment practices of RIs. The first survey was conducted among RI managers and the
second among RI stakeholders (funders, governments, local authorities, RI host
institutions), selected for their represen tativeness. Managem ent from 21  RIs and
stakeholders from 13 of these RIs were included in this study. RIs included were of
different types (distributed, single-sited, virtual, etc.), at different stages of their lifecycle
(preparatory, construction, operation, etc.), and cov ering different scientific domains
(social science, natural science, physics , etc.), to ensure that the framework model would
be as generalizable as possible. The in-depth surveys were aimed at identifying indicators
and data that are routinely collected/planned, their periodicity and their use and purposes.
The perceived usefulness of each indicator and relevance to the various lifecycle phases of
an RI were also explored. The aim was to build a picture of existing RI practices in terms
of impact assessment and to identify potential gaps and needs. The RIs surveyed and the
summarised results of this study are detailed in Appendix 2.
The proposed Reference Framework includes the indicators which RIs used and have found
useful. The first version of the framework was submitted to an expert panel to get feedback
during a workshop which was organised in Paris on 19 -20 March 2018. This workshop
brought together  about 50  participants, RI managers, and other stakeholders including
government representatives from 15 countries and experts from various institutions, who,
in addition to their comments and feedback, presented their own assessment practices.
Case studies
Following the workshop, the updated version of the framework was then tested in a small
number of case studies . Four RIs were surveyed through a combination of face to face
interviews completion of a questionnaire [https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-146802]
and complementary documentation relevant to impact assessment for these RIs.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 15

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
The four test cases were:
 European Spallation Source (ESS) in Lund (Sweden)
 Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and Technology (CIRMMT)
at Mc Gill University in Montreal (Canada)
 Inter-university Microelectronics Centre (IMEC) in Leuven (Belgium)
 Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure (BBMRI) in Graz
(Austria).
These case studies were helpful for finalising the framework and some of the lessons
learned are presented in this document. Contributions from John Womersley ( ESS),
Isabelle Cossette (CIRMMT), Helga Deschrijver (IMEC) and Michaela Mayrhofer
(BBMRI) in particular are kindly acknowledged.
Categorisation of indicators
As a result of the literature analysis, survey results, workshop feedback and discussion with
experts, relevant indicators were organised according to two separate approaches:
 The first approach articulates indicators with strategic objectives, as identif ied by
stakeholders and managers during this study. Strategic objectives can contribute to
a common understanding between the RI and its various stakeholders. Strategic
objectives can directly influence how RIs impact society. They also often determine
the allocation of resources and priorities.
We chose to select six standard objectives that emerged from the consultations and to add
one on social responsibility .1 These cover all  the main dimensions of impact (science,
technology, economy, social, societal, education):
i. be a national or world leading scientific RI and an enabling facility to support
science
ii. be an enabling facility to support innovation
iii. become integrated in a regional cluster/in regional strategies/Be a hub to facilitate
regional collaborations
iv. promote education outreach and knowledge transfer
v. provide scientific support to public policies
vi. provide high quality scientific data and associated services
vii. assume social responsibility towards society.
Additional strategic objectives were also mentioned by a few respondents. These included
for example Promoting international relationships and global diplomacy through science
collaborations (“Science diplomacy”) but were not universal enough to be included in the
standard framework. The respondents to the questionnaire and interviewees also underlined
the importance of the structuring effects of their research infrastructure (increased
collaborations between institutions, creation of user communities across disciplines, etc.).
Considering the specific nature of this element, we did not include it as a strategic objective
nor an impact category in the framework model, but rather integrated it as a C ore Impact
Indicator in relation to the enabling role of RIs. However, RI management could select
structuring effects as a specific strategic objective if it is very important for them. Indeed,

16 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
this list can be adapted for each RI according to the vision and objectives. The seven
strategic objectives are not mutually exclusive and any single RI is likely to have more than
one although is unlikely to have all seven.
 The second approach list s indicators by main impact categories. This is a more
traditional way to articulate indicators, and was the initial approach that was used in
the surveys. Six commonl y used categories were employed: scientific impact;
technological impact; training and education; direct economic impact; indirect
economic impact and societal impact.
Most of the indicators identified are applicable to a large proportion of  RIs regardless of
their type (e-infrastructure, distributed RI, observational RI , etc.) or discipline. However,
adjustments may be necessary to adapt indicators to the lifecycle phase of an RI.2
Indicator relevance
The indicators described in the following chapter are not necessarily perfect proxies for the
impact to be analysed. For example, patent numbers only partially reflect technological
impact, and a better indicator might be the actual use of licences. Similarly, the number of
spin-off companies generated is not  a great indicator of economic impact (many new
companies will fail) and better indicators could be imagined that measure turnover.
However, one of the primary criteria which drove this project was feasibility of
implementation. The indicators proposed are those which are already in use by many RIs,
for which data are often collected or available, and which are, for better or worse,
recognised as useful by many of the RI stakeholders. This framework does not attempt to
propose an ideal list of impact indica tors, but rather selects a restricted list of already
existing indicators that can be effectively used.
Because the selection of indicators is based on established practices it is also important to
note that i mpact indicators should not be interpreted on the basis of single figures. It is
usually preferable to evaluate progress on the basis of trend data.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 17

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
6.  The Reference Framework
The impact assessment framework takes into account the main activities of RIs and
approaches the impact through proxies, which c an be inputs, outputs  or even activities
themselves (Figure 1). For example, the number of publications in high impact journals
may be a proxy for international scientific impact, the number of patents with commercial
use may be a proxy for the role of the RI in innovation, and the number of staff may be a
proxy for the impact on the local economy.
This framework includes two indicator categories:
 A list of 25 Core Impact Indicators  (CIIs): this is a restricted list of indicators
considered as representative and which can provide a general pic ture of the socio -
economic impact of an RI at a given time.
 A more complete list of 58 standard indicators (25 CIIs and 33 additional indicators).
These indicators are representative of what is traditionally used by the RIs that were
surveyed and have been partially reworked to be more standard and generic.
6.1. Core Impact Indicators
Core Impact Indicators (CIIs) are generic indicators that  can provide a general picture of
the impact at a given time and that can be used by most RIs whatever their type and
discipline. CIIs were ident ified and validated through our survey s, discussion with
stakeholders and literature.
Each RI can define with its stakeholders the CIIs which are the most relevant for its current
situation. The CIIs are complementary – and can be integrated into KPIs to better manage
RI activities and to include impact assessment in regular decision -making processes. CIIs
are relevant for assessing the development of an infrastructure over time and in relation to
strategic objectives.
The list of CIIs presented in Table 2 is organised in line with the seven common strategic
objectives described earlier (see 5.4). Each indicator is identified with a unique number and
a letter (referring to its field of impact), in order to be more easily traceable across each of
the various tables presented in this report ( Letter signification : S:  Scientific impact;
T: Technological i mpact; E:  Economic impact; H:  Training and education impact;
O: Social and societal impact). More  detailed information on each of  these indicators is
given in Table 4.

18 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Table 2. Core Impact Indicators, sorted by strategic objectives
Standard Objectives  Core Impact
Indicators
Data
Be a national or world scientific
leading RI and an enabling
facility to support science

S2-Number of
citations

Total number of citations received by
publications. May include: authors
from the RI or using the RI
S3-Number of
publications in high-
impact factor
journals
Number of publications from RI users
published within Q1 journals3
S4-Number of
projects granted
Number of projects funded by
external grants (may be divided into
user or discipline categories)
S6-Number of
scientific users
Number of users, Discipline
distribution, Top scientific users,
Nationality distribution
S9-Collaboration
excellence
(scientific)
Total number of applications for
using the RI
Total number of applications from
world leading teams
S10-Structuring
effects4 of the RI on
the scientific
community
Number of projects developed with
other RIs, universities, etc.
New collaborations...

Be an enabling facility to
support innovation
T18-Patents with a
commercial use
Number of patents and licensing
(financial value of these patents)
T20-Innovations co-
developed with
industry
Number of innovations/patents co -
developed with industry
T24-Collaborative
projects with
industrial partners
Number of industrial users, num ber
of collaborative projects in which
industry is directly involved

Become integrated in a regional
cluster/in regional strategies /
Be a hub to facilitate regional
collaborations5
E27-Number of Full
Time Equivalent
within the RI
Number of FTE (per year), Gender
distribution, Nationality distribution.
If relevant, number of part -time
employees
S11-Papers co-
authored with
regional universities
Number of articles co-authored by the
RI and one or more regional
universities
T25-Regional firms
using the RI
facilities
Number of regional firms using the
RI (can be categorized by
size/turnover)
E35-Number of
local/regional
suppliers
Number of suppliers (local/regional),
may also add turnover data

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 19

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Promote education outreach
and knowledge transfer
O51-Public
visibility of the RI
Number of occurrence of the RI in
media (can use online news
aggregations services such as
Factiva), including analyses at
different geographic scales
O53-Knowledge
sharing
Number of scientific conferences,
seminars, webinars etc. organised by
the RI
Total number of people trained
(academic and industry)
H43-Students
trained and
distribution
Number of students trained and their
origin (local/national/international)
H44-Educational
and outreach
activities
Number of educational and outreach
activities, number of participants

Provide scientific support to
public policies
O46-Production of
expert advice in
support of public
policies
Number of contracts with
public/policy services for
consulting/production of reports
O47-Production of
resources in support
of public policies
Number of
data/specimen/informatics resources
dedicated to support public policies

Provide high quality scientific
data and associated services
O49-Production of
experimental and
observational data in
support of public
policies
References of experimental /
observational data produced / used in
support of public policies (in
regulations, policy reports…)
T27-Data sharing Number of data requests (commercial
and academic entities)
Number of data accesses (commercial
and academic entities)
T28-Commercial
data use and data
services
Value of data (direct or indirect
commercial value)
Data package sold and turnover

Assume social responsibility
towards society
O55-Energy
consumption
O56-Waste
management
Statistics on energy consumption,
water and waste management and
recycling
Energy or environmental certification
Stories on how the RI minimizes its
environmental impact/footprint
(initiatives, practices...)
O57-Gender balance
and diversity
Gender distribution of employees,
users and trainees
Diversity of the staff and users
O58-Corporate
social responsibility
Ethical rules
Supply chain
Good working conditions

To facilitate the use of the proposed CIIs, Table 3 presents these CIIs in a matrix sorted by
both strategic objectives and impact categories.

20 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Table 3. Matrix presenting Core Impact Indicators sorted by Strategic objectives and Impact
Impact Category:

Strategic Objective:
Scientific Impact Technological Impact Training and Education Impact Economic Impact Social and societal Impact
1.Be a national or world
scientific leading RI and an
enabling facility to support
science
S2-Number of citations
S3-Number of publications in high-impact
factor journals
S4-Number of projects granted
S6-Number of scientific users
S9-Collaboration excellence (scientific)
S10-Structuring effects of the RI on the
scientific community

2. Be and enabling facility
to support innovation
 T18-Patents with commercial
use
T20-Innovations co-
developed with industry
T24-Collaborative projects
with industrial partners

3. Become integrated in a
regional cluster/in regional
strategies/be the hub to
facilitate regional
collaborations
S11-Papers co-authored with regional
universities
T25-Regional firms using the
RI facilities

 E34-Number of Full Time
Equivalent within the RI
E35- Number of
local/regional suppliers

4. Promote education,
outreach and knowledge
dissemination
  H43-Students trained and distribution
H45-Educational and outreach activities
 O51-Public visibility of the RI
O53-Knowledge sharing

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 21

  OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
5. Provide scientific
support to public policies
    O46-Production of expert advice in
support of public policies
O47-Production of resources in
support of public policies
6. Provide high quality
scientific data and
associated services
 T27-Data sharing
T28-Data commercial use
and data services
  O49-Production of experimental
and observational data in support of
public policies
7. Social responsibility      O55-Energy consumption
O56-Waste management
O57-Gender balance and diversity
O58-Corporate social responsibility
Letter signification: S: Scientific impact; T: Technological impact; E: Economic impact; H: Training and education impact; O: Social
and societal impact. This same list of Core Impact Indicators  is presented in Appendix 3, taking into account their relevance with
respect to RI types and lifecycle phase.

22 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
6.2. Comprehensive List of Indicators
While CIIs could be used by most of the RIs we analysed and constitute a good baseline
for monitoring the impact of RIs on a regular basis, they do not necessarily reflect the
specificities of each RI. The more comprehensive list of 58 indicators presented in Table 4
includes all indicators that were identified during the surveys as being in use, or of interest,
by more than one RI.
This table allows managers and stakeholders to have a larger choice of indicators to monitor
a strategic objective. It includes more detailed information for each indicator (what each
indicator means in term of impact, the data required for the indicator t o be operative and
references to relevant publications for more details on the use of those indicators). This list
is also available in Appendix  4 with the indicators classified according to strategic
objectives.
In some cases the production of robust and meaningful quantitative measures may be
difficult. In these cases, qualitative studies or “narratives” may provide a suitable
alternative. Although in these cases progress may be harder to track, they can nevertheless
provide useful information to assess the impact of an RI.
Table 4. Comprehensive list of indicators
 Indicators Detail Data needed
S1 Number of publications Peer-reviewed articles is an indicator of
scientific activity in most scientific
fields, demonstrates the impact of the
RI on science
Total number of publications of the RI during a
given period
Online on Scopus, WoS and / or other relevant
databases. Including only papers with RI address
(Griniece et al., 2015; Dasgupta and David, 1994)
S2 Number of citations Quality of RI publications and number Total number of citations received by publications
which are including authors from RI and RI users.
(Griniece et al., 2015; Dasgupta and David, 1994)
S3 Number of publications
in High-Impact factor
journals
Publication in world-class journals with
high impact
Number of publications in database from RI users
published within Q1 journals.
(Hallonsten and Christensson, 2017; Florio et al.,
2017)
S4 Number of projects
granted
Demonstrates the RI capacity to attract
funding and excellence of its projects
Total number of projects funded by external
sources including industry funds.
Projects = scientific collaboration, industrial
collaboration, technical development etc.
(Brottier, 2016; Rosenberg, 1992)
S5 RI attractiveness Demand for use such as:
% subscribed
% oversubscribed
Number of applications for the use of the RI’s
facility
Number of non-scientific users
(Hallonsten and Christensson, 2017)
S6 Number of scientific
users
Demonstrates the RI attractiveness in
different disciplines
Number of users
Discipline distribution
Top scientific users
Nationality distribution
(Griniece et al., 2015; Florio et al., 2017)
S7 User satisfaction Based on survey results; a survey can
be run to measure user satisfaction on
project selection, support and other
items, to evaluate how the RI answers
its user needs

Satisfaction of RI users regarding project
selection, access, support, availability of
instruments…
(Griniece et al., 2015)

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 23

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
S8 User project excellence Demonstrates the RI capacity
to attract and select excellent
projects
Ratio of funded projects vs the total
number of projects applications
(Kolarz, 2017)
S9 Collaboration excellence (scientific) The number of scientific
collaborations is a way  to
measure how a RI enables
cooperation in its scientific
domain and impacts science
Total number of applications for using
the RI and origin
Total number of applications from
world leading teams (World leading
teams publish regularly in Q1
journals)
Joint grants
(Kolarz, 2017)
S10 Structuring effects of the RI on the
scientific community
To measure the visibility,
attractiveness and
community building of the RI
Number of projects developed with
other RIs, universities, etc.
New collaborations...
S11 Papers co-authored with regional
universities
Measure scientific
productivity and the capacity
to enable cooperation with
regional scientific actors
Number of articles co -authored
between the RI and one or more
regional universities or research
organisations.
Information from Scopus, W orld of
Science or other relevant databases
Including only papers with RI address
(ESS, 2018)
S12 Use and production of open data How the RI contributes to the
development of open science
Number of access, upload and
download of open data
Use and users of the open data 6
produced by the RI (users, publics,
external researchers, and internal
researchers)
(ESS, 2018)
S13 Data openness Attractiveness and quality of
access to RI resources can
create/reinforce scientific
communities and improve
their quality
Number of applications to use RI’s
existing data
Number of access granted
(Jimenez, 2017)
S14 Digital resource openness Attractiveness and quality of
access to RI digital resources
create / reinforce scientific
communities
Number of access to digital resources
granted
Number of digital resources access
requests
(Jimenez, 2017)
T15 National grants National grants received
demonstrate the RI
excellence
Number of grants/total amount from
the host country for resea rch and
development projects
(Rosenberg, 1992)
T16 Collaboration with national industry Measures the attractiveness
to industry and innovation
potential
Number of projects in collaboration
with national firms
Story of successful collaboration
(Rochow et al., 2011; Katz, 1994)
T17 Patents The number of patents
developed by the RI
demonstrate its impact on
innovation
Number of patents granted
(Autio, Bianchi -Streit and Hameri,
2003)
T18 Patents with a commercial use Commercial use
demonstrates the useful ness
of the patents developed by
the RI
Number of patents and
commercial/financial value of these
patents
(STFC, 2014)
T19 Co-patenting with companies The number of patents co -
developed by the RI
demonstrates its impact on
innovation and development
of cooperation networks
Number of co-patents with companies
(Pilar, 2012; Jaffe, 1989)
T20 Innovations co-developed with industry Emergence of new
cooperation networks with
Number of innovations co -developed
with industry

24 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
industry is a major
mechanism through which
knowledge circulates and
impacts innovation
(Pilar, 2012; Marsili, 2001)

T21 Joint technology development projects
between RI and industry
These projects are a major
mechanism through which
knowledge circulates and
impacts innovation
Number of jo int technology
development projects between RI and
industry
(ESS, 2018; Marsili, 2001)

T22 Students working for industry Development of high skill
students for industry
Number of students (PhD, master)
supported by the private sector  and
using the RI
(Pilar, 2012; Senker, 1995)
T23 Projects funded by companies A proxy to understand the RIs
attractiveness and its
potential for innovation
Number of funded projects by
companies
(Saler and Martin, 2001)
T24 Collaborative projects with industrial
partners
New collaborative projects
carried out with industry are a
major mechanism through
which knowledge circulates
and impacts innovation
Number of collaborative projects in
which industry is directly involved
(Rochow et al., 2011; Marsili, 2001)
T25 Regional firms using the RI facilities  Contributes to the
development of the regional
firms skills and impacts on
their innovation capacity
Number of regional firms using the RI
(Brottier, 2016; Autio, Bianchi -Streit
and Hameri, 2003)
T26 Collaborative projects with regional
industrial partners
Contribute to the
development of the regional
firms skills and impact on
their innovation capacity
Number of collaborative projects with
regional industrial partners
(ESS, 2018; Katz, 1994)
T27 Data sharing Access and use of the data
produced and services
provided by the RI
Number of data demands
Number of data accesses
Number of data accesses by
commercial actors and public entities
(Barratt, Wang and Binney, 2016)
T28 Data commercial use and data services  Commercial use of the data
and services provided by the
RI
Financial/commercial value of data
Turnover of data packages sold
(Barratt, Wang and Binney, 2016)
T29 Data usage The usage of the resources
delivered by the RI illustrates
its various technological
impacts
Overall usage via browser and other
methods
Usage in research (through citations)
Use of data by public entities
(Jimenez, 2017)
E30 Total expenditure in regional / local area All the regional/local RI
expenditures have an impact
on the economy
Total amount of expenditures in
regional area, including total amount
of  purchase from suppliers, contract
with suppliers and others, estimation
of economic impact on regional area
(Rochow et al., 2011; Prettner and
Werner, 2016)
E31 Public procurement and contracts Development of new skills,
technology and industrial
processes, innovation
induced through public
procurement
Total amount of purchase from a
local/national/regional suppliers
Total amount of contracts with
local/national/regional suppliers
(EFDA, 2001; Florio et al., 2016)
E32 Total number of visitors and users of the
RI
Increased revenues for the
local economy (tourism
principally)
Number of visitors and users (to be
related to average spending within
local area)
(Hallonsten and Christensson, 2017;
Florio, Forte and Sirtori, 2016)
E33 New tax payers Employees living in the local
area can increase revenues
for the region
Number of employees, living in the
local area for 3 years at least
(Florio, Forte and Sirtori, 2016)

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 25

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
E34 Number of Full Time Equivalent within the
RI
Development of new skills
and increase of the economic
activity of the region
(multiplier)
Number of FTE (all persons working
within the RI), per year
Diversity distribution
RI Alumni
(Griniece et al, 2015; Florio, Forte and
Sirtori, 2016)
E35 Number of local/ regional suppliers Increased revenues of
suppliers and related new
skills impact the economic
activity of the region
Number of suppliers (regional and
local)
(Griniece et al, 2015)
E36 Number of employees Highly skilled employees can
provide indirect benefits for
the local economy
Number of engineers
Number of scientists
Number of administrative staff
Other (technicians…)
Diversity distribution
Evolution of employees and their
distribution
(Hallin, 2012; Godin and Doré, 2014)
E37 Spin-off companies New jobs created in the local
economy, R&D spillovers
Number of spin -off companies (start -
ups created by researchers of RI)
(Griniece, Reid and Angelis, 2015;
Martin et al., 1996)
H38 Trained students satisfaction Based on survey results: a
survey can be run to measure
students satisfaction (on
training courses, support,
help, etc.), to assess how a RI
answers its students’ needs
Satisfaction of students towards the
training courses
(Jimenez, 2017)
H39 Use of the data for training To illustrate the impact of the
data produced by the RI on
teaching and training
Survey within RI and among teachers
H40 Number of graduates (regional) Development of new skills
and indirect benefits for the
economy
Number of MSc and PhD students
from local universities using the RI
(PwC, 2016; Martin et al., 1996)
H41 Career of students trained within the RI Indicator to demonstrate the
effect of the RI training on
students, and its impact on
society
Survey results
H42 Grants for trainees Illustrates the importance of
the training activity of the RI
Volume of grants awarded to trainees
(regional, national grants for example)
to use the RI (total volume)
(Pilar, 2012; Martin et al., 1996)
H43 Students trained and distribution Illustrates the RI
attractiveness and excellence
of its training
Number of students trained within the
RI Distribution (national and
international students)
(Jimenez, 2017; Martin et al., 1996)
H44 Training programmes for high level
students
Illustrates the RI role in the
training of future scientists
Number of masters and PhD training
programs.
(Arundel, Van de Paal and Soete,
1995)

26 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
H45 Educational and outreach activities The educational and
outreach activities have an
indirect impact on
participants knowledge and
skills
Total number of participants
Total number of educational and
outreach activities (open days and
other events), internal human
resources dedicated
(OECD, 2014; Arundel, Van de Paal
and Soete, 1995)
O46 Production of expert advice in support of
public policies
Consulting activity for public
services shows the potential
RIs’ influence on public
policies (and further impact
for citizens in the longer term)
Number of contracts with public
services for consulting or reports
related to support of public policies
(Barratt, Wang and Binney, 2016;
Rizzuto, 2012)
O47 Production of resources used in support of
public policies
Resources dedicated to
support public pol icies can
impact citizens in the long
term
Volume of databases / biobanks /
informatics resources used to support
public policies
(TRIUMF, 2013; Rizzuto, 2012)
O48 Contribution of the RI researchers to
public policies
Indicators demonstrating the
researcher contributions
(conferences, meetings,
reports...) to public policies
Number of meetings with policy
makers
Number of others contributions
(expert reports, conferences, articles
in regulatory or legal texts)
(Barratt, Wang and Binney, 2016)
O49 Production of experimental and
observational data in support of public
policies
These data dedicated to
support public policies can
impact citizens in the long
term
Volume of experimental /
observational data produced/used in
support of public policies
(Barratt, Wang and Binney, 2016)
O50 Public awareness  Public and users reached by
the RI website
Number of visits/consultations on the
RI website
(The Tori Group, 2013)
O51 Public visibility of the RI Measuring the RI occurrence
in online media is an efficient
way to see its popularity
Number of appearances of the RI on
Factiva (all subjects) in online media
(The Tori Group, 2013; Rizzuto, 2012)
O52 Popularity of the RI (public and users) The number of followers on
social media is a measure of
the public interest in the RI
Number of followers on selected
social medias
(LinkedIn, Facebook, Youtube,
Twitter, Baidu, etc.)
(The Tori Group, 2013; Rizzuto, 2012)
O53 Knowledge sharing  Scientific events organized
and number of people trained
to demonstrate the impact on
human resources
(development of skills and
knowledge)
Number of scientific and technological
conferences, seminars, workshops,
webinars etc. organised by the RI
Total number of people trained
(academic and industry)
(Arundel, Van de Paal and  Soete,
1995)
O54 Openness to public Events successfully
organized by the RI for the
public to produce / improve its
image
Number of events organized for the
public
Number of visitors in those events
(Griniece, Reid and Angelis, 2015;
Arundel, Van de Paal and Soete,
1995)
O55 Energy consumption What is done by the RI to
save energy during
construction and its
functioning: effect on
environment and RI
exemplarity
Energy usage
Energy labels
Narrative on energy saving during the
different RI lifecycle phases
(Rochow, R. et al., 2018; Godin and
Doré, 2014)

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 27

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
O56 Waste management How the RI manages the
waste: effect on environment
RI exemplarity
Waste production, water usage,
recycling data,  label,
(Rochow, R. et al., 2018; Godin and
Doré, 2014)
O57 Gender balance and diversity Demonstrates the effort
made by the RI for equity (RI
exemplarity)
Gender distribution of employees,
users and trainees.
Diversity of the staff, users...
(Björling, 2018)
O58 Corporate social responsibility Showing the RI as an
example of social
responsibility
Internal survey
Ethical guidelines
Responsible suppliers (label)
Good working conditions

It should be noted that the majority of these indicators, which are based on current practices,
are very traditional.  In some cases they may not be fully consistent with more recent
policies that are being promoted by some RI stakeholders.  This is notable in relation to
Open Science, where there is a growing movement to promot e open access publishing,
which is not the model adopted by the highest impact journals (S4). There is also
considerable unrest in the scientific and policy community about the use of citation indices
as measures of impact (S2). Similarly, charging for data access (T28) may be inconsistent
with policies to promote enhanced access to research data.  However, in the absence of
accepted indicators that address these concerns, judicious selection from the proposed set
is a good starting point for impact assessm ent.  All indicators have caveats and new
indicators are certainly required and in some areas, such as data access, there can be an
important role for RIs in helping to develop and test these.
6.3. Using the framework
This section describes how to select indicators, how to collect data efficiently and how to
analyse/use the results afterwards
Preparing for impact assessment: selecting indicators
It is recommended that RIs, together with their stakeholders, first identify the various types
of impact they wish to assess, related to their strategic objectives. They can then identify
Core Impact Indicators i.e. generic indicators which will provide an overall picture of the
socio-economic impact of the RI on a regular basis and are important to inform a dialogue
with stakeholders. These CIIs can be relatively broad at first and become more precise over
time in the light of experience . They can than supplement/refine these CIIs with a set of
standard indicators which will cover all the detailed aspects of impact and can be adjusted
over time alongside the evolution of the RI.
There are three basic rules to follow in order to select indicators:
 Indicators should be linked with strategic objectives.
 They have to provide information relevant to operational issues.
 They should be time-bounded, so that they can be used to assess evolution over set
periods. They should also be stable over time to ensure consistency. Nevertheless,
it is still possible to add  (and subtract) indicators for different phases of the RI’s
lifecycle.

28 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
As indicated in chapter 5.4, indicators are not perfect proxies for impact assessment. These
limitations should be well understood when selecting indicators and explanations of those
limits should be provided to interested stakeholders. Furthermor e, i ndicators cannot be
interpreted in absolute numbers and it is the evolution of their measurement over time that
is most relevant.
The earlier the indicators are selected and agreed upon in the life of an RI, then the sooner
the data can be collected. It is easier to collect data prospectively than to search for it
retrospectively. In addition, it is also important to think about the RI’s lifecycle: indicators
and their relevance will be different for each stage. Many impact indicators can be more
useful in operational phase as it is (in general) the longest phase of the life cycle and when
the RI produces output that can lead to measurable impact. I mpacts may nevertheless be
significant during the construction phase depending on the nature of the RI,
Finally, in order to have clear, useful and relevant impact assessment, indicators should be
selected by people that know the infrastructure well: its history, stakes, strategic objectives
and challenges for the future.
Selection of indicators: The ESS case
The European Spallation Source (ESS) i s a new European RI that started its construction in
September 2014. ESS has a strong interest in impact asse ssment and launched  its first assessment
for the year 2016. The starting point is that the ESS performances cannot be assessed in a traditional
way – with an exclusive focus on scientific performance or economic  impact. ESS designed  its
indicators so that each can inform on the achievement towards the RI’s strategic objectives.
With the help of an external team, ESS benchmarked other infrastructure’s practices in terms of
impact assessment and prepared a detai led list of indicators relevant  to the construction phase and
additional ones for the op erational phase  to come. These indicators  were discussed in meetings
between external teams, division managers and stakeholders, in order to fully meet the ESS needs.
The selected indicators  – which are termed “ metrics” instead of indicators, as “indicators” were
considered as too heavily connoted as a management tool – are linked to stakeholders visions and
objectives and tailored for the infrastructure’s needs. Metrics are important for ESS to:
 create and collect data that are considered as useful for various uses
 better manage teams
 show how ESS fulfills its strategic objectives through the years
 communicate to stakeholders and to facilitate future funding procedures.
These metrics have been selected for their relevance and are based on data’s availability.
A particularity is that each indicator measuring publications and citations is separated between
technique / method, environment and neutron use, to highlight the relevance and uniqueness of ESS
instruments. ESS puts a particular accent on security and reliability of the facilities and instruments
(15 instruments will be running within the facility when in operational phase, starting in 2019), and
on the environmental impacts of the infrastructure (important issue for local and regional
authorities). But the RI also follows elements such as the cost of delay s, the impact  of in -kind
contributions, its expenditures in local area, etc. The initial focus on short and medium -term
indicators – e.g. grants, citations, collaborations, expenditures, etc. Long-term effect indicators will
be assessed later on and are being considered (e.g. knowledge transfer, success rate on proposals to
use instruments, potential of the infrastructure for European grand challenges, user satisfaction,
etc.).
To support these quantitative indicators, ESS is working on narratives, for example  to show the
effects of collaborations between ESS and industries.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 29

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Data collection
The Reference F ramework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic impac t of
Research Infrastructures aims at minimising the work to define, collect and analyse data. It
also aims at minimising the ex-post collection of data.
First of all, it is recommended to use existing databases, whenever possible. There are two
advantages to using existing databases: i)  it reduces the workload; ii)  it can increase the
reliability of data as they are usually collected in the same way (although this is not always
true and should be verified).
To reduce ex-post data collection, we recommend to organi se systematic data collection
from the early stages and to focus on data that are easy to collect. To motivate employees
to collect data, it is necessary: i) to explain clearly the role and objectives of the envisaged
impact assessment(s); ii) to explain how data will be analysed; iii) to give feed-back on any
impact assessments. The commitment of RI managers is key to facilitate data collection.
Internal administrative sources remain the primary providers of data but third party
(external) data sources may also be necessary also to evaluate the impact of a RI. For
example, data for economic impacts will be gathered from internal sources (i.e. suppliers’
contracts and number, etc.) and completed by external sources (revenues of these suppliers,
etc.).
When data is not readily available, input s can be collected through surveys and then
analysed. For example, surveys can be run periodically with different audiences to assess
satisfaction, achievements, collaborations, expectations. The periodicity of a survey can be
adapted to the expected rate of change of factors that are being assessed.
To sum up, any proposal to collect data for impact assessment requires a discussion on:
 the objectives of the assessment(s) (what will we do with the results?)
 the sources of data, internal and external (what data and where will we get it?)
 the choices and proposed methods of collection (how?)
 the likely reliability of the data  (including survey data population
representativeness).
Examples of data collection processes
CIRRMT
The Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Music Media and  Technology (CIRRMT) is a
multi-disciplinary RI hosted by McGill University in Montreal (Canada).
Data on impact indicators are collected for reporting at two time points:
 For the yearly reports to its board, a brief overview of the scientific, artistic, and
technological outcomes is produced, which is based on voluntary information provided by
individual researchers and stakeholders.
 Every three years, CIRMMT produces an entire report of scientific, artistic and
technological output for the funding agencies (for operational funds). This is a tedious
process where each member submits their annual reports and CIRRMT management collate
all the information and interpret the data.

30 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
BBMRI
The Biobanking and BioMolecular Resources Research Infrastructure (BBMRI) is a distributed RI
created under the European Research Infrastructure Consortium (ERIC) legal statute. It provides
access to biobanks and biomolecular r esources coordinated by the National Nodes for health
research.
BBMRI started to collect data in 2017 for impact indicators at its central node level (situated in
Graz, Austria) in parallel with the development of its KPIs. It will start also collecting data from its
national nodes from 2019 to have a more global overview of its impact.  Early assessments focused
on classical quantitative assessments more suitable for research projects (e.g. number of
publications, number of PhD students, patents…) rather th an for BBMRI which is a n RI focusing
on providing services  and which is often providing guidance and expertise rather than access to a
single site tool or centre. Hence new data are now being collected.
Data have proven to be difficult to collect, particularly since BBMRI is a distributed RI and impact
is often linked to indirect use of data and resources and not always referenced. Data collection is not
yet automated and still largely relies on manual fe edback from national nodes. They are collected
on a yearly basis, although a quarterly periodicity is considered for some data sets. This is now an
integral part of the RI management process but is recognised as being a challenge and support is
being requested from stakeholders.
IMEC
The Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (IMEC) is a world-leading R&D and innovation hub in
nano-electronics and digital technologies. IMEC was established in 1984 in Leuven (Belgium) by
the Flemish Regional Authority. Curr ent funding (operation) comes mainly (80%) from contracts
with private companies (incl. most of the top ten ICT companies in the world) and funded projects;
20% is supported by the Flemish Authority.
Data on impact indicators are regularly collected (a pro cess coordinated by the IMEC’s evaluation
unit) to feed two types of evaluation:
 Impact studies are carried out by an external consultant on behalf of IMEC every 2  years.
 A strategic ex -post and ex -ante evaluation study is produced every 5  years by externa l
consultants at the request of the Flemish Government. The ex -post report is based on
IMEC’s self-assessment reports (including the results of the two -yearly impact studies),
bibliometric studies carried out by a specialised university centre, interviews,  and
benchmarking with similar RIs abroad. Recommendations are also provided by a panel of
international experts.
Moreover IMEC provides yearly the results on nine KPIs to the Governing Board and the Flemish
Government. Most of these KPIs are similar to (c ore) impact indicators identified in the OECD
Reference Framework.
How to use indicator data
Indicators mirror the activities of an RI. They provide information about the level of
achievement of strategic objectives and are informing interested parties about the impact
of different activities. They can be used to plan activities or to model the effects of different
decisions. Information on RI impact allows stakeholders and managers:
 To identify emerging problems and help focus their attention on what is not
working.
 To validate the coupling between their vision, strategic objectives and the day -to-
day decisions.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 31

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Some of the indicators proposed can be integrated within management and reporting tools
used by the RI (such as KPIs and scoreboards) although this is not mandatory.
Data collection and data analysis are two important but distinct parts of an assessment
exercise. The analysis of indicators can be routine and standardised  for annual reporting
 or on demand  for a specific purpose. The aim i s to limit as much as possible ad hoc
data collection and to include within routine annual reporting information about impact.
Results relative to each indicator can be compared with these targets (for the first year or
period) or to previous results to assess the impact of the RI over the years.
Using of indicators: the IMEC example
The Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (IMEC) is a world -leading R&D and innovation hub in
nano-electronics and digital technologies (see box X). It has 2 regular impact assessment processes.
The 2-year impact studies encompass all dimensions of impact: S&T, economic, social/societal and
catalytic (structuring effects).
The 5-year evaluation analysis includes an ex -post as well as an ex -ante component and addresses
the following topics: how and to what extent IMEC fulfilled its mission and reached its objectives,
what is the evolution compared to the previous evaluation period, what are the short -term and
cumulative (over 10 years and more) multidimensional impacts of its activities and how does IMEC
position itself internationally. The ex -ante part focuses on an analysis and assessment of the draft
strategic plan for the next 5 -year period. Thus the report, and in particular the impact assessment,
play a key role in the Government's five-year strategic planning.
The general requirements to be met by IMEC (and the other Flemish strategic research centres) are:
to achieve scientific excellence in an international context, to contribute to the implementation of the
science and innovation policies of Flanders, and in particular to generate an optimal impact in the
Flemish economic and societal fabric.
Impact indicators are included within IMEC KPIs and nine of those are currently used to monitor
activities and reported annually (and in the 5-year strategic evaluation) since 2017:
 The excellence of IMEC is measured by: the number of peer reviewed publications; the
number of first filings (patents); and the number of PhD students.
 The regional impact is measured by: the number of new spin-offs; the number of new iStart
businesses; the income from collaboration with enterprises in the region; and the partnerships
established with entities from the region.
 The multiplier effect on the resources received from the grant of the Flemish authority are
measured by: the income from international program mes and the co -funding rate of the
companies.
At the end of each year the KPIs are compared with the objectives that were set in advance. If the
annual KPI targets are not achieved, the remain ing annual balance (10% of the grant) will only be
partially paid out. IMEC must achieve eight out of nine KPIs to receive 100% of the grant.

Monetising the results?
As indicated in chapter 5.2, traditional cost-benefit analysis methodologies are difficult to
apply on RIs. Nevertheless there is an increasing demand for assessing impact in monetary
terms and there are a variety of methodologies for attributing financial value to impact.

32 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
What is the RI producing in terms of return on investment is an obvio us question from a
policy perspective? Return on investment is particularly important in the case of RIs funded
by multiple entities or countries. This “fair return”  calculation often has a significant
monetary aspect although non-monetary aspects, such as public utility, access and usage or
reputation, can also be important.
A second and more challenging objective is to determine a financial value for the various
impacts (and ultimately the global financial benefit a RI may provide to a region or
country).
Despite the difficulty, it can be useful to monetise certain impacts, for example through a
multiplier effect (Griniece, Reid and Angelis, 2015). From the framework proposed here,
economic indicators like number of Full Time Equivalents within the RI (E 34), total
expenditures (E30), spin-offs (E37), number of visitors and users (E 32), new tax payers
(E33) and suppliers of the RI (E 35) can be monetised through a multiplier effect. This
multiplier effect can show an increase of national or regional income that arise from
investment in an RI. As discussed throughout this report, the benefits can be multiple:
innovation, production of science, regional influence etc. The multiplier effect shows how
the RI impacts its local economy through an immediate economi c impact – how the RI
impacts local employment for example. Monetisation is easier to assess when the values of
potential outcomes can be linked to market price, such as the number of suppliers of the
RI.
RI managers wishing to monetise impacts have to be cautious: the numbers obtained may
be useful for communicating to stakeholders and funders but can also be misleading .
Over-estimation and under -estimation can both be risky. Furthermore, when multiplier
effects occur, it may not be possible to reliably differentiate those directly linked to the RI
activities to those from its local ecosystem and this methodology should therefore be
restricted to well-known indicators within a well-defined context.7
When the use of multipliers is not possible, another technique which can be used is based
on the use of counterfactual indicators such as the “willingness to pay” or the “willingness
to forego”. This approach has been used (although not without some discussion), for several
RIs in the UK 8 and can provide an eval uation of the financial value of RIs, although the
actual robustness of the methodology is still controversial  (see, for example, Florio and
Sirtori, 2014). Another method involves questionnaires to people and interviews regarding
how they value a given ou tcome. This technique is typically used to determine values
related to environmental impact.
Choosing the right methodology for assessing and monetising impacts therefore depends
on individual circumstances and on the level of analysis required by stakeho lders.
Monetisation describes only a part of an RI’s impact and is often poor at taking into account
scientific outputs, which are the main raison d’être for RIs. Monetising impacts should not
be mandatory and when it is carried out the limitations on the results should be made clear.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 33

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Monetising RI impact: the IMEC experience
Since 2005 IMEC and IDEA Consult ( www.ideaconsult.be) collaborate to monitor the
multidimensional impact of IMEC in Belgium. The model is centred around four different ‘layers’
of impact the scientific -technological impact of the institute, its economic impact, its catalytic
impact in the broader tech start -up and scale up ecosystem and finally its additional society -wide
impact. Over the ye ars the impact model has been refined and adapted to reflect new realities and
changing roles of IMEC in society.
In the analysis both quantitative and qualitative indicators are combined. Some dimensions of
impact are being monetised while others are not.  Specifically the following activities are being
monetised:
 the value (in terms of added value, employment and fiscal return) of knowledge transfer to
Belgian receivers through IMEC’s contract research, interdisciplinary collective research
(IMEC.icon), outflow of staff and training
 the economic footprint (in terms of added value, employment and fiscal return) of IMEC’s
and its spin -offs’ regular business activities, expenditures and infrastructural investments
in Belgium.
To estimate the economic leverage of these activities, a combination of methods is used:
 To estimate the economic leverage of IMEC’s contract research, a technology multiplier
based on research from Knell (2008) is used. This technology multiplier has been critically
reviewed and updated by an expert panel in 2016, organised by IDEA Consult in the context
of a study conducted on behalf of EARTO (European Association of RTO’s). The
technology multiplier is calculated on the basis of input-output tables.
 For the estimation of the economic lev erage of IMEC’s interdisciplinary collective
research, an instrument specific multiplier is being calculated by IDEA Consult on the basis
of a detailed portfolio -analysis of research projects in combination with an online survey
and interviews with corporate research partners.
 The economic value of the outflow of IMEC staff to the Belgian economy is calculated as
an average of two different calculations:
o The first method makes use of the average labour cost at IMEC, indicating the
willingness to pay of ente rprises for someone with an average ‘IMEC employee’
profile. This cost is multiplied by the Knell technology multiplier, as the actual value
of the employee for the enterprise is more than the ‘price’ it pay;
o The second method does not apply the technology  multiplier but uses the value added
per employee (at IMEC) to measure the value of the knowledge transfer of personnel
outflow.
 The calculation of the value of the knowledge transfer through training is based on the ratio
‘value per hour of training’. Thi s value is a combination of both the direct costs for the
participants (registration fee + transport costs) and their opportunity cost (i.e. the time that
the participant cannot work). This cost is again multiplied by the Knell technology
multiplier to estimate the value of the knowledge transfer.
 Finally, to estimate the economic footprint of IMEC’s and its spin-offs’ regular business
activities, expenditures and infrastructural investments in Belgium:
o The direct economic effect is measured based on data ( on employment, turnover and
added value) delivered by IMEC and the spin-offs.

34 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
o Incoming invoices of IMEC are at the basis of the first order indirect effects
calculations. The main advantage of using this type of information compared to
national input -output-tables is that an institute specific multiplier for IMEC can be
calculated. To calculate the effect further upstream (higher order effects), the latest
input-output tables are being used.
o To estimate the induced economic effect, the figures on direct and indirect employment
are used as the starting point. These are multiplied with average net wages in the
different sectors where IMEC and the spin-offs create direct and indirect employment.
Subsequently, these were multiplied with average wage -spending quota. Finally, the
fraction of income that is spent outside Belgium is subtracted in order to arrive at net
spending in the Belgian economy induced by IMEC’s and its spin-offs’ activities.
o Based on the direct, indirect and induced effect, one can estimate th e fiscal and
parafiscal return to the federal and regional governments in Belgium. This fiscal and
parafiscal return is generated t hrough the following channels: i) the social security
contributions and wage tax thanks to the additional employment; ii) corporate taxes
thanks to the additional output and iii) VAT thanks to the additional value added.
IDEA Consult and IMEC consciously choose for a conservative estimation in the monetisation of
impact, to avoid double-counting and thus overestimation. The analysis is considered as producing
objective and robust estimates of the economic leverage of IMEC on the Belgian economy – results
that can be quoted as a lower boundary.
Sources: IDEA Consult 2017, 2018.

Qualitative indicators and narratives
Qualitative indicators involve information collections via dedicated and tailored methods
such as surveys, semi-structured interviews or ECOUTER methodologies (Murthag et al.,
2017) and case studies. They are an excellent way to complement quantitative data and
provide useful insights on the different indicators and impacts listed in this framework.
This report proposes only  a few qualitative indicators because they are more difficult to
standardise: qualitative indicators need to be tailored for a n RI and are ve ry context
dependent.
Narratives provide for a more comprehensive view of impact, using examples to illustrate
progresses towards a specific goal/outcome. They are largely complementary to this
framework. Using some  of the indicators proposed in this frame work, narratives can be
produced: on topics such as sustainability, the effects of the RI on students’ careers, or the
RI’s impact on local economy. Narratives can also be used to illustrate  local and regional
social and economic impacts of an RI based on concrete examples.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 35

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
7.  Conclusions
This report proposes “A Reference F ramework for  assessing the scientific and socio-
economic impact of Research Infrastructures ”, i.e. a tool to help RIs of different scales,
types and at different steps of their lifecycle to  assess the impact of their activities. It
includes different indicator groupings, constructed on the base of an in-depth survey of RI
managers and stakeholders with research infrastructures and case studies:
 a table of Core Impact Indicators, fairly generic and related to RIs’ strategic objectives
 a matrix articulating Core Impact Indicators with i mpact dime nsions and strategic
objectives
 a more comprehensive list of standard indicators.
While impact assessment represents an investment in terms of financ ial cost and human
resources, it does provides all RI stakeholders, including funders and management with
useful information to help improve performance and investment. It can also be a good way
to communicate about RI activities with the general public.
As described throughout this report, a number of important elements have to be taken into
account for an optimal use of this assessment framework:
 The link between strategic objectives and indicators is one of the major contributions
of this work: The aim is it show how an RI achieves its goal through its whole set of
activities.
 Although this report provides a number of representative indicators  commonly used
by RIs, none of these are mandatory. Each indicator should be carefully selected and
adapted, as necessary, to the RI objectives and context, and the framework itself can
be adapted and expanded as required.
 This framework is not designed for direct comparative assessment of diffe rent RIs.
Even similar types of RIs may have different strategic objectives and missions and
socio-economic impact is context-specific.
 Impacts often results from cumulative effects over time. As indicators usually only
provide snapshot information at a g iven time, a more precise impact assessment can
be generated by pooling data series, hence the need to use consistent indicators over
time.
 Quantitative indicators, which constitute the majority of indicators included in this
framework, can only provide a partial view of impact. They should be complemented
whenever possible with more qualitative indicators and narratives which can help
illustrate the diversity of impacts generated by each RI.
Based on the report’s findings, the Expert Group offers the following recommendations to
RI stakeholders:
 RI communities are encouraged to adopt and refine this assessment framework as a
basis for impact assessment. They should seek consensus on the indicators which are
most relevant for their RIs (and co -design new ind icators if required) and on the
specific data that could best inform each indicator.

36 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
 RI management should define early in the RI life -cycle, their impact assessment
framework and its future uses. Definition of data sources and collection processes is
an important aspect of this as consistent data series are important for accuracy.
 RI stakeholders are invited to work with RI managers to define their needs for specific
indicator data as well as the use in decision -making processes. Feasibility of data
collection is an important consideration during this ‘co -design’ process. Where
necessary (e.g. for small and medium-size RIs), funders should provide the necessary
support for the data collection required to conduct robust impact assessment exercises.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 37

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Endnotes
1 This strategic objective was not part of the survey but emerged during discussion at the workshop.
It appears that most RIs want some indicators to assess their level of exemplarity (on gender, equity,
environment management, etc.).
2 See “Using the framework” in chapter 6.3 and annex.
3 Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 journals can be presented differently but a generic definition can be found at
http://ipscience-
help.thomsonreuters.com/inCites2Live/indicatorsGroup/aboutHandbook/usingCitationIndicatorsW
isely/jifQuartile.html.
4 In some cases, this can be extended as strategic objectives. However, it was not identified as such
during our in-depth surveys.
5 For distributed infr astructures, these CIIs concern  the local nodes, not  the whole research
infrastructure. Indeed, each node can have a specific impact on its local area.
6 Open data: resources freely available to everyone.
7 In the UK, the HM Treasury “Green Book”
(https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/
685903/The_Green_Book.pdf) does not promote the use of multipliers in estimates of social value.
8 The Value and Impact of Data Sharing and Curation: A synthesis of three recent studies of UK
research data centres.

38 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
8.  References
Anselin, L., A. Varga and Z. Acs (1997), “Local geographic spillovers between university research and
technology innovations ”, Journal of Urban Economics 42 Z (3), pp. 422–448,
https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.1997.2032.
Arundel, A., G. Van de Paal and L. Soete (1995), PACE Report: Innovation Strategies of Europe’s Largest
Firms: Results of the PACE Survey for Information Sources, Public Research, Protection of
Innovations, and Government Programmes. Final Report, MERIT, University of Limburg, Maastricht.
Autio, E., M. Bianchi-Streit and A.P. Hameri (2003), Technology Transfer and Technological Learning
Through CERN's Procurement Activity, CENR 2003 –005, CERN, Geneva.  DOI: 10.5170/CERN-
2003-005.
Barratt, D., J. Wang and J. Binney (2016), Assessment of the Atlas of Living Australia’s impact and value.
Alluvium, https://www.csiro.au/e n/About/Our-impact/Our-impact-in-action/Natural-
environment/Atlas-of-Living-Australia.
Bianchi-Streit, M. et al. (1984), Economic utility resulting from CERN contracts (second study), CERN
84-14, CERN, Genève ,
https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/16/042/16042987.pdf.
Bjö rling, S. (2018), Impact assessment, Perspectives from the Swedish Research Council, Head of the
Department of Research Infrastructures The Swedish Research Council, OECD Worksh op
19-20 March 2018.
Brottier, F. (2016), The socio-economic impact of research infrastructures: a generic evaluation framework
and insights from selected case studies, Europportunities O Ü ,
https://indico.cern.ch/event/558880/contributions/2381524/attachments/1383157/2103580/17_BROT
TIER_F.pdf.
Callon, M. (1994), “Is science a public good?”, Science, Technology and Human Values 19, pp. 345–424,
https://doi.org/10.1177/016224399401900401.
COST Office, (2010), Benefits of Research Infrastructures beyond Science. The Example of the Square
Kilometre Array (SKA), Final Report , https://stfc.ukri.org/files/impact-publications/benefits-of-
research-infrastructures-beyond-science/.
Dasgupta, P.  and P. David (1994). “Towards a new economics of science ”. Research Policy 23  (5),
pp. 487–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(94)01002-1.
Drèze J.P. and N. Stern (1987), “The theory of cost-benefit analysis”, in Auerbach A.J. and Feldstein M.
(eds), Handbook of public economics, North Holland, Amsterdam, Vol. II.
EFDA, (2001), Cadarache as a Euro pean Site for ITER, Report on the techni cal and Socio -economic
aspects, http://www-fusion-magnetique.cea.fr/site/rapport2001/ess1-full.pdf.
ESFRI (2017), Long-term sustainability of research infrastructures, ESFRI Scripta Volume II,
https://www.esfri.eu/sites/default/files/u4/ESFRI_SCRIPTA_TWO_PAGES_19102017_3.pdf.
European Spallation Source, (2018), First socio-economic impact assessment, Final report.
Florio, M. et al. (2016), “Exploring Cost -Benefit Analysis of Research, Development and Innovation
Infrastructures: An Evaluation Framework.” Center for Industrial Studies Working Paper N. 01/2016,
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1603.03654.pdf.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 39

 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Florio, M., S. Forte and E. Sirtori (2016), “Forecasting the socio -economic impact of the Large Hadron
Collider: A cost–benefit analysis to 2025 and beyond”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
Vol 112, pp. 38-53, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.03.007.
Florio, M. and E. Sirtori (2014), “The evaluation of research infras tructures: a cost -benefit analysis
framework”, Milan European Economy Workshops, Jean Monnet Chair, Working paper n. 2014 -10,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2722500.
Godin, B. and C. Doré (2014), Measuring the Impact of Science: Beyond the Economic Dimension, Draft,
http://www.csiic.ca/PDF/Godin_Dore_Impacts.pdf.
Gramlich, E.M. (1994) , “Infrastructure Investment: A Review Essay ”, Journal of E conomic Literature,
Vol. 32 (3): pp. 1176- 1196, https://www.jstor.org/stable/2728606.
Griliches, Z. (1995), “R&D and productivity” in Handbook of Industrial Innovation. Blackwell, London,
pp. 52–89.
Griniece E., A Reid and J. Angelis (2015) , Guide to Evaluating and Monitoring Socio -Economic Impact
of Investment in Research Infrastructures. Technopolis Group. Tallinn. Estonia ,
http://www.technopolis-group.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/2015_Technopolis_Group_guide_to_impact_assessment_of_research_infras
tructures.pdf.
Hallin, E. (2012), Economic, Societal and technological impact of large scale research facilities, Canadian
Light Source Inc, European Research Facilities Workshop ,
https://indico.desy.de/indico/event/5340/session/1/material/slides/0?contribId=6.
Hallonsten, O. and T. Heinze (2012), “Institutional persistence through gradual adaptation: Analysis of
national laboratories in the USA and Germany”. Science and Public Policy, 39, pp. 450–463,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scs047.
Hallonsten, O. (2014), “The politics of European collaboration in big science” in M. Mayer, M. Carpes, &
R. Knoblich (Eds.), International relations and the global politics of science and technology. Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 31-46.
Hallonsten O. and O. Christensson (2017), An ex-post impact study of Max-lab, Lund University School
of Economics and Management, Lu nd University,
http://portal.research.lu.se/portal/en/publications/an-ex-post-impact-study-of-maxlab(ab1e7aa7-add5-
4938-b21b-c6058b909682).html.
Horlings, E. et al. (2012), “The societal footprint of big science”, Rathenau Instituut, Working paper
1206, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266513583_The_societal_footprint_of_big_science.
Jaffe, A. (1989) , “Real effects of academic research ”. American Economic Review 79 (5), pp. 957-970,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1831431.
Jimenez, R.C. (2017), ELIXIR KPI framework and alignment of KPIs between e -Infrastructures and
research infrastructures, e -IRG workshop  June 2017, http://e-
irg.eu/documents/10920/382077/ELIXIR+indicators+-+Rafael+C+Jimenez.pdf.
Katz, J.S. (1994), “Geographical proximity and scientific collaboration”, Scientometrics 31(1), pp. 31-43,
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02018100.
Knell M. (2008), “Product -embodied technological diffusion and intersect oral linkages in Europe”,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265369750_Product-
embodied_technological_diffusion_and_intersectoral_linkages_in_Europe.

40 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Kolarz, P. et al. (2017), Comparative impact study of the European Social Survey (ESS) ERIC Final report,
Technopolis Group, pp. 134, https://www.europeansocialsurvey.org/docs/findings/ESS-Impact-study-
Final-report.pdf.
Li, C.W. (2002), “Growth and scale effects: the role of knowledge spillovers ”, Economic Letters, 74,
pp. 177-185, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1765(01)00542-0.
Marsili, O. (2001), The anatomy and evolution of industries: technical  change and industrial dynamics ,
Edward Elgard Publishing, Cheltenham.
Martin, B.  et al. (1996), The Relationship Between Publicly Fu nded Basic Research and Economic
Performance, SPRU, Science Policy Research Unit, Unive rsity of Sussex ,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242087185_THE_RELATIONSHIP_BETWEEN_PUBLIC
LY_FUNDED_BASIC_RESEARCH.
Moed H.F., M. Luwel and C. Daraio (2014), Scientometrics as Big Data Science: On integration of data
sources and the problem of different types of classification systems, OECD Workshop, Paris, 25 March,
http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/4.2.%20Henk%20Moed.pdf.
Murthag M. J. (2017), “The ECOUTER methodology for stakeholder engagement in translational
research”, BMC Me dical Ethics, BMC series – open, inclusive and trusted 2017 18:24 ,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910-017-0167-z.
OECD (2015), Frascati Manual 2015: Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research and
Experimental Development, The Measurement of Scientific, Technological and Innovation Activities,
OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264239012-en
OECD (2014), The Impacts of Large Research Infrastructures on Economic Innovation and on  Society:
Case Studies at CERN, http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/CERN-case-studies.pdf.
Pilar G. (2012) , An Analysis of the socio-economic impact of African -European research infrastructure
cooperation, Promoting African European Research Infrastructure Partnerships, Seventh framework
programme, PAERIP, https://slideplayer.com/slide/5909292/.
Prettner, K. and K. Werner (2016), “Why it pays off to pay us well: The impact of basic research on
economic growth and welfare”, Research policy, N°45(5) , pp.  1075-1090,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.03.001
PwC (2016), Study to examine the socio -economic impact of Copernicus  in the EU, Report on The
socio-economic impact of the Copernicus p rogramme, Final Report ,
http://cop.fdc.fr/sites/default/files/library/Copernicus_Report_Downstream_Sector_October_2016.pdf
Rizzuto, C. (2012), The various dimensions of impacts and of related stakeholders,  Socio-economic
relevance of research infrastructures , Presenta tion at European Association of National Research
Facilities Ope n to International Access, Hamburg ,
https://erf.desy.de/sites2009/site_erf/content/e99281/e112179/infoboxContent116075/Booklet.pdf.
Rochow, R. et al. (2011), Foresight enriched Research Infrastructure Assessment Methodology (fenRIAM),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236645351_FenRIAM_full_guide_Proposal_for_a_Foresig
ht-enriched_Research_Infrastructure_Impact_assessment_Methodology.
Rosenberg, S.R. (1992), The social impact of computers, First Edition, Academic Press.
Saler, A.J. and B.R. Martin (2001), “The economic benefits of publicly funded basic research: a critical
review”, Research Policy 30(3), pp. 509-532, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(00)00091-3.
Senker, J. (1995) , Tacit knowledge and models of innovation. Industrial and Corporate Change 4 (2),
pp. 425-447. DOI: 10.1093/icc/4.2.425.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 41

 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
STFC (2014), Impact Framework and Evaluation Strategy , Science and Technology Facilities Council ,
http://www.stfc.ac.uk/stfc/cache/file/B5D5D5C7-809A-44F3-990FBDC045835BAC.pdf.
The TORI Group  (2013), Nasa Socio -Economic Impact, Final report for NASA ,
https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/files/SEINSI.pdf.
TRIUMF (2013), Return on Investment in Large Scale Research Infrastructure, Final report for the
National Research Council Canada , https://www.triumf.ca/sites/default/files/HAL-
ReturnOnInvestmentStudy-May-2013.pdf.

42 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
9.  Appendices
9.1. Appendix 1. Expert Group Members
COUNTRY NAME ORGANISATION
Australia Michelle Barker Australian Research Data Commons
Czech Republic Jan Hrušák Academy of Sciences + ESFRI
European
Union Keji Adunmo
DG Research & Innovation
Unit B4 – Research Infrastructure
France (chair) Vincent Mangematin Kedge Business School
Italy Lucilla Alagna CNR
Japan
Takashi Nakagawa JST (now moved to Prime minister cabinet office)
Motoo Ito Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology
(JAMSTEC)
Korea
Man Hyung Cho Hannam University
Sun Kun Oh Konkuk University
South Africa Kevin Govender International Astronomical Union
Sweden
Sofie Björling Swedish Research Council
Magnus Friberg Swedish Research Council
Switzerland  Martin Pohl University of Geneva
UK
Claire Dougan STFC
Lucy Hackett STFC
USA Joshua L. Rosenbloom Department of Economics, Iowa State University
EIROforum Frédéric Le Pimpec European XFEL GmbH
EFIS Jelena Angelis European Future Innovation System Centre

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 43

 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Technopolis
Paul Simmonds Technopolis UK
Elisabeth Zaparucha Technopolis France
OECD
Frédéric Sgard GSF Secretariat
Carthage Smith GSF Secretariat
Taro Matsubara GSF Secretariat
Jean Moulin Consultant
Frédéric Bally Consultant

44 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
9.2. Appendix 2. Research infrastructures surveyed
A representative sample of 21 RIs was surveyed for which the responses of the RI Managers
were received. The survey comprised the completion of a comprehensive written
questionnaire (with iterations where appropriate) followed by telephone interviews.
[Detailed results from the surveys are available at https://community.oecd.org/docs/DOC-
146805]
RIs surveyed:
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) (international)
Australian Synchrotron (Australia)
Diamond Light source (UK)
Centre for Functional Nanomaterials (CFN) (US)
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) (international)
National Fusion Research Institute (Korea)
Sudbury Neutrino Observatory Laboratory (SNOLAB) (Canada)
Pierre Auger Observatory (International)
Square Kilometer Array (SKA) (International)
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan Subaru Telescope (Japan)
Entoto Observatory Research Center (EORC) (Ethiopia)
National Astronomical Research Institute of Thailand (NARIT) (Thailand)
European life-sciences Infrastructure for biological Information (ELIXIR) (International)
European Advanced Translational Research Infrastructure in Medicine (EATRIS)
(International)
International Mouse Phenotype Consortium (IMPC) (International)
European Marine Biological Research Centre (EMBRC) (International)
Research Icebreaker Polarstern (Germany)
European contribution to the global Argo ocean observations network (EURO -ARGO)
(International)
Atlas of Living Australia (ALA) (Australia)
European Social Survey (ESurvey) (International)
Consortium of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA) (International)

Geographical coverage
Global (2)
International (2)
Pan-European (7)
National : EU (2) + North America (2) + Australia
(2) + Asia (3) + Africa (1)
S&T Fields and Themes
Analytical facilities (3)+Materials (1)
Physical Sciences (2 Astroparticles (Ap) + 4
Astronomy/Astrophysics (Astr)) + Energy
(Ener)(2)
Health and Food (3) + Environment (4)
Social Sciences (2)
Lifecycle
Operation (Op) (10)
Operation + major upgrade (Up) (3)
Operation + in development (Dev) (6)
Construction (Constr)(2)
RI types
Single-sited (11)
Distributed (9) (incl. 4 e-RIs)
Mobile (1)
Responses from external stakeholders (policy makers, funders, host organisations and local
authorities) were also received for a subset of 14 RIs.

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 45

 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

RI MANAGERS
(21 RIS)
Global
International
ESFRI / EIRO
National
Country
(Central Hub)
Analytical facil
Materials
Physics
Energy
Life sciences
Health & Food
Environment
SSH
Single-sited
Distributed
Mobile
e-RIs
Life cycle
EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS
(14 RIS)
GOV
FUNDE
R
HOST
LOCAL
ESRF  X X  FR X     X    Op/Up
AUSTRALIAN SR    X AU X     X    Oper   Y Y
DIAMOND    X UK X     X    Oper  Y Y
CFN    X US Mat     X    Oper
ITER X    FR  Ener    X    Constr
NFRI    X KR  Ener    X    Oper
SNOLAB    X CA  AP    X    Op/Up    Y
AUGER  X   AR  AP    X    Op/Up    Y
SKA X  X  UK  Astro     X   Constr Y
NAOJ SUBARU    X JP  Astro    X    Oper Y
EORC    X ET  Astro    X    Oper
NARIT    X TH  Astro    X    Oper
ELIXIR  X X  UK   X    X  X Op/Dev   Y
EATRIS  X X  NL   X    X   Op/Dev  Y
IMPC  X   US   X    X   Oper  Y
EMBRC  X X  FR   (X) X   X   Op/Dev
POLARSTERN    X DE    X    X  Oper  Y  Y
EuroARGO  X X  FR    X   X   Op/Dev Y
ALA    X AU    X   X  X Oper Y
ESSurvey  X X  UK     X  X  X Op/Dev   Y
CESSDA  X X  NO     X  X  X Op/Dev   Y

46 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
9.3. Appendix 3. Core Impact Indicators and their relevance according to RIs’
lifecycle and types
Relevance of CII:
Each CII is linked to a strategic objective in the following table.
However, the usefulness and the relevance of these CIIs can be different according to the
RIs’ lifecycle and to the type of activity carried out by the RI. To help  managers and
stakeholders to select their CII, we propose in Table 5 below a color code according to the
relevance. This table has been submitted to different RIs during the case studies in order to
have feedback on the relevance of each CII at different steps of the RIs’ lifecycle.
Types of RIs:
Although CIIs are designed to be usable for most RIs, the relevance of each CII may also
be variable according to the RI type. In Table 5, we have classified RIs according to three
main categories:
 Research performing RI (noted as Type 1 in Table 5):
These are RIs at which research is being carried out  either by RI scientists or by
scientific users using data produced by the RI instruments. They can be subdivided
into:
‒ Experimental facilities (e.g. particle accelerators, analytical facilities,
biomedical facilities, etc.)
‒ Observational platforms (e.g. telescopes, environmental observatories, etc.).
 Equipment provider RI (noted as Type 2 in Table 5):
These are RIs which provide technological/testing/instrumental/ICT resources and
services (e.g. support to technological development, innovation, demonstration,
prototyping, HPC).
 Data/specimen resource (noted as Type 3 in Table 5):
These are RIs that provide access to data or to sample collections to users, often
through a central portal connected to distributed nodes. They can be subdivided
into:
‒ Data-oriented infrastructures
‒ Specimen collections (Biobanks, biological archives).
These three categories are not mutually exclusive and some large international
infrastructures may fall within all 3 categories.
Colour code for Table 5
 Not relevant
 low
 medium
 high
 Very high

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 47

 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Table 5. Example of Core Impact Indicators, sorted by their lifecycle relevance and RI type
CII Planning/Construction Operation/Upgrading RI type
Be a world/regional/national scientific leading RI and an enabling facility to support science
S2- Number of
citations
  1
  2
  3
S3- Number of
publications in High
Impact factor journals
  1
  2
  3
S4- Number of projects
granted
  1
  2
  3
S6- Number of
scientific users
  1
  2
  3
S9- Collaboration
excellence (scientific)
  1
  2
  3
S10- Structuring
effects of the RI on the
scientific community
  1
  2
  3
Be an enabling facility to support innovation
T18- Patent
with a commercial use
  1
  2
  3
T20- Innovations co-
developed with
industry
  1
  2
  3
T24- Collaborative
projects with industrial
partners
  1
  2
  3
Become integrated in a regional cluster/in regional strategies / Be a hub to facilitate regional
collaborations
E34- Number of Full
time equivalent within
the RI
  1
  2
  3
S11- Papers co-
authored with regional
universities
  1
  2
  3
T25- Regional firms
using the RI facilities
  1
  2
  3
E35- Number of local /
regional suppliers
  1
  2
  3

48 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
Promote education outreach and knowledge transfer
O51- Public visibility
of the RI
  1
  2
  3
O53- Knowledge
sharing
  1
  2
  3
H43- Students trained
and distribution
  1
  2
  3
H45- Educational and
outreach activities
  1
  2
  3
Provide scientific support to public policies
O46- Production of
expert advices in
support of public
policies
  1
  2
  3
O47- Production of
resources in support of
public policies
  1
  2
  3
Provide high quality scientific data and associated services
O49- Production of
experimental,
observational data in
support of public
policies
  1
  2
  3
T27- Data sharing

  1
  2
  3
T28- Data commercial
use and data services
  1
  2
  3
Assume social Responsibility towards society
O55- Energy
consumption O56-
Waste management
  1
  2
  3
O57- Gender balance
and diversity
  1
  2
  3
O58- Corporate social
responsibility
? ? 1
? ? 2
? ? 3

ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES │ 49

 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
9.4. Appendix 4. Indicators sorted by strategic objectives
Table 6. Final list of indicators
Obj. 1: Be a national or world scientific leading RI and an enabling facility to support science
S1 Number of publications
S2 Number of citations
S3 Number of publications in High Impact factor journals
S4 Number of projects granted
S5 RI attractiveness
S6 Number of scientific users
S7 User satisfaction
H38 Trained students satisfaction
S8 User project excellence
S9 Collaboration excellence (scientific)
S10 Structuring effects of the RI on the scientific community
Obj. 2: Be an enabling facility to support innovation
T15 National grants
T16 Collaboration with national industry
T17 Patents
T18 Patents with a commercial use
T19 Co-patenting with companies
T20 Innovations co-developed with industry
T21 Joint technology development projects between RI and industry
T22 Students working for industry
T23 Projects funded by companies
T24 Collaborative projects with industrial partners
Obj. 3: Become integrated in a regional cluster/in regional strategies / be the hub to facilitate regional
collaborations
S11 Papers co-authored with regional universities
E30 Total expenditures in regional / local area
E31 Public procurement and contracts
E32 Total number of visitors and users of the RI
E33 New tax payers
E34 Number of Full time equivalent within the RI
E35 Number of local / regional suppliers
E36 Number of employees
E37 Spin-off companies
H40 Number of graduates (regional)

50 │ ASSESSING THE SCIENTIFIC AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER
T25 Regional firms using the RI facilities
T26 Collaborative projects with regional industrial partners
Obj. 4: Promote education outreach and knowledge diffusion
O50 Public awareness
O51 Public visibility of the RI
O52 Popularity of the RI (public and users)
O53 Knowledge sharing
S12 Use and production of open data
O54 Openness to public
H41 Career of students trained within the RI
H42 Grants for trainees
H43 Students trained and distribution
H44 Training programs for High School students
H45 Educational and outreach activities
Obj. 5: Provide scientific support to public policies
O46 Production of expert advices in support of public policies
O47 Production of resources in support of public policies
O48 Contribution of the RI researchers to Public Policies
Obj. 6: Provide high quality scientific data and associated services
O49 Production of experimental, observational data in support of public policies
T27 Data sharing
T28 Data commercial use and data services
T29 Data usage
H39 Use of the data for training
S13 Data openness
S14 Digital resource openness
Obj. 7: Social responsibility
O55 Energy consumption
O56 Waste management
O57 Gender balance and diversity
O58 Corporate social responsibility
