
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
OECD
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND
INNOVATION POLICIES
APRIL 2024 No. 164

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers

This paper was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee for Scientific and
Technological Policy (CSTP) on 16 April 2024 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:
DSTI/STP(2023)35/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city, or area.

Please cite this publication as:
OECD (2024), Agenda for Transformative Science, Technology and Innovation Policies, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/ba2aaf7b-en.

© OECD (2024)

The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  3
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD Agenda for Transformative Science,
Technology and Innovation Policies
Multiple crises are triggering turbulence, instability and insecurity in
contemporary societies, with impacts on economies, the environment,
politics, and global affairs. An effective response will require governments to
be more ambitious and act with greater urgency in their science, technology
and innovatio n (STI) policies to meet global challenges. Sustained
investments and greater directionality in research and innovation activities
are needed, and these should coincide with a reappraisal of STI systems and
STI policies to ensure they are “fit-for-purpose” to contribute to transformative
change agendas. This policy paper provides a framework to support
governments in making these assessments. It identifies six STI policy
orientations for transformative change that should guide these assessments.
It applies these orientations across multiple areas of STI policy, including
R&D funding, the research and innovation workforce, and international R&D
co-operation, and outlines a series of concrete actions policymakers can take
to accelerate transformative change.

Keywords: Crisis Management, Policy Innovation, Research Directionality, System Reappraisal,
Transformative Framework, R&D Cooperation, Accelerated Change, Funding Strategies.
JEL codes: O3, H12, O2, H0

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Acknowledgements
The Transformative Agenda for Scie nce, Technology and Innovation Policies has been developed in
alignment with the mandate of the OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP), with
input from its working parties and from several other OECD directorates. It has been drafted by Jessica
Ambler, Carolina Resende Haddad, and Michael Keenan (Science and Technology Policy (STP) Division,
Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation (DSTI)), and produced under the guidance of
Alessandra Colecchia, Head of STP Division.
The team extends thanks to all those who have contributed to the final version of the document. This
includes Hanna -Mari Kilpelainen, Jens Lundsgaard and Jerry Sheehan of DSTI for providing valuable
comments and guidance. Gratitude is owed to CSTP delegates and members of the Science and
Technology Policy 2025 Steering Group and Advisory Board for providing multiple rounds of oral and
written feedback. A full list of members is provided in Annex 1. Special thanks go to Catherine Beaudry,
Daniel Dufour, David Guston, Mitsunobu Kano, Paula Kivimaa, Myong Hwa Lee, Göran Marklund, James
Meadowcroft, Sylvia Schwaag-Serger, and Matthias Weber.
The Transformative Agenda also owes much to several OECD colleagues. From DSTI, this includes:
Alistair Nolan, Philippe Larrue, Mario Cervantes, and Alan Paic; Carthage Smith and Frédéric Sgard
covering the Global Science Forum (GSF); David Winickoff and Douglas Robinson covering the Working
Party on Biotechnology, Nanotechnology, and Converging Technologies (BNCT); Caroline Pauno v and
Sandra Planes Satorra covering the Working Party on Innovation and Technology Policy (TIP); Fernando
Galindo-Rueda, Silvia Appelt, and Cláudia Sarrico covering the Working Party of National Experts on
Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI); Claire Jolly from the Innovation Policies for Space and the
Ocean (IPSO) unit; and Guillermo Hernandez from the Digital Economy and Policy Division. From the
Environment Directorate: Shardul Agrawala, Stephanie Venuti, Ben Henderson, Mar Gonzalez, Deger
Saygin, and Kilian Raiser. From the Directorate for Education and Skills: Andreas Schleicher. From the
Centre for Skills: El Iza Mohamedou and Rasa Silyte-Niavas. From the Trade and Agriculture Directorate:
Julia Nielson, Frank Van Tongeren, Gregoire Garsous, and Linda Moran. From the Centre for
Entrepreneurship, SMEs, Regions and Cities: Andrew Paterson and Lucia Cusmano. From the Public
Governance Directorate: Barbara Ubaldi and Bruno Monteiro. From the Directorate for Financial and
Enterprise Affairs: Ana Novik and Noemi Gietemann. From the Development Co-operation Directorate: Ida
McDonnell, Eleanor Carey, and Benjamin Kumpf. And from the International Energy Agency: Jean-Baptiste
Le Marois, Araceli Fernandez Pales, and Simon Bennett.
The authors are grateful fo r the efforts of Sylvain Fraccola, who designed infographics and oversaw all
aspects of the publication process. Special thanks are also given to Beatrice Jeffries and Jovana Poznan
for their secretarial assistance.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  5
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table of contents
Acknowledgements 4
Reader’s Guide 7
Executive summary 8
1 The Agenda for Transformative STI Policies 9
What is the Agenda for Transformative STI Policies? 9
Why a new Transformative Agenda for STI policies now? 11
2 Transformative STI policy orientations 16
Introduction 16
Direct STI policy to accelerate transformative change 17
Embrace values in STI policies that align with achieving the transformative goals 18
Accelerate both the emergence and diffusion of innovations for transformative change 19
Promote the phase out of technologies and related practices that contribute to global problems 20
Implement systemic and co-ordinated STI policy responses to global challenges 22
Instil greater agility and experimentation in STI policy 23
3 Translating the policy orientations into policy actions 25
Introduction 25
How to direct public STI funding and private finance to support transformative change? 28
How to gear research and technology infrastructures towards transformation? 30
How to leverage enabling technologies to advance transformations? 32
How to nurture skills and capabilities required for STI-enabled transformation? 34
How to ensure market and structural conditions allow STI to support transformative change? 36
How to develop and use strategic intelligence to guide transformation? 38
How to engage society in STI to further transformative change? 40
How to deepen STI co-operation between innovation system actors for transformation? 42
How to promote cross-government coherence to co-ordinate STI-enabled transformations? 44
How to leverage international STI co-ordination to support transformation for the public good? 46
4 Further guidance and next steps 48
Modular policy guidance 48
Key policy challenge toolkits 49
Future CSTP activities 49
Endnotes 50
References 56
Annex: S&T Policy 2025 Advisory Board and Steering Group Membership 71

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

FIGURES
Figure 1.1. The Transformative Agenda’s transformative goals, policy orientations and STI policy areas 10
Figure 1.2. A stylised comparison of ‘dominant’ and ‘transformative’ STI policy orientations 14
Figure 2.1. The Transformative Agenda’s six policy orientations 16
Figure 2.2. Typical S-shaped curve of technology or practice adoption and system transformation 20
Figure 2.3. Complementary patterns of technology diffusion and phase out 21
Figure 3.1. The ten STI policy areas addressed in the Transformative Agenda 26
Figure 4.1. Next steps in supporting countries’ efforts to implement the Transformative Agenda 49

TABLES
Table 2.1. Leveraging different types of policy instruments in implementing the policy orientations 17
Table 2.2. Specific values pertinent to science and technology governance 18
Table 2.3. Examples of horizontal and sectoral public policy areas closely related to STI policy 23
Table 3.1. STI ‘resources’ policy areas and associated key policy actions for transformation 26
Table 3.2. STI ‘relations’ policy areas and associated key policy actions for transformation 27

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  7
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Reader’s Guide
The OECD Agenda for Transformative Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Policy (hereafter, the
Transformative Agenda) provides high -level guidance for national STI policymakers in formulating and
implementing reforms to support the acceleration and scale -up of positive economic and societal
transformations in the face of mounting global challenges. Many of the points raised by the Transformative
Agenda may also be of relevance to the work of a broad set of other stakeholders working in areas that
can interact with STI activities in different ways. There are multiple points of entry a nd different key
messages that readers might apply based on their roles and responsibilities in STI and STI policy systems.
• High-level decision-makers may take the most value from the introductory section, which details
how and why socio -economic systems should transform, how STI can contribute to this, and the
parallel need to transform STI and STI policy systems.
• For STI policymakers, the most applicable insights can be found in the sections covering specific
policy areas, such as research and technology infrastructures or international STI relations. Key
messages in these sections may also be useful for stakeholders who are active in sub-national,
national and international STI systems . This includes res earchers in the natural and social
sciences, international and/or intergovernmental organisations, public research organisations, and
industry, as well as entrepreneurs, civil society organisations, and citizens.
• The Transformative Agenda is also valuable for policymakers working in other policy domains,
whether these are sector -specific (e.g., energy, agriculture, transportation) or horizontal
(e.g., education, trade and investment). Many of the sections covering specific STI policy areas
underline the importance of cross-government coherence and co-ordination. These sections may
offer useful lessons on when, how and why sector -specific and horizontal policy domains should
engage more actively with the STI policy domain.
• The Transformative Agenda also alig ns with and builds on the work of STI policy
researchers and practitioners. Key messages will depend on areas of focus; however, relevant
insights are likely to be found in the sections outlining different policy orientations to help steer STI
policy towar ds transformative change. In addition, sections covering specific STI policy areas
discuss how these orientations might be translated into concrete policy actions.
• Finally, for stakeholders working to promote the global STI community , policy actions
identified in the section on international co -ordination in STI will likely be of greatest use. This
section aligns with and reframes actions raised in several other areas, such as funding and finance,
market and structural conditions, and cross -government cohe rence, from the viewpoint of
international collaboration and co -operation. Many of the actions also include specific focus on
official development assistance and the representation of emerging economies in international STI
activities.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Executive summary
Multiple crises are triggering turbulence, instability and insecurity in contemporary societies, with impacts
on economies, the environment, politics, and global affairs. The climate emergency and growing socio -
economic disparity require nothing short of a p rofound transformation of established operating models.
Rising geopolitical tensions, rapid technological change, and the reach of crises like the COVID -19
pandemic have brought resilience and security to the fore as policy concerns. Tensions like these create
pressures for the transformation of economies and societies, and more specifically, for their adjustment to
future configurations that embody desirable traits, such as sustainability, resilience and inclusiveness.
To meet global challenges, governments will need to be more ambitious and act with greater urgency in
their science, technology and innovation (STI) policies. Transformations depend on scientific knowledge
and the development and deployment of enabling technologies. These, in turn, depend on well-functioning
STI systems to generate and utilise relevant knowledge, technologies, and innovation at pace and at scale.
Sustained investments and greater directionality in research and innovation activities are need ed, and
these should coincide with a reappraisal of STI systems and STI policies to ensure they are “fit-for-purpose”
to contribute to transformative change agendas. In some instances , this may call for phasing out
established practices, while in others, their evolution or maintenance will be key. Many of the reforms are
well-known within the STI policy community yet pose significant implementation challenges.
The OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP) has developed the Trans formative
Agenda, with three core elements: transformative goals for STI to pursue, policy orientations for guiding
STI towards transformative change, and STI policy areas where change may be most urgently needed.
The Transformative Agenda provides practical guidance for policymakers and other relevant stakeholders
to formulate and implement STI reforms that will accelerate positive economic and societal
transformations. Six transformative policy orientations have been identified. These consider the value o f
STI policy being more : (i) directed toward addressing economic and societal challenges, (ii) driven by
broad-based values, (iii) attentive to scaling up and diffusing multiple forms of innovation, (iv) active in
promoting phase-out of harmful technologie s, (v) systemic and co -ordinated across multiple levels, and
(vi) experimental and agile.
It also sets out policy actions for the practical scale -up and institutionalisation of reforms in ten different
STI policy areas. All of the main aspects of STI poli cy and governance are covered, including research
and innovation funding, human resources for science and technology, STI system co -ordination
mechanisms, and evaluation and measurement.
While the Transformative Agenda provides a key starting point, more detailed guidance on the design and
reform of STI policies will be supplemented by two additional forms of support:
• Modular policy guidance for each of the ten STI policy areas covered will discuss proposed key
policy actions, potential implementation pathways and challenges posed by the status quo.
• Toolkits will provide step -by-step, interactive guidance to support users in translating policy
challenges into feasible and context-specific actions.
Future CSTP projects may use peer learning methods to exp eriment with the formulation, design and
implementation of STI policies targeting transformative change. A new series of OECD innovation policy
country reviews on transformative STI policies could also be inaugurated.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  9
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

What is the Agenda for Transformative STI Policies?
The world is facing multiple interconnected crises, from climate change and biodiversity loss to rising
conflicts and geopolitical tensions . A majority of OECD countries are e xperiencing growing levels of
inequality (Solarin et al., 2022 [1]), while the COVID -19 pandemic has reversed progress on resolving
between-country income inequality by several decades (UN, 2023[2]).1 The pandemic has also emphasised
the importance of resilience to deal with future shocks, wh ile rapid technological change and growing
strategic competition between the major powers have brought security to the fore as a key policy concern.2
The climate emergency requires nothing short of a profound transformation of sectors like energy, heavy
industry, agrifood and transportation, to shift towards more sustainable, inclusive and resilient operating
models (OECD, 2023[3]) (IEA, 2021[4]).
Science, technology and innovation (STI) are uniquely positioned to help drive the transformation of
economies and societies to meet these challenges. However, depending on the national context, STI may
need to reform to fulfil this potential. Among other things, achieving transformative change require s STI
policies to be more directional and move beyond their traditional main focus on national competitiveness
and economic growth (Diercks, Larsen and Steward, 2019 [5]). Additionally, STI policies should be
considered as part of a broader policy mix that includes policies from other sector-specific (e.g., health,
agriculture, energy ) and cross -cutting (e.g., education and trade) policy domains. Making these
adjustments has implications for the governance, co-ordination and orientation of STI policies (Fagerberg,
2018[6]).
Against this background, governments may need to revisit STI policy frameworks, visions, targets and
instruments with a view to adapting them or displacing them in favour of others that are fit -for-purpose to
promote positive transformative change (Schwaag Serger and Palmberg, 2022 [7]). To support this
reappraisal and reform of STI policy, the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP) has
developed the Agenda for Transformative Science, Technology and Innovation Policies (hereafter, the
Transformative Agenda), which is comprised of three main components (Figure 1.1):
• Transformative goals for STI to pursue . The report articulates three goals: (i) Advancing
sustainability transitions that mitigate and adapt to a legacy of unsustain able development;
(ii) Promoting inclusive socio-economic renewal that emphasises representation, diversity and
equity; and (iii) Fostering resilience and security against potential risks and uncertainties.
• Policy orientations to help steer STI policy towa rds transformative change . The report will
discuss six policy orientations , which consider the value of STI policy being more: (i ) directed
toward addressing economic and societal challenges, (ii) driven by broad -based shared values,
(iii) attentive to scaling up and diffusing multiple forms of innovation, (iv) active in promoting phase-
out, (v) systemic and co-ordinated across multiple levels, and (vi) experimental and agile.
1 The Agenda for Transformative STI
Policies

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

• STI policy areas where change may be most urgently needed. The report will consider ten STI
policy areas that , taken together, constitutea broad STI policy mix. The Transformative Agenda
outlines 4 -5 key policy actions in each STI policy area that can help promote transformative
change. The ten areas are as follows:
o STI resources: STI funding and finance ; research and technology infrastructures ; enabling
technologies; skills and capabilities; market and structural conditions; and strategic intelligence.
o STI relations: between STI and society; between the public, private and non -profit sectors;
across different parts of government; and at the international level.
Figure 1.1. The Transformative Agenda’s transformative goals, policy orientations and STI policy
areas

Note: The figure provides a visualisation of the different pieces of the Transformative Agenda and their interactions.
The remainder of the Transformative Agenda provides a high-level introduction to these three components.
Sections focused on reforming specific STI policy areas will be supplemented by two additional forms of
guidance in the future. These include the following:
• Modular guidance on the ten policy areas will provide more detail on proposed STI policy actions,
potential implementation pathways and challenges posed by the status quo. These modules will
also feature tangible, country -specific case studies to showcase emerging lesso ns and good
practice and, ultimately, establish a common evidence base for policymaking.
• Toolkits will provide step -by-step, interactive online tools for users to translate STI policy
challenges into feasible and context -specific actions. This additional g uidance is currently under
preparation and is briefly described in the final section of the Transformative Agenda.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  11
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Why a new Transformative Agenda for STI policies now?
STI policy and the transformative goals
The climate crisis, growing biodiversity loss, rising inequality and heightened geopolitical tensions create
pressure on policymakers, researchers, industry and the public to reconfigure economies and societies in
ways that improve mitigation, resilience and/or adaptation in the face of these challenges. Along these
lines, the Transformative Agenda is built around achieving three transformative goals:
• Advancing sustainability transitions that mitigate and adapt to a legacy of unsustainable
development from climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss , sometimes referred to as the
‘triple planetary crisis’. 3 Socio-economic systems should evolve to satisfy the current needs of
different individuals without compromising the ability of future generations to do the same (OECD,
2023[3]). Advancing sustainability calls for accelerated transitions in specific industries (e.g., fossil
fuels to renewable energy), technologies (e.g., internal combustion to zero emission vehicles), and
established models of production and consumption (e.g., from linear to circular economy).
• Promoting inclusive socio-economic renewal that emphasises accessibility, representation,
diversity and equity. Income inequality has a sizeable and statistically significant impact on growth
and is a key strategic consideration for economic development and societal outcomes (OECD,
2023[3]). In the context of sustainable development, ‘just’ green transition s should bring social,
environmental and economic co -benefits (Altenburg and Assmann, 2017 [8]) (OECD, 2023[9]) but
will also need to address unequal starting points and the disproportionate impacts that can occur
as a result (OECD, 2018[10]).
• Fostering resilience and security against risks and uncertainties posed by the growi ng
emergence of systemic threats. Abrupt shocks, such as the COVID -19 pandemic, have
demonstrated the importance of resilience to enable modern global socio -economic systems
(e.g., supply chains, energy production systems) to anticipate, absorb, recover from and adapt to
disruptive change (OECD, 2020, p. 11[11]) (Linkov and Palma -Oliveira, 2017[12]). These concerns
are accompanied by rising strategic competition between countries in critical technologies and
resources that underpin economic competitiveness and national security. Governments
increasingly seek greater strategic autonomy to reduce vu lnerabilities to supply chain disruptions
and to enhance their national industrial base, particularly in advanced technologies (OECD,
2023[13]).
Concerns are mounting that progress made on achieving these goals to date is not proportionate to the
urgency or magnitude of evolving global challenges. Transformations go beyond incremental change and
call for ambitious measures in firms, governments and society more broadly. 4 These include
mainstreaming mental models and frameworks that embrace transformations; new skills and capabilities
to enact transformations; new relationships, for example, between the public and private sectors, between
different sectors of the economy, and between advanced and less-developed economies to exchange and
pool resources; and greater experimentation and learning that support multiple pathways to transformation
and acknowledge its uncertainty and complexity.
While there are strong synergies and interdependencies between the transformative go als, insular efforts
to advance specific goals may compromise others. For ex ample, Open Science and international
collaboration are key to effectively addressing collective global challenges but should also take account of
national security risks (Molen et al., 2023[14]) (Federation of American Scientists, 2024 [15]). The growing
demand for renewable energy technologies should consider the increased need for metals and minerals,
whose extraction has been linked to environmental damage, child labour, human rights abuses, and armed
conflicts (Church, Crawford and Schaller, 2019 [16]). In addition, there are various costs, such as volatile
energy prices, energy security concerns, and economic disruption in regions depend ent on fossil fuels
extraction, that warrant consideration in efforts to phase out fossil fuels and reduce greenhouse gas

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

emissions. In some situations, difficult choices will be necessary and will require policymakers to prioritise
– ideally in collaboration with impacted stakeholders – economic, environmental, and security-based policy
objectives.
Science, technology and innovation are uniquely positioned to help drive transformation
Transformations are facilitated by scientific knowledge and the development and deployment of enabling
technologies. For instance, STI activities and outputs can support policymakers, researchers, industry and
civil society by:
• Contributing to the advancement and expansion of knowledge that can be mobilised rapidly
and applied in unforeseen ways. Fundamental science provides an important foundation for
applied research and the development of future technological and social innovations that support
transformation. It is also often the case that significant breakthroughs emerge from the
accumulation and combination of decades of curiosity-driven research across various fields. This
was shown most recently in the rapid development of COVID-19 vaccines,5 demonstrating how
long-term investments in R&D contribute to societal resilience.
• Accelerating the development and deployment o f innovation and technology for
transformative change. Achieving the transformative goals requires attention to the development
of novel STI -based solutions in some areas. For example, anticipated pathways to achieve net
zero are based on the rapid development and deployment of a variety of pre -commercial
technologies, such as electrolysers for green hydrogen production (IEA, 2023[17]).
• Monitoring and anticipating the evolution of natural and social systems, including the
negative impacts of specific technologies or practices. Availability and timeliness of data and
scientific research is necessary to take stock of and forecast the evolution of global challenges,
like climate change , as well as the potential consequences of the rapid uptake or phase out of
technology (e.g., threats to privacy and human rights) (OECD, 2023[13]). Research from the natural
as well as the social and behavioural sciences also provides important insights into factors that
lead to exclusion and the divergence of outcomes for different groups (e.g., the social determinants
of health).
• Building the skills and capabilities for industry, public research systems, government and
society to respond effectively to system transformation. Much STI activity is closely linked with
tertiary education systems and contributes to technical and transferable skills that are important for
transformative change across economies and so cieties. In addition, engagement between
researchers and the public, through the communication of scientific knowledge, deliberate
awareness building efforts, and public engagement initiatives, is key to improving literacy and
public trust in STI.
• Convening and co -ordinating STI system actors to co -operate on achieving the
transformative goals. Networks between industry, public research organisations and
government, and the opportunities for knowledge exchange and c apacity building they afford, are
foundational to STI advances. Recent approaches have evolved to engage a broader spectrum of
contributors, such as civil society and socially innovative actors, and improve the accessibility of
scientific advancements through Open Science agendas. Such exchanges will be important to
facilitate the development of appropriate and effective solutions to societal challenges, which are
increasingly multidimensional, multi-scalar and interdependent.
• Expanding and strengthening international linkages. Transnational STI activities offer valuable
opportunities for diplomacy and the reinforcement of shared norms and values through co -
operation, collaboration and knowledge sharing. International STI linkages can be led by states but
are also often built from the bottom -up, via individual researchers, research organisations and
business firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  13
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

There is also a need to reflect on the potential harms of STI
STI can also exacerbate problems associated with contemporary global challenges, including:
• Climate change and environmental degradation: Various technological advances and resulting
production-consumption models can be linked to different dimensions of the ‘triple planetary crisis’.
For example, it is well established that human activities have been a main contributor to rising
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gas emissions and corresponding changes in global
climate patterns (IPCC, 2007[18]) (IPCC, 2022[19]) (Rosa et al., 2015[20]).
• Inequality and societal challenges: Technology-driven development often co-exists with, or may
reinforce, absolute and relative poverty (Chataway, Hanlin and Kaplinsky, 2014 [21]). Without
appropriate distributive or inclusion measures, contemporary innovation pathways can exclude
large segments of the global population as both producers and beneficiaries of change (Planes-
Satorra and Paunov, 2017[22]).
• Vulnerability to systemic threats: The diffusion of disruptive technologies often catalyses shifts
towards new ways of working and living, which can result in patterns of unemployment and require
corresponding action (e.g., behavioural change, s kills development, regulation, etc.) (Perez and
Leach, 2022[23]). Novel technologies can also present entirely new risks, such as those introduced
by digital technologies to democracy and social cohesion (e.g., cyber attacks and misinformation),
while in other instances, technologies can exacerbate or augment established risks.
How does the Transformative Agenda differ from the status quo?
The transformative goals have featured in national and international research and innovation agendas for
some time, but insufficient progress to date in achieving collective endeavours, such as the Sustainable
Development Goals, suggests a simultaneous need for policymakers to more deliberately reform certain
aspects of STI and STI policy systems (Ciarli et al., 2022[24]). Contributing to transformations and avoiding
harms requires sustained investments and greater attention to directionality in research and innovation
activities. While research excellence and national competitiveness remain essential considerations, STI
activities should also embrace goals and practices that, by design, foster sustainability, inclusion, resilience
and security. In some instances, this may require the phase out of established ways of doing things, while
in others, the evolution or maintenance of current practices will be key. As with the greater focus being
placed on engaging with the public and co -ordinating with other policy domains, STI policy reforms may
entail a broadening of mandates to better reflect overlooked and new roles that research and innovation
could play to address global challenges. Additional concrete examples are provided in the Transformative
Agenda.
Achieving transformative goals often coincides with achieving reforms to address long-standing challenges
in STI systems. For example, progress on a range of issues – such as strengthening various linkages in
STI systems (e.g. between business and academia, between different parts of government, and between
science and society), enhancing the skills and organisational capabilities of firms, and reducing precarity
in research careers – will contribute to STI system reforms that hasten progress on the transformative
goals. Likewise, directing STI systems towards goals like inequality and resilience can facilitate progress
on these long-standing issues if transformation -friendly values are embedded in STI policymaking. Th us,
the pursuit of the transformative goals provides an opportunity to promote structural reforms that address
long-standing issues in STI systems and vice versa (Few et al., 2017[25]).
While they are hardly novel and have been in evidence for some time, broadly adopting the transformative
goals would represent a shift in the orientation of STI policy. Figure 1.2 provides an overview of this
potential shift, drawing a stylised distinction between a ’dominant’ STI policy orientation (since the 1990s)
and a more ‘transformative’ STI policy orientation that is now emerging.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 1.2. A stylised comparison of ‘dominant’ and ‘transformative’ STI policy orientations

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  15
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

While this reorientation could see considerable continuation of existing STI policy goals and practices, it
would also see important changes, building on and scaling -up experimentation with more directed,
inclusive and systemic policy approaches. In this way, a more transformative STI policy orientation is likely
to coexist with the dominant orientation, at least in the near term, with reforms occurring in a more
incremental and evolutionary process, though abrupt changes are also possible in the face of future shocks
and discontinuities (Diercks, Larsen and Steward, 2019[5]). Going forwards, and with a view to accelerating
the move towards more transformative STI policy goals and practices, there are likely multiple pathways
for reorient ation, reflecting local conditions . Despite this variety, all pathways should be guided by a
common set of ‘STI policy orientations’ to help drive transformative change.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Introduction
Implementing transformative change calls for more directional, co-ordinated and agile STI policies. While
many countries have been experimenting with policy reforms for some time, these efforts would now benefit
from being scaled up and institutionalised. . The Transformative Agenda identifies six policy orientations
that should help point STI policies towards positive transformative change . These consider the value of
STI policy being more: (i) directed toward addressing economic and societal challenges, (ii) driven by
broad-based values, (iii) attentive to scaling up and diffusing multiple forms of innovation, (iv) active in
promoting phase-out of harmful technologies and practices, (v) systemic and co-ordinated across multiple
levels, and (vi) experimental and agile. These six policy orientations, which are cross-cutting and apply to
all areas of STI policy, are summarised in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1. The Transformative Agenda’s six policy orientations

2 Transformative STI policy
orientations

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  17
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Transformative STI policies are not specific to a narrow set of policy instruments but cover the full range
of policy actions. The OECD Secretariat has mapped different types of policy instruments against the key
policy orientations , as shown in Table 2.1. Governance instruments – including national strategies and
agendas, the creation and reform of public bodies, including those that promote cross -government co-
ordination and stakeholders’ engagement, and strategic intelligence – are especially important . STI
policymakers may need to cultivate novel governance and institutional capacities for transformative change
that differ substantially from those that are in place at present. Other instruments, such as those providing
direct funding to STI activities and promoting collaboration, as well as regulat ion and guidance, will also
play significant roles and may benefit from reform. Policy instrument options are briefly discussed for each
of the policy orientations below and in subsequent sections on policy actions.
Table 2.1. Leveraging different types of policy instruments in implementing the policy orientations
Types of policy instrument Directional Values Whole chain Phase out6 Co-ordinated Agile
Governance ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●●
Direct financial measure ●●● ●● ●●● ● ●● ●●
Indirect financial measures ●● ●●
Collaboration and infrastructure ●● ● ●●● ●●● ●●
Guidance, regulation, and
incentives
●●● ● ●●● ●● ●● ●
Note: Table 2.1 shows the relevance of different types of policy instruments to the implementation of the Transformative Agenda’s six policy
orientations. Governance instruments : Strategies, agendas and plans; Creation or reform of governance structu re or public body; Policy
intelligence; Formal consultation of stakeholders or experts; Horizontal STI co-ordination bodies; Regulatory oversight and ethical advice bodies;
Standards and certification for technology development and adoption; Public awarene ss campaigns and other outreach activities. Direct
financial support instruments : Institutional funding for public research; Project grants for public research; Grants for business R&D and
innovation; Centres of excellence grants; Procurement programmes fo r R&D and innovation; Fellowships and postgraduate loans and
scholarships; Loans and credits for innovation in firms; Equity financing; Innovation vouchers. Indirect financial support instruments: Tax or
social contributions relief for firms investing in R &D and innovation; Tax relief for individuals supporting R&D and innovation; Debt guarantees
and risk sharing schemes. Collaboration and infrastructures instruments : Networking and collaborative platforms; Dedicated support to
research and technology infra structures; Information services and access to datasets. Guidance, r egulation, and incentive instruments:
Technology extension and business advisory services; Science and technology regulation and soft law; Labour mobility regulati on and
incentives; Intellectual property regulation and incentives; Science and innovation challenges, prizes and awards.
Source: Based on OECD Secretariat assessment s. The policy instrument typology is from the EC-OECD STIP Compass policy instrument
typology, 2023 edition (https://stip.oecd.org/assets/downloads/STIPCompassTaxonomies.pdf).
Direct STI policy to accelerate transformative change
The urgency and ambition of the transformative goals call for speedy collective action that prioritise
both science and technology breakthroughs and the deployment and diffusion of existing technologies and
knowledge. There is need for greater directionality in STI systems to meet the transformative goals, which
will entail the mobilisation of STI actors and resources towards specified targets, typically an ar ea of
science or technology, or an economic goal or societal challenge. Such targets can be specified and
implemented at different levels of aggregation, ranging from national strategies to the plans of individual
organisations, such as firms and universities.
Efforts to cultivate organisational and governance capabilities will support governments in setting
directions and chang ing course as needed . While policymakers influence STI directions most visibly
through their own public investments in research and innovation, they can also help to articulate shared
visions that mobilise firms (who account for most R&D and innovation activities in OECD countries) and
public sector scientists (many of whom work within academic autonomy frameworks). Many governments
are experimenting with novel policy instruments, such as challenge -based funding and mission -oriented
innovation policies (MOIPs) that bring together multiple actors, including from different policy domains, as

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

well as firms and public -sector research organ isations, to co -create and collaborate across innovation
chains on transformative pathways (OECD, 2023 [13]; Larrue, 2021 [26]). Cross -government co -ordination
with other policy domains is especially important, since market and structural conditions, such as
regulations and standards, should be aligned to facilitate technology diffusion and phase out.
Policymakers should ensure their STI policy portfolios are appropriately balance d to target global
challenges. The aim of transformative STI policy is not just to generate innovations as effectively and
efficiently as possible, but also to direct them towards meeting chosen goals. Directionality is implicit in all
policymaking by default, but the STI policy mix in many countries over the last few decades has become
more ‘horizontal’ and ‘agnostic’ on the research and innovation areas it supports. There are benefits to
adapting STI policy portfolios to more readily embody directionality towards the transformative goals, for
example, through making greater use of instruments such as R&D grants and innovative public
procurement (Uyarra et al., 2020[27]). At the same time, it is important that STI policy portfolios are able to
contend with the uncertainty of unfolding events and developments, not to mention the uncertainties raised
by advances in science and technological innovation themselves. Support to STI should therefore be
sufficiently diverse to research, develop and deploy the necessary range of knowledge and a portfolio of
technologies to tackle global challenges.
Embrace values in STI policies that align with achieving the transformative goals
The transformative goals mean STI policy should embrace a broader set of values . Values are an
inherent element of all policy decisions. They are reflected in the STI priorities that governments set and
enact through the activities and areas they support. They also underpin much of the logic that drives how
STI systems operate. The transformative goals broaden the foundational values underpinning STI policy,
placing greater emphasis on respecting human rights; promoting safety, security and privacy, democratic
values, and sustainable development; and encouraging equity and inclusion.7
There are also values specific to science and technology, which emphasise principles such as trust,
openness, transparency, reciprocity and responsibility in science and technology (Table 2.2). These
provide a moral and political basis for the priorities and trade -offs that are a feature of all science and
technology governance decisions.
Table 2.2. Specific values pertinent to science and technology governance
Specific values pertinent to science Specific values pertinent to technology governance
• Freedom of scientific research encompasses the right
to freely define research questions, choose and develop
theories, and gather empirical material to question
accepted wisdom and bring forward new ideas.
• Open science refers to efforts to make the primary
outputs of publicly funded research publicly accessible
as a means for accelerating research.
• Research integrity refers to certain values, norms, and
principles that constitute good scientific practice,
including trust, honesty, accountability, respect and
responsibility.
• Reciprocity involves the practice of exchanging
research materials, outputs, and knowledge in a manner
that benefits all collaborating partners.Equity is an
important consideration with regard to reciprocity.
• Well-being of citizens involves science responding to
the needs of society.
• Trustworthiness includes ensuring that technologies, actors and their
decisions can be counted on for accuracy, reliability and regulatory
compliance.
• Responsibility involves the attribution of the consequences, positive or
negative, of actions and decisions related to technologies, as well as
accountability to those affected or to society in general.
• Transparency involves giving an open and honest description of
information conveyed, its justification, and limitations, in language that is
understandable and accessible.
• Technology stewardship places a duty with sufficient expertise and
knowledge to create and use technology in ways that are aligned with
foundational values and promote public goods.
• Innovation for public good emphasises the important benefits to society
from technology innovation, and the need to lower unnecessary barriers to
achieve that goal.
• Responsiveness requires meeting the expectation that promised
technological outcomes are delivered in a timely way.
Source: Adapted from OECD (2022[28]) and OECD (2024[29]).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  19
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

In science, for example, a values -based approach can help design policies that promote open science
while acknowledging the importance of working with trusted and values -aligned partners to advance
responsible and diverse, equitable and inclusive internati onal co-operation to address global challenges
(OECD, 2022[28]). This may require actors to make choices when there is conflict between different policy
objectives, such as economic, environmental, and security-based priorities. A values-based approach can
also ensure that the development and governance of technologies are underpinned by high -level ethical
standards and responsible practices (OECD, 2023 [13]). Embedding values in the innovation process
requires several steps, however, including building robust processes and forums in which to deliberate on
the choice of values and how they should be applied across innovation chains (from R&D agenda setting
through to technology diffusion and deployment) (OECD, 2024[29]). These require dedicated governance
arrangements, including institutions for deliberation and decision-making, as well as strategic intelligence.
Broader values can also be incorporated into policy instrument design, for example, in the selection criteria
for grant funded projects.
Accelerate both the emergence and diffusion of innovations for transformative
change
A mix of knowledge, innovatio n, and novel and existing technologies is needed to achieve the
transformative goals. For example, the IEA estimates that more than a third of the emissions reductions
required in 2050 to achieve net zero scenarios will come from technologies that are stil l in the lab (IEA,
2023[17]). Achieving net zero therefore requires a mix of new R&D and demonstration activities, together
with the deployment and diffusion of existing technologies. Moreover, the resulting sustainability and digital
transitions go beyond the adoption of new technolog ies and include investment in new infrastructures,
establishment of new markets, development of new social preferences, and support for people of working
age and communities in attaining new skills and opportunities as part of ‘just green transitions’ (Geels
et al., 2017[30]). Non-technological innovations, including social and process innovations , among others,8
will also make important contributions.
Transformations proceed in phases that typically follow S-shaped curve dynamics (Victor, Geels
and Sharpe, 2019[31]; Meadowcroft et al., 2021[32]).9 Due to their complexity, transformations rarely follow
a linear process. Instead, they are made up of collections of diverse and iterative pathways where the pace
of change ramps up and tapers off depending on the phase (Loorbach, Frantzeskaki and Avelino, 2017[33]).
Summarising the phases as shown in Figure 2.2:
• A transformation may start with a relatively long period of experimentation, in which new
technologies and practices are developed and tested and there is competition among promising
but far-from-perfect alternatives. The aim of policy at this stage is to support a variety of alternative
solutions to challenge and transform incumbent technologies and practices. In addition to bottom-
up experimentation, policymakers can leverage major structural and institutional changes and
reforms, such as new regulation or changes in international trade and investment patterns, to drive
and support the emergence and diffusion of innovations for transformative change.
• Experimentation is followed by expansionist acceleration and emergence phases, which see
growing convergence on standardised solutions and wide scale adoption. For this to happen,
however, new technologies and practices need to cross ‘valleys of death’ between R&D activities
and market entry. The aim of policy is to strengthen market formation by creating new customer
demand and promoting price-performance improvements (Kivimaa and Kern, 2016[34]). As Figure 3
shows, many promising technologies and practices do not proceed beyond this phase because of
lock-in and path dependency dynamics associated with established technologies and
infrastructures. There can also be backlash, for example, where disadvantaged groups

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

successfully lobby against the abolition of environmentally damaging fuel subsidies and thereby
weaken market incentives to pursue low-carbon innovation.
• In later institutionalisation and stabilisation phases, new arrangements become dominant,
adjustments with adjacent systems are completed, and the regulatory framework is adapted to the
new configuration. STI policies have a lesser influence during this phase.
Figure 2.2. Typical S-shaped curve of technology or practice adoption and system transformation

Source: Hebinck et al. (2022[35]) adapted from Loorbach, Frantzeskaki and Avelino (2017[33]); and Meadowcroft et al. (2021[32]).
Promote the phase out of technologies and related practices that contribute to
global problems
Achieving the transformative goals will require governments to deliberately enact policies to phase
out, discontinue, and divest from harmful technologies and activities in parallel to policies that
promote the development and diffusion of novel solutions (Rogge and Johnstone, 2017 [36]). This aligns
with policymakers more deliberately embrac ing values, such as sustainable development, safety and
security, equity and inclusion, and innovation for the public good, in the design of policy. Without these
interventions, there is substantial risk that emerging alternatives may be unable to compete with
established solutions.10 Phase out measures can help create or augment ‘protected spaces’, which might

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  21
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

be necessary to shield and scale up directional technologies, innovations, and practices. In addition, efforts
to divest from certain sectors or activities should also be accompanied by measures that will protect
impacted workers and communities.
The build-up of new technologies and practices co-evolves with the phase-out of established ones.
Figure 2.3 shows a n archetypal pattern of how phase -out can proceed . Established technologies and
practices may come under continued , destabilising external pressure. This can lead to uncertainty and
ambiguity and eventually to their phase out. 11 In successful transformations, these breakdown dynamics
are accompanied by the build-up dynamics shown in Figure 2.2. Figure 2.3 is commonly referred to as the
‘X-curve framework’ and captures the co -evolution of patterns of build -up and breakdown (Loorbach,
Frantzeskaki and Avelino, 2017[33]) (Hebinck et al., 2022[35]).
Figure 2.3. Complementary patterns of technology diffusion and phase out

Source: Hebinck et al. (2022[35]) adapted from Loorbach, Frantzeskaki and Avelino (2017[33]). Types of lock-in adapted from Rosembloom and
Rinscheid (2020[37]).
Historically, STI policy has paid less attention to processes of discontinuation and phase out due
to its natural inclination towards creating novelty (Koretsky et al., 2023[38]). Other policy areas with
regulatory and fiscal powers have taken the lead, for example, through policies designed to motivate or
require specific actions from industry (e.g., technology bans and carbon taxes), and throu gh diminished
support for established technologies and practices (e.g., elimination or reduction of fossil fuel subsidies)
(Kivimaa and Kern, 2016[34]). STI policies should co-ordinate more closely with these related policy areas
to articulate transformative policy portfolios. Other efforts that can facilitate phase out include programmes
to support the adaptation or discontinuation of particular practices and processes, disincentivising
experimentation with existing damaging technologies, 12 and repositioning research and techn ology
infrastructures to prioritise the needs of transformative innovations over established alternatives.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Implement systemic and co-ordinated STI policy responses to global challenges
Accelerating transformative change means intervening in complex systems. Most change in systems
proceeds incrementally, involving piecemeal adjustment of technologies and societal practices. Although
transformations can be sudden and swift, they typically take time to unfold and move through different
phases that face various impediments. The urgency to address global challenges means th at deliberate
action may be necessary to accelerate respective transformations. This involves multiple adjustments to
technologies, business practices, regulatory frameworks, and consumer behaviour. Transformative
change is non-linear, however, which makes it messy and unsuited to ‘command -and-control’ notions of
policy intervention. Pr edicting development paths is impractical since the direction and outcomes of
innovations are unknown, and shifts in economic or political conditions, societal opposition, or unexpected
events can stall, reverse, or reorient transformative pathways (Meadowcroft and Rosenbloom, 2023 [39]).
So while transformations call for bold and urgent policy interventions, these should be sufficiently flexible
to seize new opportunities and tackle unexpected challenges as they arise.
STI policy should identify ‘leverage points’ for interventions that acknowledge positive and negative
feedback dynamics, the distribution of power within systems, and the necessity to sequence change to
unlock potential pathways. These leverage points represent places within systems in which one small
change can lead to bigger changes everywhere (Meadows, 1999 [40]). In this respect, there is growing
interest in using public policies to help trigger ‘positive tipping points’ (Tàbara et al., 2021[41]; Systemiq,
University of Exeter and Bezos Earth Foundation, 2023 [42]; UN, 2023 [43]) that reinforce feedbacks and
virtuous cycles to accelerate transformative change.13 A more deliberate search for positive tipping points
could identify opportunities to accelerate tra nsformative change (Lenton et al., 2023 [44]; Sharpe and
Lenton, 2021[45]). However, this will require policymakers and governments to embrace and cultivate a
different set of skills, capabilities and processes, in complement to what may currently be in place.
Progress on global challenges requires collective and orchestrated action. Targeting global
challenges and their broad agendas explicitly involves a wide mix of stakeholders from firms, government,
public research and civil society, which increases the complexity for co-ordinated action. Governments can
cultivate organisational capabilities to support collective efforts that set directions and steward systemic
change itself (OECD, 2018 [46]). For example, policymakers can work with stakeholders to develop and
implement shared goals and visions for transformation, which can help reduce uncertainty and ambiguity,
as multiple actors work towards common goals and solutions. This can occur domestically as well as
internationally with the use of tools like global climate agreements. Policymakers should also deploy other
policy instruments, including funding for collaborative R&D, mission -oriented innovation policies (MOIPs),
and networking and collaborative platforms, to promote collective action on transformations.
STI policy interventions should also be tailored to specific sectors and places, since transformation
journeys tend to be at different phases and face different impediments. For example, sectors like energy
(IEA, 2023 [17]), agrifood (OECD, 2022 [47]), and transport (ITF, 2023 [48]) are at different phases in their
decarbonisation journeys, face different barriers and enablers, and will depend on different
reconfigurations of actors and technologies to reach net zero (OECD, 2023 [49]). While low -carbon
innovations are rapidly diffusing in transport, a focus on emissions reduction as part of sustainable
productivity growth is only more recently emerging in agrifood (OECD, 2023[50]; Victor, Geels and Sharpe,
2019[31]). Given this variety, STI policymakers should co -ordinate with other policy domains to design and
implement transformative systems policies (Table 2.3). In some of these areas, frameworks and good
practice may already exist to enable transformations .14 At the same time, transformations should be
promoted at multiple levels of government (local, regional, national and supra-national), which calls for
their active co -operation to clarify roles and responsibilities and to ensure that policies at all levels of
government are well aligned. For example, in federalist jurisdictions, many of the policy domains outlined
in Table 2.3 are, at minimum, the partial responsibility of sub-national authorities. More generally, a strong

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  23
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

place-based approach is beneficial to tailor STI policy interventions to specific local conditions (OECD,
2019[51]; OECD, 2020[52]).
Table 2.3. Examples of horizontal and sectoral public policy areas closely related to STI policy
Examples of horizontal policies
Tax and finance Public spending, including departmental spending and capital investment, which determine the level of public
expenditure on STI; Taxation, including general corporate taxes, carbon taxes, R&D tax incentives, etc., that
influence the propensity of firms to conduct R&D and innovate; Financial services regulation, which
circumscribe the risk profiles and investment roles institutional investors and others can assume.
Economy, industry and
trade
Market rules and regulations that promote competition and consumer protection, which impact rates of
innovation in economies; New industrial policies, including subsidies, that seek to promote high-tech sectors
of the economy; Investment promotion, both inward and outward, that shape the profile of business
ecosystems and business activities in an economy and their international linkages, which, in turn, influence the
types and levels of R&D and innovation performed; International rules on investment, such as state aid
regulations, which place restrictions on the types of support governments can offer innovative firms; Trade
policies, including export promotion, international agreements that remove trade barriers, and export controls
and other measures to promote economic security and resilient supply chains, all of which shape the locations
of production and consumption of high-tech products and services; Subsidisation or support for the
development of infrastructure or deployment of STI-based solutions with applications across sectors, such
as fibre broadband or cleantech.
Education and
employment
Investments in education, from early learning to tertiary education, including adult learning and retraining,
which provide the skills necessary for R&D and innovation; Promotion of access to education and training,
particularly for under-represented groups, that promote equity and diversity in the STI workforce; Regulations
and promotion of international workers, which influence the pool of scientists and other knowledge workers
in an economy.
Environmental
protection
Environmental regulations that promote biodiversity, pollution control, waste management, natural resource
management, etc., which shape R&D and innovation in the public and private sectors, both to develop new
products and services and to ensure regulatory compliance.
Foreign affairs and
international
development
Science and technology diplomacy initiatives that promote international STI linkages, particularly with low-
and middle-income countries; Official development assistance, which increasingly incorporates STI
elements, including voluntary technology transfer on mutually agreed terms, and the development of STI skills
and capabilities, to bolster global efforts that tackle global challenges.
Examples of sectoral policies
Health and social care Sectoral policies in many OECD countries include considerable R&D and innovation support activities and
capabilities, which can complement funding initiatives under the direct purview of STI ministries and agencies.
Sectoral policies include significant standards and regulation that shape related STI activities. These are
especially important in later phases of transformation, since they shape the environment for new technologies
to emerge and diffuse and for established ones to be phased-out.
Sectoral policies play leading roles in creating markets for new technologies and innovation, for example,
through public procurement.
Energy
Transport
Agriculture and food
Construction
Defence
Instil greater agility and experimentation in STI policy
Governments should further embrace policy experimentation to develop the novel solutions
needed to achieve the transformative goals. There is increasing recognition that conventional regulatory
approaches are ill-equipped to contend with the complexity, unpredictability, and speed of innovation and
broader system transformations (Centre for Regulatory Innovation, 2021 [53]).15 Emerging tools and
methodologies that embody experimenta tion, engagement, and iteration represent promising
advancements in this respect. Policy experimentation involves a deliberate and systematic approach to
testing new ideas, policies, or interventions to assess their potential impact and inform evidence -based
decision making. It can enable STI policymakers to balance policy flexibility and stability by testing and

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

iterating a range of policy options before choosing the programmes to scale up (Kuhlmann and Ri p,
2014[54]).
Experimentation requires particular skills and tools, but also a culture that encourages evaluation, risk
tolerance, critical assessment of the status quo and a willingness to investigate, negotiate and integrate
diverse insights (Lindner et al., 2016[55]). Many governments are already exploring ways to create ‘safe
spaces’ for experimentation inside the public sector, using, for example, policy innovation labs (Monteiro
and Kumpf, 2023[56]), living labs (Fuglsang and Hansen, 2022[57]), trusted environments (OECD, 2020[58]),
regulatory sandboxes (Attrey, Lesher and Lomax, 2020 [59]), and crowdsourcing platforms (Arnold et al.,
2023[60]). However, their adoption remains relatively nascent in most jurisdictions and sectors. These
efforts can now be scaled up to become more routine. In this respect, top-level sponsorship and sustained
support will be key, together with the adoption of robust methodologies for experimentation and
corresponding measurement and evaluation (OECD, 2023[61]) (Monteiro and Kumpf, 2023[56]).
Pursuing transformative goals involves novelty, uncertainty and complexity, thus it is important
that policies can be swiftly adapted to reflect new developments. Transformations can follow multiple
pathways and tend to evolve differently than originally expected on account of complex dynamics.
Continuous reassessment and adaptation of priorities and programming is necessary to leverage
opportunities, avoid bottlenecks and deadlocks, and act on evolving evidence and public sentiment in real
time. This calls for agile policy -making processes that prepare for and respond quickly and effectively to
changing circumstances, emerging trends, and evolving challenges, targeting a ction at where it is most
needed. Agility also refers to the ability to halt policy initiatives that are unsustainable or do not deliver
expected outcomes. Among the practices governments are already using are horizon scanning, early -
warning systems, and nowcasting (Arnold et al., 2023[60]).
A diverse range of strategic intelligence is essential for agile and experimental STI policy to
succeed. This includes benchmarks, real -time monitoring, and future -oriented analysi s to anticipate
change and the threats and opportunities it entails, to monitor system performance, and to monitor policy
interventions, including their effectiveness and efficiency (Robinson, Winickoff and Kreiling, 2023[62]; Rotolo
et al., 2017[63]). Inclusive and anticipatory intelligence tools, like technology assessment and foresight, can
help identify future opportunities and threats, and help formulate collective long-term visions and near-term
action plans. Formative evaluations can support lea rning on the non-linear cause and effect relationships
that characterize transformations and the aggregate impact of policy portfolios across different industries
and societal systems (Janssen, 2019[64]).

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  25
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Introduction
In translating the policy orientations into concrete actions, policy measures should be directed at specific
actions that may be needed to help achieve transformations rather than ‘ business-as-usual’ outcomes.
Depending on the policy area, such actions might, for example, integrate directionality and targeted values
into policymaking processes; support, as required, the development, demonstration, deployment and
phase out of a divers ity of STI activities and outputs; and develop portfolios of policies that are co -
ordinated, agile and experimental. Transformations may require the phase out of established ways of doing
things, while in other instances, the evolution or maintenance of current practices may be key. Many of the
necessary reforms are familiar to the STI policy community, but barriers remain, for example, in bridging
aspirational strategy with the development and implementation of concrete policy interventions and in
scaling-up and institutionalising corresponding policy innovations.
Transformative change is often associated with radical reforms, but small incremental changes may cause
a system to shift qualitatively where it is close to a tipping point (Feola, 2015 [65]). In most instances,
however, transformation is likely to be a long -term process triggered by a number of different events that
together contribute to a wider shift (Few et al., 2017[25]). Some of these events may be disruptive shocks
and discontinuities that policymakers can leverage to enact major structural and institutional reforms to
drive transformative change. At the same time, a progressive series of incremental changes in a policy mix
can also combine into a deeper intervention that disrupts the status quo and creates system-wide change
(Schumer et al., 2022 [66]) (Allen and Malekpour, 2023 [67]). This perspective lies at the heart of the
Transformative Agenda, and acknowledges that bringing about a fundamental transformational change in
STI will require changes across many fronts (HM Treasury, 2022 [68]), adapting as lessons are learnt on
what does and does not work (Jetel, 2022[69]). All aspects of STI policy and governance are implicated
(Figure 3.1) and can be considered in terms of:
• STI Resources:: STI funding and finance, research and technology infrastructures, enabling
technologies, skills and capabilities, market and structural conditions, and strategic intelligence.
• STI Relations: between STI and society; between the public, private and non-profit sectors; across
different parts of government; and at the international level.
This section introduces some of the main challenges in these STI policy areas and outlines a suite of
corresponding policy actions that could facilitate the transformation of STI and STI policy systems. These
are summarised in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. Some policy actions will be easier to implement than others,
depending on local conditions in a country or sector. The OECD is preparing additional policy guidance to
aid policymakers to implement these policy actions and the Transformative Agenda’s policy orientations
more broadly.
3 Translating the policy orientations
into policy actions

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 3.1. The ten STI policy areas addressed in the Transformative Agenda

Table 3.1. STI ‘resources’ policy areas and associated key policy actions for transformation
Policy area Key policy actions
1. Public funding and
private financing of
STI activities
• Introduce governance arrangements that promote agile STI funding and financing
• Broaden stakeholder engagement and decision criteria in STI funding instrument design and implementation
• Deploy funding portfolios that include significant support for high-risk high-reward research and the development of
breakthrough technology
• Socialise some higher levels of risk to encourage multiple investors to co-finance transformative STI
2. Research and
technology
infrastructures
• Adopt strategic funding approaches that enhance stability, while enabling agility and synergies within a portfolio of
activities
• Support the co-ordinated and collaborative development and use of RIs/TIs to tackle complex and interconnected
global challenges
• Confirm RIs/TIs as sites for generating and stewarding high-quality data and technology for transformations
• Leverage RIs/TIs to address skills scarcity and mismatch associated with transformation
3. Enabling
technologies
• Accelerate the productivity of research through AI and automation in science
• Mainstream the digital transformation into achieving the transformative goals
• Leverage digital technologies to facilitate decision-making in STI policy and administration
• Embed shared values into technology development and governance to advance public good while mitigating against
potential risks
• Reinforce international co-operation in STI development through common ethical practices, norms and
understanding of good technology governance
4. Skills and
capabilities
• Monitor and respond to misaligned skills supply and demand to facilitate equitable transformative change
• Invest in building digital expertise and specialised skills and knowledge in diverse communities
• Cultivate a scientific research workforce that is resilient and diverse
• Build organisational capabilities to manage the cross-cutting and long-term nature of transformation
5. Structural and
market conditions
• Co-ordinate with other policy areas to level the playing field for transformative technology and innovation to
successfully compete
• Promote international technical standards to unlock new markets and weaken the appeal of established technologies
• Adopt regulatory approaches that are agile, technology neutral and human-centered
• Use IPR systems to drive innovation and foster the wide uptake of transformative technologies
• Harmonise, legitimise and institutionalise transformative investment approaches
6. Strategic
intelligence
• Support novel and distributed sources of strategic intelligence to tackle global challenges
• Develop arrangements to combine different sorts of strategic intelligence for STI policymaking
• Cultivate skills and capabilities that promote the utilisation of strategic intelligence in STI policymaking
• Implement a strategic ‘policies for evidence’ agenda that promotes the production and use of strategic intelligence
for transformative change

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  27
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 3.2. STI ‘relations’ policy areas and associated key policy actions for transformation
Policy area Key policy actions
7. Society-STI
relations
• Improve STI communication practices to cultivate mutual trust and understanding
• Engage diverse and inclusive perspectives to develop more robust and relevant STI-based solutions
• Mainstream and scale up public participation in STI activities and policymaking
• Advance and empower citizen-led STI activities through experimentation and knowledge sharing
8. STI co-operation • Build innovation ecosystems and value chains that support transformation
• Develop flexible governance approaches for collaborations targeting transformation
• Promote collaborative platforms to support innovation for transformative change
• Disrupt established knowledge hierarchies that impede the adoption of insights from diverse disciplines
9. Cross-government
coherence
• Actively co-ordinate and align priorities and interventions across government
• Promote consistency of policy actions across levels of government
• Harmonise government infrastructure and procedure to improve knowledge sharing and co-operation
• Streamline complex governance arrangements
10. International co-
ordination in STI
• Align national transformative STI priorities and co-ordinate funding for research and innovation activities to address
global challenges
• Strengthen Open Science and knowledge sharing to improve global resilience and scale up efforts to address
collective challenges
• Safeguard research integrity and security of the global research system
• Scale up inclusive multilateral partnerships to respond effectively and equitably to global challenges
• Foster international market conditions that enhance competitiveness and equitable access to emerging STI-based
solutions

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to direct public STI funding and private finance to support transformative
change?
Transformative change calls for ambitious levels of STI investment over a long period, covering all parts
of the innovation chain, from exploratory fundamental research to the deployment and diffusion of tested
technologies. These investments are distributed among a variety of different actors within public research
and innovation systems as well as private industry. As such, they include public funding for STI from
research and innovation ministries and agencies, as well as from sectoral ministries and agencies in areas
like energy, tran sport, agriculture and health. They also cover private financing for STI, for example, by
research and innovation performing firms (including foreign direct investors), 16 banks, non-profit or
philanthropic organisations, and other sources of innovative finance, all of which can be spurred by public
policies.
As well as sustaining R&D expenditure s, governments should consider the ways their investments are
made and which parts of the innovation chain they target. For instance, in supporting research performed
in universities and public research institutes, governments need to consider balancing challenge-based
R&D funding, which can help direct research and innovation efforts towards the transformative goals, with
curiosity-driven basic science, which is associated with various breakthroughs and contributes to a global
stock of knowledge that furnishes societies with resilience.
The last two decades have seen considerable change in the policy instruments deployed by most OECD
countries to support busi ness R&D, with a near -universal shift from direct funding support, e.g., through
grants, to a greater reliance on R&D tax incentives. While both types of measure are useful, the growing
urgency to deal with key societal challenges, like climate change, points to value in taking a more directive
approach.
A further important policy question is how much to invest on diffusion of existing technologies and
innovation on the one hand compared to R&D and technology demonstration on the other. While both are
needed, the relative importance of deployment support (market pull) vis -à-vis R&D and demonstration
support (technology push) should increase with the movement from immature technologies towards
technologies closer to market competitiveness (OECD, 2023[3]) (Cervantes et al., 2023[70]).
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Introduce governance arrangements that promote agile STI funding and financing : More
flexible funding and agenda setting processes can improve the resilience of STI systems and their
ability to respond more readily and effectively to emerging crises and evolving societal challenges.
While funding flexibility (e. g., reallocation or carry -over of funds) has increased in a majority of
OECD countries in recent years, it will be important for this to be accompanied with greater focus
on particular objectives and accountability (OECD, 2 017[71]). This may require fundamental
changes to agenda and budget setting processes,17 and amendments to the underlying evaluation
and incentive frameworks used in public R&D to disrupt STI system siloes. There is also scope to
continue to experiment with policy innovations adopted in response to the COVID -19 pandemic,
such as improved communication between funders and recipients and rapid review processes
(OECD, 2023 [72]). Promoting flexibility could also encompass a range of funding mechanisms
targeting STI in firms, such as sustainable finance labs and agile innovation funds targeting
companies new to R&D (Loorbach, Schoenmaker and Schramade, 2020 [73]; Enterprise Ireland,
2022[74]). In addition, c hallenge-based or mission -oriented research should leave sufficient

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  29
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

autonomy for researchers to choose among diverse technology avenues to achieve set objectives,
in order to allow for the development of “unexpected” technology solutions (de Silva et al., 2023[75]).
• Broaden stakeholder engagement and decision criteria in STI funding inst rument design
and implementation : The barriers to achieving the transformative goals are multidimensional,
multi-scalar, interdependent, and evolving. Challenge -based research benefits from to integrate
expertise and insights from different disciplines and different sectors of society. Expanding the
public funding allocated to broadly collaborative activities will be key, yet in many countries and
scientific fields, collaborative research, particularly those that are trans -disciplinary, remain
relatively rare. Academic research and assessment processes that prioritise traditional academic
outcomes, such as journal publications, can disincentivise collaborative STI activities that seek to
convene actors from different scientific disciplines and sectors. Polic ymakers should revisit and,
as far as it is feasible, reorient established ex ante assessment and ex post evaluation funding
criteria frameworks to incentivise inter- and trans-disciplinary research.18
• Deploy portfolios of funding instruments that include significant support for high-risk high-
reward research and the development of breakthrough technology: An increasing concern of
the scientific community in recent years is that research funding processes have become too
conservative and encourage only incremental advances in STI. Failure to encourage and support
research on risky, ‘out of the box’ ideas may jeopardise a country’s longer -term ability to compete
economically and to harness science for solving national and global challenges. Policymakers
should provide political long-term support for risk-taking and long-time horizons for high-risk high-
reward research,19 while funding agencies should experiment with different approaches (OECD,
2021[76]).20 Similarly, d irect measures, including R&D grants, loans and credits, and public
procurement, are superior to indirect measures (e.g. R&D tax incentives) for supporting
breakthrough innovation and technology in firms that will be critical to advancing sustainability
transitions and the resilience of socio -economic systems (OECD, 2021[77]). Measures like these
should be more prominent in STI policy portfolios. 21 Given scientific research and technological
innovation are inherently uncertain, policy support should ‘spread bets’ on a diversity of solutions
using a portfolio approach . This will help avoid technological lock -ins and develop the absorptive
capacities to acce ss knowledge and technologies developed elsewhere. A portfolio approach
should also balance funding support across stages of the innovation chain and promote
interactions and complementarities between stages to help steward ideas from conception to
application and bridge particular ‘valleys of death’.22 There is no one-size-fits-all and composition
of these portfolios and the research areas, technologies, industries, and other forms of innovation
that are prioritised will depend significantly on the current context of individual countries and their
desired future visions.
• Socialise some higher levels of risk to encourage multiple investors to co -finance
transformative STI: Several capital market failures discourage the allocation of private investment
into technologies that promote transformative change.23 For example, there are often longstanding
alternatives to low carbon technologies, while deep technology solutions are well-known for being
more intensive with timelines for development that do not align with private sector investment
requirements. Governments can use risk-mitigation tools, such as first-loss mechanisms and equity
guarantee schemes, to help firms cross ‘valleys of death’ at various stages in the innovation chain.
Approaches like ‘blended finance’, which initially emerged as an innovative tool in the development
community to crowd in private financing for sustainability projects in developing countries (Samans,
2016[78]), are gaining traction in the STI policy field as a way to combine public and private finance
across the innovation chain (OECD, 2022 [79]) (Miedzinski et al., 2020 [80]). Governments should
continue to experiment with these approaches, which have the potential to direct STI finance and
help scale up private investments in R&D and innovation to better meet global challenges in both
developed and developing countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to gear research and technology infrastructures towards transformation?
Research infrastructures (RIs) and techn ology infrastructures (TIs) are essential for state -of-the-art
research and innovation in most scientific and technological fields. RIs are diverse in nature , from very
large and/or international RIs to smaller facilities hosted in many public research institutes , research and
technology organisations (RTOs) and universities , including technical and polytechnic universities . An
increasing number of RIs are composed of several facilities located in different sites. RIs also include e-
infrastructures and digital repositories, as well as high-performance computing infrastructures. TIs are
similar to RIs in that they have a service mission and are located in RTOs and universities. However, their
activities aim to produce technological and social innovations for the needs of industry and the public sector
rather than fundamental research. This distinction can be context and country -specific as many facilities
support both basic and applied research.
RIs/TIs have the potential to contribute significantly to the advancement and acceleration of transformative
change agendas. In part, this is rooted in the diversity of roles they play in STI systems. Besides knowledge
production, RI/TIs convene diverse collaborations, generat e and stor e high-quality data, develop and
deploy enabling technologies, and deliver education and training. Notably, facilities found in RIs/TIs, such
as demonstrators, testbeds, piloting facilities and living labs , are essential for supporting the challenging
stage of solution demonstration and scale up. At the same time, there is also a risk that RIs/TIs represent
consequential sites of lock -in, in terms of substantial sunk inves tments and obligations to influential
stakeholders, which can hamper transformative agendas.
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Adopt strategic funding approaches that enhance stability , while enablin g agility and
synergies within a portfolio of activities: RIs/TIs represent long-term strategic investments in
R&D, which are indispensable for enabling and developing research and innovation with broader
socio-economic impacts. They therefore require careful planning and continuous and stable
support, which goes beyond mere financial considerations (OECD, 2017 [81]). Furthermore, their
sustainability cannot be solely addressed at the individual facility level. The diversity of missions
and users of RIs/TIs requires that funders and governments take a broader and more collaborative
portfolio management approach to allow for long-term planning, to reconcile the need for flexibility
with financial constraints, and to facilitate the development of synergies (OECD/Science Europe,
2020[82]).
• Support the co -ordinated and collaborative development and use of RIs/TIs to tackle
complex and interconnected global challenges : RIs/TIs are uniquely positioned as ‘system
intermediaries’ to support interdisciplinary and intersectoral research and innovat ion efforts that
tackle cross -cutting issues, reduce duplication and uncover synergies. Many RIs are open to
scaling up activities with industry but are limited by current expectations and incentives. Structural
siloes and procedural bottlenecks challenge the development of integrated RIs/TIs ecosystems
and diverse collaborations (Larrue and Strauka, 2022[83]). Yet the COVID-19 crisis highlighted the
added value of RIs /TIs working together to address complex scientific and social issues (OECD,
2023[84]). Experimenting with more flexible and inclusive in -kind contribution and access models
can promote integrated RIs/TIs ecosystems that strengthen the connection of fundamental science
to solving complex societal challenges (OECD, 2023 [85]). Incentivising co -investment and co -
development with industry can strengthen partnerships and extend the influence of public funding
for TIs.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  31
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

• Confirm RIs/TIs as sites for generating and stewarding high-quality data and technology for
transformations: The data management and stewardship capacities and policies of RIs/TI s will
play an important role in advancing Open Science agendas, while also contributing to the security
and integrity of research activities and outputs. Co -ordination and co-operation across RIs will be
key to improving data findability and interoperabil ity across scientific fields through transparent
standards (GloPID-R, 2019 [86]). Furthermore, due to requirements for high excellence and the
validation of data by a broad user base, RIs/TIs represent a unique source of trustworthy data for
policymakers and the public. The facilities and expertise of TIs to test, standardise and scale -up
technologies, including deep technologies, will be crucial in developing new solutions. TIs are also
a critical component of the quality infrastructure and underlying strategic intelligence used to
ensure the quality and safety of STI-based solutions (Kellermann, 2019[87]) (Brown, Knee and Blind,
2022[88]). Funders should thus provide the necessary resources to support these activities. In
addition, collaborative and innovative funding models, such as the acceptance of blended finance
will be helpful in aligning facility services and activities with the partner and user needs.
• Leverage RIs/TIs to address skills scarcity and mismatch associated with transformation :
RIs/TIs can contribute to developing general and specialised skillsets (e.g., digital expertise), as
well as organisational capabilities (e.g., SME absorptive capacity) required for trans formative
change. They are well positioned to contribute to capacity building efforts through increased
labour mobility, industry partnerships, and multi-modal training. Furthermore, as RIs/TIs are
increasingly involved in complex societal challenges, they are now being used by broader non -
expert communities, including the public, entrepreneurs and start-ups. Supporting their use by
new communities can therefore help to improve the scientific and digital literacy of non-experts
and the dynamic capabilities of firms. Leveraging RIs/TIs in this way requires the assessment
and adaptation of access mechanisms, such as better integration of remote access mechanisms,
to facilitate use by targeted, and potentially new communities. Corresponding and sustained
funding commitments may also be warranted to improve the ability of RIs/TIs to support
increased demands and new user needs.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to leverage enabling technologies to advance transformations?
The emergence, scale-up and deployment of enabling technologies are transforming STI activities. Digital
technologies, for example, are already accelerating innovations for sustainability transitions, with artificial
intelligence (AI) and the Internet of Things (IoT) underpinning smart grids, decreasing energy and resource
consumption in industry, and increasing the efficiency of wind and solar farms (Amoroso et al., 2021[89])
(OECD, 2022 [90]). Likewise, harnessing biotechnologies, such as gene -editing and synthetic biology,
promises a revolution in multiple industries as well as contributing to sustainability transitions (OECD,
2014[91]) (Philp and Winickoff, 2018 [92]). Some of these enabling technologies are well -established, but
many are in active development, characterised by rapid expansion, evolution, novelty and uncertainty in
trajectory and impact (OECD, 2024[29]). Many are also converging with potential links between them and
resultant synergies and benefits. Less consideration has been given to the role of enabling technologies
in research for global challenges, but using AI, for example, could raise the productivity of science, allowing
more scientific knowledge to be discovered, and helping science become more efficient (OECD, 2023[93]).
The ongoing dynamics of emerging and converging technologies are largely outside the scope of
government intervention, but governments may diagnose what is going on and on that basis define
interventions that can modulate developments and nudge them in bet ter directions (OECD, 2014[94]). In
particular, accelerating the development and scale-up of relevant technologies can be supported over the
long-term through additional efforts to anticipate and mitigate the social disruptions that may follow. For
example, digitalisation comes with risks related to cybersecurity and privacy and can be costly due to the
need to build up specific infrastructures and specialised capacities (Winickoff et al., 2021 [95]), while
persistent digital divides hamper development for many and leave already marginalised populations further
behind (OECD, 2021[96]). Good technology governance – defined as the process of exercising political,
economic and administrative authority in the development, diffusion and operation of technology in
societies (OECD, 2018[97]) (OECD, 2023[98]) – can help shape technological development to help ensure
more beneficial and responsible innovation.
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Accelerate the productivity of research through AI and automation i n science. While AI is
penetrating all domains and stages of science, its full potential is far from realised . In a context in
which some scholars contend that science is becoming harder, AI in research could support the
ability of OECD countries to grow, innovate and address global challenges – from climate change
to new contagions – and help address the economi c burden of rapid population ageing.
Furthermore, laboratory robots could revolutionise some domains of science, lowering the cost and
hugely increasing the pace of experimentation. Policy makers and actors across research systems
can do much to accelerate and deepen the uptake of AI and automation in science. For example,
they can target research where breakthroughs are needed to deepen AI’s uses in science and
engineering, promote progress through ambitious multidisciplinary programmes, increase access
to high-performance computing and software for advances in AI and science, introduce steps to
improve the reproducibility of AI research, and address the potential dangers entailed in the dual
use of AI-powered discovery (OECD, 2023[93]).
• Mainstream the digital transformation into achieving the transformative goals: Many modern
innovations are new products, processes or business models that are at least partly enabled by
digital technologies or embodied in data and software. Innovation processes themselves are
changing in an era of digital transformation, for example, with the use of AI -based analytics that

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  33
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

allow for large-scale experiments in research and new virtual simulation and prototyping techniques
for developing new products. Creating new value with data -driven innovation requires firms to
adopt newer and more advanced ICTs, to invest in intangible assets, and to develop or acquire
relevant skills. The scope for supporti ve STI policy interventions is vast , and includes measures
that raise firms’ digital capabilities (particularly among SMEs), improve open access to data (with
protections for privacy and security) and data infrastructures (such as high performance
computing), and promote public-private R&D partnerships (OECD, 2019[99]; Gierten et al., 2021[100];
OECD, 2021[101]).
• Leverage digital technologies to facilitate decision-making in STI policy and administration:
The rapid pace of technological change, coupled with a pressing need for solutions to address
global challenges, mean policy makers are pressed to develop STI policies at speed, in situations
of high uncertainty and, in some cases, around potentially contr oversial technology fields. The
deployment of digital tools, such as AI, can extend and augment the capacity of policymakers and
researchers to monitor, build on, and integrate real -time intelligence and/or scientific
advancements into policymaking and STI activities, and help broaden the evidence base on which
research is assessed. However, realising this potential involves overcoming several barriers
related to data quality, interoperability, digital skills, sustainable funding and data protection
regulations. Ministries and agencies responsible for STI policies and programmes should co -
ordinate on digital policy systems and share resources as part of a coherent policy framework for
data sharing and re-use across the public sector (OECD, 2020[102]).
• Embed shared values into technology development and governance to advance public good
while mitigating against potential risks : Innovation actors should seek to align technological
development with institutional and social values, e.g. through the development of guidelines, codes
of practice and regulation in accordance with the stage of technology deve lopment (OECD,
2024[29]). Such alignment can both help maximise benefits of innovation as well as produce more
support among stakeholders and in society. The OECD Framework for the Anticipatory
Governance of Emerging Technology can help guide this approach to technology policy by
encouraging the embedding of values th roughout the innovation process, including at earlier
phases (OECD, 2024[29]). Beyond this, concrete action to better reflect collectively held values and
priorities in technology governance could be a chieved through the participation of citizens in STI
activities and policy development.
• Reinforce international co-operation in STI development through common ethical practices,
norms and understanding of good technology governance. There is a mismatch between the
transboundary nature of technology and the jurisdictional boundaries of governance and
regulation. The development, use and effects of emerging technologies span national borders,
highlighting the importance of multilateral approaches to governan ce. Deepening strategic
competition (OECD, 2023 [103]), while an engine of innovation, carries the danger of putting
downward pressure on the controls that might be necessary to promote accountable and
responsible innovation. This points to value of efforts to internationally co-create common ethical
practices, norms and understanding of good technology governance. Principles and guidelines are
an attractive modality for international, transnational and/or global actors to make moral and
political commitments with some flexibility and accommodation for differences and changing
circumstances (OECD, 2024[29]).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to nurture skills and capabilities required for STI-enabled transformation?
Transformative change calls for policy initiatives that address gaps in the skills and organisational
capabilities of firms, governments, research actors, and the public. 24 Current deficiencies relate to both
technological and “ softer” skills, e.g., information -processing skills, socio -emotional skills and
metacognitive skills (OECD, 2015[104]) (OECD, 2020[105]) (OECD, 2023[106]) (OECD, 2023[107]). Addressing
these deficiencies will require a multi -agency approach that considers both supply - and demand -side
perspectives. However, there is also a lack of empirical understanding on what skills and capabilities are
required to achieve the transformative goals, as well as the skills likely to be required in the new socio -
economic systems that will emerge.
Many skills and capabilities gaps relate to new ways of working and impact a diversity of stakeholders. For
example, policy that is more directive, experimental, anticipatory, systemic, and inclusive will require
policymakers to use skills and organisational processes that are often under -developed, such as
integrating empirical evidence into decisions and operating with long-term perspectives (OECD, 2021[108]).
With respect to national STI systems, the precarity of research careers and limited representation of certain
demographics have implications for the ability of STI systems to generate knowledge, technologies, or
innovations that are aligned with the needs of diverse groups (OECD, 2021 [109]). More broadly,
transformative change from sustainability and digital transitions, as well as other technological
advancements, is expected to create mismatch between skills demand and supply that disproportionately
impacts marginalised groups (Kanger, Sovacool and Noorkõiv, 2020[110]).
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Monitor and respond to misaligned skills supply and demand to facilitate equitable
transformative change : Sustainability and digital transitions are disrupting labour markets and
will likely exacerbate existing inequalities (OECD, 2023 [106]) (Global Deal, 2023 [111]). Better
anticipating skills needs, for example through industry and skills mapping or through skills foresight
exercises, can help advance transformations (OECD, 2019 [51]). Policy innovations may also
address skills mismatch. For example, some jurisdictions have established micro -credential
initiatives to allow organisations and individuals to rapidly acquire precise sets of modularised and
accredited skills (Varadarajan, Koh and Daniel, 2023[112]).25
• Invest in building digital expertise and specialised skills and knowledge in diverse
communities: Enabling technologies, such as digital tools, will radically transform STI and
sociotechnical systems. F or example, digital tools are critical to ensuring that data is accessible
and reusable and have the potential to augment human capacity. Policy should support a range of
stakeholders in cultivating and maintaining related skills. This may be in the form o f novel training
and education opportunities for the public and low-tech industries to help them adopt and adapt to
new technologies. Policy should also target the digital competencies of SMEs, e.g., through publicly
supported training (OECD, 2019[51]). There is a parallel opportunity to support the development of
more specialised skills and knowledge for the research community to embed legal, ethical, and
security considerations into digital or data-based activities (OECD, 2020[113]).
• Cultivate a scientific research workforce that is resilient and diverse : Lacking diversity and
resilience of the research workforce has been driven largely by established evaluation and
incentive frameworks, extreme competition for funding and declining tenured positions (OECD,
2021[109]). Current findings indicate that policymakers can help to address underlying issues, in
part, by adapting evaluation frameworks. Ideally, evaluation would encompass a broader framing

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  35
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

of research excellence and performance that includes multiple research outputs, different modes
of research and public and policy engagement. Additionally, taking steps to improve the diversity
of career pathways available to doctoral and postdoctoral researchers could aid in the retention of
a resilient research workforce that is also representative of society (OECD, 2023[114]). For example,
policy could be used to facilitate international and inter -sectoral mobility, or the development of
transferrable skills (e.g., project management, teamwork and communication).
• Build organisational capabilities to manage the cross-cutting and long -term nature of
transformation: Governments, the public research system, and industry will need specific
organisational capabilities t o respond effectively to complex , interconnected and rapidly evolving
societal challenges (OECD, 2021[108]). New processes and ways of working that promote reflexivity,
learning and adaptation are needed to handle complexity, uncertainty and ambiguity (Borrás et al.,
2023[115]). Dynamic capabilities are important to the ability of firms to contribute to and take part in
transformative change, and thus, the effective advancement of such change. For example, recent
findings suggest that organisational agility (i.e., capability to identify and pursue opportunities and
adapt to change) is fundamental to the ability of firms to develop circular business models and
related products and production systems (Castro-Lopez, Iglesias and Santos -Vijande, 2023[116]).
Within government, translating experimentation to impact will require policy skills and
organisational capabilities to adopt a more systematic approach at the level of strategy
development as well as policy implementation.26

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to ensure market and structural conditions allow STI to support
transformative change?
The roles science and technological innovation can play in tackling the transformative goals are shaped
by a wide range of structural and institutional factors. These can be far ranging, including legal instruments
that influence the structure and operation of commercial, financial, labour, and intellectual property
markets; the formation and substance of regulation and standards; corporate taxation; trade and
investment policy; the availability of underlying physical infrastructure; and less formal institutions, such as
ethics, culture and norms, among others. Factors such as industrial structure, natural resource
endowment, macroeconomic conditions, geography and geopolitics are also important in shap ing which
STI activities occur and what outcomes are deployed.27
These framework conditions, which typically arise outside the immediate remit of STI policy, are potentially
important leverage points for promoting STI-enabled transformative change. They m ay also raise
significant barriers to change. For example, despite global intentions to reduce public subsidisation of fossil
fuels, government support for fossil fuels almost doubled in 2022 to reach more than USD 1.4 trillion, as
governments introduced substantial initiatives to mitigate the impacts of high energy costs on households
and firms (OECD, 2023[117]). Such subsidies slow the phase out of fossil fuels and the adoption of low -
carbon technology alternatives.
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Co-ordinate with other policy areas to level the playing field for transformative technology
and innovation to successfully compete : Considering decarboni sation as an example, STI
policies can help reinforce the impacts of carbon prices by supporting innovations that lower the
cost of green technologies, making them competitive with existing technologies. 28 In this way, STI
policies can partially substitute for low carbon prices, which supports the case for even stronger
STI policies (OECD, 2023[3]) (Cervantes et al., 2023[70]). Another example of the importance of co-
ordinating with related policy areas lies in infrastructures, such as energy storage, smart grids, and
charging stations for electric vehicles, which are essential for sustainability transitions. These are
the responsibility of multiple government agen cies, some at the sub -national level, which
demonstrates the importance of cross-government coherence on decarbonisation efforts.
• Promote international technical standards to unlock new markets and weaken the appeal of
established technologies : International technical standards are essential for the diffusion and
interoperability of emerging technologies and the creation of markets for technology products and
services. In the race to net zero, for example, standards can effectively complement emission
pricing and incentive -based policies to create demand for low -carbon innovations, induce the
phase-out of obsolete technologies, and ultimately drive decarbonisation. An example is the
standardisation of plugs for electric cars across vehicles and charging stat ions. Such standards
are best set at the international level and at least call for international co -ordination of national
standards.
• Adopt regulatory approaches that are agile, technology neutral and human-centered: There
is growing recognition that conventional regulatory approaches are ill-equipped to contend with the
complexity, unpredictability, and speed of innovation and broader system transformations (OECD,
2021[118]) (Centre for Regulatory Innovation, 2021 [53]). Promising tools and methodologies are
emerging to improve experimentation, engagement, and iteration in this respect , though their
adoption remains relatively nascent in most juris dictions and sectors. The adaptation of current

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  37
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

“set and forget” regulatory approaches to frameworks intended to “adapt and learn” will impact the
full regulatory cycle (OECD, 2021[118]) (OECD, 2021[119]). Policymakers and regulatory authorities
may consider developing more adaptive, forward -looking and outcome -focused processes from
regulatory assessment to enforcement. Such efforts can apply emerging governance approaches,
featured, for example, in the OECD Framework for Anticipatory Governance of Emerging
Technologies (OECD, 2024[29]). In turn, this will require efforts to broaden public and stakeholder
engagement; strengthen domestic and international co -operation; and harness opportunities
provided by soft law and protected spaces for experimentation.
• Use IPR systems to drive innovation and foster the wide uptake of transformative
technologies: IPR systems should incentivise innovation and support diffusion of technologies on
voluntary and mutually agreed terms to help meet global challenges such as climate change and
access to affordable medicines . IP systems enable the sharing of technologies via market
mechanisms such as voluntary licensing agreements, patent pools, and stakeholder -led voluntary
commitments (Cervantes, Copeland and Zarnic, 2018 [120]) (Garden, 2023[121]). Policymakers can
promote these mechanisms , together with non -IP based approaches , such as open science
partnerships (Gold, 2021[122]) and open source technologies, to improve knowledge and technology
diffusion on voluntary and mutually agreed terms.
• Harmonise, legitimise and institutionalise transformative investment approaches : While
sustainable finance approaches are increasingly popular, several challenges still undermine a nd
hinder the efficient mobilisation of capital to support environmental, social and governance (ESG)
objectives, including limited transparency and comparability of ESG methodologies and metrics.
The international community has a role to play in convening collaborative and accelerated actions
to address limited reliability, comparability, consistency, and transparency of metrics and to
develop global baseline standards (Boffo and Patalano, 2020 [123]) (OECD, 2022 [124]). Through
approaches such as ‘science -based targets’ (OECD, 2021[125]), STI can inform best practice for
ESG metrics and improve the quality and consistency of data and strategic intelligence being used.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to develop and use strategic intelligence to guide transformation?
Strategic intelligence refers to the provision of data, knowledge and evidence and its utilisation in decision-
making processes related to the formulation of STI policies and strategies, allocation of resources and
governance of science and technologies (Robinson, Winickoff and Kreiling, 2023[62]; Rotolo et al., 2017[63]).
It includes the findings of research commissioned by governments, scientific advice based on the latest
available research evidence, policy and programme evaluation, monitoring and benchmarking using
statistics and indicators, and future -oriented analy sis, including forecasting and modelling, strategic
foresight and technology assessment. As such, strategic intelligence can be sourced directly from
scientists (‘science for policy’), STI system and policy analysts, and a broad range of stakeholders engaged
in deliberative or consultation policy processes.29 Strategic intelligence tools are often used in combination
and gather intelligence produced in multiple locations in a so called “distributed intelligence” system. The
system is also distributed insofa r as other STI stakeholders can often access and use much of this
intelligence in their own decision-making processes.
Transformative STI policies demand knowledge and evidence to support direction-setting, experimentation
and learning in contexts that are systemic, transdisciplinary, complex and uncertain. These demands may
require new or significantly adapted knowledge institutions and infrastructures to be built, as well as new
skills and organisational capabilities to be developed. Such developments likely amount to a transformation
in the production and use of strategic intelligence itself.
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Support novel and distributed sources of strategic intelligence to tackl e global challenges:
Transformations are wide -ranging and are characterised by non -linear dynamics in complex
systems. Changes in the fundamental properties of a system and the way it behaves have
important implications for analysis and the estimation or f orecasting of future outcomes. Simple
extrapolation from past experience will fail to foresee the way that a system may behave after it
has been transformed or once the process of change has started (HM Treasury, 2022 [68]). Yet
many of the economic principles, models, and decision -making tools used by governments are
designed for use within contexts of ‘marginal’ or incremental change, where technologies, markets
and other economic structures are rel atively stable. Different tools can be applied to support
transformative change when the aims and context of policy include widespread innovation and
structural change. These should consider uncertainties, opportunities, local knowledge and context
– something that necessarily involves continued engagement with a broad range of stakeholders,
including vulnerable and marginalised communities, in a distributed intelligence system (EEIST,
2022[126]).
• Develop arrangements to combine different sorts of strategic intelligence for STI
policymaking: A specific challenge for governments is to make sense of the range of data
available, and in particular to combine and synthesise knowledge and evidence from differe nt
sources that have different formats and have been produced for different purposes. Different
knowledges have their own assumptions, own language and concepts, own infrastructures and
own professional communities that can act as barriers to using diverse evidence in policymaking.
To help tackle these issues, countries can develop cross-cutting intelligence infrastructure for STI
policies (OECD, 2023[13]); address deficits in adequate infrastructure to enable the sharing of social
science data (GloPID-R, 2019[86]); and promote the harmonisation and mutual understanding of
definitions and processes used in data collection and management.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  39
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

• Cultivate skills and capabilities that promote the utilisation of strategic intelligence in STI
policymaking: Many countries note a persistent disconnect between the generation of strategic
intelligence and its integration into policy decisions (Monteiro and Dal Borgo, 2023[127]). While this
is a longstanding concern for the producers of strategic intelligence, 30 governments often lack the
capacity and resources to incorporate strategic intelligence insights into STI policymaking.
Governments can take various measures to support the translation of intelligence into policy
decisions. For example, they can creat e dedicated strategic intelligence units, develop training
courses for public servants and policymakers in strategic intelligence tools, and promote their direct
involvement in strategic intelligence generating activities such as strategic foresight and
participatory technology assessment. Embedding scientific expertise in policy making, for example,
through policy fellowship schemes for scientists, can also be usefu l. Social scientists have useful
insights, which government should leverage, on how countries might nurture political cultures that
are favourable to using these kinds of activities to achieve transformative goals (Meadowcroft,
2011[128]).
• Implement a strategic ‘policies for evidence’ agenda that promotes the production and use
of strategic intelligence for transformative change: The current knowledge and evidence base
that supports policy decisions, such as indicators and statistics, can further evolve to meet the
complexity and uncertainty of STI-enabled transformation. A more strategic approach to data and
analysis of STI syst ems means raising awareness of the incentives and rules that make data fit -
for-purpose to serve strategic and operational policy needs. The ‘policies for evidence’ agenda
promoted by OECD in response to its Blue Sky Forum (OECD, 2018[129]) seeks to instil a shared
sense of responsibility among decision makers over data, statistics and evidence on STI and
concerted action among them to guide and sustain evidence -building and evidence-using efforts.
Governments should aim to bring together scattered initiatives and exchange on best practices on
priority-setting, governance, resource allocation and effective data stewardship. STI policy makers
should recognise and realise to its full potential their responsi bility for the generation, upkeep and
integrity and accessibility of considerable amounts of administrative data relevant to the monitoring
of STI systems and policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to engage society in STI to further transformative change?
Society-STI engagement represents a spectrum of activities (i.e., communication, consultation, and
participation) by which civil society engages with STI activities and outputs, as well as with STI policy.
Everyday use of scientific results and technology is perhaps the most well -recognised point of
engagement. At the same time, there is increasing recognition of the merits and necessity of more active
public engagement in the development of STI activities and policy. Furthermore, STI activities alone cannot
drive transformations. Inclusive and people‐centered STI activities and policy will be a key component of
achieving all three transformative goals . Public engagement is the most expedient and effective path to
addressing the needs and concerns of differe nt social groups, including under -represented perspectives,
and broader socio-economic impacts (Paunov and Planes-Satorra, 2023[130]).
Widespread social acceptance is required to accelerate the adoption of STI -based solutions a nd to
facilitate the development of legitimate transformation policies with strong public support. Recognising the
importance of public agency and influence in the adoption of STI -based solutions will help to address
technocentric framings that are often i mplicit to STI policy agendas and will allow for more systematic
consideration of non-technological innovation, such as social or grassroots innovation.
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Improve STI communication practices to cultivate mutual trust and understanding: Digital
technologies afford new opportunities for societal engagement. They also pose significant
challenges, such as the proliferation of mis- and disinformation that can lead to public distrust and
polarisation, shown by the COVID-19 pandemic response to have adverse effects on the security
and resilience of national socio -economic systems. As a result, there is recognition that it is
important that STI communication practices evolve to maintain public trust and improve the ability
of citizens to understand and contribute to STI activities and outputs. STI communication that is
transparent, inclusive, ethical, accountable, objective, and timely should be recognised as good
practice (OECD, 2023 [131]). It may also be necessary to expand scientific codes of conduct to
safeguard scientific integrity, include public communication responsibilities, and to more clearly
delineate the roles and responsibilities of producers and users (e.g., policymakers) of s cience
advice.31
• Engage diverse and inclusive perspectives to develop more robust and relevant STI -based
solutions: Complex societal challenges often impact communities differently depending on the
intersection of various demographic characteristics (e.g., social determinants of health). Additional
efforts, such as investing in science literacy and/or digital connectivity, are important to address
the exclusion of particular demographics. Empirical evidence also indicates that accessing insights
from these groups often requires non -traditional approaches to mitigate or, at minimum, account
for factors that contribute to under -representation (e.g., lack of willingness or desire to
participate).32 In this regard, social and behavioural scientists should be engaged in the creation of
safe, inclusive and open spaces for dialogue.
• Mainstream and scale up public participation in STI activities and policymaking: Facilitating
the proactive and systematic integration of public insights into STI activities and policyma king
processes will require institutional change (e.g., policy and research evaluation), innovative
processes, and sufficient resources (Bauer, Bogner and Fuchs, 2021[132]). The allocation of funding
to societal engagement activities is often at odds with academic incentive frameworks and austerity
trends in public spending (EEA, 2019[133]). While more funding for societal engagement would be

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  41
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

beneficial, STI policymakers and researchers can also look to leverage capacity and resources
that may already exist within and beyond STI systems. For example, behavioural and social
scientists, as well as communication professionals, can contribute substantial tacit knowledge to
such efforts.33 Top-down support from elected officials and high -level decision-makers is also an
important enabler in establishing successful participatory processes (CSTP survey).
• Advance and empower citizen -led STI activities through experimentation and knowledge
sharing: In addition to mainstreaming the use and evolution of mechanisms like citizen science,
transdisciplinary research, and participatory technology governance, policymakers and
researchers should empower bottom -up citizen -led activities. Engaging citizen s at the start of
scientific projects can strengthen alignment between research methods and expectations with
societal needs and help to reframe which questions are being asked (Sauermann et al., 2020[134]).
Tapping into the public discourse can also aid policymakers in accelerating the equitable diffusion
and phase out innovation and technology. International knowledge sharing and communities of
practice will be key to demonstrating the impact of social innovation and societal engagement and
accelerating collective learning.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to deepen STI co-operation between innovation system actors for
transformation?
STI co-operation supports the need to work systematically and across sectors to deliver the transformative
goals. Co-operation involves a mix of innovation system actors, including firms of different sizes, public
research actors, the government, and civil society, that co-ordinate efforts to mobilise resources, build
capacity, share information, and formulate and implement policies supporting STI development. Common
forms of co-operation include public-private partnerships, academia -industry collaborations, technology
and knowledge transfer agreements, government -academia collaboration, research consortia,
interdisciplinary collaboration, multi-stakeholder platforms, innovation clusters and ecosystems, among
others.
Governments have a long tradition of promoting linkages in STI systems. For instance, they already deploy
a policy mix of funding, regulation, information services, and specific governance arrangements to spur
and deepen inter - and transdisciplinary and industry-academic relations. Policy measures have also
supported various intermediary actors to work as brokers between two or more parties in the innovation
process (Mignon and Kanda, 2018 [135]; de Silva et al., 2023[75]). Promoting STI co -operation that bridges
research, economic, and societal priorities will be key in addressing societal challenges. STI policy can
support co-operation by encouraging new actors to engage in collaborative networks, widening the scope
of collaborations, and challenging established networks hampering transformation (Grillitsch et al.,
2019[136]). For example, engaging a variety of actors across industry, research institutions and civil society
in co-creation initiatives was key to providing urgent responses to the COVID -19 pandemic (Kreiling and
Paunov, 2021[137]).
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Build innovation ecosystems and value chains that support transformation: The emergence
of new value chains and innovation ecosystem s that bring together cross -sectoral actors with
complementary skills can be drivers of transformation (Pigford, Hickey and Klerkx, 2018 [138]).
However, new value chains can suffer from systemic challenges, notably a lack of funding for
demonstration and ambiguous regulatory frameworks (OECD, 2019[139]; Winickoff et al., 2021[95])
(Philp and Winickoff, 2019 [140]). These barriers can prevent collective public -private action and
hinder market update of emerging solutions . Policy can create the framework conditions to
overcome such barriers, for example, by promoting public support for testing and demonstration
(e.g., by investing in new test infrastructures), using regulatory sandboxes, and supporting
innovation-oriented public procurement (de Silva et al., 2023[75]) (OECD, 2023[61]).
• Develop flexible governance approaches for collaborations targeting transformation: Cross-
sectoral social partnerships (e.g., for profit, non -profit, social enterprise, government/public) are
increasingly used to address societal challenges (Ordonez-Ponce, Clarke and Colbert, 2021 [141]).
They bring opportunities to develop sustainable collaborative business models, usually defined at
an organisational level, to the level of partnerships , and are aimed at integrating economic,
ecological, and social value creation strategies. However, efforts to promote such models can be
undermined by lack of access to funding and data access polic ies (Winickoff et al., 2021[95]). For
instance, STI policy can address some of these gaps in data access, e.g., by promoting the use of
standardised access procedures (Bustamante et al., 2023[142]; OECD, 2023 [143]). Open Science
partnerships, for example, can promote free public access to publications, data, and materials

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  43
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

(Gold, 2021[122]). Blended finance can also be leveraged to develop values and align incentives for
all partners (Garden, 2023[121]).
• Promote collaborative platforms to support innovation for transformative change : New
institutional arrangements, such as collaborative platforms, are emerging to co -ordinate a diverse
set of actors across the public and private sectors. Collaborative platforms entail a technological
architecture that allows their members to innovate rapidly, but also to collaborate with many
external players who can use the platform for their own innovations (Winickoff et al., 2021[95]). For
example, collaborative platforms can support the implementation of mission-oriented innovation
policies by promoting the alignment and convergence of different actors. Additionally, t hey can
assume an intermediary role by, for instance, acting as an impartial voice for new actor networks
to promote transformation, or facilitating experimentation activities t o change existing rules and
regulations (Kanda et al., 2020 [144]). Collaborative platforms can also harness the potential of
digitalisation to convene actors to tackle the transformative goals. Digitalisation can support
convergence and inclusivity in new collaborations by facilitating data sharing and management,
opening up and diversif ying innovation ecosystems, and decreasing costs and geographical
barriers (OECD, 2020[102]).
• Disrupt established knowledge hierarchies that impede the adoption of insights from
diverse disciplines: Collaborations involving stakeholders from multiple scientific disciplines can
generate more complete scientific evidence and STI-based solutions for global challenges (OECD,
2023[84]). However, transdisciplinary activities bring additional complexity into scientific processes,
on account of the traditional disciplinary organisation of academia and associated infrastructures ,
and the involvement of non -academic actors (OECD, 2020[105]). They also require a disruption of
established knowledge hierarchies that impede the adoption of insights from diverse sources, such
as the social sciences and humanities. STI policy can promote the emergence of consortia across
disciplines or sectors that do not regularly work together to facilitate knowledge (and infrastructure)
sharing (ITIF, 2022 [145]). It can also provide dedicated and sustainable resources for
transdisciplinary research and Open Science activities (OECD, 2020 [105]). STI policy can also
incentivise universities to engage in co -creation to meet the transformative goals . For example,
governments can use institutional performance -based funding mechanisms to link universities’
contributions to national, regional and/or local sustainability transition goals (de Silva et al.,
2023[75]).

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to promote cross-government coherence to co-ordinate STI-enabled
transformations?
System-wide transformations unfold through interdependent processes and call for co -ordinated
interventions between policy domains (i.e., STI, sectoral and horizontal policy domains) , and across
multiple levels of government (e.g. , local, regional, national and international). Transformations that
promote sustainability, inclusivity and resilience cannot be achieved or, in many cases, even chiefly driven
by STI policies, although they are certainly essent ial. For example, t argeted policies (e.g., subsidies,
regulation, procurement, etc.) in domains covering energy, transport, heavy industry and agriculture are
expected to do much of the heavy lifting of decarbonisation. Efforts to co-ordinate these interventions with
technology phase out may also yield additional synergies. Similarly, horizontal interventions, such as
education, labour and tax policies are key to providing alternatives or compensation for stakeholders
impacted by phase out, as well as addressing structural inequity. These policies often benefit from vertical
co-ordination to align efforts promoted by the various players and governmental agencies from different
territorial levels.
The substantial scope of investments needed to facilitate transformations will necessitate buy -in from
across government to co -invest in and co -manage coherent portfolios of activities. Governments can act
collectively to experiment with different solutions and transformation path ways and to make strategic
decisions regarding which of these should be scaled. This effort should be tailored to the characteristics of
government (e.g., structure, operations, legislation, political system, etc.) that are country specific, as well
as to the nature of the transformation being targeted . These considerations affect the type of policy
instruments to deploy and the network of actors to involve.
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Actively co-ordinate and align priorities and interventions across government : The
fragmentation of state structure s, often divided between government agencies with sometimes
ambiguous mandates and sectoral ministries with different interests and priorities, can hinder the
ability of governments to deliver the sorts of cross-cutting priorities and interventions called for by
the transformative goals . Governments can deploy a range of cross-government co -ordination
measures to alleviate fragmentation and better orchestrate the ir interventions , including shared
national visions, roadmaps and missions; joint programming between research and innovation
funding agencies; and strategic over sight by high -level cross -departmental committees. Some
countries have also implemented structural and organisational changes, for example by merging
funding agencies or ministries for STI that cover different parts of the innovation chain (Halme
et al., 2019[146]). Other countries are experimenting with novel approaches, such as complementary
pairings of supply -push and demand -pull interventions,34 as well as mission -oriented innovation
policies (OECD, 2023[147]).
• Promote consistency of policy actions across levels of government: STI policies are designed
and implemented at multiple levels of government, with different traditions, path dependencies and
interpretations, as well as varying degrees of autonomy (Magro, Navarro and Zabala ‐
Iturriagagoitia, 2014[148]). This raises challenges for vertical co -ordination, especially in countries
with federal systems, where policies may need to be orchestrated across multiple levels of
government and, depending on the country and the policy domain, sub-national actors may be the
primary decision-makers (Peters, 2018[149]).35 A range of tools can be used to promote vertical co-
ordination to support transformative change, for example, the use of co-financing arrangements to

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  45
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

promote effective public investment across levels of government (OECD, 2014[150]). Mapping the
policy mix and stakeholder responsibilities at different governance levels can also build coherence
in STI policy efforts (EEA, 2019[133]).
• Harmonise government infrastructure and procedure s to improve knowledge sharing and
co-operation: Government bodies are often constrained by their own specific rules, procedures,
and internal infrastructures (e.g., intranets, data storage and sharing platforms, etc.) that are
misaligned when pursuing joint actions. Governments can promote data and information sharing
to identify cross -cutting regulatory and operational issues and ensure coherence between
approaches (OECD, 2021[118]). Policymakers can also ensure that Open Government campaigns
are based on a whole-of-government approach , which will help improve inter connections and
interoperability across policy domains and government bodies, as well as build a systemic data
culture (OECD, 2019[151]).
• Streamline complex governance arrangements : Complex governance arrangements can lead
to transaction costs, the dilution of priorities, lack of leadership and blurred accountability. New
governance arrangements require a clear mapping of interdependencies to understand what type
of co-operation channels and joint actions would be usefu l to deal with specific challenges. This
calls for a nuanced and strategic approach to co-ordination, which will also demand new skills,
organisational capabilities, and incentives in administrations to promote and support cross - or
whole-of-government co -ordination. Governments can also anchor cross -government co -
ordination in national strategic frameworks by aligning a consistent pack age of policy and
regulatory interventions with overarching national priorities (OECD, 2023[152]).

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

How to leverage international STI co-ordination to support transformation for the
public good?
Scientific discovery and technological innovation occur in an interconnected global ecosystem that draw s
upon collective knowledge, talent, resources and infrastructure. Academic researchers routinely co-
operate and exchange across borders to advance shared scientific interests. Societal challenges, such as
climate change, food security, and global health issues, are increasingly targeted in international STI co -
operation, which can accelerate understanding and innovation, enhance economies of scale, strengthen
incentives for investment and foster a level playing field. Sharing experiences between co untries and
industries can reduce individual risks , unlock synergies and efficiencies, and accelerate progress, for
example, towards viable low-carbon solutions as part of sustainability transitions.
However, differing national contexts and competing inte rests often frustrate attempts at global collective
action. With most public R&D funding allocated within national boundaries, international alignment between
national strategies and programmes is notoriously difficult to achieve. National interests like d omestic
growth can be in tension with transnational priorities, such as protecting global common pool resources.
In addition, rising geopolitical tensions and the convergence of economic and security policy agendas could
undercut opportunities for cross -border knowledge exchange and technology transfer (OECD, 2023[103]).
In response, dedicated collaboration arrangements, such as international climate clubs, have emerged to
address free-riding challenges through mechanisms that require reciprocity (Nordhaus, 2015[153]) (OECD,
IEA, 2023[154]). Individual countries are also moving toward s novel collaboration approaches and more
selective knowledge sharing, particularly with respect to areas of STI with national security implications.36
This might favour the engagement of states with similar values and political interests and discourage
sharing with others.
There is a significant element of justice to the inclusion of low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) in
multilateral initiatives and decision -making. Many of the countries that are now most vulnerable to the
consequences of climate change have contributed the least to the current situation and, to keep with
international commitments, will require support to pursue alternative, less carbon intensive, routes to
development (Chandy, 2023[155]). Existing international scientific networks and global connections through
trade and official development assistance (ODA) present opportunities to accelerate transformative change
and voluntary transfer of STI-based solutions and know -how to developing countries on mutually agreed
terms. However, it has also be en recognised that new approaches are required to ensure the equitable
representation of LMICs in the development of international science activities (ICRI, 2021[156]). In addition,
there is also value in considering and adjusting for historical legacies and other tensions that can create
fear or mistrust that data and knowledge will be misused or exploited without appropriate credit given to
LMIC contributors (GloPID-R, 2019[86]).
STI policymakers can pursue the transformative goals through the following policy actions:
• Align national transformative STI priorities and co -ordinate funding for research and
innovation activities to address global challenges: Cross-country information sharing, greater
harmonization of research priorities and joint funding calls among national funding agencies,
private foundations and others can help address the transformative goals in a more cohesive,
global manner. Such measures can help reduce duplication, enhance synergies and re silience,
and maximise the impact of funding and scientific advancements. In this respect, inclusive
international goals and conventions 37 can aid in securing ambitious commitments, help to
destabilise the status quo (Kanger, Sovacool and Noorkõiv, 2020 [110]) and align context -specific

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  47
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

efforts to address global challenges (Meadowcroft et al., 2021[32]). Long-term funding commitments
will also provid e researchers and institutions with the necessary financial security to engage in
meaningful and impactful international collaboration.
• Strengthen Open Science and knowledge sharing to improve global resilience and scale up
efforts to address collective challenges: Ideally and in line with global Open Science agendas,
global knowledge sharing should aim to make STI outputs as openly available as possible, while
taking into account legitimate private, public, and community interests , with a strong emphasis on
equitable representation and access (OECD, 2021[157]).38 Despite notable progress in some areas,
several challenges persist, such as issues posed by publishing business models and evaluation
and incentive framework s that do not appropriately value efforts to make data and software
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) (Wilkinson et al., 2016 [158]). Various
policy actions may be warranted to improve the openness of different scientific outputs across
different disciplines , while also ensuring that private, public and community interests, including
national security, IPR, privacy and personal data are protected.39 For example, a review of
mechanisms, legal frameworks and skills may be useful for enhancing sharing or pooling
information, and data on voluntary and mutually agreed terms (OECD, 2015[159]).
• Safeguard research integrity and security of the global research system : There are growing
concerns over safeguarding national and economic security and protecting freedom of enquiry.
Many governments have developed training modules, guidelines and checklis ts to increase
awareness of and provide guidance to the Academic community on research security and integrity,
frequently accompanied by policies and measures to mitigate these risks. 40 These should be
proportionate and based on sound risk identification a nd assessments, as not every research
institution or research project will face the same level or type of risk (OECD, 2022[28]).
• Scale up inclusive multilateral partnerships to respond effectively and equitably to global
challenges: Efforts to strengthen the capabilities of developing countries to engage as equal
partners in global collaboration and decision -making are increasingly important. Capacity building
efforts should align with r ecipient countries’ transformation needs and research capacities, and
target the development of necessary infrastructures and collaborative platforms (COVID CIRCLE,
2021[160]) (OECD, 2022[161]). More generally, countries with similar contexts and challenges stand
to benefit from the integration of resources and activities around common priorities (OECD,
2023[162]). To date, this has been challenged by attaining agreement among funders with diverse
priorities and resources (OECD, 2023[143]). Hybrid funding mechanisms could be used to combine
funding and in -kind support from a diversity of actors. I t will also be important for the global
community to support multilateral and club -based STI collaborations that include or are driven by
representatives of the Global South.
• Foster international market conditions that enhance the competitiveness and equitable
access to emerging STI-based solutions: Legislation, regulatory frameworks, standards and soft
law influence the function of domestic markets and STI systems, e.g., the flow of goods, ideas,
people and capital, and can accelerate the deployment of transformative innovations across
borders. However, the effective use of these tools can be i mpeded by challenges to co-ordination
across governance levels ( sub-national, national and supra-national), between national policy
domains, and with industry. Many are also often deployed by actors outside conventional STI and
STI policy mandates. 41 Centers of government can play an intermediary role by facilitating
collaboration between STI policymakers, sectoral policy domains (e.g., regulation), and horizontal
policy domains (e.g., trade and investment).42 These same actors will then have invaluable insights
to feed into international co-operation or diplomacy efforts.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The Transformative Agenda provides high -level guidance to support policymakers and other
relevant stakeholders in formulating and implementing reforms to accelerate and scale-up positive
change.
The Transformative Agenda includes comprehensive coverage of how STI activities and policy can hasten
economic and societal t ransformations in the face of mounting global challenges. It highlights multiple
points of entry and a range of key messages that readers might apply based on their roles and
responsibilities in STI and STI policy systems. F or high -level decision -makers, the implications and
interdependencies of the three transformative goals are a critical consideration, as well as what they might
mean for future STI mandates. Conversely, policymakers involved in programme design and
implementation may find applicable insights in sections on specific STI policy areas, such as international
STI relations or skills and capabilities. The Transformative Agenda may also be relevant for other
stakeholders, including policymakers in other policy domains and stakeholders who are active in STI
systems, such as researchers in the natural and social sciences, public research organisations and
industry, as well as entrepreneurs, civil society organisations and citizens.
Putting reforms into practice will require policymakers to translate them to specific STI policy area and
sectoral contexts, typically (though not only) at the national level. In this regard, an important deliverable
of the OECD’s S&T Policy 2025 project is concrete policy guidance that aims to help policymakers
reappraise, and if applicable, reform their STI policies to better contribute to sustainability, inclusion,
resilience and security . Accordingly, s ections of the Transformative Agenda that focus on specific STI
policy areas will be supplemented by two additional forms of guidance:
• Modular policy guidance that discuss proposed key actions, potential implementation pathways
and challenges posed by the status quo for the Transformative Agenda’s ten STI policy areas.
• Key policy challenge ‘toolkits’ that provide step -by-step, interactive online tools for users to
translate specific STI policy challenges into feasible and context-specific actions.
Modular policy guidance
Modular guidance, provided through a combination of published and interactive digital content, will
introduce key considerations, challenges, and drivers for change in each of the ten policy areas. Guidance
will provide policymakers and othe r stakeholders with the necessary background information to support
their use of policy toolkits to develop targeted and context -specific actions. Each module will use a gap
analysis to unpack the key policy actions outlined in the Transformative Agenda. Analysis contrasts the
general ‘status quo’ for each policy area against the ideal vision required to support the transformative
goals. Key (endogenous and exogenous) factors that might be influencing the STI system are also
considered.
Intended users of the modular guidance are those who have a responsibility for or a direct stake in specific
policy areas. This could include policymakers, academics and public research organisations, industry
associations, and non-government organisations, among others.
4 Further guidance and next steps

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  49
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Key policy challenge toolkits
The policy ‘toolkits’ are meant to serve as a functional resource for policymakers and other stakeholders
to consider key challenges identified in each of the ten STI policy areas and potential actions that might
be taken to ad dress them. The toolkits will take users through a sequence of steps to support them in
thinking systematically and iteratively about a targeted problem and a corresponding desirable
future vision; the current situation and related challenges and enabling conditions; potential
sequences of actions ; and how progress might be measured and monitored . These resources will
be made available through an online playbook to allow users to work with interactive elements, such as
prefilled canvases and live data from the STIP Compass and STI Scoreboard platforms.
Toolkits will be tailored for use by subject matter experts, such as mid - and lower-level officials, who are
responsible for policy design, planning and implementation in specific STI policy areas. The toolkits are
intended to complement rather than substitute officials’ existing processes to formulate policy portfolios.
For example, structured canvases may be useful to map and discuss wider system elements, which may
not otherwise be considered, through the engagement of stakeholders who are not conventionally included
in policymaking processes. In this respect, the toolkits can be a helpful resource to engage a range of
contributors, from senior policymakers to citizens, in a workshop setting. Toolkits might also be deployed
by individuals or small teams to organise their thinking on specific policy challenges.
Future CSTP activities
The CSTP will follow up on the Transformative Agenda in its future activities. Related projects will aim to
use peer learning me thods for countries to exchange on their experiments in formulating, designing and
implementing STI policies targeting transformative change. Projects will incorporate co -creation and
sense-making processes while codifying insights into improved policy gui dance.43 A new series of OECD
innovation policy country reviews on transformative STI policies could also be inaugurated.
Figure 4.1 summarises the next steps in supporting countries to put the Transformative Agenda into STI
policy practice.
Figure 4.1. Next steps in supporting countries’ efforts to implement the Transformative Agenda

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Endnotes

1 Analysis suggests that the COVID -19 pandemic has enabled the largest growth of between -country
income inequality in thirty years. From 2019-2020 it was projected to rise 4.4%, up from the pre-pandemic
forecast of a decline of 0.8%.
2 These are among a range of megatrends impacting societies that also include ageing populations,
productivity slowdown, growing environmental degradation, and growing political and cultural polarisation
in many societies.
3 The triple planetary crisis refers to interrelated threats posed by climate change, pollution and biodiversity
loss (UNFCCC, 2022[198]). See other related OECD works, such as publications developed through the
Resource Efficie ncy and Circular Economy (RE -CIRCLE) project
(https://www.oecd.org/environment/waste/recircle.htm), the Horizontal Project on Climate and Economic
Resilience (NET Zero+) (https://www.oecd.org/climate-change/net-zero-resilience/) and the OECD
Roundtable on Financing Water (https://www.oecd.org/water/roundtable-on-financing-water.htm), among
others. In addition, the organisation manages several databases, such as the International Programme for
Action on Climate (IPAC) (https://www.oecd.org/climate-action/ipac/).
4 Definitions of transformative change refer to “a radical permanent qualitative change in the subject being
transformed, so that the subject when transformed has very different properties and behaves or operates
in a different way” (HM Treasury, 2022, p. 122[68]); and “a major change in the structure of the economy
brought about by deliberate policy efforts aimed at supporting specific long -term environmental , social,
economic or other goals, or in response to climate change and other relevant long -term trends” (Ministry
of Business, Innovation & Employment,, 2023, p. 1[203]). In this Transformative Agenda, the transformation
concept is used as an umbrella term to refer to change that involves the reconfiguration of a system so
that it behaves in a qualitatively different way (HM Treasury, 2022[68]). It is a process of structural change
involving changes in the component parts of a system and the pattern of interactions between them. It is
distinguished from incremental chan ge, which is limited to adjustments within a system that do not
fundamentally alter its essence or integrity (Schumer et al., 2022 [66]). Societies and economies have
experienced many previous transformations, for example, the change from sailing ships to steamships,
from traditional factories to mass production, and from horse -drawn carriages to automobiles (Geels and
Schot, 2007[202]).
5 Decades of investment into fundamental research on mRNA largely facilitated the expedited development
and deployment of mRNA -based vaccines during the COVID -19 pandemic response (Dolgin, 2021[175]).
Further, mRNA vaccine platforms build on established vaccine technologies and have the potential to
accelerate development and manufacturing processes without compromising on safety (Pardi et al.,
2018[176]).
6 Many STI policy instruments are implicated in phase -out, but this is often as a result of them being
withdrawn from supporting harmful technologies and activities.
7 The OECD “ Framework for the Anticipatory Governance of Emerging Technologies ” (OECD, 2024[29])
describes these as ‘foundational values’ and offers the following examples: Respecting human rights,

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  51
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

including protections of human dignity, and basic liberties such as freedom of thought, the right to privacy,
and autonomy; Promoting democratic values, including the rule of law, equality under law, representation
and participation in public life and debate, accountability, procedural justice and the public interest;
Promoting sustainable development, including the responsibility to protect biodiversity and ecosystems
and address climate change while promoting human well -being; Encouraging equity and inclusion,
recognising diversity and accessibility in its many forms, of ensuring fair treatment and full participation of
individuals or groups that are vulnerable and/or have been historically excluded or marginalized, and
providing fair access to the benefits of innovation. It should be understood both in terms of outcome, i.e.
striving t o ensure the availability of technology, as well as process, i.e. expanding who participates in
technological development. See OECD (2024[29]).
8 For example, nature -based solutions (NbS) aid in ad dressing societal challenges through actions that
proactively protect, restore, and manage natural ecosystems sustainably. Such activities have a dual focus
to benefit both the natural environment and human well -being (IUCN, 2020[190]). The concept emerged in
response to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to facilitate the ability of the
conservation community to contribute to major global challenges, such as food security and disaster risk
reduction (IUCN, 2012 [188]). Following the diverse application of the term, the International Union for
Conservation of Nature introduced the IUCN Global Standard for NbS to prevent misuse and loss of
stakeholder trust, and support the development of ambitious and effective projects (IUCN, 2020[189]).
9 Such dynamics are familiar to STI policy practitioners, since the advance and diffusion of new
technologies follow similar S-shaped curve patterns, characterised by learning by doing, increasing returns
to scale, path dependencies, and diminishing returns, among other dynamics.
10 Transitioning from established ways of doing things is often challenged by politics and uneven power
dynamics. Dominant stak eholders generally have vested interests in maintaining established industries,
technologies and practices and are often in a position to influence structural conditions, e.g., regulation, or
mask the full costs of the status quo (Johnstone, Stirling and Sovacool, 2017 [164]). At the same time, the
political domain is also a consequential site for civil discourse and an avenue for the public to influence
which issues and ideas are adopted and institutionalised and which are discarded (Meadowcroft, 2009[163]).
11 The passing of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer is a well -known
example of international efforts to phase out harmful technologies and practices. While the 1987 signing
of the treaty m arks the formal breakdown and phase out of established ways of doing things, it is now
recognised that destabilisation was first precipitated by a series of scientific findings, beginning in 1974
(Dugard, 1997[179]). In addition, phase out efforts have continued and been expanded in scope since the
treaty came into force, most recently in 2016 with the Kigali Amendment, which seeks to scale down the
use of hydrofluorocarbons (UNEP, 2020[180]).
12 For example, STI policies could also explore options for setting ‘posteriorities’, i.e. research and
technology activities that would be identified to receive diminished support on account of their contributions
to global problems.
13 History is replete with examples of sociotechnical transitions beginning with disruptive technology
innovations in niches that cascaded upwards through tipping points to society-wide transformation. These
include the move from horse drawn to motorised road transport, electrification, the build out of sewage and
water supply systems, and the emergence of digital commerce (Meadowcroft and Rosenbloom, 2023[39]).
More recent and widely cited examples include rapid decarbonisation of the UK’s power sector and the
widespread adoption of electric vehicles in Norway. In both cases, a mix of measures, including R&D

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

funding, investment in clean technologies and regulatory market reforms, laid the groundwork that brought
the system to a ‘state of criticality’ for carbon pricing (and other taxes and subsidies) to activate tipping
points (EEIST, 2022[126]). Public policies therefore created the spark for the initiation of positive tipping
points and the conditions for them to cascade through sociotechnical systems (Systemiq, University of
Exeter and Bezos Earth Foundation, 2023[42]).
14 For example, in its Special Repor t on Clean Energy Innovation, the IEA outlines four pillars – resource
push, knowledge management, market pull, and socio -political support – and corresponding policy levers
to facilitate the translation of research into technological change in the energy system (IEA, 2020[178]).
15 For example, the 2021 OECD Recommendation for Agile Regulatory Governance acknowledges the
need for more holistic, inclusive, adaptive and co -ordinated governance models to enhance systemic
resilience (OECD, 2021[118]).
16 Foreign direct investment (FDI) can generate knowledge and technology spillovers that promote
transformations in local economies The OECD FDI Qualities Indicators show that secto rs receiving more
FDI tend to have higher R&D intensity levels and foreign-owned firms are on average more innovative and
technology-intensive than their domestic counterparts (OECD, 2022[165]).
17 Funders operating in research areas commonly involved in crisis response have made use of funnel
approaches where draft priorities are informed through environmental scanning, international and domestic
science advice structures, and targeted outreach across policy domains and other funding agencies
(OECD, 2023[72]). Research areas can then be prioritised based on previous funding and current need,
policy relevance, research gaps, scientific validity, and feedback from the broader research community.
18 The Declaration of Research Assessment (DORA) was established in 2012 and has since spurred a
movement to reform research evaluation and assessment practices (DORA, n.d.[177]). In some respects,
the COVID -19 pandemic response renewed these efforts due to calls for institutions to redefine
expectations for science productivity and to ensure the transparent evolution of evaluation frameworks.
19 The OECD (2021[76]) defines high-risk, high-reward research as research that 1) strives to understand
or support solutions to ambitious scientific, technological, or societal challenges; 2) strives to cross
scientific, technological, or societal paradigms in a revolutionary way; 3) involves a high degree of novelty;
and 4) carries a high risk of not realising its full ambition as well as the potential for high, transformational
impact on a scientific, technological, or societal challenge.
20 Among the key factors that promote conservatism in research are tenure, promotion, and advancement
policies at research institut es. There are powerful incentives in the current system for researchers,
especially early-career researchers, to be conservativ e in their research in order to be more certain of
securing the publication outputs against which they will be assessed. Promoting HRHR research requires
a change in the human resource policies of research institut es and in research assessment more broadly
(OECD, 2021[76]).
21 Governments could also redirect some of their R&D tax credits towards greener activities. There are
various ways this might be achieved in practice, including targeting tax credit s towards large -scale
infrastructure required for technology deployment (e.g., carbon capture, utilisation and storage; electric
vehicle charging; hydrogen) and investment in new low carbon machinery or equipment, among others
(Beck, 2020[194])

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  53
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

22 The IEA estimates that at least USD 90 Billion of public funding needs to be raised by 2026 to complete
a portfolio of demonstration projects for technologies that could be commercially ready by 2030 and
contribute to achieving net zero emissions by mid-century (IEA, 2022[174]).
23 For example, in the green transition, challenges for private investors include insufficient profitability
compared to investments with similar risk profiles; difficulty assessing ri sks owing to information
asymmetries between innovators and investors; lack of awareness and uncertainty around government
priorities and regulations; and challenges in meeting ‘internal rate of return’ requirements or ‘return on
equity’ thresholds. These imperfections in capital markets limit the amount of private capital available for
low-carbon technologies (Cervantes et al., 2023[70]).
24 While organisational or dynamic capabilities lack a universally agreed definition, in this context they can
be taken to refer to strategic routines or processes that might be in place in an organisation to improve its
ability to ‘integrate, build and reconfigure internal and external competencies to address rapidly changing
environments’ (Teece, Pisano and Shuen, 1997, p. 516[182]) (Bleady, Ali and Ibrahim, 2018[183]).
25 Micro-credentials represent a potentially disruptive innovation in the education sector. As such, it will be
important for the STI system to advance the underlying evidence base as related experiments are
deployed. For example, little is currently known about how micro -credential programmes might impact
higher education institutions and the roles and resp onsibilities of different actors, including policymakers
in determining qualification criteria and standards.
26 This policy action aligns with and expands on the 2019 OECD Declaration on Public Sector Innovation
(OECD, 2019[196]). The Declaration was introduced to legitimise innovation as a central strategic function
of the public sector and to provide recommendations to support governments and policymakers in taking
more deliberate approaches to innovation management. A variety of avenues are outlined to assist public
sector organisations across five priority areas: embracing and enhancing innovation; encouraging and
equipping all public servants to innovate; cultivating new partnerships and involving different voices;
supporting exploration, iteration and testing; and diffusing lessons and sharing practices.
27 For the sake of practicality, this section focuses primarily on more tangible factors, i.e., infrastructure,
standards and regulation, and tools intended to augment commercial and financial markets. Other
structural conditions, such as labour policy and ethics are covered elsewhere in other STI policy areas.
28 Carbon pricing is, in principle, a way to make polluters pay for their greenhouse gas emissions, for
example, through a carbon tax or a cap -and-trade system. Carbon pricing changes the relative costs and
benefits of competing technologies, which can lead to the development of new technologies and processes
that are more energy -efficient and environmentally friendly. However, measures like carbon taxes are
politically unpopular and are currently set at sub-optimal levels.
29 For example, approaches like technology assessment and foresight have an established track record of
providing decision-makers with strategic intelligence on emerging technologies. They provide open and
inclusive processes to better a lign innovation and regulation trajectories with societal goals, taking into
account possible ethical and societal aspects and potential impacts and risks.
30 For instance, ongoing debates on the use of ‘science for policy’ call for scientists to become bet ter
communicators and to consider policy makers as end users of scientific knowledge (Boswell and Smith,

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2017[192]) (Edler, Karaulova and Barker, 2022[193]). Another example relates to the limited use of evaluation
findings in policy making (Amanatidou et al., 2014[195]), which can hamper policy adaptation and agility.
31 International surveys suggest that globally, public trust in science and scientists rose during the COVID-
19 pandemic (Gallup, 2020 [168]). However, more recent country -specific data indicate that in some
instances, this trend has reversed with trust declining below pre -pandemic levels (Pew Research Center,
2022[170]), while in others, attitudes have become more polarised (Fonseca et al., 2023 [171]). When
compared against public trust in other prominent actors, such as journalists and politicians, results could
indicate a broader societal trend of declining public trust in institutions (Ishmael-Perkins et al., 2023[172]).
In this case, scientists and medical professionals remain among the most trusted actors (Environics
Institute, 2023[169]).
32 Analysis of the demographic characteristics of citizen science participants reveals general patterns of
the overrepresentation of highly educated, high-income individuals (Geoghegan et al., 2016[166]).
33 Insights from behavioural scie nce can be useful for the development of citizen science activities in
several respects. Some of these include anticipating potentially unintended effects of activity design,
understanding how structural inequalities can contribute to variations in the exp ectations of different
population groups, and supporting scientists and public participants in probing into how their experiences
and personal characteristics influence views on specific topics (Hallsworth, 2023[187]).
34 For instance, some joint agency initiatives mix both technology push and market pull instruments to
provide support to new solutions along all stages of the innovation process, e.g. by combining funding
mechanisms with public procureme nt and the removal of legal barriers for the market uptake of new
solutions among users (Larrue, 2021[26]).
35 Multi-level governance reforms are generally conducted by central governments, but they can also be
partially driven by sub -national levels. Accordingly, reforms emerging at other government levels should
be understood and managed efficiently in order to account for mutual dependencies in relations (OECD,
2017[191]).
36 For example, in the United States, the National Science Foundation’s Global Centers program supports
partnerships between the US and two or more partner countries. The program is m eant to support
multidisciplinary research that can only be achieved through the development of international partnerships
that unite complementary areas of expertise and access to unique capabilities and resources. Participating
funding agencies are based in Canada, Japan, Republic of Korea, Finland and the United Kingdom (NSF,
2024[197]).
37 Global diplomacy efforts on climate change date back to 1992 with the ratification of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), This accord established the annual Conference of the Parties
(COP) forum to support global exchange and discussion, ultimately producing the Kyoto Protocol and Paris
Agreement (Maizland, 2023[181]). Since negotiation of the initial Paris accord, many of the 195 signatory
countries have strengthened their commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and support the
adaptation of emerging and disproportionately impacted economies.
38 Various international initiatives have adv anced the global Open Science agenda in recent years. For
example, in 2021, UNESCO introduced the organisation’s Recommendation on Open Science, which
outlines seven areas for action from promoting a common understanding of open science to improving
international and multi -stakeholder co -operation to reduce digital, technological and knowledge gaps

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  55
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

(UNESCO, 2021[184]). Additionally, OpenAIRE has been in place since 2009 to support the widespread
implementation of Open Access in Europe (OpenAIRE, n.d.[185]).
39 The revised OECD recommendation on access to research data from public funding identifies seven
key areas of focus, including data governance, technical standards and practices, and incentives and
rewards (OECD, 2021[157]) (OECD, 2020[173]).Similarly, the OECD Recommendation on Enhancing Access
to and Sharing of Data, which is broader in scope, sets out general principles and policy guidance to
support governments in maximising the benefits of improving data accessibility, while protecting the rights
of individuals and organisations (OECD, 2019[201]).
40 The OECD maintains a collection of such policies in the EC -OECD STIP Compass, see
https://stip.oecd.org/stip/research-security-portal.
41 Over the last decade, attention to the security implications of foreign investment has reached an
unprecedented level, with many governments introducing new or adjusting existing policies in response to
disruptions triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine (OECD,
2023[186]). In many of the countries with related instruments in place, these mechanisms cover large parts
of the economy or, at minimum, multiple sectors of strategic importance to economic competitiveness
and/or the strategic autonomy of socio -economic systems. For example, since the mid -2000s, there has
been a diversification and broadening of the focus of related policies to include sectors such as criti cal
infrastructure, advanced technologies, health infrastructure, and biotechnologies. Further, investment
screening mechanisms, which require the review of specific transactions defined by associated criteria,
have become the most common instrument used to manage risks associated with foreign investment.
42 There are important feedback loops between standards and regulation, international trade and
investment, and technological innovation. International standards and certifications can be key enablers of
international trade and investment; however, domestic alignment is necessary to encourage responsible
business conduct and improve the realisation of equitable outcomes related to sustainability and economic
inclusion (OECD, 2022 [165]). At the same time, opportunities afforded by trade, such as access to new
markets or supply chains and increased domestic competition, are essential to innovation (Blind, 2023[167]).
43 These activities will build off an initial 202 4 pilot project with Thailand to test and experiment with the
module guidance for several STI policy areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

References

Allen, C. and S. Malekpour (2023), “Unlocking and accelerating transformations to the SDGs: a
review of existing knowledge”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 18/4, pp. 1939-1960,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-023-01342-z.
[67]
Altenburg, T. and C. Assmann (2017), Green industrial policy: Concept, policies, country
experiences, UN Environment, Geneva, Bonn, https://archive.un-
page.org/files/public/green_industrial_policy_book_aw_web.pdf (accessed on
14 September 2023).
[8]
Amanatidou, E. et al. (2014), “Using Evaluation Research as a Means for Policy Analysis in a
‘New’ Mission-Oriented Policy Context”, Minerva, Vol. 52/4, pp. 419-438,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-014-9258-x.
[195]
Amoroso, S. et al. (2021), World Corporate Top R&D investors: Paving the way for climate
neutrality, https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC126788 (accessed on
22 March 2024).
[89]
Arnold, E. et al. (2023), “Navigating green and digital transitions: Five imperatives for effective
STI policy”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 162, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/dffb0747-en.
[60]
Attrey, A., M. Lesher and C. Lomax (2020), The role of sandboxes in promoting flexibility and
innovation in the digital age, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/the-role-of-
sandboxes-in-promoting-flexibility-and-innovation-in-the-digital-age_cdf5ed45-en (accessed
on 27 September 2023).
[59]
Bauer, A., A. Bogner and D. Fuchs (2021), “Rethinking societal engagement under the heading
of Responsible Research and Innovation: (novel) requirements and challenges”, Journal of
Responsible Innovation, Vol. 8/3, pp. 342-363,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2021.1909812.
[132]
Beck, L. (2020), The US Section 45Q Tax Credit for Carbon Oxide Sequestration,
https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/45Q_Brief_in_template_LLB.pdf (accessed on 25 March 2024).
[194]
Benner, M., G. Marklund and S. Serger (eds.) (2022), A smart green direction for innovation: The
answer to unemployment and inequality?, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd.,
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788970815.
[23]
Bleady, A., A. Ali and S. Ibrahim (2018), “Dynamic capablities theory: Pinning down a shifting
concept”, Academy of Accounting and Financial Studies Journal, Vol. 22/2.
[183]
Blind, K. (2023), Maximizing the impact of standards and regulation to drive transformative
innovation: a, Report produced on behalf of Our 2050 World (commissioned by BSI),
https://our2050.world/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Maximizing-the-impact-of-standards-and-
regulation-to-drive-transformative-innovation_Final-Version_V1_0.pdf.
[167]

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  57
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Boffo, R. and R. Patalano (2020), ESG Investing: Practices, progress and challenges, OECD
Publishing, https://www.oecd.org/finance/ESG-Investing-Practices-Progress-Challenges.pdf
(accessed on 23 November 2023).
[123]
Borrás, S. et al. (2023), The transformative capacity of public sector organisations in
sustainability transitions: A conceptualisation,
http://wp.circle.lu.se/upload/CIRCLE/workingpapers/202302_borras.pdf (accessed on
18 February 2024).
[115]
Boswell, C. and K. Smith (2017), “Rethinking policy ‘impact’: four models of research-policy
relations”, Palgrave Communications, Vol. 3/1, p. 44, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-017-
0042-z.
[192]
Brown, N., P. Knee and K. Blind (2022), The role of standardisation in support of emerging
technologies in the UK.
[88]
Bustamante, J. et al. (2023), “Resolving the patents paradox in the era of COVID-19 and climate
change: Towards a patents taxonomy”, Research Policy, Vol. 52/9, p. 104850,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104850.
[142]
Castro-Lopez, A., V. Iglesias and M. Santos-Vijande (2023), “Organizational capabilities and
institutional pressures in the adoption of circular economy”, Journal of Business Research,
Vol. 161, p. 113823, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.113823.
[116]
Centre for Regulatory Innovation (2021), Regulators’ Experimentation Toolkit,
https://wiki.gccollab.ca/images/6/6b/CRI_Regulators%27_Experimentation_Toolkit.pdf .
[53]
Cervantes, M., H. Copeland and Z. Zarnic (2018), Accelerating the development and diffusion of
low-emissions innovations, OECD, https://www.oecd.org/sd-
roundtable/papersandpublications/Accelerating%20the%20development%20and%20diffusion
%20of%20low-emissions%20innovations.pdf.
[120]
Cervantes, M. et al. (2023), “Driving low-carbon innovations for climate neutrality”, OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 143, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/8e6ae16b-en.
[70]
Chandy, L. (2023), Economic Development in an Era of Climate Change,
https://carnegieendowment.org/2023/01/04/economic-development-in-era-of-climate-change-
pub-88690 (accessed on 12 March 2024).
[155]
Chataway, J., R. Hanlin and R. Kaplinsky (2014), “Inclusive innovation: an architecture for policy
development”, Innovation and Development, Vol. 4/1, pp. 33-54,
https://doi.org/10.1080/2157930x.2013.876800.
[21]
Church, C., A. Crawford and S. Schaller (2019), Managing the trade-offs of transformation
through foreign policy, https://www.iisd.org/publications/brief/managing-trade-offs-
transformation-through-foreign-policy (accessed on 26 March 2024).
[16]
Ciarli, T. (ed.) (2022), Changing Directions: Steering science, technology and innovation towards
the Sustainable Development Goals, SPRU, University of Sussex,
https://doi.org/10.20919/FSOF1258.
[24]

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

COVID CIRCLE (2021), Funding and undertaking research during the first year of the COVID-19
pandemic: COVID CIRCLE lessons for funders, https://www.glopid-r.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/11/funding-and-undertaking-research-during-the-first-year-of-the-covid-
19-pandemic-covid-circle-lessons-for-funders.pdf.
[160]
de Silva, M. et al. (2023), Unlocking co-creation for green innovation: An exploration of the
diverse contributions of universities, https://www.oecd.org/publications/unlocking-co-creation-
for-green-innovation-b887f436-en.htm (accessed on 22 March 2024).
[75]
Diercks, G., H. Larsen and F. Steward (2019), “Transformative innovation policy: Addressing
variety in an emerging policy paradigm”, Research Policy, Vol. 48/4, pp. 880-894,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.028.
[5]
Dolgin, E. (2021), “The tangled history of mRNA vaccines”, Nature, Vol. 597/7876, pp. 318-324,
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-021-02483-w.
[175]
DORA (n.d.), About DORA, https://sfdora.org/about-dora/ (accessed on 12 March 2024). [177]
Dugard, P. (1997), “The Montreal Protocol: An exercise in international environmental
diplomacy”, ASHRAE Journal, Vol. 39/9, p. 38.
[179]
Dunlap, R. and R. Brulle (eds.) (2015), The human (anthropogenic) driving forces of global
climate change, Oxford University Press.
[20]
EC (2019), Open Science, https://research-and-
innovation.ec.europa.eu/document/download/77d34a83-7ed9-4041-9fb2-
3be3094f2319_en?filename=ec_rtd_factsheet-open-science_2019.pdf.
[199]
Edler, J., M. Karaulova and K. Barker (2022), “Understanding Conceptual Impact of Scientific
Knowledge on Policy: The Role of Policymaking Conditions”, Minerva, Vol. 60/2, pp. 209-233,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-022-09459-8.
[193]
EEA (2019), Sustainability transitions: policy and practice,
https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/sustainability-transitions-policy-and-practice
(accessed on 30 September 2023).
[133]
EEIST (2022), Ten Principles for Policy Making in the Energy Transition, https://eeist.co.uk/eeist-
reports/ten-principles-for-policy-making-in-the-energy-transition/ (accessed on
19 February 2024).
[126]
Enterprise Ireland (2022), Agile Innovation Fund, https://www.enterprise-
ireland.com/en/supports/agile-innovation-fund (accessed on 28 November 2023).
[74]
Environics Institute (2023), Confidence in Leaders,
https://www.environicsinstitute.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/cot_cover-
confidence-in-leaders5f77a9f8d8f24682b4dbcdb2b552c1a2.pdf?sfvrsn=4a85efd8_0.
[169]
Fagerberg, J. (2018), “Mobilizing innovation for sustainability transitions: A comment on
transformative innovation policy”, Research Policy, Vol. 47/9, pp. 1568-1576,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.08.012.
[6]
Federation of American Scientists (2024), The Future of Open Science Policy,
https://fas.org/accelerator/open-science/ (accessed on 16 April 2024).
[15]

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  59
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Feola, G. (2015), “Societal transformation in response to global environmental change: A review
of emerging concepts”, Ambio, Vol. 44/5, pp. 376-390, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-014-
0582-z.
[65]
Few, R. et al. (2017), “Transformation, adaptation and development: relating concepts to
practice”, Palgrave Communications, Vol. 3/1, p. 17092,
https://doi.org/10.1057/palcomms.2017.92.
[25]
Fonseca, C. et al. (2023), COVID-19 and the public perception of genetics,
https://genetics.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Copy-of-Public-Perception-of-
Genetics.pdf.
[171]
Fuglsang, L. and A. Hansen (2022), “Framing improvements of public innovation in a living lab
context: Processual learning, restrained space and democratic engagement”, Research
Policy, Vol. 51/1, p. 104390, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104390.
[57]
Gallup (2020), Wellcome Global Monitor: How COVID-19 affected people’s lives and their views
about science, https://cms.wellcome.org/sites/default/files/2021-11/Wellcome-Global-Monitor-
Covid.pdf.
[168]
Garden, H. (2023), “Collaborative mechanisms for sustainable health innovation: The case of
vaccines and antibiotics”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 145,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/3e8d40dc-en.
[121]
Geels, F. and J. Schot (2007), “Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways”, Research
Policy, Vol. 36/3, pp. 399-417, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESPOL.2007.01.003.
[202]
Geels, F. et al. (2017), “Sociotechnical transitions for deep decarbonization”, Science,
Vol. 357/6357, pp. 1242-1244, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aao3760.
[30]
Geoghegan, H. et al. (2016), Understanding motivations for citizen science, UKEOF, University
of Reading, Stockholm Environment Institute (University of York) and University of the West
of England, https://www.ukeof.org.uk/resources/citizen-science-
resources/MotivationsforCSREPORTFINALMay2016.pdf.
[166]
Gierten, D. et al. (2021), Firms going digital: Tapping into the potential of data for innovation,
OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 320, OECD Publishing, https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/firms-going-digital_ee8340c1-en (accessed on
22 March 2024).
[100]
Global Deal (2023), Upskilling and reskilling for the twin transition: The role of social dialogue ,
https://www.theglobaldeal.com/resources/Upskilling-and-reskilling-for-the-twin-transition.pdf.
[111]
GloPID-R (2019), Data sharing in public health emergencies: Learning from past outbreaks,
GloPID-R, https://www.imit.org.cn/data/upload/portal/20220228/CASE-STUDY%20_data-
sharing-in-public-health-emergencies-case-studies-workshop-reportv2.pdf.
[86]
Gold, E. (2021), “The fall of the innovation empire and its possible rise through open science”,
Research Policy, Vol. 50/5, p. 104226, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104226.
[122]
Grillitsch, M. et al. (2019), “Innovation policy for system-wide transformation: The case of
strategic innovation programmes (SIPs) in Sweden”, Research Policy, Vol. 48/4, pp. 1048-
1061, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.004.
[136]

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Hallsworth, M. (2023), “A manifesto for applying behavioural science”, Nature Human Behaviour,
Vol. 7/3, pp. 310-322, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01555-3.
[187]
Halme, K. et al. (2019), Case study on the policy mix for science-industry knowledge transfer in
Finland: Contribution to the OECD TIP Knowledge Transfer and Policies projec,
https://stip.oecd.org/assets/TKKT/CaseStudies/2.pdf (accessed on 13 March 2024).
[146]
Hebinck, A. et al. (2022), “An actionable understanding of societal transitions: the X-curve
framework”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 17/3, pp. 1009-1021, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-
021-01084-w.
[35]
HM Treasury (2022), The Green Book (2022), HM Treasury, London,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-green-book-appraisal-and-evaluation-in-
central-government/the-green-book-2020#a7-transformation-systems-and-dynamic-change
(accessed on 19 February 2024).
[68]
ICRI (2021), International Conference on Research Infrastructures: Proceedings Report. [156]
IEA (2023), Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach , IEA,
https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-roadmap-a-global-pathway-to-keep-the-15-0c-goal-in-
reach.
[17]
IEA (2022), The Need for Net Zero Demonstration Projects, https://www.iea.org/reports/the-
need-for-net-zero-demonstration-projects.
[174]
IEA (2021), Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector,
https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050.
[4]
IEA (2020), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020,
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/04dc5d08-4e45-447d-a0c1-
d76b5ac43987/Energy_Technology_Perspectives_2020_-
_Special_Report_on_Clean_Energy_Innovation.pdf.
[178]
IPCC (2022), Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability,
https://report.ipcc.ch/ar6/wg2/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FullReport.pdf (accessed on 24 March 2024).
[19]
IPCC (2007), Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report - Summary for Policymakers. [18]
Ishmael-Perkins, N. et al. (2023), The Contextualization Deficit: Reframing Trust in Science for
Multilateral Policy, The Centre for Science Futures, https://doi.org/10.24948/2023.10.
[172]
ITF (2023), ITF Transport Outlook 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/b6cc9ad5-en.
[48]
ITIF (2022), Low-Carbon Process Technologies: Key Pieces of the Net-Zero Future,
https://itif.org/publications/2022/11/14/low-carbon-process-technologies-key-pieces-of-the-
net-zero-future/ (accessed on 28 November 2023).
[145]
IUCN (2020), Issues Brief: Ensuring effective nature-based solutions,
https://www.iucn.org/sites/default/files/2022-02/iucn_issues_brief_-_nbs_standard_eng.pdf
(accessed on 20 March 2024).
[190]

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  61
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

IUCN (2020), IUCN Global Standard for Nature-based Solutions: a user-friendly framework for
the verification, design and scaling up of NbS: first edition, IUCN, International Union for
Conservation of Nature, https://doi.org/10.2305/iucn.ch.2020.08.en.
[189]
IUCN (2012), The IUCN Programme 2013-2016, https://www.iucn.org/sites/default/files/2022-
05/wcc-5th-003.pdf (accessed on 20 March 2024).
[188]
Janssen, M. (2019), “What bangs for your buck? Assessing the design and impact of Dutch
transformative policy”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 138, pp. 78-94,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.08.011.
[64]
Jetel, R. (2022), What Is Systems Change? 6 Questions, Answered,
https://www.wri.org/insights/systems-change-how-to-top-6-questions-answered (accessed on
26 March 2024).
[69]
Johnstone, P., A. Stirling and B. Sovacool (2017), “Policy mixes for incumbency: Exploring the
destructive recreation of renewable energy, shale gas ‘fracking,’ and nuclear power in the
United Kingdom”, Energy Research &amp; Social Science, Vol. 33, pp. 147-162,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.005.
[164]
Kanda, W. et al. (2020), “Conceptualising the systemic activities of intermediaries in
sustainability transitions”, Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, Vol. 36,
pp. 449-465, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2020.01.002.
[144]
Kanger, L., B. Sovacool and M. Noorkõiv (2020), “Six policy intervention points for sustainability
transitions: A conceptual framework and a systematic literature review”, Research Policy,
Vol. 49/7, p. 104072, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104072.
[110]
Kellermann, M. (2019), Ensuring Quality to Gain Access to Global Markets: A Reform Toolkit,
Washington, DC: World Bank; Braunschweig, Germany: Physikalisch-Technische
Bundesanstalt, https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1372-6.
[87]
Kivimaa, P. and F. Kern (2016), “Creative destruction or mere niche support? Innovation policy
mixes for sustainability transitions”, Research Policy, Vol. 45/1, pp. 205-217,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.
[34]
Koretsky, Z. et al. (2023), Technologies in Decline: Socio-Technical Approaches to
Discontinuation and Destabilisation, Routledge, New York, US.
[38]
Kreiling, L. and C. Paunov (2021), Knowledge co-creation in the 21st century: An international
experience-based policy report, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-
technology/knowledge-co-creation-in-the-21st-century_c067606f-en (accessed on
14 March 2024).
[137]
Kuhlmann, S. and A. Rip (2014), The challenge of addressing Grand Challenges,
https://ris.utwente.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/5140568/The_challenge_of_addressing_Grand_Cha
llenges.pdf (accessed on 19 February 2024).
[54]
Larrue, P. (2021), The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges, https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/the-design-and-implementation-of-mission-oriented-
innovation-policies_3f6c76a4-en (accessed on 27 September 2023).
[26]

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Larrue, P. and O. Strauka (2022), “The contribution of RTOs to socio-economic recovery,
resilience and transitions”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 129,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ae93dc1d-en.
[83]
Lenton, T. et al. (2023), The Global Tipping Points Report 2023, University of Exeter, Exeter,
https://global-tipping-points.org/ (accessed on 19 February 2024).
[44]
Lindner, R. et al. (2016), Addressing directionality: Orientation failure and the systems of
innovation heuristic. Towards reflexive governance.
[55]
Linkov, I. and J. Palma-Oliveira (2017), Risk and Resilience: Methods and Application in
Environment, Cyber and Social Domains, Springer Netherlands.
[12]
Loorbach, D., N. Frantzeskaki and F. Avelino (2017), “Sustainability Transitions Research:
Transforming Science and Practice for Societal Change”, Annual Review of Environment and
Resources, Vol. 42/1, pp. 599-626, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-102014-021340.
[33]
Loorbach, D., D. Schoenmaker and W. Schramade (2020), Finance in Transition: Principles for a
Positive Finance Future,
https://www.rsm.nl/fileadmin/Corporate/About_RSM/Positive_Change/2020_Finance_in_Tran
sition.pdf (accessed on 28 November 2023).
[73]
Magro, E., M. Navarro and J. Zabala‐Iturriagagoitia (2014), “Coordination‐Mix: The Hidden Face
of STI policy”, Review of Policy Research, Vol. 31/5, pp. 367-389,
https://doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12090.
[148]
Maizland, L. (2023), Global Climate Agreements: Successes and Failures,
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/paris-global-climate-change-
agreements#:~:text=The%20Kyoto%20Protocol%20required%20only,countries%20to%20set
%20emissions%20targets. (accessed on 13 March 2024).
[181]
Meadowcroft, J. (2011), “Engaging with the politics of sustainability transitions”, Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions, Vol. 1/1, pp. 70-75,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2011.02.003.
[128]
Meadowcroft, J. (2009), “What about the politics? Sustainable development, transition
management, and long term energy transitions”, Policy Sciences, Vol. 42/4, pp. 323-340,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-009-9097-z.
[163]
Meadowcroft, J. et al. (2021), Pathways to net zero: A decision support tool,
http://www.transitionaccelerator.ca.
[32]
Meadowcroft, J. and D. Rosenbloom (2023), Governing the net-zero transition: Strategy, policy,
and politics, https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2207727120 (accessed on
19 February 2024).
[39]
Meadows, D. (1999), Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System, The Sustainability
Institute, http://drbalcom.pbworks.com/w/file/fetch/35173014/Leverage_Points.pdf (accessed
on 15 September 2023).
[40]
Miedzinski, M. et al. (2020), Science, Technology and Innovation for SDGs Roadmaps. [80]

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  63
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Mignon, I. and W. Kanda (2018), “A typology of intermediary organizations and their impact on
sustainability transition policies”, Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, Vol. 29,
pp. 100-113, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2018.07.001.
[135]
Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment, (2023), Which analytical tools are suited to
transformative change?, New Zealand Government,
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/assets/Analytical-tools-suited-to-transformative-change-report.pdf
(accessed on 18 April 2024).
[203]
Molen, I. et al. (2023), Keeping science open? Current challenges in the day-to-day reality of
universities, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8355324 (accessed on 16 April 2024).
[14]
Monteiro, B. and R. Dal Borgo (2023), “Supporting decision making with strategic foresight: An
emerging framework for proactive and prospective governments.”, OECD Working Papers on
Public Governance, No. 63, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/1d78c791-en.
[127]
Monteiro, B. and B. Kumpf (2023), Innovation labs through the looking glass: Experiences across
the globe, https://oecd-opsi.org/blog/innovation-labs-through-the-looking-glass/ (accessed on
19 February 2024).
[56]
Nordhaus, W. (2015), “Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-riding in International Climate Policy”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 105/4, pp. 1339-1370,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.15000001.
[153]
NSF (2024), Global Centers, https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/global-centers-gc
(accessed on 17 April 2024).
[197]
OECD (2024), Framework for Anticipatory Governance of Emerging Technologies, OECD
Publishing, https://doi.org/10.1787/0248ead5-en.
[29]
OECD (2023), Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023: Adapting Agriculture to
Climate Change, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/b14de474-en.
[50]
OECD (2023), “An effective, fair and equitable transition”, in Net Zero+: Climate and Economic
Resilience in a Changing World, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/aeac6dba-
en.
[9]
OECD (2023), Artificial Intelligence in Science: Challenges, Opportunities and the Future of
Research, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/a8d820bd-en.
[93]
OECD (2023), Communicating science responsibly, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5c3be7ce-en.
[131]
OECD (2023), “COVID-19 and policy for science”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers, No. 152, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/8f86e60b-en.
[84]
OECD (2023), “COVID-19 and science for policy and society”, OECD Science, Technology and
Industry Policy Papers, No. 154, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0afa04e2-
en.
[72]
OECD (2023), COVID-19, resilience and the interface between science, policy and society,
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/covid-19-resilience-and-the-interface-
between-science-policy-and-society_9ab1fbb7-en (accessed on 15 November 2023).
[143]

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD (2023), “Emerging technology governance: Towards an anticipatory framework”, in OECD
Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023: Enabling Transitions in Times of
Disruption, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/d67d5380-en.
[98]
OECD (2023), Freedom of investment process: Investment policy developments in 61
economies between 16 October 2021 and 15 March 2023.
[186]
OECD (2023), Net Zero+: Climate and Economic Resilience in a Changing World, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/da477dda-en.
[3]
OECD (2023), OECD Inventory of Support Measures for Fossil Fuels 2023, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/87dc4a55-en.
[117]
OECD (2023), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023,
https://www.oecd.org/publications/oecd-reviews-of-innovation-policy-korea-2023-bdcf9685-
en.htm (accessed on 13 March 2024).
[152]
OECD (2023), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023: Enabling Transitions in
Times of Disruption, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0b55736e-en.
[13]
OECD (2023), OECD Skills Outlook 2023: Skills for a Resilient Green and Digital Transition,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/27452f29-en.
[106]
OECD (2023), OECD work in support of industrial decarbonisation, ISSUU,
https://issuu.com/oecd.publishing/docs/oecd_industrial_decarbonisation_2023 (accessed on
18 March 2024).
[49]
OECD (2023), “Promoting diverse career pathways for doctoral and postdoctoral researchers” ,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 158, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/dc21227a-en.
[114]
OECD (2023), “Reaching Net zero: Do mission-oriented policies deliver on their many
promises?”, in OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023: Enabling
Transitions in Times of Disruption, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/fd790e2c-
en.
[147]
OECD (2023), Regional Industrial Transitions to Climate Neutrality, OECD Regional
Development Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/35247cc7-en.
[162]
OECD (2023), “Regulatory sandboxes in artificial intelligence”, OECD Digital Economy Papers,
No. 356, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/8f80a0e6-en.
[61]
OECD (2023), “Science, technology and innovation policy in times of strategic competition”, in
OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023: Enabling Transitions in Times of
Disruption, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/f3c247fc-en.
[103]
OECD (2023), Skills requirements in cutting-edge technologies for green and digital futures:
Implications for STI policies, https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/skillsrequirementsincutting-
edgetechnologiesforgreenanddigitalfuturesimplicationsforstipolicy.htm (accessed on
9 April 2024).
[107]
OECD (2023), “Very Large Research Infrastructures: Policy issues and options”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 153, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/2b93187f-en.
[85]

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  65
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD (2022), Declaration on Transformative Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food
Systems, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0483 (accessed on
19 February 2024).
[47]
OECD (2022), FDI Qualities Policy Toolkit, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/finance-and-
investment/fdi-qualities-policy-toolkit_7ba74100-en (accessed on 19 February 2024).
[165]
OECD (2022), “Framework for industry’s net-zero transition: Developing financing solutions in
emerging and developing economies”, OECD Environment Policy Papers, No. 32, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0c5e2bac-en.
[161]
OECD (2022), Inclusive Forum on Carbon Mitigation Approaches, https://www.oecd.org/climate-
change/inclusive-forum-on-carbon-mitigation-
approaches/?_ga=2.237167680.1185783980.1708330587-982265485.1706514215.
[79]
OECD (2022), Integrity and security in the global research ecosystem, OECD Publishing,
https://www.oecd.org/publications/integrity-and-security-in-the-global-research-ecosystem-
1c416f43-en.htm (accessed on 14 November 2023).
[28]
OECD (2022), “Measuring the environmental impacts of artificial intelligence compute and
applications: The AI footprint”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 341, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/7babf571-en.
[90]
OECD (2022), “Policy guidance on market practices to strengthen ESG investing and finance a
climate transition”, OECD Business and Finance Policy Papers, No. 13, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2c5b535c-en.
[124]
OECD (2021), “Civil service capacities in the SDG era: An assessment framework”, OECD
Working Papers on Public Governance, No. 47, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/a20bad7c-en.
[108]
OECD (2021), Development Co-operation Report 2021: Shaping a Just Digital Transformation,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ce08832f-en.
[96]
OECD (2021), Effective policies to foster high-risk/high-reward research, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/effective-policies-to-foster-high-
risk-high-reward-research_06913b3b-en (accessed on 25 March 2024).
[76]
OECD (2021), Financial markets and climate transition: Opportunities, challenges and policy
implications, OECD Paris, https://www.oecd.org/finance/Financial-Markets-and-Climate-
Transition-Opportunities-Challenges-and-Policy-Implications.pdf (accessed on
18 February 2023).
[125]
OECD (2021), “Government support for business research and innovation in a world in crisis”, in
OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021: Times of Crisis and Opportunity,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/7a7891a5-en.
[77]
OECD (2021), Practical guidance on agile regulatory governance to innovation,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/public/doc/669/9110a3d9-3bab-48ca-9f1f-4ab6f2201ad9.pdf
(accessed on 14 March 2024).
[119]
OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council concerning Access to Research Data from Public
Funding, https://www.oecd.org/sti/recommendation-access-to-research-data-from-public-
funding.htm.
[157]

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
66  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness
Innovation, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0464 (accessed
on 30 January 2024).
[118]
OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council on Enhancing Access to and Sharing of Data ,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0463 (accessed on
22 March 2024).
[101]
OECD (2021), “Reducing the precarity of academic research careers”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 113, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0f8bd468-en.
[109]
OECD (2020), A systemic resilience approach to dealing with Covid-19 and future shocks,
https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=131_131917-kpfefrdfnx&title=A-Systemic-Resilience-
Approach-to-dealing-with-Covid-19-and-future-shocks (accessed on 24 November 2023).
[11]
OECD (2020), “Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 88, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0ca0ca45-en.
[105]
OECD (2020), Broad-based Innovation Policy for All Regions and Cities, OECD Regional
Development Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/299731d2-en.
[52]
OECD (2020), “Building digital workforce capacity and skills for data-intensive science”, OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 90, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/e08aa3bb-en.
[113]
OECD (2020), Enhanced Access to Publicly Funded Data for Science, Technology and
Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/947717bc-en.
[173]
OECD (2020), Moving Towards a Safe(r) Innovation Approach (SIA) for More Sustainable
Nanomaterials and Nano-enabled Products,
https://one.oecd.org/document/env/jm/mono(2020)36/REV1/en/pdf (accessed on
19 February 2024).
[58]
OECD (2020), The Digitalisation of Science, Technology and Innovation: Key Developments and
Policies, https://www.comecso.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/digitalisation-of-STI-
summary.pdf (accessed on 28 September 2023).
[102]
OECD (2019), Declaration on Public Sector Innovation, https://oecd-opsi.org/work-
areas/declaration/.
[196]
OECD (2019), Digital Innovation: Seizing Policy Opportunities, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/a298dc87-en.
[99]
OECD (2019), Enhancing Access to and Sharing of Data: Reconciling Risks and Benefits for
Data Re-use across Societies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/276aaca8-en.
[201]
OECD (2019), Regions in Industrial Transition: Policies for People and Places, OECD,
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/urban-rural-and-regional-development/regions-in-industrial-
transition_c76ec2a1-en (accessed on 19 February 2024).
[51]
OECD (2019), Rethinking Innovation for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264311053-en.
[139]

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  67
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD (2019), The Path to Becoming a Data-Driven Public Sector, OECD Digital Government
Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/059814a7-en.
[151]
OECD (2018), Blue Sky perspectives towards the next generation of data and indicators on
science and innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-
technology/oecd-science-technology-and-innovation-outlook-2018_sti_in_outlook-2018-en
(accessed on 30 January 2024).
[129]
OECD (2018), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2018: Adapting to
Technological and Societal Disruption, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2018-en.
[46]
OECD (2018), Opportunities for All: A Framework for Policy Action on Inclusive Growth, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264301665-en.
[10]
OECD (2018), “Technology governance and the innovation process”, in OECD Science,
Technology and Innovation Outlook 2018: Adapting to Technological and Societal Disruption,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2018-15-en.
[97]
OECD (2017), “Multi-level Governance Reforms: Overview of OECD Country Experiences,
OECD Multi-level Governance Studies”, https://www.oecd.org/fr/publications/multi-level-
governance-reforms-9789264272866-en.htm (accessed on 22 March 2024).
[191]
OECD (2017), “Strengthening the effectiveness and sustainability of international research
infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 48, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/fa11a0e0-en.
[81]
OECD (2017), “The role of the budget process in promoting public sector innovation”, in
Fostering Innovation in the Public Sector, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264270879-6-en.
[71]
OECD (2015), “Making Open Science a Reality”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers, No. 25, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5jrs2f963zs1-en.
[159]
OECD (2015), “Scientific Advice for Policy Making: The Role and Responsibility of Expert Bodies
and Individual Scientists”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 21,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5js33l1jcpwb-en.
[104]
OECD (2014), Challenges and Opportunities for Innovation Through Technology: the
Convergence of Technologies, https://one.oecd.org/document/dsti/stp(2013)15/final/en/pdf.
[94]
OECD (2014), Recommendation of the Council on Effective Public Investment Across Levels of
Government, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0402 (accessed
on 13 March 2024).
[150]
OECD (2014), “Synthetic biology: A new and promising technology”, in Emerging Policy Issues
in Synthetic Biology, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264208421-4-en.
[91]
OECD, IEA (2023), Climate Club: Accelerating global industry decarbonisation through stronger
international collaboration, https://climate-club.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Climate-Club-
COP-28-background-paper.pdf.
[154]

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
68  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD/Science Europe (2020), “Optimising the operation and use of national research
infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 91, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/7cc876f7-en.
[82]
OpenAIRE (n.d.), OpenAIRE History, https://www.openaire.eu/history (accessed on
18 March 2024).
[185]
Ordonez-Ponce, E., A. Clarke and B. Colbert (2021), “Collaborative Sustainable Business
Models: Understanding Organizations Partnering for Community Sustainability”, Business &
Society, Vol. 60/5, pp. 1174-1215.
[141]
Pardi, N. et al. (2018), “mRNA vaccines — a new era in vaccinology”, Nature Reviews Drug
Discovery, Vol. 17/4, pp. 261-279, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd.2017.243.
[176]
Paunov, C. and S. Planes-Satorra (2023), Engaging citizens in innovation policy, OECD
Publishing, https://www.oecd.org/publications/engaging-citizens-in-innovation-policy-
ba068fa6-en.htm.
[130]
Peters, B. (2018), “The challenge of policy coordination”, Policy Design and Practice, Vol. 1/1,
pp. 1-11, https://doi.org/10.1080/25741292.2018.1437946.
[149]
Pew Research Center (2022), Americans’ Trust in Scientists, Other Groups Declines,
https://www.pewresearch.org/science/wp-
content/uploads/sites/16/2022/02/PS_2022.02.15_trust-declines_REPORT.pdf.
[170]
Philp, J. and D. Winickoff (2019), Innovation ecosystems in the bioeconomy, https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/innovation-ecosystems-in-the-bioeconomy_e2e3d8a1-en
(accessed on 14 March 2024).
[140]
Philp, J. and D. Winickoff (2018), “Realising the circular bioeconomy”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 60, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/31bb2345-en.
[92]
Pigford, A., G. Hickey and L. Klerkx (2018), “Beyond agricultural innovation systems? Exploring
an agricultural innovation ecosystems approach for niche design and development in
sustainability transitions”, Agricultural Systems, Vol. 164, pp. 116-121,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.04.007.
[138]
Planes-Satorra, S. and C. Paunov (2017), “Inclusive innovation policies: Lessons from
international case studies”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers,
No. 2017/2, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/a09a3a5d-en.
[22]
Robinson, D., D. Winickoff and L. Kreiling (2023), Technology assessment for emerging
technology: Meeting new demands for strategic intelligence, https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/technology-assessment-for-emerging-
technology_e738fcdf-en (accessed on 30 September 2023).
[62]
Rogge, K. and P. Johnstone (2017), “Exploring the role of phase-out policies for low-carbon
energy transitions: The case of the German Energiewende”, Energy Research & Social
Science, Vol. 33, pp. 128-137, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.10.004.
[36]
Rosenbloom, D. and A. Rinscheid (2020), “Deliberate decline: An emerging frontier for the study
and practice of decarbonization”, WIREs Climate Change, Vol. 11/6,
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.669.
[37]

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  69
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Rotolo, D. et al. (2017), “Strategic intelligence on emerging technologies: Scientometric overlay
mapping”, Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 68/1,
pp. 214-233, https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23631.
[63]
Samans, R. (2016), Blending public and private funds for sustainable development, OECD,
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/dcr-2016-9-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/dcr-
2016-9-en.
[78]
Sauermann, H. et al. (2020), “Citizen science and sustainability transitions”, Research Policy,
Vol. 49/5, p. 103978, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.103978.
[134]
Schumer, C. et al. (2022), “Methodology Underpinning the State of Climate Action Series”,
https://www.wri.org/research/methodology-underpinning-state-climate-action-series
(accessed on 22 March 2024).
[66]
Schwaag Serger, S. and C. Palmberg (2022), “Towards transformative policy in Finland and
Sweden: some viewpoints from practice”, in Benner, M., G. Marklund and S. Schwaag Serger
(eds.), Smart Policies for Societies in Transition: The Innovation Challenge of Inclusion,
Resilience and Sustainability.
[7]
Sharpe, S. and T. Lenton (2021), “Upward-scaling tipping cascades to meet climate goals:
plausible grounds for hope”, Climate Policy, Vol. 21/4, pp. 421-433,
https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2020.1870097.
[45]
Solarin, S. et al. (2022), “Inequality Persistence of 21 OECD Countries from 1870 to 2020: Linear
and Non-Linear Fractional Integration Approaches”, Social Indicators Research, Vol. 164/2,
pp. 711-725, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-022-02982-x.
[1]
Systemiq, University of Exeter and Bezos Earth Foundation (2023), The breakthrough effect:
How tipping points can accelerate net zero?, https://www.systemiq.earth/breakthrough-effect/
(accessed on 19 February 2024).
[42]
Tàbara, J. et al. (2021), Towards transformative emergence: Research challenges for enabling
social-ecological tipping points toward regional sustainability transformations , https://tipping-
plus.eu/sites/default/files/Working%20Documents/T%2BWorking%20Document%20Series%2
02021.01-Transformative%20emergence.pdf (accessed on 19 February 2024).
[41]
Teece, D., G. Pisano and A. Shuen (1997), “Dynamic capabilities and strategic management”,
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 17/7, pp. 509-533.
[182]
UN (2023), The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023: Special Edition - Towards a
rescue plan for people and planet, https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2023/The-Sustainable-
Development-Goals-Report-2023.pdf.
[2]
UN (2023), Times of Crisis, Times of Change: Science for accelerating transformations to
sustainable development.
[43]
UNEP (2020), Handbook for the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer . [180]
UNESCO (2021), UNESCO Recommendation on Open Science, UNESCO,
https://doi.org/10.54677/mnmh8546.
[184]
UNESCO (2021), UNESCO Recommendation on Open Science,
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379949.
[200]

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
70  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

UNFCCC (2022), What is the triple planetary crisis?, https://unfccc.int/news/what-is-the-triple-
planetary-crisis.
[198]
Uyarra, E. et al. (2020), “Public procurement, innovation and industrial policy: Rationales, roles,
capabilities and implementation”, Research Policy, Vol. 49/1, p. 103844,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103844.
[27]
Varadarajan, S., J. Koh and B. Daniel (2023), “A systematic review of the opportunities and
challenges of micro-credentials for multiple stakeholders: learners, employers, higher
education institutions and government”, International Journal of Educational Technology in
Higher Education, Vol. 20/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00381-x.
[112]
Victor, D., F. Geels and S. Sharpe (2019), Accelerating the low carbon transition: The case for
stronger, more targeted and coordinated international action, https://www.energy-
transitions.org/publications/accelerating-the-low-carbon-transition/ (accessed on
11 September 2023).
[31]
Wilkinson, M. et al. (2016), “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and
stewardship”, Scientific Data, Vol. 3/1, https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18.
[158]
Winickoff, D. et al. (2021), Collaborative Platforms for Emerging Technology: Creating
Convergence Spaces, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/ed1e030d-
en.pdf?expires=1695903234&id=id&accname=ocid84004878&checksum=04B0B4E37A10BF
1341463AD27D472CE6 (accessed on 28 September 2023).
[95]

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES  71
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table A.1. S&T Policy 2025 Advisory Board Membership
Country Name Affiliation
AUT Matthias Weber Head of Center for Innovation Systems and Policy, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH
BEL Michel Goldman Founder of the Institute for Interdisciplinary Innovation in healthcare (I3h) at the Université libre de
Bruxelles; Editor-in-Chief of Frontiers in Medicine
CAD Catherine Beaudry Full Professor, Department of Mathematical and Industrial Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal;
Canada Research Chair in Management and Economics of Innovation; Director, Partnership for
the Organisation of Innovation and New Technologies (4POINT0)
CAD James Meadowcroft Chancellor’s Professor, Department of Political Science and the School of Public Policy and
Administration, Carleton University; Research Director, Transition Accelerator
CHL Alexis M. Kalergis Full Professor and Director Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile
FIN Paula Kivimaa Research Professor, Climate and Society & Academy of Finland; Research Fellow, Finnish
Environment Institute SYKE, Climate Change Programme; Senior Research Fellow, Science
Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex
ITA Alessandra Faggian Professor of Applied Economics, Director of Social Sciences and Vice Provost for Research at the
Gran Sasso Science Institute
JPN Mitsunobu Kano Professor and Vice Executive Director of Okayama University Graduate School of Interdisciplinary
Science and Engineering in Health Systems
KOR Myong Hwa Lee Research fellow and Head of the National R&D Research Office at the Science and Technology
Policy Institute
NLD Marko Hekkert Full professor of Dynamics of Innovation Systems at Utrecht University, Director of the Copernicus
Institute of Sustainable Development
POL Anna Visvizi Associate professor, Head of the International Political Economy Department, SGH Warsaw
School of Economics
SWE Sylvia Schwaag Serger Professor of Research Policy at Lund University School of Economics and Management, Member
of Swedish Prime Minister Innovation Council
USA David Guston Foundation Professor; Director, School for the Future of Innovation in Society; Associate Vice
Provost for Discovery, Engagement and Outcomes, Global Futures Laboratory, Arizona State

Annex: S&T Policy 2025 Advisory Board
and Steering Group Membership

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
72  OECD AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATIVE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICIES
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table A.2. S&T Policy 2025 Steering Group Membership
Country Name Affiliation
AUT Christian Naczinsky Head of Department, EU and OECD Research Policy, Ministry of Education, Science and Research
CAD Daniel Dufour Director General, Natural Resources Canada
CHE Patrick Vock Co-ordinator for Multilateral Affairs, State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation
EC Alexandr Hobza Chief Economist, Director General for Research and Innovation, European Commission
ESP Cecilia Cabello-Valdes Policy Officer, Director General for Research and Innovation, European Commission
FIN Kirsti Vilen Ministerial Advisor, Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment
FRA Patrick Monfray Emeritus Research Director, Institut Pierre Simon Laplace
GBR Amanda Collis Executive Director, Research Strategy, UK Research and Innovation
JPN Hidetoshi Kotera Professor Emeritus, Kyoto University, and Technical Advisor to Science and Technology Policy
Bureau, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
KOR Yongsuk Jang Senior Research Fellow, Science and Technology Policy Institute
PRT Luis Melo Professor, Dept of Physics, Technical University of Lisbon, Portugal
SWE Göran Marklund Deputy Director General and Head of Operational Development Division, VINNOVA

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
www.oecd.org/climate -change/inclusive -forum -on -carbon -mitigation -approaches
IFCMA@oecd.org
For more information:
STIPolicy.data@oecd.org
www.oecd.org/sti
