
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH
FUNDING IN SWEDEN
OPTIMISING THE SYSTEM IN
RESPONSE TO MULTIPLE DEMANDS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
May 2023 No. 148

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers

This paper was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee for Scientific and
Technological Policy (CSTP) on 5 May 2023 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2023)6/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.

© OECD (2023)

The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  3

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Foreword
This report includes suggestions and options for change for the public funding of research and innovation
in Sweden. It is an input to the review committee U 2022:06 and is designed to inform a broader dialogue
that is taking place amongst different national stakeholders. The Swedish government establish ed the
review committee in 2022 to analyse the current state of public funding for research and innovation and
propose changes to existing funding structures and mechanisms to effectively promote research
excellence, support innovation, and address societal needs.
The current report provides an outside view of the challenges and opportunities for the Swedish research
and innovation system, which is faced with similar challenges to those of many other OECD countries.
Illustrative examples from these countries are included, where appropriate. Options for change to improve
public research funding are included in the report to stimulate discussion. Many of these actions would
need further refinement before they could be implemented.
In 2016, an OECD review provided a comprehensive analysis of the Swedish STI system, including some
of its major policy initiatives at that time, and identified areas for improvement and associated policy
actions. The recommendations in the OECD review focused on 4 key areas: 1. stre ngthening university
research; 2. linking research and innovation; 3. STI to address societal challenges; and 4. priorities,
strategies and governance. These four areas align well with the remit that has now been given to the review
committee U2022:06 and hence provide a good starting point for the analysis in this report. The report
takes into account contextual changes in Sweden since 2016 and builds on recent and ongoing work
conducted by the Global Science Forum (GSF) and the Committee for Science and T echnological Policy
(CSTP) of OECD. However, it does not pretend to be a detailed in -depth analysis of the whole Swedish
STI system.
In 2022, the OECD CSTP launched a cross -cutting initiative, named S&T Policy 2025, that focuses on
enabling socio-economic transitions through science, technology and innovation (STI). The initiative aims
to provide systematic guidance for driving reform, on the premise that a gap exists between the current
STI policy framework and what is needed to realise policy objectives such as sustainability, resilience and
inclusiveness. This includes the combination and design of new policy instruments addressing critical
aspects of the functioning of STI systems, including: funding; human resources; research infrastructures
(RIs); coordination mechanisms; and evaluation and measurement. The initiative aims to build on recent
OECD work in each of these areas. Although the systematic guidance for S&TP2025 has not yet been fully
developed, the question of what it means for public research funding in Sweden is directly relevant to the
current analysis.
This work was commissioned and paid for by the review committee U 2022:06. It was drafted by the GSF
Secretariat Masatoshi Shimosuka, Carthage Smith and Frédéric Sgard with input from Michael Keenan,
Philippe Larrue and Blandine Serve.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Table of contents
Foreword ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 2
Executive Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 5
Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 9
Analysis and Options for Change ................................ ................................ ..................... 11
1. University excellence, taking risks and addressing societal needs ................................ 11
Redirection of universities ................................ ................................ .............................. 12
Funding mechanisms for novel research ................................ ................................ ........ 16
2. Research infrastructures ................................ ................................ ............................... 19
3. Supporting societal transitions and resilience ................................ ................................ 24
Research programme agenda setting and design ................................ .......................... 25
Programme implementation, management and evaluation................................ ............. 26
4. STI Strategy ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 30
Overarching strategy ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 31
Alignment across key research funders ................................ ................................ ......... 32
Stakeholder engagement in the development of strategy ................................ ............... 33
5. Governance and structures ................................ ................................ ........................... 35
An incremental approach ................................ ................................ ............................... 37
Going beyond an incremental approach (radical approach) ................................ ........... 39
Concluding Remarks ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 42
References ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 43
Appendix ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 45

FIGURES
Figure 1. R&D intensity by sector of performance as a percentage of GDP by country 45
Figure 2. Higher Education Expenditure on R&D (HERD) as a percentage of GDP 45
Figure 3. HERD and HERD financed by the government sector as a percentage of GDP 46
Figure 4. Total number of 10% top-cited scientific publications, fractional counts 46
Figure 5. Proportion of 10% top-cited scientific publications to total scientific publications, fractional counts, % 47
Figure 6. Sweden's average distance to the SDG targets level 47
Figure 7. Number of projects funded from the European Research Council (ERC) by country 48
TABLES
Table 1. The remits of councils and agencies 36
Table 2. Higher education institutions' income from research grants in Sweden by funder, SEK million (current
prices) 48

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  5

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Executive Summary
The demands and expectations for publicly funded research are increasing. Science is expected not only
to be a major source of knowledge creation and innovation, but also to address societal challenges. The
Covid-19 pandemic has made it clear how research and innovation impact the whole s ocio-economic
system. Breakthroughs in science and innovation, are urgently required to enable sustainable societal
development within critical planetary boundaries. Science has a vital role to play in underpinning societal
transitions and improving resili ence and, as intermediaries between the government and research
providers, funding agencies are expected to play a leading role. At the same time, public budgets for
science are limited. Those involved in public research funding are faced with the difficul t task of finding
ways to meet these growing demands and expectations.
The OECD review of innovation policy in Sweden in 2016 ('OECD 2016 review') provided a comprehensive
analysis and recommendations relating to 4 key aspects of the STI system: strengthen ing university
research; linking research and innovation; dealing with societal challenges; and, prioritisation, strategy and
governance. The current report builds on the OECD 2016 review and provides options for change and
case studies on how the public funding system can effectively promote research excellence and innovation
and address societal needs. The options for change and examples combine the results of recent work
done by the OECD Global Science Forum (GSF) and the Committee for Science and Technological Policy
(CSTP).
This report is organised under five pillars: 1) university excellence, taking risks and addressing societal
needs, 2) research infrastructures, 3) supporting societal transitions and resilience, 4) STI strategy, and 5)
governance and structures. The issues and solutions that arise under the different pillars are interrelated
and need to be considered both individually and systemically.
1. University excellence, taking risks and addressing societal needs
Universities are the critical players in publicly funded research and innovation activities in Sweden. This is
evident from the fact that public research funds are largely invested in universities. Therefore, responding
to the growing demands and expectations from science in the Swedi sh context means nothing less than
maximising the capacity of universities to meet these demands and expectations. The OECD 2016 review
noted challenges with leadership and strategy implementation in the university system.
Public funding agencies need to provide universities with the necessary support and incentives to help
them overcome this strategic deficit and embrace new priorities and research approaches.
Options for change 1: for university excellence, taking risks and addressing societal needs
• Incentivise universities to take on a strategic leadership role and implement institutional changes
that enable risk -taking and challenge -driven research. Competitive funding awards from funding
agencies can either directly support such change or be conditional on change taking place.
• Consider the need for linking societal challenges and/or innovation performance of universities to
the allocation of General University Funds (GUF).
• Foster High -risk/High-reward (HRHR) research by introducing a portfolio approach at the
programme level and designing competitive funding initiatives and performance monitoring
processes that incentivise researchers and their universities to take more risk and develop more
inter- and trans-disciplinary research.
• Research funders and universities need to work together to develop and adopt research evaluation
criteria and processes in line with DORA and other such declarations that recognise not only

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
research excellence in disciplines but also risk -taking and contributions to resolving pressing
societal challenges.
2. Research infrastructures
Research infrastructures (RIs) are essential enablers for research and innovation activities and can play
an important role in supporting and facilitating challenge driven research . As is the case in Sweden, RIs
are often funded through a variety of different funding schemes, which can make it difficult to take a
strategic approach. Although RIs were not specifically addr essed in the OECD 2016 review, the survey
that has been conducted as part of the ongoing Swedish government U2022:06 review, revealed
considerable concern in the research community with regard to how RIs are managed.
An extensive corpus of OECD work, inclu ding analysis of individual RI cases from Sweden, has led to a
number of options for change, concerning key aspects of RI management, that are relevant in the Swedish
context.
Options for change 2: for research infrastructures
• Develop a national RI portfo lio management strategy for better decision -making (including on
national vs international investment), resource allocation and optimisation of synergies.
• Set up a dedicated, long -term funding mechanism for RIs that enables long -term
visibility/commitment and participation in relevant international RI projects.
• Provide support (by research funders to the promoters of new RI projects) for establishing robust
business plans, covering the whole RI life-cycle.
• Support the development of user-base optimisation strategies by individual RI managers.
• Develop, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, a consensus impact monitoring toolbox that
can inform funders/decision makers and RI managers.
3. Supporting societal transitions and resilience
Societal transiti ons and resilience are increasingly important targets for public research investment. In
Sweden, a number of challenge-driven research and innovation initiatives have been initiated following the
the Lund Declaration in 2009. Some of these were considered in the OECD 2016 review and a number of
common challenges were identified that have been confirmed in more recent programme reviews. A critical
issue has been ensuring the involvement of different stakeholders at different stages of prioritisation,
programme design and project implementation
Options for change 3: for supporting societal transitions and resilience
• Strengthen the government's, and other critical stakeholder's, engagement in the agenda - and
priority- setting process of challenge programmes , such as the Strategic Innovation Programmes
(SIPs) and N ational Research Programmes (NR Ps); establishing agendas and priorities at the
cross-government level should enhance the national commitment to research on societal
challenges and facilitate deployment of various policy instruments including regulations.
• Learn from past experience and build on existing expertise in further developing SIPs and NRPs
or other challenge programmes, while using a portfolio management approach at the agency and
national level. Different initiatives should be linked or coordinated through effective bridging
mechanisms, potentially including a common governance system (see ahead).
• Adapt research management and funding processes, including evaluation of the proposals,
monitoring of projects and assessment of impacts, drawing on good practices for implementing
challenge programmes in different countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  7

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

• Promote funding programmes to support capacity building within universities to address societal
challenges (see 1.).
• Provide support to existing centres of excellence to network with other research institutions to
develop solution driven transdisciplinary research initiatives and build related capacity.
4. STI Strategy
Each of the 3 pillars of university excellence, research infrastructures and societal transition and resilience
need to be addressed by a set of policy tools and involves multiple stakeholders. Effective collective action
requires a shared vision and strategy. In addition to highlighting an overall lack of strategy wit hin the
Swedish system, the OECD 2016 review specifically identified a lack of coherence in policy, planning,
governance, and processes.
The Swedish research system includes a large variety of actors, including multiple funding sources. This
appears to encourage an opportunistic rather than strategic approach and makes it difficult to implement
new approaches and initiatives at a significant scale.
Options for change 4: for STI Strategy
• Establish an overarching national strategy for developing the research and innovation system, with
public research funding organisations playing a central role and all research actors, particularly
universities, being consulted. The strategy should integrate excellence and socio -economic
benefits and make explicit the role of academic research and universities in addressing complex
and urgent societal challenges.
• Introduce an inclusive and transparent muti -stakeholder process for setting high -level research
priorities and engage the research community and institutions from the outset to strengthen their
commitment. Part of this process might include public consultation.
• Clarify the remit of different funding organisations while ensuring the alignment of funding
initiatives through portfolio management at the (cross-) agency and national levels.
• Pursue deeper strategic alignment between public research funding agencies and foundations,
and establish effective coordination mechanisms with major private foundations.
• Align the national strategy and priorities, and implementation ac tivities at the research agency
level, with EU research priorities and leverage EU support to facilitate change at the national level.
5. Governance and structures
Sweden has a diversity of public research funding agencies that each have their own remit, culture and
‘users’. The challenges faced by the Swedish research system (1 -4 above) are systemic and cut across
these different funding agencies and so it is timely to ask whether the current governance and structures
for public research funding ar e optimal to effectively respond to these challenges. Already in the OECD
2016 review, the issue of rationalisation of funding bodies was raised. Since then the experiences with the
various challenge programmes have emphasised the need for more effective c ross-agency governance.
Two potential scenarios for restructuring research funding are presented for consideration in this report.
The incremental change scenario proposes more effective coordination across the existing agencies. The
radical change scenar io involves the merger of several agencies and the preservation of the Research
Council but with a new remit and governance structure. There are obvious variations of these scenarios
that might be more interesting in the Swedish context. What is most impor tant is that any change in
structures is driven by a clear strategy and aims that these have buy in from key stakeholders, including,
in the case of Sweden, the universities. Form should follow function rather than vice-versa.
Options for change 5: for governance and structures

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
• Give serious consideration to reforming the governance and structures of the public funding
organisations in Sweden. The rationale for reform is to create and implement more coherent
policies that align with a shared national strategy and address the need to more effectively support
STI that enables socio-technical transitions. Such reform could include modifications to the remits
and coordination mechanisms for existing funding agencies, and/or might include more radical
structural changes and mergers.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  9

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Introduction
In common with many other countries, there are increasing demands and expectations for publicly funded
research in the Swedish context. In addition to producing excellent basic research and new knowledge,
science systems are expected to underpin innovation and provide solutions to complex societal challenges,
including those embedded in the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). There is growing
recognition, that meeting these inter -related but distinct expectations, r equires an evolution in the way
funding agencies operate, in how STI strategies are developed and implemented and in how universities
and research infrastructures perform and are assessed.
Since the OECD review of the Swedish STI system in 2016 (‘ OECD 2016 review’), two major global
disrupters have emphasised the critical importance of both basic and applied science in addressing
complex societal challenges. The COVID -19 pandemic required rapid and unprecedented mobilisation of
science and, as countries em erge from the pandemic, a series of hydrometeorological crises across the
world have highlighted the urgency of addressing environmental changes, including global warming and
biodiversity loss. STI has a critical and urgent role to play in promoting societal resilience and sustainability
and this is becoming a central aim for STI policy and research funding.
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted all sectors of society, including science systems. While
science alone cannot solve complex societal c hallenges, the pandemic has illustrated how science is
inseparable from society and needs to work with, and meet the needs of, multiple stakeholders, including
policy makers and civil society. The development and provision of vaccines in record time was dependent
on long -term investment in fundamental research and effective collaboration between academia and
industry. In other areas, such as engagement with policy makers and the public, science struggled and the
limits of conventional STI policy were sometimes starkly apparent. Scientific advancement requires policy
support in many areas, including data and information, research infrastructures, and science -industry
collaborations. Effectively integrating scientific evidence into policymaking and building so cietal trust and
engagement are now high on the agenda for science policy makers and research providers.
Environmental issues, including climate change and biodiversity loss, require urgent attention that goes
beyond increased scientific understanding to providing comprehensive socio -technological solutions.
Taking climate change as an example, Sweden adopted a new climate policy framework in 2017, which
includes a climate act, climate targets and a climate policy council, in order to meet the targets of the Paris
Agreement that were set in December 2015. These targets will not be achievable without a combination of
technological innovation (re. excellent basic research) and societal and behavioural transitions (re.
transdisciplinary research and innovation) and the timeline for meeting these targets is now very short.
These two massive global disrupters – COVID-19 and the environmental crisis – strongly emphasise the
importance of research and innovation systems in supporting, and in some cases leading, socio-economic
transitions to sustainability and resilience. This means that STI systems themselves need to be resilient.
Public research funding agencies and research providers, including universities and research
infrastructures (RIs) need to be both the drivers and implementers of the necessary transformations.
While universities play a very significant role in research and innovation in Sweden, questions were raised
about the strategic leadership in universities in the OECD 2016 review. Although the colleg iate
management of universities has its advantages, a lack of leadership and strategy can be problematic not
only for promoting high -risk research and research excellence but, more significantly, for addressing
complex societal challenges. Traditional rese arch support systems and universities do not incentivise
researchers to pursue transdisciplinary research (TDR) and high -risk/high-reward (HRHR) research, or

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
mission oriented research, all of which are required for addressing complex societal challenges (OECD,
2020[1]; OECD, 2021[2])
Research Infrastructures (RIs) and the services that they provide are critical enablers of both fundamental
and solutions focused research and, as was seen during the COVI D-19 pandemic they can play a major
role as intermediaries that bring together different disciplines and actors. Networks and clusters of RIs or
RI ecosystems are essential for addressing complex societal challenges. Establishing and maintaining a
comprehensive national RI portfolio requires strategic planning and sustainable long -term investments.
Whilst RIs were not an area of focus for the OECD 2016 review, it is notable that in the recent survey
conducted for the ongoing Swedish Government review, there was a high level of dissatisfaction/concern
with how RIs are managed in the Swedish research system.
Socio-technical transformations require more than the creation of new knowledge and technologies. They
need societal support and behavioural changes. Achieving this requires an agreed vision and a
combination of policy actions and institutional changes. It requires a holistic, cross -sectoral approach to
STI policy development, combining not only financial support but also regulation and capacity building. It
also requires the engagement of diverse stakeholders and the introduction of innovative policy tools at
both the strategic and operational levels, i.e. new initiatives that go beyond traditional policies for promoting
research and innovation.
Research funding organisations have to work within limited budgets and given the multiple demands and
expectations from research, they need to be strategic, establish priorities and make choices. They need to
balance the demands of the research community, with the needs of policy makers and the expectations of
society. Research excellence and rigour need to be balanced, or integrated, with research relevance and
urgency. Research is international and strategic alignment of national priorities, research strengths and
needs with international priorities, notably at the EU level in the case of Sweden, can leverage additional
resources and expertise for mutual be nefit. Linking, or coordinating, public research funding with private
or philanthropic funding can also help ensure that the multiple demands from research are met. Structures
and processes need to facilitate connections between different funders, limiting barriers and maximising
complementarities.
The governance and structures of funding organisations should be designed to efficiently and effectively
deliver the multiple demands from research. In so doing they need to leverage and provide support to
research providers, and in particular universities. Silos between funding agencies and within universities
are increasingly seen as a challenge for addressing complex societal challenges or mission -focused
research that cuts across different sectors or domains. Similarly, the tendency towards disciplinary
conservatism is an obstacle to risk taking in research as new scientific breakthroughs often emerge at the
boundaries between different fields. As evidenced in many countries during COVID -19, effective planning
and coordination across multiple research agencies is not easy. Several countries have recently
established new coordination and joint programming initiatives and in some instances are fusing different
agencies. It is timely to ask whether similar action is necessary in the Swedish context.
This paper is structured into five sections: university excellence, taking risks and addressing societal
needs; research infrastructures; societal transitions and resilience; STI strategy; and, governance and
structures. Each section begins with the relevant recommendations from the OECD 2016 review as a
starting point, then describes the key contextual changes since 2016, and provides analyses and options
for change for the public funding of research and innovation in Sw eden, illustrated with case examples
from other countries. It is important to note that the different sections, and options for change, are closely
interrelated. Basic cross -country comparative data on research systems and some aspects of their
performance is provided in appendices and is referred to in the text of this report where appropriate.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  11

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Analysis and Options for Change
1. University excellence, taking risks and addressing societal needs
In the Swedish research system, the role of universities is essen tial and the majority of the governmental
appropriations for research and development is allocated directly to universities. As the main research
providers in Sweden, universities have to maintain research excellence, facilitate scientific breakthroughs
and risk -taking and generate the knowledge and innovations that are required to address societal
challenges. Meeting these three expectations from research is no easy challenge. The recommendations
of the OECD 2016 review in this regard were:
• to address the governance and leadership weaknesses of the university system,
• to ensure that the increase of general university funds (GUF) is combined with sustainable
improvement in research performance,
• to avoid extending the Strategic Research Area ( SFO) without addressing the weaknesses in
universities’ strategies and leadership,
• to amend GUF allocation to link it to performance and rewards and incentivise the third mission,
• to encourage the improvement of human resources,
• to promote specialisation for universities, and
• to change external third -party funding (TPF) to give larger grants with fewer beneficiaries and
rationalise the number of funding organisations.
With regard to traditional measures of excellence, Sweden does reasonably well in terms of total research
publication outputs and highly cited publications, when compared to other OECD countries, although there
is some concern that increased investment over the past decade is not reflected in corresponding
increases in productivity/performance. Relative to certain benchmarks countries, such as the Netherlands
or Switzerland, Sweden is perhaps lagging behind when it comes to traditional bibliometric performance
indicators or league tables (see appendix, figs 1,2,4 and 5).
Weighing the mer its and disadvantages of using different bibliometric measures to assess research
performance is not the main focus of this report, but the OECD 2016 review referred to a relationship
between performance and the implementation of university strategies. Spe cifically, ‘Sweden’s “good but
not sufficiently excellent” scientific performance points to a failure by university management to be
selective, combined with sub-optimal mechanisms affecting the allocation of funds (whether from TPF, with
its medium-sized instruments, or from the way the universities allocate GUF internally) ’ (OECD, 2016[3]).
The creation of internationally competitive research fields requires commensurate support, which often
involves a reallocation of resources within an organisation. Only universities themselves can decide to
reduce or discontinue activities to strategical ly refocus their resources. This requires leadership and
governance arrangements that enable universities to implement strategies and take risks that may not
always have full consensus support internally.
This relationship between the strategic strength of a university and its performance is supported by analysis
of the SFO programme, which suggested that universities with long -term strategies are better able to
capitalise on funding opportunities than others (OECD, 2016[3]). This in turn relates to choices in terms of
allocation of GUF to strategic priorities and these choices depend on university governance processes. In
other words, a stronger organisational research strategy and its implementation have implications for
supporting research excellence. The ability to develop, implement and modify strategies is also a
necessary condition for a university to evolve with changing needs and opportunities including in
responding to societal challenges. The importance of thi s cannot be over -emphasised in the case of
Sweden, where universities play such a critical role in state-funded research.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
As in most OECD countries the university landscape in Sweden is not homogeneous. Sweden has a
relatively small number of traditional r esearch universities with a long history and a larger number of
relatively young university colleges that have limited research activity. In the SFO initiative, strong
specialised research universities dealing with technology and medicine, whose SFO applic ations and
institutional strategies were closely linked, were more successful than their less -focused counterparts.
This again highlights the link between strategy and excellence – at least in terms of competitive funding
success.
The level of GUF compare d to the total research budget of universities is a hot point of discussion in
Sweden as it is in many other OECD countries. On one side, the argument is that increased GUF enables
universities to be strategic, support more core staff and take long -term risks. On the other side, more
competitive funding is said to promote research excellence and ensure a level playing ground across
universities/research groups. Cross country comparisons reveal no correlation between the proportion of
GUF and bibliometric re search performance (see appendix, fig 3). According to the OECD 2016 review,
‘there is no clear evidence that, if the Swedish universities do have a “research problem”, it is caused by
the GUF level’ . Certainly, there was no evidence in 2016 that increasin g GUF was enabling Swedish
universities to be more strategic – indeed those institutions that did best in the SFO competition tended to
have lower levels of GUF.
At the same time, bibliometric indicators are increasingly criticised as measuring only one as pect of
excellence and narrow pursuit of higher performance against these measures of academic success is
unlikely to lead to better delivery of the multiple outputs that are demanded from public research.
Traditional academic and university structures, o rganised in disciplines and focusing predominantly on
publication outputs, struggle to effectively support high -risk research and inter - and trans -disciplinary
research to address complex societal challenges. Pressure to publish and precarity in research c areers
and funding tends to promote conservatism in research choices – favouring safe short -term incremental
research over higher risk or uncertain longer-term research. This conservatism is often embedded in, and
encouraged by, the traditional funding dis tribution systems for both GUF and competitive research funds
(OECD, 2021[2]).1
Redirection of universities
Whilst governments establish the overall framework in which universities operate, respect for academic
freedom and university autonomy limit the influence of governments and research funding agencies on the
internal operations and structuring of universiti es. Change has to come from within. As summarised in a
recent cross -country analysis of policies to promote transdisciplinary research (OECD, 2020 [1]), public
research funders can play an important role in incentivisin g and supporting such change, promoting
strategic leadership and providing significant funding for high risk and challenge driven research linked to
clear criteria.
Sweden can learn from initiatives in other countries that link public funding provision to university reforms
and incentivise the implementation of non-traditional research cooperation across different institutions (See
box 1). These cases show how strategic leadership in universities can change conventional research
environments to simultaneou sly support societal transition and innovation activities as well as research
excellence. It is important to note that in these cases, reorienting the university and working to improve its

1 It is noteworthy that in a recent OECD working paper on new High -Risk High-Reward
(HRHR) indicators (Machado, 2021[20]), Swedish performance when analysed as a share
of top 10% most novel publications worldwide was abo ve average during the 2005 -2017
period, and Sweden also had an above average level of international collaboration,
suggesting a fairly satisfactory performance for these aspects of the research system .

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  13

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

societal value is not in conflict with research excellence, but rat her compatible with it, and in fact leads to
the extension of research excellence.
Reforms in universities are affected by a complex combination of different measures that need to operate
synergistically within a unified overall strategy. In this context, the fundamental importance of having
appropriate research evaluation criteria and processes should be recognised. The behaviours of
researchers, especially early career researchers, are dictated by tenure, promotion and career
advancement policies and the behaviour of research institutions is strongly influenced by how they will be
assessed. The need for improving the way in which the publicly funded research and researchers are
evaluated is recognised in the San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessmen t (DORA) that was
developed in 2012 and has subsequently attracted a lot of international support from within and outside
academia. Some countries are now taking active measures to follow up on this declaration (see
Netherlands example, box 1) and the European Commission is also promoting reforms.
Many universities across the world, and in Sweden, have established Centres of Excellence, which are
often multidisciplinary, and mission driven. Many of these carry out world -leading research and they often
attract significant external funding from both public and private donors. However, they tend to remain as
‘add ons’ and often have little real influence on the overall direction and operations of their university ‘hosts’.
This limits their effectiveness and t heir capacity to act as change agents within the research system as a
whole. In Sweden, the Stockholm Resilience Centre (SRC) is notable in this regard. It is a world -leading
institute established within a historical university, supported mainly by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic
Environmental Research (Mistra), with competitive third-party funding from multiple other public and private
donors. There seems to be considerable unexploited potential from both the University of Stockholm and
the Swedish re search system as a whole to leverage the expertise and resources within the SRC to
promote research excellence and risk-taking whilst addressing societal challenges.
The Swedish experience with SciLifeLab (Science for Life Laboratory) is interesting in th is regard. The
SciLifeLab, which provides access to cutting -edge life science research infrastructures, was launched in
2010 as a joint effort of four universities (Karolinska Institute, KTH Royal University of Technology,
Stockholm University and Uppsala University), and was awarded status as an official national infrastructure
for molecular biosciences in 2013. It is funded by a combination of government grants, funds via the
universities through the SFO framework, and external funding, e.g. from the Wall enberg Foundation. The
SciLifeLab operates not as an internal centre of a single university, but as a collaborative platform for cross-
disciplinary, basic and applied research that engages non -academic partners. This experience of scaling
up a federated initiative to the systemic level could provide valuable insights for amplifying existing scientific
excellence and implementing substantial change across the Swedish research system to address complex
strategic priority areas.
Box 1. Combining research excellence and societal relevance in universities
Arizona State University (ASU) and its Decision Centre for a Desert City (DCDC) (USA)
ASU embraces an overall mission to address societal challenges and is organised into colleges with
more than 170 cross -disciplinary centres and institutions . The university is one of the top ranked
universities for research and innovation in the US, and many of its centres actively engage with non -
academic stakeholders to pursue solutions for complex real-life problems.
The DCDC exemplifies what ASU is about. It was established in 2004 with an investment from NSF
through the Decision Making Under Uncertainty programme. The centre aims to provide the knowledge
and technologies for transitions to sustainable water management, and a cross-sectoral team of social,
behavioural, economic and sustainability researchers are working in partnership with ‘external’
stakeholders. Both formal and informal approaches have been taken in the design, implementation and
evaluation of the project to ensure that knowledge from outside academia is incorporated into research

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
and solutions. In addition to workshops and collaborative transdisciplinary research an External
Advisory Committee includes representatives from key decision-making bodies.
This type of transdisciplinary research generally takes a long time before it can be published in scientific
journals and the research itself may be less scientifically impactful (in the short -term) than more
fundamental research, which is a disincentive for young researchers who need to develop their careers.
For this reason:
• the centre provides specialised training and post -doctoral research mentorship programmes,
and
• all post-docs are required to participate in regular mentoring m eetings and evaluations as well
as submit an Individual Development Plan.
• the centre has worked with university management to reform promotion and tenure review
procedures, and “conduct use -inspired research” has became one of the Eight Design
Aspirations of the university.
Source: (OECD, 2020[1])
Aalto University (FIN)
Aalto University was established in 2010 through the merger of three universities – Helsinki University
of Technology, Helsinki University of Economics and Helsinki University of Art and Design – with the
aim of becoming a ‘world -class innovation universit y’ as envisaged by the 2004 Brunila Report. The
vison was to ‘create a new innovative university merging science and technology, design and art, and
business and economics’. It has focussed on cross -disciplinary areas that build on the capacity and
competencies of the original three universities. Hence its activities now focus on seven key areas – 1)
ICT and digitalisation, 2) materials and sustainable use of natural resources, 3) arts and design
knowledge-building, 4) global business dynamics, 5) advanced energy solutions, 6) human -centred
living environments, 7) health and wellbeing – which combine four core competences in the fields of
ICT, materials, arts and design and business together with three grand challenges related to energy,
living environment and health.
In order to develop a multi -disciplinary university with an international perspective, the university
adopted approaches that were relatively unusual in Finland such as
• offering both bachelor’s and master’s programmes in English,
• introducing competency-based tenure track mechanisms to increase international staff, and
• engaging more deeply with industry to support international research partnerships.
As a result, the university is ranked globally as one of the best performing universities, founded in recent
years. Also, the introduction of tenure -track positions has been an effective mechanism for increasing
the proportion of foreign staff: as of 2019, 38% of the teaching staff were foreign, an increase of 111%
from the 2010 ratio.
Aalto University is legally defined as a non -profit foundation rather than a public corporation, and the
university has capital endowments with funding from the private sector. In addition, the government
invested merger funds and provided significant additional financia l support including matching funds
that are added to the private funds raised by the university.
Source : (OECD, 2021[4]) ; https ://www.aalto.fi/en/aalto-university/history; https ://www.aalto.fi/en/research-art
Technical University of Berlin (GER)
The technical university has developed a transdisciplinary research strategy that is promoted by the
University’s Executive Board as well as at the highest leadership level. To promote cooperation with
non-academic partners, consultation workshops and trialogues are organised by specialised university
teams, leading to the identification of topics and project ideas and funding applications. A Pre-Research
Forum has been organised in collaboration with Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin
and Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin and a number of transdisciplinary trialogues focussing o n
urban development have also been held. These bring together stakeholders from science, politics,

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  15

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

business and civil society to address specific urban themes, such as migration, mobility, growth and
tourism.
Source : (OECD, 2020[1]) ; https://www.tu.berlin/en/topics/knowledge-exchange/2020/mai/citizen-science-researching-with-society
World Premier International Research Centre Initiative (WPI) (JPN)
The WPI was launched in 2007 by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
(MEXT) aiming to promote university reforms as well as industry -academia collaboration and
interdisciplinary research. Specifically, the WPI supports the establishment of globally open, state of
the art, research centres for 10 years. These are deigned to attract talent from all over the world and
must comply with a number of criteria:
• each centre to expand new leading-edge and new interdisciplinary domains,
• each centre to secure comparable outside research resources through other competitive funds,
donations, in-kind contributions, etc., and
• the centre’s host institution to clearly define the centre’s role within the institution’s strategy and
commit to providing comprehensive support to the centre.
For each centre, a monitoring system is in operation. An international Programme Committee,
Programme Director and Programme Off icer conduct an annual two -day site visit to assess project
progress and advise on necessary corrective actions.
The WPI has produced high quality research outputs, with the percentage of top 1% cited publications
by the five WPI centres supported in the early years being higher than that of the world’s top universities.
The initiative has also been well received by the industry and other stakeholders. At the same time
there are some challenges, such as ensuring the continuity of the centres after the initial public funding
support come to an end.
Source: (OECD, 2018[5])
Research Assessment Reform (NLD)
In the Netherlands, public research funders, jointly with universities and research institutions, published
a position paper in 2019 entitled ‘Room for everyone’s talent: towards a new balance in the recognition
and rewards for academics’. The position paper is supported by the 3 main public research funders:
KNAW (Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences), NWO (Nether lands Organisation for Scientific
Research) and ZonMw (Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development).
A Strategy Evaluation Protocol (SEP) for 2021 -2027, which has been adopted by VSNU (Association
of Universities in the Netherlands), KNAW and NWO, emphasises the use of qualitative assessments
and paying attention in evaluations of contributions to: open science, academic culture, human resource
policy and PhD policy.
Furthermore, NWO and ZonMw have committed that they will no longer request , or take account of,
bibliometric indicators in funding applications, and they will modify the research outputs template on
curricula vitae and application forms to include broader outputs and narratives.
Source: https://www.nwo.nl/en/position-paper-room-everyones-talent; https://sfdora.org/resource/room-for-everyones-talent/;
https://stip.oecd.org/stip/interactive-dashboards/policy-initiatives/2021%2Fdata%2FpolicyInitiatives%2F99993910;
https://stip.oecd.org/stip/interactive-dashboards/policy-initiatives/2021%2Fdata%2FpolicyInitiatives%2F99993908
As discussed previously, public funding for research in universities consists of both competitive funding
from funding agencies and General University Funds (GUF). Whilst much of the policy discussion focuses
on the relative proportions of these funds, the criteria for allocation of GUF are potentially another tool for
promoting institutional change. For example, a certain percentage of the GUF research allocation could be
linked to the delivery of research for societal challenges, risk -taking and innovation. Sweden has some
previous experience of this with the SFO, an initiative under which universities received additional

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
institutional research funding for five years on the condition that this was linked to strategic research areas
identified by the government. The SFO was a policy designed to ensure that a cer tain percentage of
research funding was used to generate societal benefits or solve societal challenges. As has been
discussed earlier, the success of the SFO, depended on universities’ ability to make strategic choices,
which many institutions found difficult. It has also been noted that some of the SFO's objectives were not
clearly integrated into the criteria and requirements, which governed its implementation (OECD, 2016[3]).
Currently, in Sweden a certain percentag e of the GUF continues to be allocated based on research
performance (quantity and quality of scientific publications, and external funding). The experience of the
SFO could be leveraged now to link the allocation of GUF to reforms in university governance and effective
strategic leadership. New performance assessment frameworks that incentivise innovation, risk-taking and
dealing with societal challenges would complement this.
Funding mechanisms for novel research
There is concern across OECD countries tha t research is becoming too conservative and that short -term
incremental research is being favoured over long-term risk-taking. Many countries are developing specific
initiatives to promote High -Risk/High-Return (HRHR) research. There are three distinct but inter-related
rationales for this: 1. To encourage breakthroughs and the emergence of new scientific paradigms (often
at the borders between disciplines); 2. To provide new insights to address complex societal challenges; 3.
To accelerate the emergence of novel technologies and disruptive innovations (OECD, 2021[2]). Whilst
inter-disciplinarity is not an absolute pre-requisite for HRHR research it is a feature of many HRHR projects
and an important consideration, when designing policies to promote HRHR.
Whilst some of the responsibility rests with universities, public funders themselves need to address growing
concerns that the traditional research management and peer review process favours established, low risk
ideas over novel research (OECD, 2021[2]). From the public funding p erspective, fostering high-risk/high-
reward (HRHR) research requires different policy instruments and funding processes (See box 2).
Promoting HRHR research – as well as transdisciplinary research (much of which is high risk) – is a shared
responsibility between governments, research institutions and funders as discussed above.
Promoting highly novel research cannot be effectively achieved simply by increasing research project
funding but requires integration of carefully designed programmes, including appr opriate review and
monitoring processes, that facilitate structural change in research providers. Developing appropriate
performance indicators and measures is critical to incentivise the necessary changes.
Box 2. Funding mechanisms for HRHR research
Evaluation and funding allocation mechanisms
While the traditional mechanism for project selection and research funding is based on peer review,
most HRHR programmes have modified review procedures or use different selection processes that
give programme managers more authority.
Modified peer review approaches relate mainly to the review criteria, the composition of review panels
and the way that these panels operate. At one end of the scale simple criteria specifying HRHR
requirements may be included in existing funding schemes. Moving up the scale, more explicit selection
criteria (and specific weights in the evaluation score) might be developed for dedicated HRHR schemes.
Examples include those used in the NIH’s New Innovato r Award, Canada NFRF Exploration and the
Netherlands’ Off Road programme. A further step is to anonymise proposals prior to review as is done
in the NIH’s Transformative Research Awards and Swiss NSF’s Spark programme.
The authoritative programme manager m odel empowers individual managers to allocate research
funding based on their own expert judgement rather than through a peer review process. This approach

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  17

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

is exemplified in DARPA in the US and other initiatives incorporating the DARPA model including the
Moonshot R&D programme in Japan and the new Advanced Research and Invention Agency (ARIA) in
the UK. It depends on having expert programme managers who are empowered to take risk – and to
manage those risks.
Source: (OECD, 2021[2])
US DARPA (Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency) model
The DARPA model, which focuses on breakthrough technology development, can be characterised as
follows:
• Leadership by knowledgeable and innovative programme managers (PMs). PMs are not
research implementers but managers and are hired for three- to five-year terms often from the
outside government with new ideas. PMs have broad authority over the adoption of research
and the allocation of funds, and provide leadership based on the ir own knowledge. Expertise
in specific technical fields, budget management skills and the ability to communicate with a
range of stakeholders are important.
• Independence as a funding agency: DARPA operates with a high degree of independence from
the ministries that have direct needs. This is necessary to avoid investing in short -term and
traditional technology extension projects and to invest in long-term technologies with disruptive
potential.
• Moving away from the traditional system of peer review: whilst complying with strict rules
regarding conflicts of interest, PMs can directly manage the project selection process through
the agency’s internal procedures. This allows PMs to make decisions on projects under their
own authority, rather than on projects t hat have achieved a high average score in the
community based on predefined criteria. There are often no open calls for project proposals.
• Proactive project monitoring and portfolio management: the DARPA model is known to favour
‘fast failures’ and the PM may ask the study implementer to try a different approach or terminate
the research. They may also adopt several projects tackling the same issue and have them
compete or create opportunities for knowledge exchange such as closed workshops. With this
practical approach, PMs facilitate the creation of new communities across disciplinary and
sectoral boundaries, especially when disruptive innovations are needed that cannot be
produced by existing technologies and players. Project portfolio management also enables risk
reduction and the trialling of different possibilities in situations of high uncertainty.
Source: (OECD, 2021[2]); (Larrue, 2021[6])
Portfolio approach and the Japanese Moonshot R&D initiative:
A major obstacle to HRHR is the traditional risk -averse policy of many funders, who are accountable
for spending public money. Adopting a portfolio approach to risk management at the programme level
rather than the individual proj ect level can help mitigate this fear of failure. In a portfolio approach,
funders spread the risks over different R&D projects or programmes testing different pathways and
methods to meet a specific target. Not all projects will succeed but those that do will have a major
impact. This is similar to how venture capital investments are managed.
The portfolio approach is at the core of the programme manager model as used by DARPA and the
Japanese Moonshot R&D initiative. The Moonshot initiative funds research projects that contribute to
achieving seven Moonshot Goals, which themselves are derived from three over -arching grand
challenges. In order to manage the risk, a package of projects is constructed for each goal, and the
approach is to assess the potential of achieving the goal at the level of this package rather than at the
level of individual projects. This strategy is reflected in the programme design, with a programme
director appointed for each Moonshot Goal being charged with developing a portfolio pl an, including
selecting projects from an open call for proposals. The programme director is required to select research
projects that try different routes and methods to achieve each goal. In the first funding round between
3 and 13 projects were initially selected for each of seven moonshot goals (see box 4 also for
programme governance).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Note: see also section 4. STI Strategy for the portfolio approach at an agency and national level
Source: (OECD, 2021[2]); (Larrue, 2021[6])
Impact evaluation of HRHR programmes:
Although impact evaluation is one of the undeveloped aspects of HRHR funding, some dedicated HRHR
programmes assess not only scientific, economic and societal impa cts but also the programmes’
capacity to foster risk taking in research. New “novelty” indicators may also be used alongside, or
instead of, traditional bibliographic indicators to assess risk taking and map this against scientific impact
in terms of citations.
The NIH evaluated their HRHR programmes by explicitly assessing researchers’ willingness and ability
to move beyond traditional incremental research. In assessing the capacity of the INSPIRE (Integrated
NSF Support Promoting Interdisciplinary Researc h and Education) programme to foster HRHR, the
NSF evaluated whether projects submitted, reviewed, and awarded under INSPIRE were different to
those under other NSF funding schemes (70 percent of INSPIRE PIs reported that they had not
submitted their INSPIRE project to another funding mechanism and thought that it was unlikely or very
unlikely that their project would have been funded outside of INSPIRE.)
Source: (OECD, 2021[2])
Contextual factors
In addition to policies for funding and evaluating research, there are contextual factors that can provide
a supportive environment for HRHR research and non -funding policies that can be implemented to
create a more conducive environment to perform HRHR research. These context ual factors and
supporting policies, although insufficient by themselves to foster HRHR research in the absence of the
necessary research funding, can strongly influence the success of HRHR research funding schemes.
Critical factors include long-term political support for risk-taking in research, and tenure, promotion, and
career advancement policies at academic research institutions.
Source: (OECD, 2021[2])
Options for change
• Incentivise universities to take on a strategic leadership role and implement institutional changes
that enable risk -taking and challenge -driven research. Competitive funding awards from funding
agencies can either directly support such change or be conditional on change taking place .
• Consider the need for linking societal challenges and/or innovation performance of universities to
the allocation of GUF.
• Foster High -risk/High-reward (HRHR) research by introducing a portfolio approach at the
programme level and designing competitive funding in itiatives and performance monitoring
processes that incentivise researchers and their universities to take more risk and develop more
inter- and trans-disciplinary research.
• Research funders and universities need to work together to develop and adopt research evaluation
criteria and processes in line with DORA and other such declarations that recognise not only
research excellence in disciplines but also risk -taking and contributions to resolving pressing
societal challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  19

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2. Research infrastructures
The OECD 2016 review did not analyse research infrastructures (RIs), although they represent a
substantial proportion of public investment in research in Sweden and play a critical role in supporting
research excellence and innovation. 3 7% of the Swedish Resear ch Council’s expenditure was dedicated
to RIs in 2021 – compared with ~31% in the previous four years . As demonstrated during the COVID -19
pandemic, RIs also have a central role to play in ensuring the resilience of science systems and in enabling
challenge-driven research.
There is no single definition of what constitutes a research infrastructure, but for this report, it is understood
as an organisational structure dedicated to deliver data or services for basic or applied research, excluding
equipment that only used by a very small community of users with specific needs and/or which is not open
to users outside the host organisation. RIs are distinct from research and technology organisations or
technology infrastructures, such as the RISE institutes in S weden, which are primarily focussed on the
applied research needs of different industry sectors2.
In a survey carried out as part of the ongoing U 2022:06 review, “effective financing of infrastructure” was
given the lowest rating relative to other aspects of the research system, suggesting some real challenges
in the overall strategic management and support for research infrastructures in Sweden.
Currently, the Council for Research Infrastructures (RFI) at the Swedish Research Council establishes a
long-term plan based on a four-year cycle which starts with a biannual “inventory” that is created through
a call for proposals to address RI needs. Proposals can be submitted by higher education institutions,
public authorities, research funding bodies and re searcher teams. This leads to a sort of roadmap called
“The guide to Research Infrastructures”. Up to 50 per cent of the funding for individual RIs is allocated via
this call for proposals, with host institutions (typically universities) being responsible for the other 50%,
which may come from a variety of sources. Special budget lines and funding processes may be set up for
large RIs such as MAX IV and ESS. Participation in international RIs is supported through Swedish
membership with either dedicated fun ds for the specific RIs or subscriptions taken from RFI’s baseline
budget. RFI also directly operates some national RIs, including a national data network, and covers their
full costs.
Feedback regarding the current Swedish RI funding system, collected du ring several recent OECD -GSF
RI policy studies, identified a number of specific challenges, some of which are shared with other countries:
- The difficulty to ensure long-term engagement/sustainability with short-term funding commitments
(allocation from the government is made on a yearly basis)
- Difficulties in participating to international RI projects, linked to timing mismatches between
national and international partners regarding funding decisions. There can also be difficulties in
reconciling Sweden’s bottom-up decision-making process with the more top-down approaches of
international partners, and the lack of flexibility on specific issues, such as variations in exchange
rates.
- Difficulties in prioriti sation within the budget (weighing up the benefit of long -term engagement
against the need for renewal and turnover in RIs)

2 The role of the RISE institutes is not within the remit of this report. Although their major
focus is on the needs of industry, it is noted that these public research institutes are
important players in the overall research ecosystem in Sweden and, in a similar way to RIs,
can play a critical mediator role in bringing together different actors to address shared
scientific and/or societal challenges (Larrue and Strauka, 2022[22]).

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
- Difficulties in reconciling different approaches between stakeholders to valuing and measuring
the potential societal impacts of RIs
Although RIs are diverse and include sin gle-sited, distributed or networked facilities of local, national or
international dimension, some common policy issues have been identified in previous OECD work. The
main challenges are typically related to
• Overall strategy,
• sustainability (e.g. risk management, data access/management, user communities, upgrades
phasing out...), and
• impact assessment (scientific excellence and attractiveness, economic and innovation, education
and training, societal challenges, support to policymaking…).
To address these issues, a series of options for change have been developed for consideration by funding
agencies and other relevant stakeholders (See also box 3 for case studies). How these options for change
are implemented is context specific and some are likely to be more relevant that others in the case of
Sweden. With this proviso, the main options for change include:
• Develop a RI portfolio management strategy for better resource allocation, decision -making and
optimised synergies;
• Provide dedicated, long-term funding for RIs so that they have long-term visibility and commitment
on budgets;
• Establish robust business plans for individual RIs covering the whole life-cycle, including plans for
phasing out;
• Develop risk assessment/mitigation policies and processes for all RIs;
• Integrate data access and data management into RI operations, and provide the necessary
support to implement policy demands, e.g. for open data. Data management plans should clarify
the roles of individual RIs as well as their links with other cyber-infrastructures or e-infrastructures
and how these are supported;
• Optimise the user-base of each RI and integrate new users into RI business plans;
• Determine and agree on reasonable expectations of impact with all stakeholders; and
• Develop robust and diverse impact indicators for the whole RI life -cycle and institutionalise data
collection processes to inform these indicators.
Box 3. Strengthening and optimising the functioning RIs
Strategic investment and management strategy: the Korean National Facility and Equipment Centre (NFEC)
NFEC is a non -profit organization under the MSIT (Ministry of Science and ICT) overseeing Korea’s
science technology research development budget. NFEC is tasked with setting up a comprehensive plan
for Korean research infrastructures (i.e. science technolo gy research & development facilities and
equipment), budget allocation & adjustment, budget management, performance analysis, etc.
NFEC responsibilities cover a range of domains:
• Present a vision for the national RIs and formulate specific policies,
• Improve laws and the legal framework related to national RIs,
• Research and analyse the domestic & overseas RI landscape and trends,
• Prepare a roadmap and investment portfolio for national RIs,
• Promote international cooperation related to the national research infrastructures,
• Operate financial support project for the jointly utilized (e.g. by academia and industry) RIs,
• Request and allocate the national RI budget,
• Support the relocation of idle or under-utilized equipment,
• Manage operating cost accounts of national RIs,

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  21

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

• Conduct ethics training and support the dissemination of a rigorous science culture,
• Operate a professional training system for the RIs,
• Operate a comprehensive information platform for national RIs (ZEUS), and
• Actively oversee the developmen t of large RIs (feasibility, cost adjustment, project
management…).
RI portfolio management strategy: Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI)
Canadian RIs are funded, managed and operated by a complex mix of national, regional and local
stakeholders. As RIs become larger and more complex, while overall research budgets are limited, there
is a need to manage the rich Canadian RI portfolio in a rational way as well as to optimise the user base.
The CFI is a public body that embraces a portfolio management appr oach for RIs funded under its Major
Science Initiatives Fund. An important part of this is the maintenance of an open on-line catalogue, the CFI
Research Facilities Navigator, which provides information on Canadian RIs
(https://navigator.innovation.ca/en) (OECD, 2017[7])
Although the CFI does not have a formal roadmap, it identifies RI needs through regular stakeholder
consultations and communicates with its communities through a process of stakeholder representative
reviews and workshops. The CFI also takes a lifecycle approach to portfolio management and makes
decisions, including closure of RIs, based on merit reviews and funding availability.
As described in a recent OECD activity (OECD/Science Europe, 2020[8]) the CFI’s approach is consistent
with the OECD RI portfolio management guiding model which was developed as a tool to help optimise
national RI processes:

Source: (OECD/Science Europe, 2020[8])
Long-term visibility and commitment: Australian National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy
(NCRIS)
While research budgets are set on a one-year basis in most countries, several OECD countries and funding
agencies have created mechanisms to commit to continuous funding over a longer period. This enables
RIs to be operated more strategically.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
An OECD report (OECD, 2017[9]) highlighted the case of the NCRIS, which provides USD 1.5 billion over
10 years for RI funding. The funding assures a long-term and sustainable operational base to support world
class science and research in Australia and removes some of the financial uncertainty around the planning
of future RI investments.
Funding is provided through a renewable two -year agreement, ensuring that currently supported facilities
are operational until the end of the t wo-year period and are ready for subsequent periods based on long -
term plans for national research infrastructure.
RIs funded through NCRIS are expected contribute not just to the activities of host institutions but to the
wider research and innovation system. Funding and eligibility rules encourage collaborative research and
co-investment.
Source: (OECD, 2017[9])
Risk-benefit analyses and risk assessment/mitigation policies: Department of Energy (DoE) and NSF
contingency management
RIs are costly investments and their planning needs to be complemented by adequate risk assessment
and management which should be integrated into their business plans. RI components are often at the
cutting edge of technological development, which means that technical challenges can affect schedules at
each stage of design, implementation and operation and drive -up overall costs. Changes in decision -
making by the government, funders and stakeholders are also a risk for RIs, particularly in th e early life-
cycle stages.
As an approach to contingency management, the DoE and NSF have developed detailed manuals for risk
management in large RI projects. In addition, DOE and NSF provide funding for contingencies during the
construction phase, with a percentage of the overall budget set aside for contingencies based on the
detailed ex ante risk assessment.
For example, in the case of the DoE-supported National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II) project, the
cost was estimated more than 4.25 million man -hours and $912 million, and it included state -of-the-art
technology at the start of the project in 2005. During the estimation process, potential cost, schedule and
technical risks were quantitatively assessed based on their likelihood and potential to impact the progress
of the project. A bottom-up risk assessment process was integrated with a top-down assessment to identify
28 key risks with a manageable and actionable response. The mitigation strategies were used to inform
decision-making during the project and, as risks were reduced or eliminated, the strategies were updated
to optimise scientific capacity within the overall project.
Source: (OECD, 2017[9])
Optimising the user base: Nanotechnology Platform in Japan
Many RIs are intended to be used by a diversity of researchers and in order to maximise their effectiveness,
it is necessary to have a user base strategy, which is likely to evolve over time.
The user assessment methods adopted in the Japanese Nanotechnology Platform follow closely the
guiding model developed by OECD (OECD/Science Europe, 2020 [8]). This includes the following key
elements:
▪ Monitoring of the user base,
▪ Optimising use potential,
▪ Clarity of access mechanisms,
▪ Accessibility of data,
▪ Promotion of data sharing and monitoring of secondary access,
▪ Optimised costs of access, and
▪ Provision of user support.
User monitoring is carried out through analysis of the reservation system and an ID card system for logging

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  23

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

into the equipment. The use potential is optimised by increasing the throughput of machines, improving
their use in parallel and diversifying the users. Potential users can consult a platform manager to
understand technical options and related charges before applying for use. Subsidies and technical
assistance are provided for first-time users. The development of an open data policy is underway and this
will include access to appropriate metadata, inc luding the experimental conditions and a dedicated open
database with experimental data. Users who make their data open and publish research results have
preferential access charges compared with those – often from industry – who do not wish to share
experimental outputs.
Source: (OECD/Science Europe, 2020[8])
Impact indicators: European Social Survey (ESS) European Research Infrastructure Consortium (ERIC)
The ESS is a new international RI that is still in construction phase, but its potential socio-economic impact
(SEI) was embedded in the design from the start. Its strategic mission is not just to enable scientific
breakthroughs but also to address major societal challenges. ESS developed an impact assessment
model, derived from the OECD reference framework (OECD, 2019[10]) that takes into account the whole
impact pathway from input to impact throughout the full life cycle of the infrastructure. Thus, impacts are
already being assessed during the construction phase: 42 SEI indicators and metrics were determined for
the construction phase, and 41 for the operation phase, which partially overlap. These indicators include
co-publications between member countries, new partners in grant projects, the number of new suppliers
etc. They had to be developed in line with the expectations of the different ESS stakeholders. Some initial
lessons learned from this exercise include:
• SEI can be measured from the concept phase through the complete lifecycle of a RI
• SEI/KPI parameters should not be static and need to be fine-tuned:
o When phase milestones are achieved
o If context or surrounding parameters have changed
• SEI should be seen as a continuous project for a RI with fixed reporting dates e.g. on an annual
basis
• SEI does not have the same shape and form for all RI stakeholders:
o ESS created narratives for each member country
o A translation of SEI along the lines “what does it mean for you” is necessary for different
stakeholders
o SEI can be seen as an abstract and agile currency depending on the “customer”
Source: (OECD, 2019[10])
Options for change
• Develop a national RI portfolio management strategy for better decision -making (including on
national vs international investment), resource allocation and optimisation of synergies.
• Set up a dedicated, long -term funding mechanism for RIs that enables long -term
visibility/commitment and participation in relevant international RI projects.
• Provide support (by research funders to the promoters of new RI projects) for establishing robust
business plans covering the whole RI life-cycle.
• Support the development of user-base optimisation strategies by individual RI managers.
• Develop, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, a consensus impact monitoring toolbox that
can inform funders/decision makers and RI managers.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
3. Supporting societal transitions and resilience
In 2009 the Lund Declaration emphasised the importance of research on societal challenges and the need
to go beyond broad thematic approaches in implementing such research. The implicit commitment was
that Sweden would play a leading role in developing research and innovation to address societal
challenges. The Challenge-driven Innovation (CDI)3 programme was launched in direct response to this.
The Strategic Innovation Programme (SIP) was then introduced in the 2012 Research and Innovation Bill,
which ‘intended to create preconditions for sustainable solutions to global societal challenges and to
increase competitiveness in fields of high relevance to the Swedish economy’ (Tomas Åström, 2020 [11]).
Although Sweden is closer to achieving most of the 2030 SDG targets than the average of OECD countries,
there is still some distance to go to reach these targets (see appendix, fig 6) and a concerted effort will be
required to do so.
In the OECD 2016 re view, which considered both the CDI and SIP initiatives, the following suggestions
were made with regard to STI and societal challenges:
• develop a national research and innovation strategy regarding societal challenges,
• integrate this strategy with the wider research and innovation strategy and with wider policy areas
(e.g. energy, transport),
• increase agency efforts to play a leadership role at a European and even global level,
• expand the scale of the CDI programme and refine its scope,
• develop more and broader policy instruments,
• consider the involvement of a broad mix of stakeholders who operationalise project results,
• with specific regard to the SIP initiative, consider increasing funding and participation so that it is
of the scale necessary to support disruptive, as opposed to incremental, change.
Since 2016, the CDI programme has been phased out. A recent analysis of this programme (Vinnova,
2022[12]), identified a number of obstacles or weaknesses that are common to many such challenge-driven
initiatives. These include: unclear or ambiguous value offers; legal barriers; lack of an organisation taking
responsibility for the uptake or dissemination of project outcomes; and challenges with governance at the
programme and project level. The assessment emphasises the importance of developing regulatory
systems, building customer bases and new business models in addition to developing technological
solutions. At the same time, it notes that traditional research evaluation met hods that focus on short-term
outputs are not adequate to assess the impact of this type of programme, and the long -term effects of
knowledge sharing, capacity building and networks need to be considered.
The Swedish National Research Programmes (NRPs) wer e launched as a new 10-year initiative in 2017
following the 2016/17 Research Bill (and after the OECD 2016 review). The aim of the NRPs is to support
research based on strategic societal challenges agendas. The initiative is administered by three funding
agencies – the Research Council, Formas and Forte – and was established based on priority areas
proposed by these three councils, in a process that included consultations with and beyond the research
community. In a report commissioned by the three councils in 2022 (Erik Arnold, 2022[13]), the NRP scheme
was described as being different from traditional programmes in that it adopts some of the mechanisms
for implementing challenge -based programmes, such as the use of multi -stakeholder programme
committees and a relatively large budget allocation for individual projects. On the other hand, the report
concluded that the challenge orientation of the programmes and their emphasis on knowledge utilisation
is insufficient to address so cietal challenges. This is reflected by the limited and declining involvement of
programme committees and ‘outsiders’ including problem-owners, weakly defined needs and priorities, an
over-focus on basic research and a gap between knowledge -generated and k nowledge required to
address societal challenges. The report concluded that the operation of the programme is strongly

3 Utmaningsdriven innovation (UDI) in Swedish

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  25

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

influenced by the strategy, rules and traditions of the funders and that the core missions and operational
regimes of these funders need to be re-considered to effectively implement societal challenge research.
A meta-evaluation of SIPs was carried out in 2020 at the request of its three funders, Vinnova, Formas
and the Energy Agency. In that report (Tomas Åström, 2020 [11]), the SIPs were assessed as positive
overall, with high expectations of future commercial benefits for companies and the publication of high -
quality scientific papers, as well as system -level benefits such as the diffusion of technolo gies across
sectoral boundaries and the establishment of spin -offs. Many of the SIP programmes were originally
targeted at key sectors of Swedish industry with the aim of improving competitiveness in existing areas of
strength. The SIP’s five high level im pact objectives placed ‘increased sustainable growth’ and ‘improved
competitiveness and increased exports for Swedish industry’ first, with the looser objective of ‘creating
conditions’ for solutions for societal challenges being last on the list. Neverthe less, the SIPs embrace an
ambition to address socio -technical transitions. Several significant limitations were identified when
considering the potential of SIPs in this regard. SIPs are led by coalitions of service and technology
providers that build soci ally beneficial capacities by doing what is necessary for them, in the short -term.
As a result, the outcomes of SIPs have tended to be incremental rather than radical and risk -taking is
limited. They meet the immediate needs of commercial partners but make little contribution to solving wider
societal challenges.
For SIPs to be used to address more systemic issues, they need to involve more actors representing the
needs and demand side rather than the provider side. Solving problems might then be translate d into
economic demand, creating business opportunities, such as new markets. Systemic transitions require the
engagement and evolution of downstream policy frameworks including rules, norms, markets, practices
and skills. To achieve this, strengthening bo th policy engagement and the input of key social actors in
programme governance are required and the programmes need to focus on more clearly defined priorities.4
These analyses of recent Swedish initiatives indicate the need to be attentive to 4 critical factors with
regard to STI policies and funding to address societal challenges: 1) agenda setting and design of research
programmes, 2) operation of funding progra mmes, 3) missions and structures of funding agencies
themselves, and 4) contextual factors that enable the necessary research to be conducted.
This section will discuss the planning of research programmes, and the operation and management of
these programmes since they relate to planning and implementation in the funding agencies. The mission
and structure of the funding agencies themselves are discussed in the last section of this report, which
focuses on governance and structure. Effective implementati on of research initiatives to address societal
challenges extends beyond the traditional grant management function of funding agencies and is highly
dependent on contextual and enabling factors within and beyond research institutions and universities.
Such challenges require the integration of research and knowledge from different disciplines and
stakeholders, although the disciplinary and reward structures that are prevalent within academia are not
conducive to inter- and trans-disciplinary research with uncertain outcomes (see previously). The Swedish
dependency on universities exacerbates these issues as discussed in section 1.
Research programme agenda setting and design
Regarding societal transitions and resilience, the SIP and NRP schemes may not have been wholly
successful to date but they should be considered as valuable assets. The implementation of challenge -
driven or mission-oriented research and innovation policies ( MOIPs) is context specific and the most
effective initiatives often “result from a gradual process with a dedicated effort to make existing policies

4 At the time of writing, the next generation of the Strategic innovation programmes, called
Impact Innovation, was already being designed and is expected to implement the lessons
learned from the evaluation in 2020 to enhance the ambition to promote more systemic
socio-technical transitions.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
better oriented and coordinated” (Larrue, 2021[6]). As noted above, while the SIPs and NRPs have different
characteristics, they also share a major challenge: agenda setting is neither sufficiently balanced between
bottom-up and top -down nor prioritised. In the SIP, agenda setting is a bottom -up process with no top -
down government involvement. At the funding agencies level, Vinnova, the Swedish innovation agency,
encourages and supports target-setting by multiple stakeholders rather than leading or proactively guiding
the construction of targets. A similar point can also be made for the NRPs, which are largely implemented
via the traditional bottom-up competitive funding processes of the research agencies. However, bottom-up
consensus building approaches are “inherently conservative” (OECD, 2016[3]), and sponsors or funding
agencies can play an important role in maintaining a balanced risk portfolio and ensuring attention to
potentially disruptive areas of future interest. At the programmatic level, the active engagement of different
ministries, in addition to funding agencies, in the agenda -setting process could contribute to the
establishment of a more comprehensive and risk-balanced programme scope (Larrue, 2021[6]). This would
also enable societal challenge research and innovation to be promoted using a broader range of policy
instruments, the need for which was pointed out in both the OECD 2016 review and the Vinnova CDI
assessment report. National government commitment would be expected to strengthen the engagement
with the SIP from both the research community and other actors.
Several countries have developed and adopted mission or challenge driven ag endas at the cross -
government level, albeit with a major focus on innovation and industry. Examples include the Top Sector
and Innovation Policy in the Netherlands, the Hightech Strategy 2025 in Germany, the Moonshot R&D
Programme in Japan and the National Acceleration Strategies in France (See box 4). The Netherlands
established its Top Sector targets in a centralised way but at the same time obtained a strong commitment
from multiple stakeholders – initially the industrial sector and more recently other p ublic sector and civil
society actors. Buy-in from essential stakeholders is important for the success of any challenge programme
and was a weakness in the CDI and NRPs initiatives as highlighted in the recent assessment reports
(discussed above). The German Hightech Strategy facilitates the coordination of various policy instruments
and acts as an umbrella for federal government initiatives. It defines priority areas and specific missions
for government-wide initiatives, although there is no specifically d esignated budget for implementing the
strategy. In Japan’s Moonshot Programme, the Cabinet Office (CAO) led the establishment of the
programme targets consulting across multiple ministries and the funding agencies managed by these
ministries, while the same funding agencies are in charge of the detailed project implementation. Each of
the French National Acceleration Strategies has a dedicated interministerial coordinator.
In terms of programme design, it can be seen that the SIPs and NRPs have different l imitations. In the
SIPs, it is necessary to aim for long -term and radical results rather than incremental ones, and to shift
emphasis from the specific service and technology providers to more systemic issues. In the NRPs, the
focus of the programmes’ acti vities has been largely on knowledge creation with little emphasis on the
utility and utilisation of research results, and it is necessary to build a system of cooperation that goes
beyond the academic sector and involves service providers as well as the p roblem-owners. These
differences in the evolution of the two initiatives can be understood from the fact that the SIPs have been
led by Vinnova, with its remit for innovation, whereas the NRPs have been managed by the research
council and sectoral agencies . The different funding agencies have distinct areas of expertise and work
with different communities (see ahead table 1). As addressing complex soci etal problems requires the
integration of knowledge and expertise across different domains, experience and lessons from the SIPs
and NRPs need to be shared across agencies. Common governance and/or formal coordination
mechanisms across the two initiatives might be considered and could help to capture attention from a
greater number of research performers and other actors (see ahead section 5).
Programme implementation, management and evaluation
Challenge driven research projects, which require collaboration across multiple disciplines and
stakeholders, do not fit with normal academic review criteria and funding allocation processes (which has

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  27

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

been one of the issues for the NRPs). The expected outputs include new scientific knowledge, which is
often communicated in scientific journals, but the principle aims and impacts may be policy changes,
informed-decision making, design and adoption of practical socio -technical solutions or establishment of
long-term networks. There are no standard processes for assessing the merits of such challenge driven
project proposals, although considerable experimentation is taking place in this respect and accepted good
practices are starting to emerge (OECD, 2020[1]). For example, the selection and evaluation of the “Co -
Create” programme at the Brussels Institute for Research and Innovation (Innovir) is done by both a mixed
panel of experts in the related domain and a jury composed of citizens . The NSF convergence Research
Programmes uses a ‘college’ of specially trained leading researchers to assess its highly inter-disciplinary
proposals. A 10-step proposal review process has been proposed for transdisciplinary research (OECD,
2020[1]) but implementing this requires a significant change in both the culture and operations of research
funding managers.
It is not only the ex ante evaluation of research projects that needs to be adapted for challenge driven
projects but also the monitoring and ex poste impact assessment processes. As pointed out in the Vinnova
CDI evaluation report, it is important in assessing the impact of such programmes to consider a variety of
long-term effects (See box 4: the case of the Centre of Innovation (COI) programme in Japan). Methods
for doing this are currently being explored in a number of settings and it is recognised that evaluation
should consider the benefits to all stakeholders and use both qualitative and quantitative ind icators.
Pathways-to-impact and theory -of-change approaches, which are often used in development research,
can be adapted to help identify and assess the foreseeable impacts of challenge-driven research although
these need to be used flexibly as the most important impacts are not always readily predicted.
Box 4. Multi-sector initiatives for innovation and societal challenges
Mission-driven Top-sector and Innovation Policy (NLD)
The top sector approach has been in place since the early 2000s for and provides an overall framework
to promote innovation and increase the international competitiveness of the Netherlands. Tackling
societal challenges is gradually becoming more prominent within the top-sector approach.
The Mission Driven Top Sector Innovation Policy (MTIP), initiated by the Ministry of Economy and
agreed in 2018, presents strategic agendas that integrate both economic development and societal
mission perspectives. Specifically, the MTIP features 25 missions with clear targets across four societal
areas. Under this framework, the nine top sectors work together to develop Knowledge and Innovation
Agendas KIAs) for each of the four societal themes. The KIA development process engages
policymakers and a wide range of other stakeholders in addition to the business sectors. There are
additional agendas for two horizontal themes on key technologies and the valorisation of knowledge.
These agendas are action roadmaps and contain specific concrete multi-year mission-driven innovation
programmes (MMIPs) for each of the 25 missions. Each MMIP defines the research and innovation
required to achieve the mission, the role of each partner, financial resources and necessary policy
instruments. The latter include a broad mi x of regulatory reform, pricing mechanisms and public
procurement, in addition to grants and other funding.
Governance is at the overall policy level, in each top sector and also by theme. These sectoral and
thematic governance structures involve officials from ministries and regional authorities, along with
companies, research institutions and other stakeholders. They play an important role in coordinating
policy and regulation.
To ensure the commitment of key partners, four -year Knowledge and Innovation C ontracts (KICs) are
agreed, with each partner providing in-kind and/or financial contributions; the KIC 2020-2023 has a total
annual commitment of EUR 4.9 billion (of which EUR 2.05 billion is from the private sector).
Source: (Larrue, 2021[6])

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Hightech Strategy 2025 (GER)
The High-Tech Strategy was launched in 2006 and High-Tech Strategy (HTS) 2025 is the fourth edition.
The strategy is led by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and serves as an
umbrella for federal initiatives, facilitating the coordination of diverse policy instruments within specific
priority areas.
HTS 2025 is structured around three main areas of action. One of these three, the Grand Challenges,
includes 12 mission-oriented policy areas. These 12 areas include global societal challenges as well as
economic challenges. The former relates to healthcare, plastic pollution reduction and greenhouse gas
emission reduction, while the latter include the creation of advanced national batte ry production
capacities. Within each mission, societal transformation is recognised as being dependent on both
technological and social innovation, and the policy instruments are a mix of regulation, capacity building
and finance.
The governance structure of this strategy is coordinated through the Secretary of State’s Roundtable
on HTS 2025. This new intra -governmental coordination mechanism is tasked with defining, steering
and shaping the policy agendas of the various ministries in line with the HTS 2025 priorities. The Round
Table receives recommendations and expertise from the High Technology Forum (HTF), which was
established to engage a wide range of stakeholders in the consultative process that defined the
objectives of the HTS. The link between pol icymakers and the HTF is also supported by the dual role
of the BMBF Secretary of State and the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft as Chair of the HTF. At the operational
level, an inter-ministerial committee involving the Federal Government and all ministries monito rs and
supports the implementation and progress of the HTS.
It should be noted that, as there is no common R&D budget under HTS 2025, in practice, each ministry
is responsible for its own activities, which may present challenges over the longer-term in maintaining
a mission-oriented approach in the context of fragmented implementation responsibilities.
Moonshot R&D Programme (JPN)
This programme sets ambitious goals to attract talent and promote challenging R&D projects with the
aim of resolving difficult societal issues while bringing together the wisdom of researchers. Under this
programme, the government formulates ambitious goals (Moonshot Goals) targeting social issues that
are difficult to achieve but are expected to have a large impa ct if realised. [see Box 2 for details of
programme implementation].
The seven goals for 2020 were defined by the Cabinet Office in collaboration with relevant ministries –
MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and technology), METI (Minis try of Economy,
Trade and Industry), MHLW (Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare) and MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries), and the funding agencies managed by these ministries. Each goal may have
more than one target, resulting in 14 ta rgets as a whole. For example, Moonshot Goal 1 is the
‘realization of a society in which human beings can be free from limitations of body, brain, space, and
time by 2050’, which includes two 2050 targets: ‘development of technologies and infrastructure to carry
out large-scale complex tasks combining large numbers of robots and avatars teleoperated by multiple
persons by 2050’; and, ‘development of technologies that will allow anyone willing to augment their
physical, cognitive, and perceptional capabilities to the top level, and spread of a new lifestyle that will
be welcomed by society, by 2050’. Intermediate targets for 2030 have also been established.
The funding agencies are primarily responsible for implementing the Moonshot programme, including
the call for proposals and support for portfolio development by programme directors, but they were also
involved in the target-setting phase. Specifically, to support target setting, the funders organised a two-
day international conference to collect inputs fro m academia, industry and other stakeholders on the
latest trends in research and actual needs. The involvement of the funding agencies at the target setting
stage ensured their commitment to the implementation of the programme and led to better alignment
between the strategic and operational levels.
It should be noted that during the implementation phase of research projects, in addition to the funding
agencies’ management R&D to address specific targets, a committee consisting of representatives from
relevant ministries and agencies oversees all targets to ensure consistency and cross -governmental

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  29

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

support.
Source : https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/moonshot/top.html
Centre of Innovation (COI) programme (JPN)
The program was launched by MEXT in 2013 and is managed by a funding agency, Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST), to tackle vision-driven transdisciplinary innovation challenges by promoting
collaboration between the industrial and academic sectors through joint leadership. The challenges
were derived through a back -casting co-design approach focused on societal challenges for the next
decade. The overarching challenges that emerged from this approach were: aging, livi ng environment
and sustainability.
To design and implement COI projects, networks of industry, academia and societal stakeholders were
established around shared visions and values. Procedures for effective collaboration, such as
intellectual property agr eements, were agreed at the outset. These established networks and
cooperative practices were leveraged in responding to COVID19 and made substantive contributions
in a number of areas, including:
• Sharing of 3D data through GitHub to facilitate the rapid production of face shields by SMEs,
• The development of wearable devices for medical check-ups to reduce physical contact, and
• Development of portable devices to support telemedicine for pregnant women
Source: (OECD, 2020[1]); OECD GSF work for Mobilising science in response to crises: Lessons learned from COVID-19
National Acceleration Strategies (FRA)
Acceleration strategies (ASs) are a new instrument in the Investments for the Future programme (PIA)
- launched by the French government in 2010 and now integrated in the French recovery plan (France
2030). One of the key objectives of ASs is to provide support to specific technology areas via integrated
support across all stages of the innovation chain, from exploratory research to market deployment.
Each strategy has its own structure of governance, with a dedicated inter -ministerial coordinator.
Although the initial focus of the ASs is on technological development/industrial strategy, social
innovation is likely to take an increasingly prominent role, as has happened with the Top Sector and
HighTech approaches in Netherlands and Germany respectively
The Carbon -free Hydrogen AS has set targets for 2030, including the installation of a carbon -free
hydrogen production capacity of 6.5 GW by electrolysis, the saving of more than 6 Mt of CO ₂ and the
creation of 50,000 to 150,000 direct and indirect jobs in France. The task of the coordinator is to lead
the inter -ministerial coordination and monitoring of all the actions impleme nted using a collectively
developed roadmap as guideline. The Carbon free Hydrogen AS has a budget of EUR 3.4 billion during
the period 2020-2023, and EUR 7 billion are planned until 2030. The Strategy covers all aspects related
to the establishment of a hydrogen value chain from research to production, pipelines and markets. The
Acceleration Strategy also aims to develop key technologies and components through pilot projects for
different types of usages and markets.
Options for change
• Strengthen the government's, and other critical stakeholder's, engagement in the agenda - and
priority- setting process of challenge programmes such as SIPs and NRPs; establishing agendas
and priorities at the cross-government level should enhance the national commitment to research
on societal challenges and facilitate deployment of various policy instruments including
regulations.
• Learn from past experience and build on existing expertise in further developing SIPs and NRPs
or other challenge programmes, while using a portfolio management approach at the agency and
national level. Different initiatives should be linked or coordinated through effective bridging
mechanisms, potentially including a common governance system (see ahead).

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
• Adapt research managemen t and funding processes, including evaluation of the proposals,
monitoring of projects and assessment of impacts, drawing on good practices for implementing
challenge programmes in different countries.
• Promote funding programmes to support capacity buildin g within universities to address societal
challenges (see section 1).
• Provide support to existing centres of excellence to network with other research institutions to
develop solution driven transdisciplinary research initiatives and build related capacity (see section
1).
4. STI Strategy
In the OECD 2016 review, recommendations related to priorities, strategies and governance were as
follows:
• to recognise the lack of coherence in policy, planning and governance structures and processes,
• to implement a natio nal visioning mechanism that can build greater consensus about major
priorities,
• to set priorities regarding challenges, areas of technology, clusters and value chains without pre -
judging market results,
• to deploy an effective mechanism for coordinating policies across different sectors,
• to promote the university reforms that are needed for them to perform with more flexibility and
strategy,
• to retain academic competence in the governing bodies of research agencies, while ensuring that
academia does not represent the overwhelming majority,
• to require the research councils and Vinnova to seek a balance in the use of internal expertise
versus input from its beneficiaries in their decision-making processes and operations, and
• to review current policy governance and coordination mechanisms.
These can be summarised as a need for prioritisation across different areas and topics and integration of
these priorities into an overall R&I strategy (and issues related to the governance of the overall system,
which are dealt with in the next section). In Sweden, the problem is not that prioritisation has not occurred,
but that strategy development has not been open and inclusive, and as a result, there is weak alignment
across various sectors, agencies and initiatives as seen in SFO, SIP and CDI (OECD, 2016[3]). The same
issue was found in the operation of NRPs , even though the original intention was that NRPs would
complement already existing initiatives (Erik Arnold, 2022[13]).
Prioritisation is important not only for research to address societal challenges and innovation in specific
sectors but also for fundamental research because it is difficult to establish a critical mass without
prioritisation when resources are limited. Sweden is fortunate in this regard in that its investment in
research as a percentage of GDP is high relative to most other countries (see appendix, figs 1 and 2) but
nevertheless it cannot expect to compete in all research areas with much larger economies. In the OECD
2016 review the smaller absolute financial support in centres of excellence was criticised relative to other
like sized countries where prioritisation is more robust (OECD, 2016[3]). The tendency in Sweden has been
to provide limited direction, with broad thematic priority areas then being subject to bottom -up
implementation, allowing considerable room for interpretation and alignment with existing research and
ideas rather than favouring new approaches.
This section considers the development and implementation of an overall national STI strategy. As laid out
in the OECD 2016 review several key factors affect the successful formulation and implementation of
national strategies including: alignment, inclusiveness, transparency and communication, and governance.
In the case of Sweden, which has several funding agencies with partially overlapping remits as well as a
number of major public and private research donors, the issue of alignment is particularly important.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  31

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Overarching strategy
Sweden should seek to establish an overarching national vision and strategy for research and innovation
that provides clearer top-down direction. The process for achieving this needs to fully engage key societal
stakeholders, across diff erent sectors as well as the research community and universities . Promoting
bottom-up research excellence will undoubtedly be a substantive part of this strategy but it needs to be
integrated into a broader vision of research and innovation to promote societal transitions and resilience.
As a recent example of the development of a holistic national research vision and strategy, the case of
New Zealand is insightful (See box 5). The latest Japanese Basic Plan is another interesting example of a
national research vision and strategy, where STI policies were systematically reconfigured through a vision
of the future society that depends not only on economic development but also on the resolution of societal
challenges.
Box 5. Comprehensive national STI visions and strategies
Te Ara Paerangi — Future Pathways White Paper 2022 (NZL)
The comprehensive strategy for STI in New Zealand was published in 2022 by MBIE (Ministry of
Business, Innovation and Employment), which was formed through a merger of the Department of
Building and Housing, the Department of Labour, the Ministry of Economic Development, and the
Ministry of Science and Innovation, in 2012.
The strategy includes high -level targets (visions), policy directions, and pla ns with implementation
timelines and has four key objectives: 1) creating new futures by establishing national research priorities
and growing global connectivity including with the EU, 2) embedding Te Tiriti including advancing Māori
aspirations in the RS I system, 3) valuing our people through expanding fellowship schemes and
supporting diversity, and 4) building system agility including clarifying the roles of government agencies,
developing a system-wide infrastructure roadmap, considering institutional reforms of public research
organisations, and introducing new funding approaches to support the wider goals of the reform.
Feedback from 903 submissions and over 1,000 people attending workshops and seminars was taken
into account in developing the strategy.
Source : https ://www.mbie.govt.nz/science-and-technology/science-and-innovation/agencies-policies-and-budget-initiatives/te-ara-
paerangi-future-pathways/te-ara-paerangi-future-pathways-white-paper/
Introduction of Society 5.0 as a future society: Japanese STI Basic Plan
Society 5.0 was initially propos ed in the 5 th basic plan of 2016 -2020 as a future society that Japan
should aim for. The definition is “a human -centred society that balances economic advancement with
the resolution of social problems in a system that highly integrates cyberspace and phys ical space”.
This is seen as the next step following on from the hunter -gatherer society (Society 1.0), agricultural
society (Society 2.0), industrial society (Society 3.0), and information society (Society 4.0) .
The underlying rational is that as economic development progresses, the trade -off with social issues
that are difficult to deal with in the current socio-economic system are becoming increasingly complex.
The aim is to create a new society that balances economic development and the resoluti on of social
issues by incorporating advanced technology into all industries and aspects of social life .
In the current plan (2021-2026), which describes the government’s STI policies to be implemented over
five years with a view to 2030, the policies are organised to realise Society 5.0 from three perspectives:
the vision of society as a result of innovation and social transition; capabilities to explore the frontiers
of knowledge; and human resources development to support STI.
Source : https ://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/society5_0/index.html

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Although the government can lead the development of an overall national science and innovation strategy,
public research funders need to be included in the process of establishing the strategy and play a lead role
in its implementation. Funding agencies are positioned between the government and research performers
and play the central role in translating a national vision and strategy into research programmes that support
and incentivise research providers, including universities, to implement t he necessary research and
innovation activities.
Alignment across key research funders
With regards to alignment, Swedish public funders should give further consideration to how their different
funding programmes align with each other to address shared pr iorities. Implementation of a shared
strategy can be facilitated by introducing a portfolio management approach at the agency and cross -
agency level. The case of the Research Council of Norway (RCN) is an instructive example (See box 6).
This management approach is remarkable not only because it enables higher-level strategic steering and
interdepartmental cooperation within the funding agency, but also because simplifying and streamlining
the funding schemes reduces both the administrative burdens in the agency and the peer review and
opportunity costs to researchers.
In addition to the alignment across Swedish public agencies, the relationship between these agencies and
other national R&D funders, specifically foundations, and the EU, should be explicitly considered as part
of the national strategy development and implementation. This is evident from the fact that the councils
and government agencies account for less than half (47.6%) of the research grant income to universities
in Sweden, with 9.9% from t he EU, 6.0% from public research foundations and 26.9% from private
foundations and other non -profit organisations (NPOs) (see appendix, table 3). Apart from the research
council (23.4%) which is the largest single source of competitive research funding, F ormas provides the
next largest government amount (5.2%).
The high level of research investment from public and private foundations is a unique characteristic of the
Swedish research environment and has a major influence on what research is conducted and how research
providers behave. Public funding agencies should adopt alignment mechanisms that assure strategic
cooperation with public foundations, which go beyond simple recognition of each other’s portfolios. While
there may be some barriers to partnersh ips with private foundations at the operational level, strategic
synergies need to be identified and exploited. Promoting mutual participation in prioritisation and agenda
setting and participation in the portfolio management exercises of funding agencies could be one way to
enhance strategic alignment and identify common interests and/or research gaps (See box 6).
Relative to many other European countries, Sweden is not overly successful in securing EU Framework
research funding (see appendix, fig 7). The OECD 2016 review emphasised that there is an unexploited
opportunity for the national research funding agencies to play a leadership role at a European level. There
are opportunities not only to influence the European research agenda but also to use this agenda to help
give direction to national research funding efforts, e.g. EC missions can provide inspiration and additional
resources for national challenge -driven research. There are also opportunities to more closely align
national and European research management processes to relieve some of the burden on researchers
and encourage them in applying for EC funding (see Box 6, RCN example).
Box 6. Alignment within and across funders
Portfolio management at the agency level (NOR)
The RCN has introduced portfolio management as an institutional rather than a programme level. This
involves more than 50 initiatives being organised into 15 cross -functional portfolios. This has
transformed the RCN’s organisational structure and funding operations including calls for proposals and

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  33

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

evaluation processes. Efficiency gains and cost savings have been achieved by streamlining and
standardising procedures across the organisation. The revised portfolio plan for 2021 -22 was the
subject of a public consultation and was well received by the research and innovation community.
On the other hand, the lack of a shared budgeting process to support this portfolio approach is a
challenge. The introduction of a process to ensure coordination of budgeting acr oss multiple portfolios
would enable more effective portfolio management.
Source: (Larrue and Santos, 2022[14])
Collaboration between UKRI-MRC and the Wellcome Trust (UK)
The Wellcome Trust is a major independent charitable foundation in the UK. The UKRI – Medical
Research Council (MRC) is the public funding agency for medical research and has a history of co -
investment in strategic priority areas with the Wellcome Trust. The Human Genome initiative is a notable
historical example of this. The two organisations also co-initiated a number of vaccine trials in response
to the 2014 Ebola outbreak. More recently, The MRC strategic delivery plan 2022 to 2025 emphasises
collaboration with funders including the Wellcome Trust. For example, it describes partnerships with
other funders and industry in relation to a major investments portfolio. It also states that the MRC will
“set and deliver ambitious targets to achieve net zero for our estate and operations befo re 2040 and
work with partners including within UKRI, ... Wellcome and others”. The UKRI-Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) has also entered into a strategic partnership with the Wellcome
Trust.
Source: https://www.ukri.org/publications/mrc-strategic-delivery-plan/mrc-strategic-delivery-plan-2022-to-2025/; https://www.ukri.org/what-
we-offer/browse-our-areas-of-investment-and-support/infections-and-immunity/; https://www.ukri.org/what-we-offer/supporting-
collaboration/supporting-collaboration-epsrc/strategic-partnerships/; (Ketels Christian, 2020[15])
Consistent call for proposal procedures with EU Framework Programmes (NOR)
RCN has adopted new call for proposal procedures across all research areas that align with the EU
Framework Programmes’ selection criteria. The consistency with EU criteria is expected to make it
easier for Norwegian applica nts to participate in EU calls and simplify the coordination between the
national calls and EU calls.
Source: (Larrue and Santos, 2022[14])
Stakeholder engagement in the development of strategy
Looking beyond government, research funders and universities, a national science strategy should engage
multiple stakeholders both in defining priorities and in ensuring commitment to address those priorities.
Strategy development should use open and inclu sive processes with comprehensive stakeholder
communication (See box 7). The development of the Netherlands National Research Agenda is often cited
as an example of how to engage civil society in a dialogue on the roles and priorities for science from basic
research through to societal challenges. The case in Ireland, with its campaign on future research in 2021
in light of the COVID -19 pandemic and the urgency of the climate change challenge, can also provide
inspiration.
Research, innovation and societal transformations can be facilitated by the government and/or public
funders but they need to be enacted by other stakeholders including universities, companies and civil
society. These actors need to be engaged in co -designing and, in some cases, c o-producing, the
knowledge, technologies and other innovations that are required to address complex societal challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Box 7. Broad engagement of stakeholders
Dutch National Research Agenda
The Dutch Government launched a new strate gy for science in 2014, the National Research Agenda.
One of the key features of its development was a major public consultation, which was undertaken in
order to maximise support from diverse groups in society. The public consultation was carried out using
a website, via which everyone living in the Netherlands could ‘ask a scientist a question’.
In total, around 12,000 questions were gathered and analysed to create 248 clusters. In creating the
clusters, the following criteria were used:
• Is the research related to the question likely to produce results within 10 years?
• Is the research challenging and ground-breaking?
• Are there outstanding research groups in the country working on the issue? If none exists, is
there a strong rationale for investing in capacity building to solve the question.
Three thematic conferences, focused on ‘science4science’, ‘science4competitiveness’ and
‘science4society’, were then organised to further consolidate the 248 clusters. A total of 900 people
attended the conferences, which had disciplinary and multi-disciplinary discussion groups. 195 clusters
emerged from these discussions and an expert panel then further narrowed down the questions to 140.
These 140 questions were tied to the priorities of national research organisations and divided into five
chapters of the National Research Agenda: i) man, the environment and the economy, ii) the individual
and society, iii) sickness and health, iv) technology and society, and v) fundamental of existence. The
agenda also shows the relevance of the 140 questions to the themes of the EU Horizon 2020.
Each research organisation was put in contact with those who submitted questions relevant to the
agendas and they were able to communicate directly with them. By the time the National Research
Agenda was published, more than half of those who submitted questions had received invitations from
research organisations to lectures, public meetings and online forums.
In 2018, NWO, the main research funding agency in the Netherlands launched the firs t funding round
for the Dutch National Research Agenda (NWA) programme. The programme encourages broad-based
multidisciplinary consortia to submit research proposals that align with 25 NWA ‘routes’ and supports
the entire chain of fundamental to applied research.
Source: (OECD, 2017[16])
Ireland’s Creating Our Future campaign
The Creating Our Future campaign was launched by the Irish Department of Further and Higher
Education, Research, Innovation and Science (DFHERIS) in 2021. It was designed to solicit ideas from
the public on how research can be used to create a better future in the context of the COVID -19
pandemic and the urgency of the climate change challenge, both of which highlight the critical role of
research and innovation. The campaign aimed to engage people in the discussion about research and
innovation, and to gather ideas that would inspire future researchers, catalyse research in new areas
and encourage new forms of collaboration.
Between July and Novemb er 2021, 18,062 submissions were collected through a combination of an
online portal and various in -person events. The submissions were analysed by an Expert Committee
with the assistance of seven expert groups (data analysis teams, five multidisciplinary working groups,
and a research design team) through a seven -stage approach. The approach consisted of 1) data
validation, 2) data allocation, 3) bottom-up qualitative analysis by the five working groups, 4) data-driven
analysis by the analysis team, 5) top -down qualitative analysis by the five working groups, 6) design
thinking analysis by the design research team and 7) the summary of findings and recommendations
by the Expert Committee.
The process finally resulted in the identification of 16 priority the mes. These include themes, such as:

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  35

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

building a more inclusive society; resilience in our country; and innovative housing solutions. The Expert
Committee also made five recommendations on areas where research should start first, and six
associated recommendations on developing a research system that delivers value for the public. These
included the need for more focus on establishing an inclusive research system and investing in
multidisciplinary, transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary research.
The campaig n is linked to a broader national strategy. In Impact 2030 (Ireland’s Research and
Innovation Strategy), the campaign is described and the Impact 2030’s governance groups are
expected to provide fora to promote the campaign’s outputs. The strategy mentions that relevant
government departments will be invited to determine which themes are most relevant for them and how
they can contribute to take them forward.
Source : https ://creatingourfuture.ie/reports/; https ://www.gov.ie/en/publication/27c78-impact-2030-irelands-new-research-and-innovation-
strategy/#:~:text=’Impact%202030%3A%20Ireland’s%20Research%20and,innovation%20on%20many%20national%20priorities.
Options for change
• Establish an overarching national strategy for developing the research and innovation system, with
public research funding organisations playing a central role and all research actors, particularly
universities, being consulted. The strategy should integrate excellence and socio -economic
benefits and make explicit the role of academic research and universities in addressing complex
and urgent societal challenges.
• Introduce an inclusive and transparent muti -stakeholder process for setting high -level research
priorities and engage the research community a nd institutions from the outset to strengthen their
commitment. Part of this process might include public consultation.
• Clarify the remit of different funding organisations while ensuring the alignment of funding
initiatives through portfolio management at the (cross-) agency and national levels.
• Pursue deeper strategic alignment between public research funding agencies and foundations,
and establish effective coordination mechanisms with major private foundations.
• Align the national strategy and prioritie s, and implementation activities at the research agency
level, with EU research priorities and leverage EU support to facilitate change at the national level.

5. Governance and structures
The OECD 2016 review proposed that success in enhancing research and innovation system performance
and the response to societal challenges in Sweden would require reforming governance for the whole
system (OECD, 2016 [3]). Judicious reform should aim to improve the coordination horizontally across
ministries and agencies and vertically between the hierarchy of different actors. The remits, governance,
and structures of the public research agencies are at the centre of such reform.
Any re-structuring of the funding bo dies needs to start with a consideration of their roles in the specific
Swedish context. There are three generic models for research and innovation policy as described in the
OECD 2016 review: the linear model, the interactive or coupling model, and the societal challenges model.
These three models are complementary to each other rather than alternatives.
In the Swedish context, the linear model is mainly promoted by the Research Council, and the interactive
or coupling model corresponds to the role of Vin nova. Vinnova has also increasingly played a role in
developing research to address societal challenges, as seen with the CDI and SIP initiatives. This role is
shared with other public funders including Formas, Forte and the Energy Agency, although these h ave a

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
more limited sectoral remit. The historical mission of the largest research funding agency, the Swedish
Research Council, is to promote research excellence by funding bottom -up research proposals and
enabling research infrastructures. In contrast to Formas and Forte, the Research Council covers many
research fields, provides less top-down direction and is less involved in the implementation and monitoring
of individual projects (Erik Arnold, 2022[13]). The remits of councils and agencies are summarised in table
1. Each of these funders has established expertise and processes that align with the different models for
research and innovation, and it is important in any re -structuring that this expertise is recognised and
valued.
Table 1. The remits of councils and agencies
Councils or
agencies Remit Regulation
Disbursed
funds
(2021;
Million
SEK)
Swedish
Research
Council
The Swedish Research Council shall support basic research of the highest scientific
quality in all fields of science.
The Swedish Research Council shall
 1. Promote the quality and renewal of Swedish basic research,
 2. Support investigator-initiated research,
 3. Initiate and support interdisciplinary research initiatives,
 4. Allocate funds to research of internationally high quality,
 5. Promote and initiate international research cooperation and exchange of
experience, and
 6. Evaluate research and assess its scientific quality and significance.
Lag (2000:662) om
Vetenskapsrådet

Förordning (2009:975)
med instruktion för
Vetenskapsrådet
7,903
Swedish
Research
Council for
Sustainable
Development
(Formas)
The Research Council for the Environment, Agricultural Sciences and Rural
Development (Formas) shall promote and support basic research and needs-driven
research in the fields of the environment, agricultural sciences and rural development.
The research supported must be of the highest scientific quality and relevant to the
Council’s areas of responsibility. Formas may also fund innovation activities to a certain
extent.
Förordning (2009:1024)
med instruktion för
Forskningsrådet för
miljö, areella näringar
och samhällsbyggande
1,782
Swedish
Research
Council for
Health,
Working Life
and Welfare
(Forte)
The task of the Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (Forte) is to
promote and support basic and needs-driven research in the field of working life and in
social and public health sciences.
Förordning (2007:1431)
med instruktion för
Forskningsrådet för
hälsa, arbetsliv och
välfärd
821
Sweden’s
Innovation
Agency
(Vinnova)
The task of the Sweden´s Innovation Agency (Vinnova) is to promote sustainable
growth by funding needs-driven research and the development of effective innovation
systems. Innovation systems are networks of public and private actors where
innovations and new knowledge are developed, disseminated and used.
In order to achieve sustainable growth and strengthen Sweden’s competitiveness, the
Agency shall, from a challenge-driven perspective, promote the exploitation of research
and the promotion of innovation.
Förordning (2009:1101)
med instruktion för
Verket för
innovationssystem
3,675
Swedish
Energy
Agency
The Swedish Energy Agency shall promote research and innovation in the form of a
strategically designed overall effort spanning the entire innovation system, in close
cooperation with, and as a complement to, other energy policy efforts and other policy
instruments aimed at achieving climate and energy targets and energy-related
environmental policy objectives.
Förordning (2014:520)
med instruktion för
Statens
energimyndighet
1,272
 Note: the remit was extracted section 1 of each regulation from the source websites and machine translated, except for the Sw edish Energy
Agency where the section regarding research is cited.
Note: Disbursed funds are specified according to the annual reports of each of the agencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  37

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Source : https ://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/forordning-2009975-med-instruktion-for_sfs-2009-975;
https ://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/forordning-20091024-med-instruktion-for_sfs-2009-1024;
https ://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/forordning-20071431-med-instruktion-for_sfs-2007-1431;
https ://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/forordning-20091101-med-instruktion-for-verket_sfs-2009-1101;
https ://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/forordning-2014520-med-instruktion-for-statens_sfs-2014-520;
https ://www.vr.se/analys/rapporter/vara-rapporter/2022-02-24-arsredovisning-2021.html; https ://formas.se/om-formas/vad-vi-gor/formas-
arsredovisningar.html; https ://forte.se/publikation/arsredovisning-2021/; https ://www.vinnova.se/publikationer/arsredovisning-2021/;
https://www.energimyndigheten.se/nyhetsarkiv/2022/energimyndigheten-sammanfattar-aret-2021/
Given that there are established funding organisations that align with the linear model (promoting research
excellence) and the interactive or coupling model (promoting technological innovation), the key questions
are: 1. Where to situate responsibilities and funding to address societal challenges, and 2. How to best
align and integrate different types of policy initiative using different models, recognising that that they are
heavily interdependent.
Vinnova has taken a lead in developing societal challeng e research policy, which extends beyond the
agency’s traditional remit for technological innovation and industry support, and it has established valuable
expertise and experience in this area. Forte, Formas and the Energy Agency also have expertise in thei r
specific sectoral domains and the Research Council has more recently played a lead role in several of the
NRPs (see earlier). However, the current system for addressing societal challenges is problematic in that
it involves several separate agencies and, if it is to be scaled up, this will require a higher level of investment
and a more robust organisational structure that manages the balance across various projects and
participants (OECD, 2016[3]).
In the following section two alternative scenarios for creating a more robust organisational structure are
proposed: 1) an incremental approach, i.e. a more effective implementation of R&I policy corresponding to
the three models with the existing structures; and 2) a more radical approach, i.e. restructuring the
organisations themselves. These two scenarios involve varying degrees of change to existing structures
and there are corresponding costs associated with this. On the other hand, Sweden, like other countries,
has been implementing new policy initiatives within the current organisational structure over a long period
of time. This has been sufficient for it to build and maintain a well performing STI system, in terms of
research excellence and technological innovation. However, there are concerns about conservatism and
lack of high -risk, breakthrough research. Moreover, experience to date with the introduction of policy
initiatives to address grand challenges, suggest that the current organisational structure may not be
sufficient to support the socio-technical transitions that are necessary to address grand challenges.
An incremental approach
The incremental option is to introduce a stronger coordination mechanism for challenge driven research,
while maintaining the cu rrent agency structures but adjusting their remits where necessary. Under this
scenario, all agencies would have shared responsibility for promoting challenge driven research and the
associate funding programmes would have joint governance and/or formal coordination mechanisms. As
the agency with the broadest experience in designing and running challenge driven initiatives, Vinnova
would be an appropriate ‘lead organisation’ for challenge -driven research, charged with managing the
overarching governance and coordination mechanisms, monitoring the overall portfolio of programmes
and promoting stakeholder engagement at the strategic cross-cutting level.
In addition to designating Vinnova as lead, it would then be necessary to adjust the remits of each council
and agency in order to effectively implement programmes that contribute to tackling societal challenges,
including SIP, NRP and CDI (see box 8). This could include the extension of the remit of some agencies
to explicitly include societal challenges and c ommitment to work with Vinnova as the lead agency in this
area. This sounds like a minor adjustment but in the recent review of the NRP initiative (Erik Arnold,

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
2022[13]), it was emphasised that, the respective core missions of the funding agencies have a significant
impact on the implementation of the programme (see earlier discussion).
It should be noted that in the NRP initiative, as it currently operates, each theme is allocated to a single
funding agency, whereas under thi s new scenario it would be possible to allocate several funders to a
single theme with oversight from the overarching coordination body. This is similar to the way the
Norwegian Pilot-E initiative operates, with roles divided between RCN, Innovation Norway and Enova, with
RCN focusing on the early phase and Enova on the later stage (Larrue, 2021[6]).
In terms of funding allocation across agencies, this scenario would imply a slight increase in the resources
for Vinnova, in order to manage the overall governance and coordination functions. It might also imply the
pooling of some funds, e.g. for some NRPs, in joint initiatives and, over the medium to long -term, an
increase in the proportion of the funds for all agencies be ing allocated to support challenge driven -
research.
Box 8. Adjustment of the remits and collaboration between public funders
New Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (TIP) in the US NSF
TIP was established in 2022 and is the first new NSF directorate to be established in 30 years. It is the
eighth directorate in the NSF, and an addition to the seven existing directorates that support science
and engineering research and education (Biological Sciences, Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, Engineering, Geosciences, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences, and Education and Human Resources).
NSF’s mission is to promote ’the progress of scienc e by investing in research to expand knowledge in
science, engineering and education’ and to invest ‘in actions that increase the capacity of the U.S. to
conduct and exploit such research’. Within this mission, TIP is designed to harness ’the nation’s vast
and diverse talent pool to advance critical and emerging technologies, address pressing societal and
economic challenges, and accelerate the translation of research results from lab to market and society’
and to improve ’U.S. competitiveness, growing the U.S. economy and training a diverse workforce for
future, high-wage jobs’. The directorate builds on the foundation of more than 70 years of NSF support
for mainly basic research in universities. TIP is expected to work with the entire agency to leverage
ongoing research investments to drive research and innovation and deliver societal and economic
benefits more rapidly. A range of potential priority areas have been identified, ranging from trustworthy
artificial intelligence systems to biotechnology, cyber security, next -generation wireless networks,
microelectronics and semiconductors, and quantum computing platforms.
In the directorate, there are three primary focus areas — 1) fostering innovation and technology
ecosystems, 2) establishing translation path ways, and 3) partnering across sectors to engage the
nation’s diverse talent. In addition to launching new initiatives, the NSF has repositioned its existing
innovation and translation portfolio into each of three key focus areas.
Source : https ://beta.nsf.gov/news/nsf-establishes-new-directorate-technology; https ://beta.nsf.gov/tip/latest;
https ://www.nsf.gov/about/research_areas.jsp; https ://www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/strategic_plan/
Collaboration agreement between multiple agencies (NOR)
Building upon the cooperation built between the Research Council of Norway, Innovation Norway and
Enova since 2016 in the Pilot-E challenge-based scheme, an overarching collaboration agreement has
been signed between the three agencies for the period 2021-25 and extended to also include the state
enterprises Gassnova and SIVA. The objective of the agreement is to ensure a seamless connection
between the different funding instruments of the different agencies to better support sustainable
transitions. The Cooperation agreement includes notably the coordination of existing instruments or the
development of joint calls for proposals ‘where there are concrete societal challenges that need to be

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  39

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

solved, where there are special opportunities for green growth, and where a coordinated effort helps
overcome barriers that prevent development from taking place’. Other cooperation may include joint
portfolio analyses, development of common knowledge bases and analysis in relevant areas, the
identification of areas t hat may be relevant for joint efforts, joint mobilisation activities and
communication with users, sharing of expertise and best practice, implementation of joint assignments
for ministries in the green growth area, joint competence development, shared inf ormation systems,
etc.
Going beyond an incremental approach (radical approach)
Strengthened cross -agency coordination mechanisms can help ensure strategic and operational
coherence but each agency has its own user communities and demands and there is probably a limit to
how much these can be aligned in practice without combining budgets and programmes 5. A more radical
approach would be to merge Vinnova and the other thematic funders, i.e. Formas, Forte and the Energy
Agency, and give the merged agency a more explicit remit for challenge driven research and innovation.
In this ‘partial-merger’ scenario the Swedish Research Council would remain independent, perhaps with a
strengthened operational focus on supporting high -risk/high-reward research and a clearer role in
supporting research infrastructures. However, it would operate under the same national research strategy
and strong coordination mechanisms, including, where appropriate, joint programming and funding
mechanisms, in partnership with the new agency. The remit of the Research Council might also need to
be adjusted to more explicitly recognise not only its role in promoting research excellence and break -
through research (i.e. risk taking), but also its contribution to solutions for societal challenges (see box 8
and NSF-TIP). An even more radical alternative would be to merge the research council also into the new
agency, which might make coordination and integration across different research areas and aims easier.
In this case, one might expect that some operational independence between the newly merged units would
persist but a joint strategy and capacity to readily move and combine funds from different areas would
change the way of operating.
In considering the different scenarios for the organisation of the public research agencies in Sweden, it is
critical to consider the impact on research providers and universities. As stated at the start of this paper,
the aim is to optimally leverage the research capacity of universities to deliver the multiple outputs that are
required from research. A clear national science and innovation strategy combined with a rationalised
structure for implementation and increased focus on risk taking and societal challenges would put a strong
onus on universities to evolve their own structures and operations accordingly. It would encourage
university leaders to develop their own strategies and it would create more opportunities for collaboration
between research institutions and with other stakeholders to address urgent and complex challenges.
Research excellence will continue to be a major driving force but as the COVID-19 pandemic comes to an
end and environmental threats become more acute, perhaps the time it right to look again at how research
excellence is defined and measured.
The cases of several countries that have merged funding agencies are summarised in box 9. Whilst several
countries have rationalised their structures dealing with research or innovation, the UK is the only country
that has merged both research and innovation into a single structure. It is notable that a common rationale
for these mergers was concern about redundancy and inefficiency and challenges in coordinating across
multiple structures. The mergers in themselve s were also seen as a way to disrupt existing systems and
set new directions.

5 Widespread international experience implies that organisations governed by beneficiaries
are not well-suited to change (OECD, 2016[3]).

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Box 9. Mergers of research funding bodies
UK Research Innovation (UKRI)
UKRI was established in 2018 from a merger of 9 existing bodies, comprising the seve n research
councils, Innovate UK and Research England, which was formerly part of the Higher Education Funding
Council for England (HEFCE). The merger of the research Councils, the innovation agency and the
Higher Education Funding Council was aimed at the ‘effective formulation of strategy, promotion of
research, and engagement with their communities’ (Nurse, 2015[17]). It was expected also to provide a
strengthened voice for science to the government, enable cross-sectoral strategy development and
implementation and simplify transactional operations. The UKRI was until recently managed by the
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) and is now under the new Department
for Science, Innovation and Technology.
Note: full details of how UKRI operates are not provided here since the 2022-06 Committee is visiting UKRI
Source : https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nurse-review-of-research-councils-recommendations;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/independent-review-of-uk-research-and-innovation-ukri
Research Council of Norway and Innovation Norway
The Research Council of Norway (RCN) was established in 1993 by merging five councils for science
and technology, social sciences, agriculture, fisheries, and applied social sciences. It covers all scientific
disciplines and both basic and application-oriented research funding and is the only council with special
responsibility for public research institutes and an advisory role to the government. The creation of RCN
was a response to repeated criticism of the diversity of bodies in different funding roles and their limited
capacity to manage their performance, interactions and cross-cutting issues.
Specifically, the mission of RCN is ‘to promote a society where research is created, used and shared,
and thus contributes to restructuring and enhanced sustainability’, which is quite extensive and is unique
for a research funding agency in an OECD country. The Research Council’s strategy for 2020 -2024
has three key objectives – sustainable development, ground-breaking research and radical innovation,
and restructuring in the business and public sectors – which are aligned with the Long Plan for Research
and Higher Education 2019-2028 in Norway and the EU’s framework programme. RCN funding comes
from almost all ministries and is allocated to a diverse range of universities, public research institutes
and companies. The RCN also deals with coordination between different policy sectors, research and
policy evaluation, and strategic advice to the government on science and technology policy issues.
The RCN was complemented in 2004 by the creation of Innovation Norway, which was formed through
the merger of four governmental organisations: the Norwegian Tourist Board, the Norwegian Tr ade
Council, the Norwegian Industrial and Regional Development Fund (SND), and the Government
Consultative Office for Inventors (SVO). In addition to these two agencies, there is the Industrial
Development Corporation of Norway (SIVA) that was founded in 1 968, focusing on physical
infrastructure to service industry.
Source : (OECD, 2017 [18]) ; https ://www.forskningsradet.no/en/; https ://www.forskningsradet.no/en/research-policy-strategy/strategies-
plans/
Merger of the Irish Research Council and Science Foundation Ireland
Ireland has announced a plan in Impact 2030 – Ireland’s Research and Innovation Strategy - to merge
the Irish Research Council (IRC: the largest competitive funder of research in the Arts, Humanities and
Social Sciences) and Science Foundation Ireland (SFI: the largest compe titive funder of research in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics).
The reform has been prompted by Covid -19, which highlighted the importance of research and
innovation in crisis response and the need for collaboration between different resear ch disciplines to
transform ideas into impact. It also aims to put R&I at the heart of Ireland’s response to important issues

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  41

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

for citizens such as climate change and digital transformation. The merger is expected to help co -
ordinate funding activities, improve administrative efficiency and simplify the set of support instruments
provided to researchers, while building on the existing capacity, strengths and international brands of
IRC and SFI.
Impact 2030 also states that a critical action in the process of establishing the new agency is to take a
holistic view of the current IRC and SFI funding in order to identify any duplication or gaps and to
improve complementarity with other funding agencies in the broader R&I landscape of Ireland.
At the same time as the merger, the relationship between ministerial policymakers and the public
research system, will be strengthened by establishing a new dedicated Evidence for Policy function
within the Department of Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science.
It should be noted that Enterprise Ireland (EI), which promotes business sector R&D activities in Ireland,
will not be part of the proposed merger.
Source: https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/27c78-impact-2030-irelands-new-research-and-innovation-
strategy/#:~:text='Impact%202030%3A%20Ireland's%20Research%20and,innovation%20on%20many%20national%20priorities
National Research Foundation of Korea and an innovation agency
Korea agreed on a ‘one ministry, one specialized institution’ approach in 2018 in order to increase R&D
investment efficiency. This was seen as a solution to a number of concerns, including:
similar/overlapping planning activities by different actors; lack of organic linkage between research
results and innovation; the excessive burden on researchers due to different regulatory procedures and
management requirements for each institution.
Korea unified agencies under the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) into the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF):
• Transferred the R&D managed by the National IT Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA) to the
Information and Communication Technology Promotion Center (IITP), and
• Made the IITP an affiliated institution within the NRF
Agencies under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (MOTIE) were unified into a single dedicated
agency for industrial technology R&D:
• The Korea Institute of Industrial Technology Evaluation and Planning (KEIT) and the Institute
of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) were merged, and
• The merged agency oversees the overall R&D portfolio of MOTIE.
• The Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology (KIAT) was preserved along with its
specific remit and activities for industrial promotion (rather than technology development).
Source: https://policy.nl.go.kr/cmmn/FileDown.do?atchFileId=224326&fileSn=65773
Options for change
• Give serious consideration to reforming the governance and structures of the public funding
organisations in Sweden. The rationale for reform is to create and implement more coherent
policies that align with a shared national strategy and address the need to more effectively support
STI that enables socio-technical transitions. Such reform could include modifications to the remits
and coordination mechanisms for existing funding agencies, and/or might include more radical
structural changes and mergers. Two alternative change scenarios are presented in this
discussion paper but it is recognised that other scenarios may be more appropriate in the specific
Swedish context.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Concluding Remarks
Societal needs and expectations regarding public research are increasing. Science systems are now
expected not o nly to produce new knowledge, but also to support innovation and generate solutions to
complex societal challenges. Public research funders as intermediaries between governments and
research providers are having to adjust their strategies and operations to incentivise the research that is
required to respond to these expanded expectations. Universities, as the main research providers (and
centres of education and training for future researchers) are increasingly expected to work with funders
and other actor s to deliver the necessary scientific knowledge and tools that are urgently required to
support societal transitions.
The Swedish research system has its strengths and weaknesses, which have been explored in detail in
earlier analyses, including the 2016 O ECD review. Many of the weaknesses relate the lack of strategic
leadership and clear direction across the system, which makes it difficult to break down embedded ‘silos’
– between disciplines, agencies, sectors and institutions. These are accentuated when it comes to high -
risk research or research that addresses societal challenges, which require new approaches that are more
inter-disciplinary and inter -sectoral. There are important lessons to be learned from several recent
initiatives – SFO, SIP, NRPs - to address societal challenges, which have tested the limits of what is
possible within the current system.
This report includes a number of options for change for consideration with a view to improving different
aspects of the Swedish public research system . These essentially relate to two issues – strategy and
structures – that need to be considered together. There appears to be a strategy deficit across the research
system, from the national to the institutional scale, and in the absence of shared prioriti es and directions,
collective action is limited and each actor, from individual researchers to universities to funders, does their
own thing. New initiatives are stifled from the outset by the dominant incentives within the system that
favour incremental r esearch and short -term academic publication outputs. In the absence of effective
coordination, the diversity of different public and private research funding sources in Sweden and the
relative availability of funding overall, favour an opportunistic rather than a strategic approach.
It is timely for Sweden to ask the question whether it is satisfied with what its research system is producing
in terms of scientific breakthroughs, innovation and addressing societal needs and, depending on the
answer to this first question, whether incremental or more radical structural changes are required. This
report includes a number of suggestions as to how a more strategic approach can be implemented at
different levels and concludes with two potential scenarios for chan ge at the level of the public research
funding agencies. The aim is not to prescribe what should be done but to facilitate a discussion about what
is required and how it can be best achieved.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  43

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

References

Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (2021), Independent review of UK
Research and Innovation (UKRI): final report and recommendations.
[21]
Erik Arnold, G. (2022), A Formative Meta-Evaluation of Seven Swedish National Research
Programmes 2017-2021.
[13]
Ketels Christian, M. (2020), Peer review of the Danish R&I system,
https://doi.org/10.2777/603976.
[15]
Larrue, P. (2021), “The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A
new systemic policy approach to address societal challenges”, OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers, No. 100, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
[6]
Larrue, P. and R. Santos (2022), “Towards a new stage in Norway’s science, technology and
innovation system: Improving the long-term plan for research and higher education”, OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 133, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/ce07b7c3-en.
[14]
Larrue, P. and O. Strauka (2022), “The contribution of RTOs to socio-economic recovery,
resilience and transitions”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 129,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ae93dc1d-en.
[22]
Machado, D. (2021), “Quantitative indicators for high-risk/high-reward research”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2021/07, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/675cbef6-en.
[20]
Nurse, P. (2015), Ensuring a successful research endeavour: review of the UK research councils
by Paul Nurse.
[17]
OECD (2022), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Germany 2022: Building Agility for
Successful Transitions, OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/50b32331-en.
[19]
OECD (2021), “Effective policies to foster high-risk/high-reward research”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 112, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/06913b3b-en.
[2]
OECD (2021), Improving Higher Education in the Slovak Republic, Higher Education, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/259e23ba-en.
[4]
OECD (2020), “Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 88, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0ca0ca45-en.
[1]
OECD (2019), “Reference framework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic impact of
research infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 65,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/3ffee43b-en.
[10]

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
OECD (2018), “Effective operation of competitive research funding systems”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 57, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/2ae8c0dc-en.
[5]
OECD (2017), “Digital platforms for facilitating access to research infrastructures” , OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 49, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/8288d208-en.
[7]
OECD (2017), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Norway 2017, OECD Reviews of Innovation
Policy, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264277960-en.
[18]
OECD (2017), “Open research agenda setting”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy
Papers, No. 50, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/74edb6a8-en.
[16]
OECD (2017), “Strengthening the effectiveness and sustainability of international research
infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 48, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/fa11a0e0-en.
[9]
OECD (2016), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Sweden 2016, OECD Reviews of Innovation
Policy, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264250000-en.
[3]
OECD/Science Europe (2020), “Optimising the operation and use of national research
infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 91, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/7cc876f7-en.
[8]
Tomas Åström, E. (2020), Meta-evaluation of the second round of strategic innovation programs
after six years.
[11]
Vinnova (2022), Analysis of the program Utmaningsdriven Innovation. [12]

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  45

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix
Figure 1. R&D intensity by sector of performance as a percentage of GDP by country
HERD: higher education expenditure on R&D; GOVERD: government intramural expenditure on
R&D; BERD: business enterprise R&D; PNPERD: private non-profit expenditure on R&D

Note: the data of 2020 where 2020 data corresponds to 2019 for Switzerland and United Kingdom
Source: OECD (2023), "Main Science and Technology Indicators", OECD Science, Technology and R&D Statistics (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00182-en (accessed on 22 February 2023).
Figure 2. Higher Education Expenditure on R&D (HERD) as a percentage of GDP

Source: OECD (2023), "Research and Development Statistics, OECD Science, Technology and R&D St atistics (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00189-en extracted from OECD STI.Scoreboard platform on 23 February 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Figure 3. HERD and HERD financed by the government sector as a percentage of GDP
HERD: higher education expenditure on R&D; GUF: general university funds

Note: the data of 2019
Source: OECD STI Scoreboard (last accessed on 23 February 2023)
Figure 4. Total number of 10% top-cited scientific publications, fractional counts

Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 6.2022, September 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN  47

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 5. Proportion of 10% top-cited scientific publications to total scientific publications,
fractional counts, %

Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 6.2022, September 2022.
Note: the drop in most countries from 2019 coincides with the COVID-19 pandemic and should be interpreted cautiously.

Figure 6. Sweden's average distance to the SDG targets level

Note: It shows the average distance the country needs to travel to reach each SDG. Distances are measured in standardised uni ts with 0
indicating that the level for 2030 has already been attained and 3 is the distance m ost OECD countries have already travelled. Bars show the
average country performance against all targets under the relevant Goal for which data are available, and diamonds show the O ECD average.
Whiskers show uncertainties due to missing data, ranging from assuming that missing indicators are all 3 standardised distances from the 2030
target level to assuming that they are already at the target level.
Source: Measuring distance to the SDG targets – Sweden

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48  PUBLIC RESEARCH FUNDING IN SWEDEN

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
Table 2. Higher education institutions' income from research grants in Sweden by funder, SEK
million (current prices)
 SEK Million %
Councils and government agencies 10,393 47.6%
 The Research Council 5,110 23.4%
 Formas 1,144 5.2%
 Forte 589 2.7%
 Vinnova 1,034 4.7%
 Swedish Energy Agency 787 3.6%
 Other government agencies 1,729 7.9%
EU 2,162 9.9%
Public research foundations 1,307 6.0%
 SSF (Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research) 650 3.0%
 Other public research foundations 657 3.0%
Foundations and other non-profit organisations (NPOs) in Sweden 5,875 26.9%
 Wallenberg Foundations 1,969 9.0%
 Other private foundations and NPOs 3,906 17.9%
Others 2,106 9.6%
Total 21,843 100.0%
Note: the data of 2021; Universities have other funds such as the direct government subsidies, SEK 21.6B, including the basic funding of higher
education institutions, SEK 19.1B
Source: Universitet och högskolor Årsrapport 2022
Figure 7. Number of projects funded from the European Research Council (ERC) by country

Source: ERC (2023) datahub of ERC funded project, https://erc.europa.eu/project-statistics/project-database (accessed on 8, February 2023)
