
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers
2023/04
The contribution of R&D
specialist institutions to R&D
performance: Findings from
the NESTI 2022 pilot data
collection
Fernando Galindo-
Rueda,
Brigitte van Beuzekom
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/d7917b11-en

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers

OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or
of its member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are those of the authors.
Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progres s by the author(s) and are
published to stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD works.
Comments on Working Papers are welcomed, and may be sent to OECD Directorate for Science,
Technology and Innovation, OECD, 2 rue André -Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France; e -mail:
sti.contact@oecd.org.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/NESTI(2022)1/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the
status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and
boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

The statistical data for Israel are suppl ied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli
authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan
Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international
law.

© OECD (2023)

The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be
found at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  3
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

The contribution of R&D specialist institutions to R&D
performance: findings from the NESTI 2022 pilot data collection
Fernando Galindo-Rueda and Brigitte van Beuzekom (OECD)

Long-standing policy interest in the role of organisations specialised in research and
experimental development (R&D) raises questions about how these organisations are classified
under different institutional sectors and contribute to R&D statistics This paper reports on the
findings of the pilot data collection conducted in 2022. The results show a diverse range of R&D
specialist ecosystems as well as major reporting gaps . The ultimate aim of this exercise and its
recommendations is to demonstrate how several OECD countries are able to provide meaningful
statistical results using OECD guidance and promote the mainstreaming of reporting into future
national and OECD R&D statistics.
Keywords: Research and development, innovation, institutions, R&D specialisation
JEL Codes: O30, O32, C80

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Acknowledgements
This report has been prepared by Fernando Galindo -Rueda and Brigitte van Beuzekom from the
Science and Technology Policy Division in the OECD Directorate for Science, Technology and
Innovation, in support of the project conducted under the aegis of the OECD Working Party of
National Experts on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI) under the intermediate output
result “1.3.2.5.1 Data and new tools for STI policies” within the Programme of Work and Budget
of the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP). The work reported in this study
was initiated following a proposal by the Spanish delegation to CSTP and NESTI to conduct
analysis on how R&D specialist organisations that may be classified under different institutional
sectors are accounted for and contribute to R&D statistics.
The authors would like to thank all the national contact points engaged that contributed to this
work with either complete or partial responses.

List of contributors

Australia Adriane Antoniazzi, Australian Bureau of Statistics
 Gavril D'Souza, Department of Industry, Science and Resources
 Carolann Hoad, Australian Bureau of Statistics
 David Kennedy, Australian Bureau of Statistics
 Robert Nocciolino, Australian Bureau of Statistics
 Charlotte Tabi, Department of Industry, Science and Resources
 Francesco Tornatore, Australian Bureau of Statistics
Austria Petra Koll, Statistics Austria
 Andreas Schiefer, Statistics Austria
Belgium Karl Boosten, Belgian Science Policy
 Elena Phalet, Belgian Science Policy
Brazil
Jorge Mário Campagnolo, Ministry of Science, Technology &
Innovation

Joelmo Jesus de Oliveira, Ministry of Science, Technolo gy &
Innovation

Flavio Jose Marques Peixoto, Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics
 Alessandro Pinheiro, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics

Fernanda de Vilhena, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistic
Cornelio Silva, Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
Canada Susan Demedash, Statistics Canada
 Charlene Lonmo, Statistics Canada
 Damigou Lamboni, Statistics Canada
 Gregory Maloney, Statistics Canada
Chinese Taipei Claire Fan, Ministry of Science and Technology
Czech Republic Martin Mana, Czech Statistical Office
 Marek Štampach, Czech Statistical Office
 Libor Sojka, Czech Statistical Office
Estonia Tiina Pärson, Statistics Estonia
 Rita Raudjarv, Statistics Estonia

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  5
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Finland Ari Leppälahti, Statistics Finland
 Mervi Niemi, Statistics Finland
Germany Dominik Asef, Federal Statistical Office
 Andreas Kladroba, Stifterverband
 Katharina Skutella, Federal Ministry of Education and Research
Greece Panagnostidis Anagnostidis, National Documentation Centre
 Maria Kleideri, National Documentation Centre
 Eleni Malliou, National Documentation Centre
Israel Merav Katz, Central Bureau of Statistics
 Malul Pnina, Central Bureau of Statistics
Italy Valeria Mastrostefano, National Institute of Statistics
 Maura Steri, National Institute of Statistics
Japan Tomohiro Ijichi, National Institute of Science and Technology Policy,
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology

Hideaki Nakamura, Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications
Korea Hyuk Han, Korea Institute of S&T Evaluation and Planning
 Yujin Jeong, Korea Institute of S&T Evaluation and Planning
 Hanul Kim, Korea Institute of S&T Evaluation and Planning
Lithuania Tadas Juknevicius, Ministry of Education, Science & Sport
 Gediminas Samuolis, Statistics Lithuania
 Loreta Žebuolienė, Statistics Lithuania
Netherlands Linda Bruls, Statistics Netherlands
Norway Bo Sarpebakken, Statistics Norway
 Kaja Wendt, Statistics Norway
Poland Mariola Jaskow, Statistics Poland
 Magdalena Orczykowska, Statistics Poland
 Marta Prusakowska, Statistics Poland
 Dominik Rozkrut, Statistics Poland
 Magdalena Wegner, Statistics Poland
Portugal
Catarina Carreira, Directorate -General for Education and Science
Statistics
 Ana Martins, Directorate-General for Education and Science Statistics

Filomena Oliveira, Directorate -General for Education and Science
Statistics
South Africa Atoko Kasongo, Human Sciences Research Council
 Tlangelani Makamu, Human Sciences Research Council
Spain Sagrario Calvo Lopez, National Institute of Statistics
 Alberto Davila Gamez, National Institute of Statistics
 Amaya Ezcurra Martinez, Ministry of Science & Innovation
 Belen Gonzalez Olmos, National Institute of Statistics
 Cristina Moneo, Ministry of Science & Innovation
Sweden Nils Adriansson, Statistics Sweden
Türkiye Serhat Atakul, Turkish Statistical Institute
United States John Jankowski, NCSES, National Science Foundation
 Raymond Wolfe, NCSES, National Science Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Executive summary
Long-standing policy interest in the role of organisations whose purpose is to conduct research
and experimental development (R&D) as a service calls for accureate depictions of their footprint
in sectoral-based statistical representations of national R&D systems. Motivations for policy
interest in R&D specialist organisations are manifold, relating to the optimal institutional division
of “labour” within systems and the sustainability of organisations that have R&D as its main
function, fulfilling the expectations and requirements of other actors. OECD reviews of innovation
policy and other targeted poli cy support initiatives dedicate considerable effort to investigating
related issues of governance, ownership, financing and knowledge exchange.
This paper represents an initial attempt to fill the existing gap by demonstrating how several
OECD countries are able to provide meaningful statistical results using the tools and guidance in
the OECD Frascati Manual to characterise these institutions. The preliminary results of the data
collection result in several substantive findings and methodological implications.
Lessons from the data collection process about R&D systems
The data collection conducted in 2022 under the aegis of the OECD Working Party of National
Experts on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI) process has revealed significant interest.
However, there are still many cases when participation or engagement in the analysis has been
missing or just partial. The data collection process revealed ambiguities and gaps in terms of data
availability and application of core “Frascati” guidance. For an informal data collection like this,
the application of heuristics provided reasonably good approximations to the intended outcomes.
The diversity of types of R&D specialist organisations across and within sectors makes it difficult
to draw general lessons about which economies are more prone to decouple R&D from other
functions into separate types of units. Unfortunately, the data collected do not yet enable the
derivation of data-based typologies of R&D systems along these lines for reasons that anticipat e
what might be the focus of future NESTI work.
• The number of economies for which information has been reported is very limited, with
some major R&D performing countries entirely or partly missing from the exercise.
• There are idiosyncratic differences in the way in which countries implement the concept
of statistical unit and collect separate data from R&D specialist units within broader
organisational and oversight structures.
• There is still scope for collecting additional information on the nature of the R&D carried
out by specialist organisations, i.e. basic and applied research versus experimental
development; fields of R&D; or on the composition of government R&D funding (e.g.
institutional or project-based).
Despite these limitations, the data collection has provided several insights on the R&D structure
of pilot participants, highlighting those in which the R&D specialist sector plays a significant role.
This pilot exercise has shown the important role playe d by R&D specialist business enterprises
that are affiliates of larger business groups , e.g. in Israel. Affilidated R&D units are by far the
largest category of R&D specialist institution –not the type commenta tors have in mind when
referring to “R&D institutes”. Independent R&D service providers, key actors in the market for
“ideas”, appear to be somewhat less common. Their status may be transitory before sales of other
goods and services exceed any income from R&D services, for instance in the case of R&D based
start-ups.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  7
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

In countries such as Norway and Spain, non -profit R&D specialist organisations serving
businesses play an important role . Their status is often subject to special regulations and
governments can play major roles as funders. Communication of statistics on business R&D
should acknowledge the role of this subsector.
In the government sector, the results show how governmental institutions performing R&D are
specialised or embedded into organisations with broader remits. The study provided in sights on
the connection between territorial decentralisation and government R&D institutes. The results
put on the spot the variety of R&D that specialist R&D organisations undertake and the challenge
of putting them all in the same “box”.
Methodological lessons
The data collection has also provided several insights on the way that R&D statistics are currently
compiled around the world . This paper argues that classification, data collection and reporting
practices that are sensitive to the degree of specialisation in R&D provision can help national
statistical organisations provide statistical outputs that are easier to interpret and analyse by
domestic and international users than it is currently the case.
The strengthening of statistical registers of R&D performing units across all sector s should be a
priority for NSOs in charge of R&D statistics. Registers should be equipped with relevant
classification information and surveys should help with updates. In the absence of “off the shelf”
registers to draw upon , bodies in charge of producing R&D statistics should be empowered to
make their own classification decisions in line with established guidance and subject those to an
appapriate degree of external scrutiny, both domestic and international.
The data collection has also raised issues about practices on the definition of statistical units and
reporting arrangements that lead to the following recommendations:
• In the government sector, government R&D surveys should effectively adopt the
performer’s statistical unit perspective rather than collect all information from sponsoring
agencies or ministries without breakdowns covering the diverse institutional and
functional range of R&D performing organisations under their oversight.
• In the business sector, the correct interpretation of BERD statistics requires to distinguish
the contribution of non -profit organisations under control of business enterprises from
other for-profit business enterprises and their affiliates . Questionnaire design should be
adapted to take into account these different types of business enterprises.
• R&D statistics should be sensitive to the emergence of mixed institutions - under control
by institutions across different sectors or at different terrirorial levesl of government.
Furthermore, communication of statistical classification decisions in R&D statistics should draw
on best practices on transparency from other statistical domains and international experience.
Classification disclosure is unlikely to represent a confidentiality breach, especially outside the
for-profit business enterprise sector. In the interest of international comparability and quality
assurance, countries should disclose their classification decisions to the extent that provisions on
statistical confidentiality allow them to do so.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Table of contents
The contribution of R&D specialist institutions to R&D performance: findings from the NESTI
2022 pilot data collection....................................................................................................................... 3
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................................ 4
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................... 6
1. Introduction and background ........................................................................................................ 10
2. Measurement guidance ................................................................................................................... 12
3. The 2022 ad hoc data collection exercise and its precedents ....................................................... 14
4. Analysis of results from the data collection................................................................................... 18
4.1. R&D specialist units within the Government sector ................................................................... 18
4.2. R&D specialist units within the Business enterprise sector ........................................................ 21
4.3. R&D specialist units within the Private non-profit sector .......................................................... 25
4.4. R&D specialist units within the Higher education sector ........................................................... 26
4.5. The broad picture on R&D specialist organisations ................................................................... 27
5. Conclusions and next steps ............................................................................................................. 30
5.1. Lessons from the data collection process about R&D systems................................................... 30
5.2. Methodological lessons ............................................................................................................... 31
5.3. Next steps .................................................................................................................................... 32
Annex A. Questionnaire ...................................................................................................................... 33
Annex B. Additional detailed tables ................................................................................................... 39
Annex C. Economy notes .................................................................................................................... 46
Endnotes ............................................................................................................................................... 51

FIGURES
Figure 1. Visual representation of R&D specialist units (ISIC72) across the headline institutional classification in the Frascati
Manual 15
Figure 2. R&D specialist institutions contribution to government R&D, latest available year 19
Figure 3. Sources of funds for government R&D in specialist R&D institutions, latest available year 20
Figure 4. R&D specialist institutions contribution to business R&D, latest available year 22
Figure 5. Share of Business R&D accounted for by units with R&D (ISIC72) and with R&D and other Professional, scientific and
technical activities as main activity (ISIC72+), ANBERD database, 2019 22
Figure 6. Business enterprise R&D specialist institution contributions, ISIC 72, by source of funds, latest available year 24
Figure 7. PNP R&D specialists contribution to total PNPERD, latest available year 25
Figure 8. PNP specialist institution contributions, ISIC 72, by source of funds, latest available year 26
Figure 9. R&D specialist institutions contributions to domestic R&D (GERD), latest available year 27
Figure 10. R&D specialist institutions expenditure distribution by sector, percentages, latest available year 28
Figure 11. Total R&D specialist institution contributions, ISIC 72, by source of funds, latest available year 29

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  9
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

TABLES
Table 1. Inventory of responses to the OECD/NESTI ad hoc 2022 questionnaire 16
Table 2. Contribution to GERD by R&D specialists in government, public enterprises and non-profits serving business 29
Table 3. R&D expenditure by R&D specialised institutions, USD PPPs, latest available year 39
Table 4.Number of R&D specialised institutions, units, latest available year 40
Table 5. Sources of funding of R&D in R&D specialised institutions 41

Table A A.1. Types of R&D institutions and R&D performance in the economic territory 35
Table A A.2. Sources of funding for the R&D performance of ISIC 72 units 36

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

1. Introduction and background
Long-standing policy interest in the role of organisations1 set up with the primary objective of
conducting research and experimental development (R&D) has driven several enquiries on the
way such organisations are captured and depicted in statistical representations of national science
and innovati on systems, particularly through institutional sector classifications for R&D.
Institutional sector classifications provide a high level characterisation of R&D performers that
follows the logic of generic economic and social statistics in the System of Na tional Accounts,
but enabled much richer characterisations. Unfortunately, statistical reporting parsimony and
confidentiality requirements results in a great of information not being available for international
comparisons. This paper represents an attemp t to fill the existing gap by demonstrating how
several OECD countries are able to provide meaningful statistical results using the tools and
guidance in the OECD Frascati Manual and how this could and should be mainstreamed into
regular reporting going forward.
Motivations for policy interest in R&D specialist organisations are manifold but ultimately boil
down to questions about the optimal division of “labour” within STI systems across different types
of organisations. These questions concern the extent to which organisations that have R&D as its
main activity can operate sustainably, fulfilling the expectations and requirements of other actors
in the system. Organisational specialisation in R&D performance can drive greater efficiency, but
may come at the expense of missing potential synergies with other activities. Issues of governance,
ownership and control, financing, knowledge exchange and products follow as a result in policy
debates, fuelled by interest in the emergence of new types of organisation s with novel
combinations of the above elements. OECD reviews of innovation policy and other targeted policy
support initiatives typically dedicate considerable effort to investigating such questions in country
or even regional specific contexts.
As one m ight expect, much public policy interest is focused on public research organi sations
(PROs) loosely characterised as research-focused organisations that are public by nature or in
which the government has an “influence” (Cruz-Castro et al, 2020)2. The reference to “influence”
stretches the more explicit SNA definition of effective control, as it may ultimately include any
type of regulatory influence. Additional restrictions on the PRO concept typically exclude
organisations in the university and enterprise spheres (Cruz-Castro et al, 2020). As noted by the
authors, the focus is not limited to the “R” of research. OECD R&D policy work (e.g. OECD,
2011,3 and several innovation policy reviews) has drawn on the terminology of Arnold, Barker
and Slipersæter (2010)4, which uses the generic term of ‘research institutes’ as encompassing three
main types of R&D organisations according to the their ‘principal mission’, namely “government
laboratories”, academic institutes, and research and technology organisations (RTOs), each
presumed to be focused on mission-oriented research, basic science or oriented and applied
research (to service industry and innovation). A recent study by Larrue and Strauka (2022) 5
analyses the evolution of the funding, governance and polic y context of RTOs over the last ten
years, and the implications of these changes on their ability to achieve their mission. It shows that
their contribution to solving societal challenges is now tightly intertwined with their historical
mission of supporting innovation in industry and public administrations.
Formal sectorisation practices within several national STI systems and policies often allude to a
so called “research sector”, distinct from universities, business and at times even government.
Legislation and studies often refer to “research bodies”, “research institutes” or “research
organisations”, sometimes by reference to entities with a focus on “research” only or intending to
cover both “research and development” as the focus of activity within s uch organisations. In
several countries especially within Europe, the term “Research and technology organisation”

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  11
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

(RTO) is often used, drawing attention on the role played by specialist organisations on the active
development of new products and processes, as well as on the provision of technology services to
other entities. Also in Europe, state aid rules define “Research and knowledge dissemination
organisations” (RKDOs) as entities pursuing predominantly non -commercial education
knowledge dissemination o bjectives, while consultations on the revised state aid framework
included the new concept of “technology infrastructures”. The terminological drift thus
incorporates several additional features with specific policy purposes in mind that result in
differential treatment of the organisations falling within the scope of a given definition. That
makes this a somewhat evasive or “moving target” for statistical measurement. Such a situation
goes a long way towards explaining why consensus on what to measure and how, and getting it
done, has thus far been evasive.
Ultimately, the lack of visibility of an R&D sector within the top -level classification used by
countries to report data in line with Frascati Manual recommendations represents a practical
challenge in terms of conducting public policy discussions about R&D specialisation, particularly
those of an international comparative nature. This paper argues, with new evidence, that
classification, data collection and reporting practices that are sensitive to the degree of
specialisation in R&D provision, can help national statistical organisations provide statistical
outputs that are easier to interpret and analyse by domestic and international users than it is the
case at present.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

2. Measurement guidance
In the presence of several competing legal and informal definitions for the object of measurement
interest, before attempting to test and institutionalise new definitions, it is considered best
statistical practice to assess to what extent the existing measurement tools can approximate what
policy and other stakeholders seek to see captured and reported. Chapter 3 of the 2015 Frascati
Manual provides several elements under two main classifications for institutional units6 involved
in performing R&D:
• The institutional headline classification, which is inspired by the System of National
Accounts’ set of institutional sectors, and is based on a taxonomy of elements that include
the following differentiating elements:
o The residence status of the institutional unit, distinguishing the economic territory
from the rest of the world, which includes extra-terrorial organisations by convention.
o The market -based nature of activity by the unit, contrasting those that charge
meaningful economic prices for their products (thus operating in the market) with
those that do not.7
o The existence of control by government of the institutional unit, thus distinguishing
public from private institutions.
• The classification of institutional units by main economic activity, or in other words, what
is the main product (good or service) of the statistical unit.
The headline institutional classification (HIC, thereafter for economy) used in the Frascati Manual
comprises the mutually exclusive categ ories of Business enterprises, Government, Higher
education (HE) institutions and (other) Private non-profit (PNP). The HE sector represents an ad
hoc addition to the SNA classification present in the manual since its first edition of 1963.
Institutions ar e allocated to a HIC sector using a decision tree that draws on the taxonomy
mentioned above and that includes the distinctive criterion of whether the unit provides HE
services8. This is the main basis on which countries report aggregated data on R&D domestically
and to OECD.
This structure also shapes (and reflects) how different survey instruments are addressed to
different statistical units, with all units in the same HIC in a country often receiving the same
distinctive questionnaire from the NSO or agency in charge of R&D statistics production. In many
countries, different agencies or bodies are in charge of collecting and reporting data for different
sectors within a country, which can pose a challenge for exercises that attempt to provide
economy-wide views of activities that transcend multiple institutional sectors or where boundaries
may be porous due to changes in defining features.
In addition to this, the 2015 Frascati Manual edition indicated that the classification of units by
main economic activity should be systematically applied to all statistical units and not only those
in the Business enterprise (BE) sector given a) it’s broad applicability, b) the scope for improving
survey design and implementation based on knowledge of the main economic activity, and c) the
need to respond to a wider range of policy user questions, such as those having to do with a range
of economic activities carried out in multiple institutional sectors.
it is recommended that countries should tag institutional units in all sectors according to
their principal economic activity even if they choose not to report these figures on a
systematic basis. (FM, 3.32)

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  13
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

A major focus of the economic activity classification of institutional units, in all
institutional sectors, r elates to the categories of R&D services, health and education.
Units involved in these activities can potentially be part of any Frascati institutional
sector. The complete presentation of R&D statistics on the basis of an economic activity
may possibly r eveal some potential differences for units engaged in education services
with respect to the total reported for higher education, which can be due to a number of
factors, including the distinction between primary and secondary activities. (FM 3.34)
This r ecommendation was also the edition’s response to a number of stakeholder requests to
increase9 the number of headline “institutional sectors” to also comprise a “research sector”. This
meant assigning equal standing in the HIC to an “R&D sector” on a par with the likes of “Higher
education” and “Government”. Since such move would have resulted in an unworkable HIC
decision tree, the 2015 revision’s compromise was to keep a stable and manageable number of
HIC sectors characterised by socioeconomic roles, w hile committing to generating cross-cutting
statistics based on the main activity information.
The OECD secretariat, with the explicit agreement of NESTI, accordingly implemented an
additional data collection table within its international survey of R&D a ddressed to NESTI
members and participants. The table requests a breakdown of total GERD by main economic
activity of all resident R&D performing units. Nearly seven years since the publication of the 2015
manual, response to this particular table is rathe r poor making the result not suitable for
publication with the established body of OECD R&D statistics. Discussions at OECD and
Eurostat, which also strives to collect this information on a regular yet pilot basis, have revealed
a mix of cases underpinning the response from countries that the “information is not readily
available”:
• Lack of readily available compiled indicators, but the underpinning information is actually
available to NSOs. This situation reveals issues of priority and resources for indica tor
generation or issues of statistical confidentiality.
• Lack of classification information on main activity in registers available and used for data
collection, and/or lack of information reported by reporting units, especially in non -
business sectors. This element is often intertwined with unwillingness or lack of resources
to undertake classification or adjust questionnaires to mitigate for missing register
information.10
The diagnosis of the situation revealed that it was necessary for NESTI to undertake a focused ad
hoc data collection in order to facilitate mutual learning across countries to show how the most
relevant statistics could be more systematically produced and communicated to an international
user community.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

3. The 2022 ad hoc data collection exercise and its precedents
The concept of the “R&D specialist institutions” project was brought up for consideration at both
the 2018 and 2019 NESTI meetings, based on a proposal originally made by representatives from
Spain at the 2018 NESTI meeting. The aim was to undertake a comparative analysis of the
classification of the so called “research institutes” at the country-level. NESTI agreed to undertake
a pilot study in order to clarify how “boundary” institutions, and in particular “R&D institutes”,
are classified in countries.
This initiative was effectively a revival of work done at NESTI in support of a project by the
former OECD Working Party on Research Institutions and Human Resources (RIHR), a body
whose mandate was eventually subsumed into that of the OECD Working Party on Innovation
and Technology Policy ( TIP). Results from that initiative were included in OECD (2011) and
comprised ad hoc tabulations provided by Austria, Denmark, Finland, Luxembourg, Poland and
the Russian Federation, as well as the Flanders region of Belgium, conducted in response to the
RIHR policy interest. At the time of the 2018 proposal, there was significant interest from
numerous countries, including: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
France, Greece, Ireland, Korea, Norway, Portugal, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United
States. A pilot questionnaire was presented at the 2019 NESTI meeting with a slightly broader,
less normative perspective than conceived in the 2009-10 NESTI-RIHR exercise, which conflated
aspects of R&D and other S&T goals as well as public ownership and funding (see Box 1 for the
2009/2010 project operational definition of research institutions).
Box 1. Definition of “research institutions” used in the 2009-2010 OECD project
The project by the former OECD Working Party on Research Institutions and Human
Resources (RIHR) defined “research institutions” as national entities, irrespective of
their legal status (organised under public or private law):
• whose primary goals are to conduct fundamental research, industrial research,
experimental development, training, consu lting and service provision, and to
disseminate their results by way of training, publication and technology transfer;
and
• whose profits (if any) are reinvested in these activities, the dissemination of their
results, or training; and
• which are either to tally or to a substantial share publicly owned, and/or are
funded primarily from public sources via base funding (block grants) or through
contract-based research, and/or are regulated, so as to achieve primarily public
missions.
This definition thus combined R&D and related economic activity goals on one hand, a
lack of profit motive, and a component of public funding, regulation and mission that
was and is still not easy to operationalise, in particular since all economic activities are
regulated to some extent to achieve public policy objectives. The ad hoc nature of this
definition placed responsibility on national contacts to interpret the requirement,
significantly detached from available statistical classifications. This was a judgement
that few NSOs were willing or capable to make within the scope of the exercise, which
was reflected in the low degree of participation.
Source: OECD, based on OECD (2011).

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  15
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Following a hiatus in the project between 2019 and 2021, forced by the need to refocus NESTI
resources during the COVID-19 crisis, discussions were resumed at the 2021 NESTI meeting. On
that occasion, the secretariat proposed to resume the project on collecting data to determine the
contribution of R&D specialist institutions to GERD as well as their sources of funding by means
of a simplified questionnaire. The document argued that while sustained quality improvement and
granular statistics by types of institutions requires effective sharing of entity names and statistical
classifications applied, so that the criteria adopted can be probed by peers and the international
community, this would require a significant agreement and substantial investment that at that time
did not seem feasible to undertake. Setting that as possible medium to long-term ambition for the
project, in the shorter term, the suggestion was to start work with the definitions and tools provided
in the Frascati Manual 2015 to produce an initial picture of the ISIC72 industry in terms of its
contribution to GERD, sectoral aggregates, and its sources of funding structure. It was posited as
a working hypothesis that a “good enough” approximation to the RIHR research institutions
framework can be pursued through some additional breakdowns based on established statistical
definitions.
The questionnaire , including guidance provided to NESTI R&D contacts, is available under
Annex A. A summary overview of the approach is available under Figure 1.
Figure 1. Visual representation of R&D specialist units (ISIC72) across the headline institutional
classification in the Frascati Manual
R&D specialist units can be found in all FM institutional sectors and fall under different categories within each

Notes: NPI stands for Non-profit institution. GOV=government. COs=companies.
Source: OECD, based on the Frascati Manual.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

In March 2022, following several iterations to gather feedback from countries, the data request
was sent to contacts from 46 economies (OECD members and non-members) engaged with OECD
in the reporting of R&D statistics via NESTI. Twenty-five responded but only twenty submitted
complete or near complete responses (see Table 1 for a summary of responses).
• Eight were able to provide data for all the sectors (Business enterprise, Higher education,
Government and Private-non-profit).
• Eight provided data for three of the four sectors, either Business enterprise, Government
and Private-non-profit or Business enterprise, Higher education and Government.
• Four provided data for both Business enterprise and Government sectors.
• Four were only able to provide data for the Business enterprise sector (effectively what
has been systematically collected for decades for the business sector), and one country
provided data for the Business enterprise sector and the PNP sector.
• Most countries provided data for the latest available year, with a majority providing data
for 2020 or 2019. A few contacts provided time series data for several years.
Table 1. Inventory of responses to the OECD/NESTI ad hoc 2022 questionnaire
Availability of responses per economy under each of the survey components
 Table 1 Table 2
 BERD Private Public HERD Private Public GOVERD Central/local PNPERD SourceFund
Australia y n n n n n y n y BE+GOV+PnP
Austria y y y y confidential confidential y y y ALL
Belgium y y 0 y 0 y y y y ALL
Brazil y partial y n n n n n n BE
Canada y y 0 n n n n n y BE+PnP
Czech Republic y y y n n n y y y BE+GOV+PnP
Germany y partial n n n n n n n BE
Spain y y y y y y y y y ALL
Estonia y n n n n n y n y BE+GOV+PnP
Finland y y y 0 n n y y y ALL
Greece y y y n n n n n n BE
Israel y y 0 n n n y n y BE+GOV+PnP
Italy y y y n n n y y y BE+GOV+PnP
Japan y y n y y y y y y ALL
Korea y y 0 n y n y n y ALL
Lithuania y y 0 0 n n y n n BE+GOV
Netherlands y n n 0 n n y n n BE+GOV
Norway y y n n n n y partial n BE+GOV
Poland y y y y 0 y n partial n BE+HE+GOV
Portugal y y y y n n y y y ALL
Sweden y y y y 0 y y y n BE+HE+GOV
Türkiye y n n n n n n n n BE
Chinese Taipei y y n n n n y partial y BE+GOV+PnP
United States y n n n n n y n n BE+GOV
South Africa y y y y y y y y y ALL
Total count 25 18 11 8 4 6 19 10 15
Notes: y/n; not reported; 0=nil value. BE=business; GOV=government; HE=higher education; PnP=private non profit
Source: OECD, based on responses to OECD/NESTI data collection.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  17
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

The data collection period since the launch of the questionnaire gave countrie s ample time to
elaborate the GERD contribution and sources of funding indicators requested when underlying
data were available. The 2-month timespan also allowed for some first order ad hoc classification
work within countries. Several email exchanges took place over the collection period and beyond
as some countries requested extensions or indicated reporting difficulties, particularly for the
government sector. Very few among responding countries provided qualitative explanations about
the types of domestic institutions included in the responses, with a few preferring to provide
additional clarifications by email rather than within the questionnaire. A few edits were
implemented following the discussions at the NESTI meeting held in September 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

4. Analysis of results from the data collection
This section examines the main findings from the NESTI pilot data collection, firstly on a sector-
by-sector basis, concluding with an overview of the results across the entire economy for those
instances where responses were sufficiently comprehensive.
4.1. R&D specialist units within the Government sector
As indicated in the Frascati Manual (chapter 8), the Government sector consists of the following
groups of resident institutional units:
• all units of central (federal), regional (state) or local (municipal) government, including
social security funds, except those units that provide higher education services;
• all non -market non-profit institutions ( NPIs) that are controlled by government units,
which are not part of the Higher education sector.
Although Government expenditure on R&D (GOVERD) is too often identified with the R&D
expenditures of research institutes whose staff are generally free from higher education tuition
responsibilities, it effectively encompasses R&D performing government institutions across the
entire R&D spectrum, from those focusing on basic research with scientific infrastructures that
are too big for any given university to host, R&D facilities focusing on governmental priority
areas such as energy or defence, through to technology development institutions that are controlled
by government even if specialised in providing translational services, prototyping and testing
facilities o r other institutions assisting businesses. Also public hospitals can fall under the
government sector’s organisations performing R&D. Not all government institutions engaged in
R&D have this activity as their main or even secondary function. This proved to the most
challenging reporting challenge for national contact points.
4.1.1. Contribution to GOVERD
From the questionnaire’s outturn, data on Government R&D are available for 18 economies with
the median value representing slightly over half of the domestic gov ernment sector’s R&D
(Figure 2). This indicator exhibits very large variability, from almost 100% in the case of
Belgium11 to less than a quarter for Sweden, Japan, I srael and South Africa. Such variability
appears to reflect the extent to which government R&D performance is concentrated in specialised
R&D establishments or is integrated into institutions fulfilling multiple other roles, such as public
hospitals, R&D f unding agencies or even government departments. Among respondents, the
median share of specialist R&D units within total GOVERD is 55%. This high figure appears to
indicate that there is a high degree of specialisation within government, although it is difficult to
generalise this finding to the entire range of countries including those that have not responded as
those may exhibit a greater tendency to have units that combine R&D and non-R&D functions.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  19
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Figure 2. R&D specialist institutions contribution to government R&D, latest available year
As a share of Government expenditure on R&D (GOVERD)

Note: ** For th e Netherlands the Government sector includes the PNP sector. ** For th e United States, the data for
Government only includes Federally Funded Research and development Centres allocated to the government sector.
Source: OECD calculations based on ad hoc NESTI data collection and MSTI, August 2022.
4.1.2. Levels of government
The NESTI questionnaire enquired on the dist ribution of such contribution between central and
local (including regional) government. Most of the reported GOVERD under R&D specialist
organisations appears to take place under the purview of the central government, with the
exceptions of Japan, Belgium and Spain and where 77%, 76% and 75%, respectively, takes place
within R&D institutions under the control of regional authorities. The percentage is 30% for
Austria, the only other federal or quasi-federal country reporting this breakdown.12
4.1.3. Sources of funding
Funding for R&D specialist organisations in the government sector in all economies originates
principally from government itself (Figure 3). Contributions from the business sector to the R&D
of these organisations do not exceed 15% for any economy. In contrast, contributions from the
rest of the world can be as large as over 40% in the case of Belgium. For several European
economies, such contributions can be in the order of 20% and are presumed to originate in large
part from EU programmes. Private non-profit funding is only appreciable in the case of Israel at
slightly less than 10%.
96.4
86.6
85.4
81.9
78.7
77.5
69.4
68.8
55.6
54.7
53.9
52.0
51.5
47.9
41.4
36.3
22.2
15.4
14.5
0.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
%

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Figure 3. Sources of funds for government R&D in specialist R&D institutions, latest available year
As a share of GOVERD by specialist R&D (ISIC72) institutions, percentages

Note: See previous chart.
Source: OECD calculations based on ad hoc NESTI data collection, August 2022.
4.1.4. Reporting challenges
Identifying specialist R&D institutions within government was a key focus for the data collection
in view of the policy interest and the previous feedback from NESTI delegates. The exercise
confirmed that sever al countries have not yet implemented the recommendation to collect
information within the sector on the basis of economic activity. The problem plays at the level of
both registers and survey questionnaires.
• Many of the NSOs or bodies collecting GOVERD h ave poor access to generic statistical
registers and have to develop their own registers when in principle data sharing
arrangements and record linking should suffice. Besides, the available statistical registers
are often focused on business enterprises, so GOVERD compilers have to implement ad
hoc solutions often on the basis of limited information.
• The exercise also revealed a more substantive problem with data collection practice in
many countries. For many, NSOs request data from institutions of gover nment
(authorities) who respond on behalf of all R&D performing institutions under their
responsibility. Pooling returns under these authorities has the practical effect of making
the government authorities the effective statistical unit, in departure from the OECD
Frascati guidance to treat the separate institutional units that engage in R&D as the
statistical units. The authorities can still act as reporting units (i.e. the entity from which
the required statistics are collected) but NSOs need to provide these reporting units with
the means and guidance to transmit the information about the underlying statistical units,
including their main economic activity, for example by pointing to the need to report
separately for each of them.
In the case of governm ent institutions with both intramural R&D and significant provision for
funding for R&D carried out externally, many NSOs have not explicitly addressed the question
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
NLD ESP LTU ISR AUS AUT NOR FIN BEL KOR PRT JPN ZAF SWE CZE ITA TWN EST USA
%
Sources of funding: Business (%) Sources of funding: Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of world (including businesses and int org / EU programmes) (%)** Sources of funding: Private non profit (%)
Not allocated (%)

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  21
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

of deciding what their main activity is and classifying such institutions accordingly. Thus ,
organisations like the National Institutes of Health in the United States might be classified as
public administration service providers rather than R&D service providers (ISIC72). Similar
instances may arise in the case of government institutions providing other scientific and technical
services and R&D playing a relatively minor role, such as in the case of many geological or
meteorological institutes. Such classification calls may appear unimportant and even fastidious at
a domestic level, but postponi ng clearly presents a major roadblock for effective international
comparisons.
The generalised lack of commentary from countries about which flagship institutions fall under
GOVERD is an additional challenge, because such information can help reveal simi larities and
differences of criterion as to what represents government control and non-market production, the
two distinctive features of the government sector (alongside the higher education services
features). For instance, the information contained OECD R&D Sources and Methods database
clarifies that the Fraunhofer Society, in the case of Germany13, while principally serving business,
is effectively controlled by the ensemble of federal and state level governments through an
assessment of governance and funding arrangements. While this information is readily available
in the OECD R&D Sources and Methods, it is not easy for less expert data users to take these into
account when looking at the published data. Valuable time and resource are dedicated to provide
ad hoc clarifications on request when a single, co-ordinated register could do the job.
4.2. R&D specialist units within the Business enterprise sector
As stated in the Frascati Manual (chapter 7), the sector comprises:
• All resident corporations, includin g not only legally incorporated enterprises, regardless
of the residence of their shareholders. This group also includes all other types of quasi -
corporations, i.e. units capable of generating a profit or other financial gain for their
owners that are recognised by law as separate legal entities from their owners and set up
for purposes of engaging in market production at prices that are economically significant
[…]
• All resident NPIs that are market producers of goods or services or serve business.
This definition comprises a heterogeneous group of institutions performing R&D which highlights
the different contexts in which it is possible to find R&D specialist institutions.
Unsurprisingly, all respondents to the NESTI pilot questionnaire provided information on the
contribution to BERD by statistical units under ISIC72. The classification by main economic
activity is core to business R&D data collection and reporting. This information is already reported
to and published by OECD in its R&D Statistics and further elaborated within the OECD
ANBERD database. R&D specialist business enterprises account for the largest share of BERD
within Israel, with nearly one third of total BERD, followed by Lithuania and Spa in both with
over 20% (Figure 4).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Figure 4. R&D specialist institutions contribution to business R&D, latest available year
As a share of business enterprise R&D (BERD), percentages

Source: OECD calculations based on ad hoc NESTI data collection and MSTI, August 2022.
The data on the share of BERD and other Professional, scientific and technical activities from the
ANBERD database (Figure 5), mirrors the data collected in th is exercise for those economies
reporting on both. Israel, Lithuania and Spain are in the lead on this indicator.
Figure 5. Share of Business R&D accounted for by units with R&D (ISIC72) and with R&D and other
Professional, scientific and technical activities as main activity (ISIC72+), ANBERD database, 2019
Estimates from ANBERD database, as a share of domestic BERD

Note: ISIC72+ comprises all Professional, scientific and technical activities, including Scientific R&D (ISIC72).
Source: OECD ANBERD database.
31.43
27.60
21.77
18.71
18.24
16.22
14.26
12.46
12.26
11.63
10.83
8.66
8.60
7.89
7.36
6.90
6.38
5.19
4.63
4.09
3.49
2.57
2.24
0.34
0.01
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
%

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  23
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Breakdowns within ISIC72 BERD proved a bigger challenge and were not provided in all cases.
Eighteen economies were able to separate between private and public (i.e. government controlled)
enterprises, although only 11 reported any data for the latter.
4.2.1. R&D specialist public enterprises
Eleven countries were able to provide data for public enterprises . By and large, it appears that
several countries do not systematically track the public or private status of enterprises. Without
baseline data reported to OECD on public business R&D across sector it is hard to benchmark the
information collected on this issue . Developing and transition economies appear to have larger
levels of R&D accounted for by public enterprises, but this might appear to be connected with
state-controlled industries, such as energy, utilities, etc. in such economies. The economies with
the largest share of R&D by public enterprises among the business enterprise specialist sub-sector
are Brazil (96%), South Africa (89%) and Poland (55%).
The public enterprise configuration appears not to be the standard set -up for R&D specialist
organisations under government control since they may not always be designed or able to charge
economically meaningful prices , turning into governments institutions when that happens .
However, in some instances, extraordinary income so urces e.g. on sales of IP, can drive reverse
ad hoc classification decisions to identify a government unit specialising in R&D as a public
enterprise.
4.2.2. Affiliated private enterprises
While most of the general policy discussion on specialist R&D institutions envisages these as
independent R&D organisations, it is important to note that private business groups can organise
their economic activity in ways that result in them having separate R&D specialist units un der
their direct control, typically tasked with serving the ultimate revenue raising activities of the
entire group . F or instance, an ISIC72-classified enterprise may be the affiliate R&D “lab” of
another domestic or foreign-controlled business group operating predominantly in markets such
as pharmaceuticals, pharma, ICT or any other . The information collected indicated that the
majority of private enterprise R&D in the ISIC72 sector takes place within statistical units that are
subsidiaries of other business entities thus indicating there can be a significant decoupling between
R&D and other activities that the R&D is intended for.
• In Belgium, Israel, Italy and Sweden over 70% of ISIC72 private BERD is conducted
within affiliated enterprise units.
• Relatively higher rates of independent (i.e. non-affiliated) specialist ISIC72 private BERD
are found in Canada (64%), Greece (49%) and Poland (40%).
These results are not only influenced by globalisation and specialisation patterns, but are also
extremely sensit ive to the way in which statistical units are configured within countries and
information collected. Higher levels of aggregation, e.g. into domestic groups, are bound to be
associated with a smaller part of BERD being reported as carried out within ISIC72 units since
the R&D is in such cases more likely to be allocated to the predominant activity or activities of
the broader “served” business group.
4.2.3. Non-profit R&D institutions serving business
As indicated in the definition of the BE sector, it also comp rises non-profit institutions that are
market producers of goods or services or serve business . These types of institutions are rather
common in the domain of R&D specialist organisations undertaking applied research and
experimental development services for the benefit of business, especially in the same geographical
area. While they may be government regulated and government institutions may play a significant

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

part in their governance and funding, if the latter don’t have the ability to control key aspects of
their activities vis à vis other stakeholders they cannot be characterised as part of the government
or broader public sector. Many might operate under the oversight or form of membership-based
organisations, funded through a mix of subscriptions, subsidies and payments for individuated
services to member/customers.
The role of these organisations in some innovation systems can be rather significant. In Norway,
80% of R&D specialist business R&D takes place within non-profit institutions, close to 13% of
total BERD. In the case of Chinese Taipei it is 50% but out of a much smaller share of BERD in
specialist business R&D units. In the case of Spain, the 34% non -profit share in R&D specialist
BERD corresponds to 7% of total BERD, a rather significant component. One example provided
by Spain’s Statistical Institute of an organisation reported within BERD is the private-non-profit
research and technology foundation Tecnalia. Its orientation to serve businesses implies it should
not be classified as “ Private non-profit”, as an incomplete reading of the Frascati definition for
BE might otherwise suggest.
Thus, in some economies, a significant part of business R&D is actually conducted by institutions
that are not typically thought of as enterprises and have non-profit legal structures. This type of
insight is very important when interpreting R&D statistics and conveying to the public what the
figures actually represent. It implies that there should be a concerted quantification effort.
4.2.4. Sources of funding for business R&D in specialist organisations
The heterogeneity of specialist R&D organisations in the business enterprise sector is reflected in
the profile of sources of funding by economy (Figure 6).
Figure 6. Business enterprise R&D specialist institution contributions, ISIC 72, by source of funds, latest
available year
As a share of total, percentages

Source: OECD calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, August 2022.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
JPN KOR BRA TUR AUS USA SWE ITA LTU DEU CAN ESP EST BEL AUT PRT TWN POL GRC NOR CZE FIN ISR NLD ZAF
%
Sources of funding: Business (%) Sources of funding: Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of world (including businesses and int org / EU programmes) (%)** Sources of funding: Private non profit (%)
Not allocated (%)

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  25
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Business (domestic) funding is predominant, especially in the case of Japan and Korea where it is
over 90%. Government funding is dominant in the case of Chinese Taipei and Norway. Funding
from the rest of the world, which combines European Commission and international business
funding, is dominant in the cases of Finland, Israel, the Netherlands, South Africa and the Czech
Republic.
4.3. R&D specialist units within the Private non-profit sector
According to the FM’s (chapter 10) definition of the PNP sector for R&D measurement purposes,
it comprises:
• all non-profit institutions serving households (NPISH), as defined in the SNA2008, except
those classified as part of the Higher education sector;
• for completeness of presentation, households and private individual s engaged or not
engaged in market activities.
A total of 15 responses for the PNP sector R&D specialist units were collected. In this sector, it is
common for surveys to collect information on the main activity of the organisation as
recommended in the Fr ascati Manual. However, the challenge with this sector is the infrequent
nature of dedicated surveys, a consequence of the traditional lower weight of this sector ’s
contribution to total domestic R&D. The PNP sector is a residual sector in nature as it onl y
includes non-profit institutions (NPIs) that do not fall neatly under either government, business or
higher education sector unit’s control.
The data collected show that the PNP R&D specialist contribution as a share of total PNPERD is
over 50% for most countries. For Canada and Israel it constitutes 100% (Figure 7).
Figure 7. PNP R&D specialists contribution to total PNPERD, latest available year
As a share of PNPERD, percentages

Source: OECD calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, August 2022.
The sources of funding for the PNP specialist R&D subsector are varied. For several European
economies that main source of funding is Rest of world, which includes EU programmes
100.8
100.0
84.8
82.9
82.2
65.3
61.3
60.9
52.4
35.3
31.4
9.9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
%

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

(Figure 8). Only in the case of Spain the business enterprise sector appears as the principal funder.
For Canada, Japan, Italy , Finland and Korea the principal source is the government sector. In
Portugal the largest contributor is higher education sector (classified in not allocated).
Figure 8. PNP specialist institution contributions, ISIC 72, by source of funds, latest available year
As a share of total, percentages

Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, August 2022.
4.4. R&D specialist units within the Higher education sector
As earlier alluded to, this headline institutional sector is a rather idiosyncratic feature of the
Frascati Manual (chapter 9) for it introduces economic activity elements in its definition. This
sector is composed of:
• all universities, colleges of technology and other institutions providing formal tertiary
education programmes, whatever their source of finance or legal status;
• all research institutes, centres, experimental stations and clinics that have their R&D
activities under the direct control of, or administered by, tertiary education institutions.
Higher education was the least reported sector in this pilot exercise. Eight countries provided data
for it. Most responses coincide in pointing out that R&D institutes within the HE sector are not
separate statistical units in relation to the HEI they are part of and as a result these cannot be
identified.
Universities are major centres of research, and when countries have wished to expand
their R&D in specific fields, universities have frequently been considered appropriate
locations for new institutes and units. Many such units are principally government -
financed and may be mission-oriented research units; others are financed by Private non-
profit sector funds and by t he Business enterprise sector. Examples can be units
established to meet national priorities regarding environment, life sciences, medicine or
science and engineering; often they have a time-limited horizon. When they are set up to
be managed by universiti es or university departments, these can be considered as
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
ESP ISR CZE AUT CAN BEL AUS EST ITA JPN KOR FIN ZAF TWN PRT
%
Sources of funding: Business (%) Sources of funding: Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of world (including businesses and int org / EU programmes) (%)** Sources of funding: Private non profit (%)
Not allocated (%)

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  27
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

belonging to the Higher education sector. Whatever the choice, it is important to report
on the institutions that are included in the sector.
The second bullet point of the definition of the HE sector proved somewhat challenging to reach
consensus during the Frascati Manual revision and its interpretation, in an already expansively
defined sector, has to be contained to some degree. For instance, spin -offs from universities that
may be run by individu al academics or the HEI’s technology transfer offices should not be
considered as part of HE but components of the business sector since they pursue an entirely
different economic function. While this is the presumed practice, further confirmation from NSOs
is required.
For the countries that separately identified R&D institutes within HE, the contributions to HERD
are relatively small, with a median of just over 2%.
The data collection inquired about the public versus private nature of these organisation s within
HE but only two countries provided such a breakdown.
Eight countries reported on the sources of funding for HERD in R&D specialist institutions.
Government funding dominates with small contributions from domestic businesses and the rest of
the world.
4.5. The broad picture on R&D specialist organisations
For the economies with a reasonably complete picture within this exercise it is possible to attempt
to assess to what extent the highly diverse group of R&D specialist organisations play a central
role in R&D performance (Figure 9). With 29% of all GERD accounted for by these organisations
across all sectors, Israel emerges as the economy with the greatest degree of R&D specialisation,
with Sweden at the other extreme at 7%.
Figure 9. R&D specialist institutions contributions to domestic R&D (GERD), latest available year
As a share of total GERD, percentages

Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection and March 2022, MSTI, August
2022.
29.2
26.1
23.4
20.0
19.0
18.5
17.4
14.7
12.4
12.2
11.7
11.6
11.4
8.6
7.3
0.1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
%

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Israel’s position is explained by the contributions to BERD by business affiliates of other
enterprises as well as independent for -profit compa nies. Next in line, Lithuania, the Czech
Republic and Spain combine high shares of R&D specialist contributions to both BERD and
GOVERD, with the contributions to BERD passing in large measure through non-profit
institutions serving business.
The distribution of identified specialist R&D organisations’ GERD contributions across sectors is
depicted in Figure 10. Overall, R&D specialists’ contribution to GERD comes mostly from within
the business sector and not inside the government as often implied in references to “R&D
institutes”.
Figure 10. R&D specialist institutions expenditure distribution by sector, percentages, latest available
year

Note: ** For the Netherlands the Government sector includes the PNP sector. ** For the Poland, Government is only
central government.
Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, August 2022.
A tentative depiction of the economies that participated in the data collection with the largest non-
for-profit R&D institutes (in absolute terms) is available in Table 2.
96
85
72
62 61 61
50 50 46 45
37
32
25 24
9
3
0.9
34.7
4.7 2.9
0.9 48.2
9
54.4
1
14
28
3
30 35
46 50 54 51
63
65
18
11
31
97
3 4
1
3 3.7
0
3
9
57
5.8
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% Business enterprise Higher education Government Private non-profit

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  29
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Table 2. Contribution to GERD by R&D specialists in government, public enterprises and non-profits
serving business
Economy Value (USD PPP) Comment
United States 23 514 Only FFRDCs accounted for
Korea 6 152 Only government reported
Italy 4 103 Total public enterprises +government
Chinese Taipei 4 031 Non-profit org serving bus, + government
Spain 2 887 Non-profit org serving bus, public enterprises + government
Brazil 2 102 Total public enterprises
Belgium 1 891 Non-profit org serving bus, + government
Czech Republic 1 428 Total public enterprises +government
Norway 1 206 Non-profit org serving bus, + government
Australia 1 187 Only government reported
Note: HE NPIs not included. FFRDCs= Federally Funded Research and Development Centers.
Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, August 2022.
The contribution to total sources of funding is closely related to the nature of the R&D specialist
mix. Figure 11 shows that the government sector is largest contributor in over half the economies.
In four economies the largest contributor is the business enterprise sector, Sweden, Spain, Austria
and Lithuania. For two economies, it’s the rest of world, Israel (66%) and Finland (41%).
Figure 11. Total R&D specialist institution contributions, ISIC 72, by source of funds, latest available year
As a share of total, percentages

Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, August 2022.

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SWE ESP AUT LTU POL BEL ISR JPN NOR EST PRT FIN CZE NLD ZAF TWN
%
Sources of funding: Business (%) Sources of funding: Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of world (including businesses and int org / EU programmes) (%)** Sources of funding: Private non profit (%)
Not allocated (%)

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

5. Conclusions and next steps
5.1. Lessons from the data collection process about R&D systems
The data collection conducted in 2022 under the aegis of the OECD Working Party of National
Experts on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI) process has confirmed the widespread
interest in this issue among countries. However, there are still many economies, large and small,
whose R&D statistical representatives have chosen or not been able to participate or engage in
some of the more demanding data processing required to submit results.
The data collection process revealed some ambiguities and knowled ge gaps in terms of data
availability and application of core Frascati guidance. On several occasions the secretariat had to
point out metadata features, domestic reports, and possible practical solutions to address some of
the challenges identified by the national contacts. For an informal data collection such as this,
some heuristics can provide reasonably good approximations to the intended outcomes.
The diversity of types of R&D specialist organisations across and within sectors makes it difficult
to draw general lessons about the extent to which some economies are more prone than others to
decouple R&D from other functions into separate types of units. Unfortunately, the data collected
do not yet enable the derivation of data -based typologies of R&D sy stems along these lines for
reasons that anticipate what might be the focus of future NESTI work with more decisive support
from policy and stakeholders to National Statistical Organisations (NSOs) in charge.
• The number of economies for which information has been reported is still very limited,
with some major R&D performing countries missing from the exercise or some of its key
elements.
• There are idiosyncratic differences in the way in which countries implement the concept
of statistical unit and theref ore collect separate data from R&D specialist units within
broader organisational structures.
• The pilot data collection did not set out to capture additional information on the nature of
the R&D carried out by specialist organisations, anticipating that c ountries would be
reluctant to provide information by types of R&D (basic and applied research and
experimental development); fields of R&D; or on the composition of government R&D
funding (e.g. institutional or project-based).
Despite these limitations, the data collection has provided several insights on the R&D structure
of participating countries, highlighting those in which the R&D specialist sector plays a significant
role as well as its composition.
• This pilot exercise has shown in the case of the business enterprise sector R&D (BERD)
the important role played by R&D specialist enterprises that are affiliates of larger
business groups in countries such as Israel. This is by far the largest category of R&D
specialist institution - not the type that most commentary allude to when referring to “R&D
institutes”. Independent R&D specialists in the business sector are less common and their
status may be in part transitory before their sales of other goods and services comes to
dominate the income from R&D services, for instance in the case of R&D based start-ups.
• In a few countries such as Norway and Spain, the results show the importance of non-
profit R&D specialist organisations serving businesses and drawing on multiple sources
of funding. Their status tends to be subject to special regulations and governments can
also provide significant levels of funding. This type of business enterprise unit is typically

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  31
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

not thought about in most commentary about business R&D statistics but should be
explicitly considered.
• When it comes to the government sector, the results show the varying extent to which
governmental institutions performing R&D are specialised or embedded into
organisations with broader remits. The study provided some insights too on the connection
between political decentralisation and government R&D institutes. These results put on
the spot the variety of R&D, from basic research to experimental development through
applied research, that specialist R&D organisations undertake and the difficult of putting
them all in the same “box”.
5.2. Methodological lessons
The data collection has also provided several insights on the way that R&D are and can be
collected in countries. This paper has argued , with new evidence, that classification, data
collection and reporting practices that are sensitive to the degree of specialisation in R&D
provision, can help national statistical organisations provide statistical outputs that are easier to
interpret and analyse by domestic and international users than it is the case at present.
The strengthening of statistical registers of R&D performing units across all institutional sectors
should continue to be a priority for NSOs in charge of R&D statistics data collection and reporting.
Registers should be equipped with relevant classification information and surveys should help
update such information. In the absence of “off the shelf” registers with the necessary information,
those in charge of producing R&D statistics should be empowered to make their own classification
decisions and should be encouraged to subjecting those calls to a larger degree of external scrutiny,
both domestic and international.
The data collection has also raised issues about the shaping of statistical units and reporting
arrangements that lead to the following conclusions:
• In the government sector, government R&D surveys should effectively adopt the
performer’s statistical unit perspective rather than collect all information combined from
sponsoring agencies or ministries without attention to the diverse range of R&D
performing organisations under their policy oversight.
• In the business sector, it is of paramount information for the interpretation of BERD
statistics to separately itemise the contribution of non -profit organisations under contr ol
of business enterprises from other business enterprises. Questionnaire design should be
adapted to take into account the broader nature of the business enterprise concept.
R&D statistics production should be more sensitive to issues caused by the emerg ence of mixed
institutions under control by institutions across different sectors or jointly by central and
subnational governments.
Furthermore, it is pertinent for the international community and NSOs in charge to discuss
potential limits to certain con fidentiality restrictions when it comes to classification. Statistical
classification in the domain of R&D statistics should apply best practices on transparency from
other countries and other statistical domains. Classification disclosure is unlikely to represent a
confidentiality breach, especially for statistical units outside the for-profit business enterprise
sector. The following Frascati Manual recommendation should be more actively implemented:
It is proposed that, in the interest of international comparability and quality assurance,
countries disclose their classification decisions to the extent that provisions on statistical
confidentiality allow them to do so. This is expected to strongly facilitate a better
understanding of data differences and to promote convergence towards increased
comparability (FM 3.49)

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Finally, the data collection has revealed a number of information gaps in the OECD R&D sources
and methods database that countries could help update as a part of the regular annual reporting
cycle.
5.3. Next steps
Several options are open but their pursuit depends on the actual interest of countries, at both policy
and statistical level. The scope of the initial project proposal envisaged the conduct of
collaborative work towards building transparent registers for R&D specialist organisati ons, as
well as more systematic reporting within the core OECD R&D data collection. Stakeholders have
also indicated an interest in exploring more detailed R&D funding questions and connections with
topics of knowledge transfer and impact.
Subject to agre ement by NESTI, t he OECD will invite members and partners engaged in the
reporting of R&D statistics with a view to obtaining a more comprehensive set of responses on a
second survey round , i.e. striving for a) a greater coverage of OECD members and partne r
economies, b) greater coverage of R&D specialist institutions in all sectors for those, and c)
potentially more information on the profile of R&D expenditures in those organisations by type,
namely on basic, applied research and experimental development.
In the meantime, NSOs are invited, in consultation with their own domestic stakeholders, to take
note of the findings and recommendations in this paper and work towards implementing its main
recommendations so that they can report on the core indicators on GERD by Main economic
activity, included in the regular OECD R&D data call that feeds into the OECD R&D Statistics
database. Once a sufficiently large critical mass of responses has been achieved, the OECD will
proceed to disseminate the relevant data table.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  33
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Annex A. Questionnaire
Introduction and guidance
What is this collection about?
This data collection is being carried out in line with the agreement at the NESTI December 2021
meeting. It is about making sense of the R&D expenditure in all types of organis ations whose
main economic activity is R&D performance. According to the accepted classifications, this is
effectively the ISIC72 "industry".
R&D specialist organisations are the object of major policy and stakeholder interest, comparable
to some extent with interest in universities as key R&D actors. Their contribution to GERD cannot
be currently ascertained since they fall under different FM sectors depending on several factors,
including government policies.
The broader objective is to help countries d evelop their data infrastructures to give a coherent
description by economic activity of its total GERD, e.g. eventually considering also health
services providers etc.
Initial challenge - lack of main activity data
Lack of industry (main activity) class ification. Some countries may not classify institutions
outside their FM business enterprise sector to a suitable industry classification.
This data request should therefore be an encouragement to apply such classification more broadly
across all FM insti tutional sectors, since all institutional units undertake productive economic
activities of some sort, including those in government.
 It is preferable to adopt classifications already made by authoritative national sources, such as
NSOs, when those class ification decisions can be accessed by R&D stats compilers, e.g. via
statistical registers.
 Time is allowed to enable countries to identify the appropriate classification of non-classified
units, in line with FM2015 recommendations, either by classifying ex novo or linking to existing
sources.
Conceptual and sectoral specificities
Public sector . The cross-cutting definition relates to control by government. Control can be
exerted in multiple ways.
Diversity of business sector. The common defining factor of this sector is that it operates in the
market, serving businesses or charging meaningful prices for its activities.
The data collection wishes to draw attention to the fact that there are both private enterprises and
public enterprises.
Among private enterprises, there are different types of units according to the FM:
• (Affiliate) Enterprises that specialise on R&D and depend on a parent, domestic or abroad,
and for whom much of their R&D is carried out.
• Independent enterprises that specialise on R&D and provide services or license/sell their
IP to others.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

• Not for profit R&D organisations whose main purpose is to serve industry/business - under
multiple funding arrangements - these are also classified in FM as enterprises (and in the
SNA as corporations when legally incorporated)
Government sector . The government sector is defined by control by government, with the
exclusion of public enterprises, as well as (following FM) public universities which are a self-
standing FM institutional sector.
Differentiation of GOV units by territorial levels of government may be possible. There may be
public R&D institutes that are 50% and 50% regionally and central government controlled.
Higher education sector. Universities etc contain in cases R&D specialised institutes, etc. Part
of the aim of this collection is to identify whether countries data collection practices identify such
institutions as standalone stat units of the HE sector …or their activity is em bedded in the data
furnished by the parent HEI. In the latter case there would be no ISIC72 units in the HE sector.
The private / public distinction applies to these institutions when they are separately recorded.
Institutions resulting from cross-sectoral partnerships
Some R&D organisations recorded as individual institutional units can be the result of
partnerships between organisations in different sectors (e.g. business -government or HE -
government or... etc...). Their classification will depend on whe ther any sector can exert control
over it.
Please provide clarifications if you cannot distinguish between central or local/regional
government data. Also note that non -profit organisations controlled by the government sector
should be included in the government sector. Lastly, we would be interested in knowing the size
cut-off(s) for the reported data.
Why data on sources of funding?
Table 2 seeks to identify how R&D in R&D specialist organisations is funded. This information
is only requested for the top level 1 (FM institutional sectors) of R&D specialists.
 Countries can provide more details, e.g. funding of non-profit institutions serving business may
differ from funding of R&D affiliates.
In some cases, countries may also wish to provide further d etails on project versus institutional
types of government funding.
Examples and clarifications on the most important R&D organisations
It is very important to provide concrete examples about how major R&D specialist organisations
are classified.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  35
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Contributions to GERD and sectoral expenditure
Table A A.1. Types of R&D institutions and R&D performance in the economic territory
Institutional
sector
(FM 2015)
ISIC
Rev4
Year Subcategory –
Level 1 FM sector
– Level 2
Private/public
sector
Subcategory Number of
institutional
units in
economy
GERD
contribution
Explanatory notes – overwrite these
notes to provide examples of institution
in your country fitting the description, as
appropriate - please also explain if
category is left empty and reason for it
(e.g. not applicable within country or not
known)
Level 3 - sector
specific profiles
(Million
National
Currency)
Total 72 2019 Total Total xx xx
Business
enterprise
72 2019 Total BE Total BE xx xx Please check / explain if this total does
not match your reported BERD for
ISIC72
Business
enterprise
72 2019 Private Total – private
enterprises
xx xx
Business
enterprise
72 2019 Private Subsidiary of
another business
entity*
xx xx e.g. R&D enterprises that are affiliated
to other firms, domestic or abroad
Business
enterprise
72 2019 Private Independent for-
profit business*
xx xx Independent R&D firms, for profit status
Business
enterprise
72 2019 Private Non-profit
organisations
serving
business#
xx xx Private R&D institutes and centres set
up to serve business
Business
enterprise
72 2019 Public Total – public
enterprises
xx xx Government controlled enterprises
primarily dedicated to R&D
Higher
education
72 2019 Total HE Total HE xx xx R&D institutes ascribed to and
controlled by HEIs - explain if category
missing, e.g. HE R&D institutes note
separated from
Higher
education
72 2019 Private xx xx As above, private HEIs (non profit and
for profit)
Higher
education
72 2019 Public xx xx As above, HEIs part of the government
sector
Government 72 2019 Total GOV Total GOV xx xx R&D institutes ascribed to and
controlled by government sector, other
than to public HEIs
Government 72 2019 Public Central
government
xx xx R&D inst part of central government
sector
Government 72 2019 Public Reg/local
government
xx xx R&D inst part of regional/local
government sector
Government 72 2019 Public Not attributable
to a single level
of government
xx xx R&D institution under joint control of
different levels of government
Private non
profit
72 2019 Total PNP Total PNP xx xx
Rest of the
world
(international
orgs only)
72 2019 International Public International
Public
xx Not within
scope of
GERD
International orgs in territory, do not
count as GERD
(number of units only)
Note: * These two categories may not be straightforward to differentiate without information on company ownership.
 # Category within BE sector that is most closely aligned to RIHR Research Institution definition. Priority for
identification within private BE. See Contextual defs tab for definition.
MNC=Million national currency
Additional years may be provided for completeness by generating additional identical sheets and replacing the year
value.
Source: OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Sources of funding for R&D specialists institutions
Table A A.2. Sources of funding for the R&D performance of ISIC 72 units
 Total Sources of funding for
total

Institutional
sector
(FM2015)
ISIC Latest
available
year
GERD
contribution*
Sources
of
funding:
Business
(MNC)
Sources of
funding:
Government
(MNC)
Sources of funding:
Rest of world
(including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes)
(MNC)**
Sources
of
funding:
Private
non
profit
(MNC)
 Explanatory notes (Sum
of sources of funding
should add up to
relevant intramural R&D
in previous page)
(Million
National
Currency -
MNC) – from
previous
table
Not
allocated
Total 72 2019 xx xx xx xx xx xx
Business
enterprise
72 2019 xx xx xx xx xx xx
Higher
education
72 2019 xx xx xx xx xx xx
Government 72 2019 xx xx xx xx xx xx
Private non
profit
72 2019 xx xx xx xx xx xx
Rest of the
world
(international
orgs)
72 2019 Not within
scope of
GERD
Not
within
scope of
GERD
Not within
scope of
GERD
Not within scope of
GERD
Not
within
scope
of
GERD
Not
within
scope of
GERD
International orgs in
territory, do not count
as GERD, just report
number of units
Explanatory
notes

Note: * Total GERD contribution should add up to institutional sector totals in previous page. ** You may able to
separate between business and other international sources of funding. MNC Million National Currency
Source: OECD
Core and contextual definitions from other projects
Statistical definition of specialist R&D statistical units - ISIC72
ISIC72 - Scientific research and development [ Include ]
This division includes the activities of three types of research and development: 1) basic research:
experimental or theoretical work undertaken primarily to acquire new knowledge of the
underlying foundations of phenomena and observable facts, without particular application or use
in view, 2) applied research: original investigation undertaken in order to acquire new knowledge,
directed primarily towards a specific practical aim or objective and 3) experimental development:
systematic work, drawing on existing knowledge gained from research and/or practical
experience, directed to producing new materials, product s and devices, to installing new
processes, systems and services, and to improving substantially those already produced or
installed. Research and experimental development activities in this division are subdivided into
two categories: natural sciences and engineering; social sciences and the humanities. This division
excludes market research (see class 7320).
ISIC711 - Architectural and engineering activities and related technical consultancy [Do
not include, unless in combination with ISIC72]

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  37
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

This class includes the provision of architectural services, engineering services, drafting services,
building inspection services and surveying and mapping services and the like.
This class includes:
—architectural consulting activities:
™ building design and drafting
™ town and city planning and landscape architecture
—engineering design (i.e. applying physical laws and principles of engineering in the design of
machines, materials, instruments, structures, processes and systems) and consulting activities for:
™ machinery, industrial processes and industrial plant
™ projects involving civil engineering, hydraulic engineering, traffic engineering
™ water management projects
™ projects elaboration and realization relative to electrical and electronic engineering, mining
engineering, chemical engineering, mechanical, industrial and systems engineering, safety
engineering
™ project management activities related to construction
—elaboration of projects using air conditioning, refrigeration, sanitary and p ollution control
engineering, acoustical engineering etc.
—geophysical, geologic and seismic surveying
—geodetic surveying activities:
™ land and boundary surveying activities
™ hydrologic surveying activities
™ subsurface surveying activities
™ cartographic and spatial information activities"
Frascati Manual
3.4. General classifications applicable to all institutional units - Classification of units by main
economic activity
Record-keeping practices for institutional classification (includes primary economic activity)
Definition of “research institutions” used in the 2009-2010 RIHR project:
The RIHR project defined “research institutions” as national entities, irrespective of their legal
status (organised under public or private law):
• whose primary goals are to conduct fundamental research, industrial research, experimental
development, training, consulting and service provision, and to disseminate their results by way
of training, publication and technology transfer; and
• whose profits (if any) are reinvested in these activities, the dissemination of their results, or
training; and

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

• which are either totally or to a substantial share publicly owned, and/or are funded primarily
from public sources via base funding (block grants) or through contract-based research, and/or are
regulated, so as to achieve primarily public missions.
This definition thus combined R&D and related economic activity goals on one hand, a lack of
profit motive, and a component of public funding, regulation and mission that was and is still not
easily operationalisable, in particular since all economic activities are regulated to some extent to
achieve public policy objectives.
Sources: DSTI/EAS/STP/NESTI(2010)13; DSTI/STP/RIHR(2009)5
EARTO definition
EARTO, the European trade association representing RTOs, defines them as organisations “which
as their predominant activity provide research and development, technology and innovation
services to enterprises, governments and other clients …”.
This definition distinguishe s RTOs from universities, the predominant activity of which is
education, and from enterprises, the predominant activity of which is the production and sale of
goods and services. The EARTO definition has been challenged because it “also includes fully
privately owned for-profit contract research organisations” 1 . The observation is correct, as is in
part the attendant comment that “though their activities may be similar, the governance structure
of such companies and hence the driving forces for change are very different”. A recent study of
RTOs used this definition: “RTOs are organisations with significant core government funding
(25% or greater) which supply services to firms individually or collectively in support of scientific
and technological innovat ion and which devote much of their capability (50% or more of their
labour) to remaining integrated with the science base” 2 .
Source: https://www.earto.eu/wp-
content/uploads/RTOs_and_the_Evolving_European_Research_Area_WhitePaperFinal.pdf
EU State aid definitions
research and knowledge dissemination organisation' or 'research organisation' means an
entity (such as universities or resea rch institutes, technology transfer agencies, innovation
intermediaries, research-oriented physical or virtual collaborative entities), irrespective of its legal
status (organised under public or private law) or way of financing, whose primary goal is to
independently conduct fundamental research, industrial research or experimental development or
to widely disseminate the results of such activities by way of teaching, publication or knowledge
transfer.
research infrastructure means facilities, resources and related services that are used by the
scientific community to conduct research in their respective fields and covers scientific equipment
or set of instruments, knowledge -based resources such as collections, archives or structured
scientific information, enabling information and communication technology-based infrastructures
such as grid, computing, software and communication, or any other entity of a unique nature
essential to conduct research. Such infrastructures may be 'single -sited' or 'd istributed' (an
organised network of resources)
‘technology infrastructure’ means facilities, equipment, capabilities and related support services
required to develop, test and upscale technology to advance through industrial research and
experimental development activities from validation in a laboratory to a validation representative
of the operational environment, and the users of which are mainly industrial players, including
SMEs, which seek support to develop and integrate innovative technologies to d evelop new
products, processes and services, whilst ensuring feasibility and regulatory compliance
Source: https://www.earto.eu/wp-content/uploads/draft_RDIF_communication_en.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  39
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Annex B. Additional detailed tables
Table 3. R&D expenditure by R&D specialised institutions, USD PPPs, latest available year
 Total Total
Business
enterprise
Total – private
enterprises
Subsidiary of
another
business
Independ
ent for
profit bus
Non-profit
organisation
serving bus.
Total –
public
enterprises
Total
Higher
edu.
Private Public Total
Gov.
Central
gov.
Reg/
local
gov.
Not
attributable
single level
Total
PNP
AUS 2019 .. 1,054.1 .. .. .. .. conf .. .. .. 1,187.8 conf conf .. 739.3
AUT 2019 2,008.3 1,229.2 1,024.9 .. .. 175.9 204.3 94.4 conf conf 610.6 429.3 108.2 73.1 74.1
BEL 2019 3,637.3 1,810.0 1,810.0 1,443.7 146.6 219.7 0.0 33.7 0.0 33.7 1,670.8 400.6 1,270.2 0.0 122.8
BRA 2017 .. 2,187.0 .. .. 84.2 .. 2,102.8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
CAN 2019 .. 1,736.4 1,736.4 487.6 1,105.2 143.6 0.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 116.4
CZE 2020 2,069.6 770.3 638.6 .. .. .. 131.7 .. .. 1,296.7 1,296.7 .. .. 2.6
DEU 2019 .. 4,126.8 .. .. .. 418.1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
ESP 2019 4,922.1 3,004.8 2,876.0 1,470.6 380.1 1,025.4 128.8 143.7 81.6 62.1 1,733.2 428.7 1,304.5 .. 40.4
EST 2019 100.4 32.2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0
FIN 2020 961.0 433.9 418.4 291.0 127.2 .. 15.5 0.0 .. .. 492.2 492.2 0.0 0.0 35.3
GRC 2019 .. 99.4 87.3 44.9 42.4 .. conf .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
ISR 2019 5,438.4 5,245.7 5,245.7 3,977.5 1,268.2 0.0 0.0 .. .. 37.1 .. .. 37.1 155.6
ITA 2019 .. 1,689.6 1,581.3 1,445.4 135.9 .. 108.2 .. .. .. 3,994.8 3,729.9 266.3 0.0 449.2
JPN** 2021 20,215.3 4,782.6 4,782.6 .. .. .. .. 1,733.3 206.0 1,527.3 2,216.9 504.4 1,712.6 .. 11,482.5
KOR 2020 .. 2,295.4 2,295.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6,152.6 6,152.6 0.0 0.0 732.6
LTU 2019 279.3 127.8 126.9 .. .. 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 151.5 151.5 .. .. 0.0
NLD** 2019 2,537.4 1,827.5 .. .. .. .. 0.0 0.0 0.0 710.0 .. .. .. ..
NOR 2019 1,336.4 661.9 129.9 .. .. 532.0 .. .. .. .. 674.5 674.5 .. .. ..
POL 2019 3,214.8 1,992.6 904.9 545.7 359.2 .. 1,087.8 1,117.0 0.0 1,117.0 103.1 conf .. conf
PRT 2020 837.0 207.0 193.6 88.0 55.7 49.8 13.4 403.4 0.0 0.0 153.9 120.0 4.0 30.0 72.7
SWE 2019 1,383.4 1,180.3 1,171.5 1,055.7 103.4 12.4 8.8 13.0 0.0 13.0 190.0 165.0 0.0 28.8 ..
TUR 2019 .. 342.7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
TWN 2020 4,099.4 135.5 66.0 .. .. 69.5 .. .. .. .. 3,961.6 3,961.6 .. .. 2.3
USA** 2019 .. 23,551.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23,514.2 .. .. .. ..
ZAF 2017 3.9 0.34 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.31 2.12 0.01 2.11 1.21 0.99 0.21 0.00 0.23
Note: ** For the Netherlands the Government sector includes the PNP sector. ** For the United States, the data for Government is underestimated.** For Japan, PNP data is provisional.
Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, Table 1, August 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Table 4.Number of R&D specialised institutions, units, latest available year
Units Total Total
Business
enterprise
Total –
private
enterprises
Subsidiary
of another
business
entity
Independ
ent for
profit
business
Non-profit
organisation
serving
business
Total –
public
enterprises
Total
Higher
edu.
Private Public Total Gov. Central
gov.
Reg/
local
gov.
Not
attributabl
e to a
single
level of
gov.
Total
Private
non-
profit
AUT 2019 561 366 340 .. .. 15 26 6 2 4 146 61 12 73 43
BEL 2019 558 498 497 321 136 40 1 10 0 10 41 23 18 0 9
BRA 2017 .. 23 .. .. 16 .. 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
CAN 2019 .. 1,074 1,074 53 986 35 0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
CZE 2020 261 159 153 .. .. .. 6 - - - 98 98 .. .. 4
DEU 2019 .. 1,044 .. .. .. 126 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
ESP 2019 1,478 1,281 1,256 329 758 169 26 30 21 9 129 19 110 .. 38
EST 2019 110 70 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 0 0 0 34
FIN 2020 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 0 .. .. 10 10 0 0 21
GRC 2019 .. 153 151 5 146 .. conf .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
ISR 2019 .. 831 831 275 556 0 0 .. .. .. 17 .. .. 17 105
ITA 2019 .. 812 775 307 468 - 37 .. .. .. 61 25 36 0 175
JPN** 2021 1,665 817 817 .. .. .. .. 281 184 97 344 20 324 .. 223
KOR 2020 .. 954 954 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 50 50 0 0 16
LTU 2019 227 209 182 - - 27 0 0 0 0 18 18 - - 0
NOR 2019 133 89 75 0 0 14 - - - - 44 44 - .. -
POL 2019 713 606 519 60 459 - 87 79 0 79 25 . . - 3
PRT 2020 321 230 223 34 181 8 7 42 0 0 9 6 2 1 40
SWE 2019 245 208 190 150 37 3 18 1 0 1 36 12 0 24 ..
TUR 2019 .. 578 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
TWN 2020 147 40 27 .. .. 13 .. .. .. .. 97 97 .. .. 10
USA** 2019 .. 9,900 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42 .. .. .. ..
ZAF 2017 246 55 39 .. .. .. 16 30 6 24 105 .. .. .. 56
Note: ** For the United States, the data for Government is underestimated. .** For Japan, PNP data is provisional.
Source: Based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, Table 1, August 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  41
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Table 5. Sources of funding of R&D in R&D specialised institutions

GERD
contribution
(USD PPPs)
Sources of funding: Business
(%)
Sources of funding:
Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of
world (including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes) (%)**
Sources of funding:
Private non-profit (%) Not allocated (%)
AUS 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 1,054.1 79.2 9.4 .. 0.0 ..
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 1,187.8 12.1 81.4 .. 1.0 ..
 Private non profit 739.3 9.8 45.3 3.8 39.8 1.3
AUT 2019 Total 2,008.3 39.4 33.6 25.7 0.9 0.4
 Business enterprise 1,229.2 57.4 12.1 30.3 0.1 0.1
 Higher education 94.4 2.6 72.8 19.9 0.0 4.7
 Government 610.6 10.6 74.3 14.2 0.6 0.3
 Private non profit 74.1 24.2 5.8 52.2 17.5 0.2
BEL 2019 Total 3,637.3 32.5 27.2 38.8 1.0 0.5
 Business enterprise 1,810.0 58.0 9.0 32.9 0.0 0.0
 Higher education 33.7 4.3 31.1 24.2 1.9 38.5
 Government 1,670.8 6.4 48.3 44.7 0.3 0.3
 Private non profit 122.8 19.4 6.0 49.3 25.0 0.3
BRA 2017 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 2,187.0 87.8 12.1 0.1 .. ..
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
CAN 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 1,736.4 62.9 11.8 23.6 1.8 0.0
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Private non profit 116.4 21.8 51.3 24.1 2.8 0.0

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

GERD
contribution
(USD PPPs)
Sources of funding: Business
(%)
Sources of funding:
Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of
world (including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes) (%)**
Sources of funding:
Private non-profit (%) Not allocated (%)
CZE 2020 Total 2,069.6 16.5 55.4 27.6 0.1 0.4
 Business enterprise 770.3 39.9 18.8 41.1 0.1 0.1
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 1,296.7 2.6 77.2 19.5 0.1 0.6
 Private non profit 2.6 27.1 9.5 62.8 0.6 0.0
DEU 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 4,126.8 64.7 19.9 15.0 0.4 0.0
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
ESP 2019 Total 4,922.1 43.7 37.6 16.8 1.5 0.3
 Business enterprise 3,004.8 62.2 18.8 18.3 0.7 0.1
 Higher education 143.7 21.7 50.2 17.6 3.7 6.8
 Government 1,733.2 13.9 69.6 14.3 2.0 0.2
 Private non profit 40.4 32.3 22.0 11.0 34.4 0.2
EST 2019 Total 100.4 20.0 66.6 12.8 0.4 0.1
 Business enterprise 32.2 58.4 26.6 14.2 0.7 0.1
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 65.2 1.6 86.6 11.8 0.0 0.1
 Private non profit 3.0 7.7 61.3 20.8 7.5 2.7
FIN 2020 Total 961.0 18.0 39.4 40.5 2.0 ..
 Business enterprise 433.9 30.8 3.0 66.0 0.2 ..
 Higher education 0.0 .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 492.2 7.7 69.9 20.5 1.9 ..
 Private non profit 35.3 5.4 62.1 4.7 27.2 ..

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  43
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

GERD
contribution
(USD PPPs)
Sources of funding: Business
(%)
Sources of funding:
Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of
world (including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes) (%)**
Sources of funding:
Private non-profit (%) Not allocated (%)
GRC 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 99.4 47.2 32.8 18.9 1.1 0.0
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
ISR 2019 Total 5,438.4 30.5 3.1 65.7 0.7 0.0
 Business enterprise 5,245.7 30.6 2.0 67.4 0.0 0.0
 Higher education 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
 Government 37.1 13.4 76.7 2.4 7.5 0.0
 Private non profit 155.6 29.3 24.6 24.6 21.5 0.0
ITA 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 1,689.6 69.5 7.1 23.2 0.1 0.2
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 3,994.8 2.6 89.3 6.8 0.9 0.4
 Private non profit 449.2 6.8 35.9 26.3 30.5 0.4

JPN 2021 Total 20,215.3 27.1 59.9 0.8 6.5 5.7
Business enterprise 4,782.6 95.3 2.5 2.2 0.0 0.0
Higher education 1,733.3 5.4 29.8 0.4 1.5 62.8
Government 2,216.9 4.0 95.4 0.0 0.5 0.1
Private non profit** 11,482.5 6.5 81.5 0.4 11.1 0.5
KOR 2020 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 2,295.4 89.6 10.0 0.2 0.1 0.1
 Higher education 0.1 .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 6,152.6 5.8 92.8 0.6 0.8 0.1
 Private non profit 732.6 5.5 91.4 0.0 3.0 0.0

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

GERD
contribution
(USD PPPs)
Sources of funding: Business
(%)
Sources of funding:
Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of
world (including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes) (%)**
Sources of funding:
Private non-profit (%) Not allocated (%)
LTU 2019 Total 279.3 39.1 32.5 28.1 0.1 0.1
 Business enterprise 127.8 69.2 1.0 29.4 0.1 0.3
 Higher education 0.0 .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 151.5 13.7 59.1 27.0 0.1 0.1
 Private non profit 0.0 .. .. .. .. ..
NLD 2019 Total 2,537.4 16.1 42.8 39.0 1.2 0.9
 Business enterprise 1,827.5 16.9 33.3 47.7 1.5 0.5
 Higher education 0.0 .. .. .. .. ..
 Government** 710.0 14.0 67.1 16.5 0.4 2.0
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
NOR 2019 Total 1,336.4 27.0 62.9 9.9 0.2 0.0
 Business enterprise 661.9 46.1 42.1 11.6 0.1 0.0
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 674.5 8.3 83.4 8.2 0.2 0.0
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
POL 2019 Total 3,214.8 32.8 52.7 10.4 0.7 3.4
 Business enterprise 1,992.6 50.6 36.6 12.4 0.2 0.1
 Higher education 1,117.0 3.6 77.9 7.5 1.5 9.5
 Government .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
PRT 2020 Total 837.0 18.3 57.0 17.5 0.7 6.6
 Business enterprise 207.0 57.4 23.4 18.7 0.1 0.4
 Higher education 403.4 6.3 73.4 15.4 0.8 4.1
 Government 153.9 4.6 73.0 17.4 0.2 4.8
 Private non profit 72.7 2.2 27.8 25.4 3.0 41.6

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  45
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

GERD
contribution
(USD PPPs)
Sources of funding: Business
(%)
Sources of funding:
Government (%)
Sources of funding: Rest of
world (including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes) (%)**
Sources of funding:
Private non-profit (%) Not allocated (%)
SWE 2019 Total 1,383.4 64.6 15.2 17.6 0.5 2.2
 Business enterprise 1,180.3 75.2 4.3 19.8 0.5 0.1
 Higher education 13.0 0.9 80.3 12.0 2.6 3.4
 Government 190.0 2.7 78.2 4.2 0.0 14.8
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
TUR 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 342.7 86.5 10.8 2.6 0.0 0.1
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
TWN 2020 Total 4,099.4 3.3 96.2 0.1 0.3 0.0
 Business enterprise 135.5 52.0 44.2 2.6 1.1 0.1
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government 3,961.6 1.6 98.0 0.1 0.2 0.0
 Private non profit 2.3 3.0 76.3 0.0 20.7 0.0
USA 2019 Total .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Business enterprise 23,551.0 77.5 16.6 4.7 .. 1.2
 Higher education .. .. .. .. .. ..
 Government** 23,514.2 0.7 98.6 .. 0.2 0.5
 Private non profit .. .. .. .. .. ..
ZAF 2019 Total 3.9 3.5 37.8 17.9 2.1 38.6
 Business enterprise 0.3 4.5 28.1 50.7 15.0 1.7
 Higher education 2.1 3.7 24.2 14.0 0.8 57.4
 Government 1.2 2.9 68.9 7.1 0.9 20.2
 Private non profit 0.2 4.2 14.1 62.3 1.5 18.0
Note: ** For the Netherlands the Government sector includes the PNP sector. ** For the United States, the data for Government is underestimated. .** For Japan, PNP data is provisional.
Source: Calculations based on OECD R&D specialist institutions ad hoc data collection, Table 2, August 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Annex C. Economy notes
Australia. No data available for Higher Education. These institutions are classified under ISIC
85 in Australia.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics uses the ABS Economic Units Model. An example of the
hierarchy of this model can be seen in the diagram below.

Definitions
The Legal Entity (LE) statistical unit is defined as a unit covering all the operations in Australia
of an entity which possesses some or all of the rights and obligations of individual persons or
corporations, or which behaves as such in respect of those matters of concern for economic
statistics. Examples of legal entities include companies, part nerships, trusts, sole (business)
proprietorships, government departments and statutory authorities. Legal entities are
institutional units.
The Enterprise Group (EG) is an institutional unit covering all the operations within Australia's
economic territory of legal entities under common control. Control is defined in Corporations
legislation. Majority ownership is not required for control to be exercised.
The Type of Activity Unit (TAU) is a producing unit comprising one or more legal entities,
sub-entities or branches of a legal entity that can report productive and employment activities
via a minimum set of data items. Only a small number of data items are required to be available
on a quarterly basis.
The activity of the unit should be as homogeneous as possible. If accounts sufficient to
approximate Industry Value Added (IVA) are available at the ANZSIC Subdivision level, a
TAU will be formed.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  47
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

All of the surveys used to compile the ISIC 72 data sample at the Type of Activity Unit level.
Austria. "Not allocated" refers to funding from HES only. HES data cannot be split into
"public" and "private" due to confidentiality reasons.
In Austrian R&D statistics, the „Institutes sub -sector“ („kooperativer Bereich“) is a separate
(small) sub-sector within the Business enterprise sector (38 R&D performing units out of 3,872
R&D enterprises altogether in the BES 2019). It reflects in principal very closely the group
which is at the focal interest of this exercise.
This sub-sector consists of 2 types of institutes:
• COMET – Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies: Wikipedia describes these
centres as follows: „The centers receive about 50% of their budget from public funding, and
the other 50% have to be acquired from companies. 5% are expected as in-kind contributions
from the scientific partners. The COMET program stimulates academic scientists and
industrial researchers and developers to work together on strategic and translational research
projects, closer to industry than university groups would typically wo rk on, however
concentrating on prototype research and not on products ready for the market.“
• Members of the Austrian Cooperative Research (ACR): Those are private research
institutes offering applied R&D for companies, especially for SMEs.
In our national publications R&D figures of this „Institutes sub -sector“ are separately
presented as part of the BES and units included are considered as units „of the same kind“,
operating either under the COMET or the ACR umbrella. For the data presented here, however,
it is important to note that most of the institutions in the „Institutes sub -sector“ are classified
into NACE 72, but not all (31 out of 38 are ISIC 72, 7 belong to other ISIC classes) -
classification of the units for R&D statistics is taken from SBS or, if not available, from the
business register. Some of them are also classified as public enterprise, and not in the private
sector (15 out of 38). For this exercise we have restricted the analysis to those units that are
classified into ISIC 72 and done t he classification between private/public according to the
SNA information in the business register. Therefore the „Institutes sector“, as published
nationally, is not visible in the tables.
Belgium. Data initially reported for Belgium was revised after the September 2022 NESTI
meeting. In the data, presented in this updated paper , only organisations where R&D is the
main activity of the organisation as a whole were selected.
Most institutes affiliated to universities and university colleges have been excluded, because
of the primary education function of the reporting organisation. However, data for the Walloon
region’s research centres linked to HES institutions have been included because the institutes
are separate administrative entities. This is not the case in Flanders, where universities include
any research centres in their reporting.
The different statistical unit approaches in the two different parts of the country constitute an
administrative issue . Having separate research centres makes it possi ble for the Walloon
region to fund research in the HES, which strictly speaking falls under the authority of the
French Community and can only be funded by it.
From communication with contacts from Belgium, the close to 100% share of specialist
organisations in GOVERD appears to be due to the fact that the data collection process targets
directly R&D departments within government institutions, e.g. the R&D department of the
central bank. Many of these units do not appear to have the requirements of standalone
institutional units (e.g. lack legal identity and independent accounts), so the reported 100%
likely represents an overestimate of the target measurement concept for the data collection.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included in Not
allocated.
Brazil. The values considered as 'Business funding' comprise Firm's own funding + other
Brazilian firms' funding (State firms+private firms). In both cases, firms' own funding
represents more than 99% of the value.
Czech Republic. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were
included in Not allocated.
For the breakdown of private enterprises w e use different categories, because we don´t have
data for affil iated domestic firms, but only for foreign affiliates. In respect of domestic
(national) firms, we don´t know if they are affiliated to other domestic firms or independent.
Spain. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included
in Not allocated.
Non-profit organisations serving business includes Private non-profit organisations identified
by Tax Identification Card, whose definition is close to Research Institution.
Estonia. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included
in Not allocated.
Finland. HES units are included in the data of universities and other HES organisations and
thereby classified into industry education (NACE 85420).
Enterprises in the business register with NACE code 72, total R&D.
GOV units with NACE code 72 in the business register.
PNP units with NACE 72 in the business register.
Greece. Regarding the figures for the HES, GOV, PNP, we would like to mention that the
breakdown of the total R&D expenditure in each sector of performance by ISIC is not available
for the reference year 2019. However, starting from 2020 we have included this breakdown in
the national questionnaires and we plan to include the ISIC breakdown in our national results
for 2020 and onwards.
Israel. The size cut-off for the reported data in the business sector is above 5 employs, and for
less than 5 employs if there is a specific indication for R&D activity from external sources.
Italy. Non-profit organisations serving business are not surveyed.
HE R&D institutes are not separately reported from Universities.
As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included in Not
allocated. This includes funds from public and private universities.
Japan. In the “Survey of Research and Development” in Japan (hereinafter, “RDS”), all of
the higher education institutions are classified into “O Education, Learning support”.
In the Japan Standard Industrial Classification, Rev.13, which can be regarded as
corresponding to “P Education” in the International Standard Industrial Classification, Rev. 4.
However, in this exercise, tables are provided under the premise that the Higher Education
sector of ISIC 72 units comprises of research institutes attached to universities.
In the RDS, no public institution and non -profit organisation is classified into any economic
activity. For this reason, in this exercise, tables are provided under the premise that the Private
Non-Profit sector of ISIC 72 units comprises of organisation s performing R&D as a main
activity in the non-profit institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  49
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Corresponding items
Sources of funding Sources of funds of “intramural R&D expenditures” in the RDS
Business (MNC) “Companies” and “Public corporations and enterprises, which are based on self-supporting
accounting systems” (as well as internal funds of “Companies” and “Public corporations and
enterprises, which are based on self-supporting accounting systems”)
Government (MNC) “Central Government”, “Local governments”, “National and public research institutions and
independent administrative institutions”, and “Others in the ‘Public institutions’” (as well as internal
funds of “Central Government”, “Local governments”, “National and public research institutions
and independent administrative institutions”, and “Others in the ‘Public institutions’”)
Rest of world
(including businesses
and int org / EU
programmes)
(MNC)**
“Companies ‘abroad’”, “Universities ‘abroad’” and “Others ‘abroad’”
Private non profit
(MNC)
“Non-profit institutions” (as well as internal funds of “Non-profit institutions”）
Not allocated “National and public universities and colleges” and “Private universities and colleges” (and internal
funds of “National and public universities and colleges” and “Private universities and colleges”)
The amounts of “internal funds” in the sources of funds are calculated by subtracting amounts
for intramural R&D performance in the R&D funds received from the total amounts of
intramural R&D expenditures.
Korea. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included
in Not allocated.
Lithuania. Since 2010 R&D institutes controlled by HEI's connected to universities lost the
status of a separate legal entity.
Netherlands. By definition higher education is included in ISIC 85, not 72.
Government includes the PNP sector.
Norway. In Norway around 90% of R&D expenditure in ISIC 72 is in non -profit research
organisations. In our domestic R&D statistics these units are all categorized in «the institute
sector».
When we report internationally our domestic institute sector is split; institutes that primarily
serve business are reported in Business enterprise (BE), whereas all other institutes, regardless
of their legal status, are put in Government (GOV). In other words we do not use the SNA for
distribution on institutional sectors. This has always been the case for Norway.
Forty-four percent of the R&D expenditure in the non -profit ISIC 72 entities took place in
units that w e classify in BE, whereas 56 percent applied in units classified in GOV. The
distribution of the non -profit units is however one of the most difficult issues we face. The
main challenges are mentioned below.
All the research institutes classified in BE rec eive basic public funding provided by the
Research Council of Norway. Most of them also have extensive other funding from public
sources. In most cases board members are appointed by government agencies. From this point
of view one might say that BE institutes are controlled by the government.
Poland. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included
in Not allocated.
Portugal. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included
in Not allocated.
Sweden. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were included
in Not allocated.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50  THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Chinese Taipei. As HES as a funding source is not present in the Table 2, HES sources were
included in Not allocated.
United States. Data for the Government sector is underestimated, as only Federally Funded
R&D Centers counted for GOVERD are included. See
https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/ffrdclist/.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
THE CONTRIBUTION OF R&D SPECIALIST INSTITUTIONS TO R&D PERFORMANCE  51
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY WORKING PAPERS

Endnotes

1 In this document, the terms organisation and institution are used indistinctively without presumption
of any features, such as whether they are public or private.
2 See Laura Cruz-Castro, Catalina Martínez, Cristina Peñasco, Luis Sanz-Menéndez, The classification
of public research organizations: Taxonomical explorations, Research Evaluation, Volume 29, Issue 4,
October 2020, Pages 377–391, https://doi.org/10.1093/reseval/rvaa013
3 OECD (2011) Publ ic Research Institutions: Mapping Sector Trends. Paris: OECD .
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264119505-en.
4 Arnold E., Barker K., Slipersæter S. (2010) Research Institutes in the ERA. Brussels: EC.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/docs/en/research-institutes-in-the-era.pdf.
5 See Larrue, P. and O. Strauka (2022), "The contribution of RTOs to socio -economic reco very,
resilience and transitions", OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 129, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ae93dc1d-en.
6 In addition to these, there are functional classifications for the R&D carried out in the institutional
units.
7 An additional element within the SNA that helps differentiate househoulds from non profit institutions
serving households (NPISH) is the extent to which the unit’s main economic functio n is production of
goods and services or consumption. In the Frascati Manual, households are pooled together with NPISH
as Private non profit for completeness and economy because of the very limited role played by
households in modern economies as performers of formal and systemic R&D activities.
8 Higher education is an economic activity that the FM has traditionally singled out and assigned HIC
status. HE institutions can fall under any of the SNA institutional sectors.
9 Conversely, there were also requests from parts of the mainstream statistic al community to remove
the Higher Education sector in order to fully align with the SNA institutional classification but this
proposal was dismissed on the grounds that it would be particularly disruptive for STI policy users of
R&D data to implement such an adjustment after decades of established practice. NSOs have established
mechanisms for compiling existing Frascati R&D data on the SNA institutional classification basis for
the purposes of official statistics on R&D capital formation and output in the National Accounts.
10 The OECD source and methods database, which is completed with information provided by national
R&D contacts to the NESTI secretariat, contains at present no entries with any information on the
classification by main economic activity for units the government sector.
11 From communication with contacts from Belgium, this appears to be due to the fact that the data
collection process targets directly R&D departments within government institutions, e.g. the R&D
department of the central bank. Many of these units do not appear to have the requirements of standalone
institutional units (e.g. lack legal identity and independent accounts), so the reported 100% likely
represents an overestimate of the target measurement concept for the data co llection.
12 In the case of the United States, the measured central (federal) share is 100% because only the R&D
of Federally funded research centres contributing to GERD have been reported.
13 Germany’s entry on government’s institutional coverage in the OECD R&D Sources and Methods
database states “ Research institutes of federal, Länder (federal states) and local governments e.g. the
national research centres, the Max Planck and the Fraunhofer societies, Blue List institutions, scientific
museums and libraries. Private non profit organisations working in science, research and development
as long as they receive more than EUR 160,000 from the government. ”
