
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
VERY LARGE
RESEARCH
INFRASTRUCTURES
POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
July 2023 No. 153

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers

This paper was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee for Scientific and
Technological Policy (CSTP) on 9 June 2023 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2023)5/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.

© OECD (2023)

The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  3
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Foreword
This report follows and complements recent work undertaken by the OECD Global Science Forum (GSF)
on the establishment, management and sustainability of research infrastructures (RIs). It addr esses the
new challenges faced by managers, operators, funders and decision-makers in developing and supporting
Very Large Research Infrastructures (VLRIs) and in establishing long-term strategies.
VLRIs are complex undertakings owing not only to their high technology requirements, scale, and long
lifespan but also to the increasing diversity of partners involved, the number of physical sites over which
they may be distr ibuted and, of course, the increasing costs for their construction and operations, which
necessitate elaborate business models to ensure their sustainability . Most VLRIs provide services to the
international research communit y and are correspondingly funded, managed and operated by multiple
stakeholders. In the context of limited research budgets, governments and funding agencies are confronted
with the challenge of supporting increasingly large and complex RI portfolios and need to make selective
decisions between supporting national projects and international VLRIs . Potential users of VLRIs are
increasingly diverse, and thei r numbers are rising, particularly as the data produced by VLRIs become
progressively more complex , varied, and widely distributed . The ope ration and use of these VL RIs
therefore require careful optimisation . Furthermore, recent crises , such as the COVID-19 pandemic and
associated global supply chain issues, have highlighted the need for enhanced risk assessment and
management policies when embarking on such large enterprises.
This policy report presents a series of lessons learned on establishing VLRIs, options for improving their
use and operation, as well as more strategic considerations that VLRI stakeholders should take into
account in their planning of future projects.
A summary of the decision -making processes and strategic instruments used by countries on VLRIs for
their investment policy is presented in a separate annex document: DSTI/STP/GSF(2023)5/ANN/FINAL.
This project was overseen by an international Expert Gr oup appointed by GSF (appendix 1). The report
was written by the Expert Group co-chairs (Heidi Bandulet and Willy Benz ), the project consultant (Paul
Dufour) and the GSF secretariat (Frédéric Sgard), with extensive input from Expert Group members.
It is hoped that this report will be informative and useful and comments from readers are welcomed. The
Global Science Forum staff can be reached at gsforum@oecd.org.

The OECD Global Science Forum (GSF)
The GSF is a Working Party of the OECD Committee for Scien tific and Technological Policy (CSTP). Its
main objective is to support countries to improve their science policies and share in the benefits of
international collaboration . GSF provides a venue for consultation s and mutual learning among senior
science policy officials of OECD member countries. It carries out analytical work on high -priority science
policy issues.
The GSF's principal stakeholders are the government science policy officials who bring issues to the GSF
for deliberation and analysis in an intergovernmental setting.
More information on the GSF mission and activities is provided at http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/global-
science-forum.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table of contents
Foreword 3
VLRI Acronyms 5
Executive Summary 6
Policy Recommendations 8
Introduction 11
1. Policy context and horizon scanning 16
2. Analysis of challenges 23
2.1. Governance 23
2.2. Financing and business models 26
2.3. Data management 39
2.4. Impact assessment and expectations 43
2.5. VLRIs ecosystems 47
3. Conclusions 51
Notes 52
References 54
Appendix 1. OECD GSF Expert Group on VLRIs 56

FIGURES
Figure 1. VLRIs included in the first (VLRI managers) survey 13
Figure 2. Funders and decision-makers consulted in the second survey 14
Figure 3. VLRI generic governance structure 25
Figure 4. Evolution of Korea’s number of constructed large RIs and funding allocation for their construction 28
Figure 5. Illustration of how VLRIs are perceived by decision-makers and of actual VLRI costs beyond the
construction phase 37

TABLES
Table 1. Roadmaps and Other Strategic Planning Platforms for VLRIs 18
Table 2. Selected Roadmaps linked to National Strategies 19
Table 3. International policy fora on RI policy 22
Table 4. Existing legal structure models for VLRIs 23

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  5
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

VLRI Acronyms
ARICE Arctic Research Icebreaker Consortium
EAST Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokamak
ECCSEL European Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage Laboratory
ELI Extreme Light Infrastructure
ELIXIR Not an acronym – European distributed RI for life science data
ELT Extremely Large Telescope
EMBL-EBI European Molecular Biology Laboratory – European Bioinformatics Institute
ESS European Spallation Source
FAIR Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research
Hyper KAMIOKANDE Not an acronym – neutrino observatory in Kamioka
IceCube Not an acronym - neutrino observatory in Antartica
IFMIF International Fusion Materials Irradiation Facility
IODP International Ocean Discovery Program
ITER International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor
JWST James Webb Space Telescope
KAGRA Kamioka Gravitational Wave Detector
KSTAR Korea Superconducting Tokamak Advanced Research
LIGO Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
NICA Nuclotron-based Ion Collider fAсility
SARAO South African Radio Astronomy Observatory
SKA Square Kilometre Array
TRIUMF Not an acronym - Canada's particle accelerator centre
VIRGO Not an acronym – European gravitational-wave detector
European XFEL European X-ray free-electron laser

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Executive Summary
This report is based on an analysis of publicly available documents and additional information collected
from a group of 15 OECD countries and 3 relevant international bodies represented on an expert group,
which oversaw the work. It also includes the outc omes of two dedicated international workshops. The
report identifies and analyses good practices and presents a series of lessons learned regarding the
establishment of VLRIs, options for improving the ir use and operation, as well as more strategic
considerations that VLRI stakeholders should take into account in their planning of future projects. These
analyses and recommendations relate to six main issues that were investigated in detail:
• Strategic planning
• Governance
• Financing
• Impact
• Data management
• Ecosystem
Strategic planning and priority-setting are becoming critical as research funders need to make increasingly
tough choices about their investments. Many of the existing planning instruments have difficulties to
integrate VLRIs because of their high cost and international dimension, and investment decisions are still
very much taken on a case-by-case basis. National planning and decision-making instruments must evolve
to fully capture their respective international contexts as well as societal and interdisciplinary dimensions.
The necessary strategic processes and instruments need be developed at all relevant levels (international,
national and RI level). These should enable closer collaboration among research communities and
decision-makers and support a more comprehensive portfolio management approach that reconciles VLRI
decision-making with the priority needs of scientific communities.
Governance models for VLRIs have always been a challenge, owing to the diversity of VLRI partners and
differences in the culture and practices of these partners. Recent crises have demonstrated the need for
robust mechanisms able to face unexpected events. Feedback from VLRI managers indicated a strong
demand for stable and resilient governance models, balanced with an increased need for flexibility. Indeed,
VLRIs usually involve many international partners , and their governance structures must allow for t he
participation of a diversity of s takeholders. Sustainability and inclusivity must be ensured through
innovative governance models that can respond to different partner expectations and better manage the
potential risks associated with VLRI projects.
The number, scale, complexity, and diversity of VLRIs are all increasing and each new generation of VLRIs
is becoming more and more costly. New investments are routinely in the billions of euros for construction,
and operation costs typically span decades. At the same time, m any funders are reporting reaching a
ceiling in their ability to support VLRIs. This not only means increased selectivity in their investments but
also a demand for better and more efficient use of available resources. Funding pressure implies more
cooperation among funders and improved strategic planning. There is need for a more accurate picture of
the funding trends an d anticipated demands at the global level in order to develop a more reliable and
predictable funding environment that encompasses the entire life-cycle of VLRIs. In addition, the increasing
complexity of VLRI partners and users calls for more inclusive an d flexible funding models that will allow
different forms of contributions and hence facilitate the participation of broader communities of
stakeholders. Finally, the demand for efficiency in financial management requires better risk assessment
and risk management procedures and related budget contingencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  7
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The primary expectation for impact from VLRIs is the production of breakthrough scientific knowledge, and
this remains true for all recent initiatives. However, the potential socio -economic impact of VL RIs has
become more important in the investment decision of funders and decision-makers. While socio-economic
impact assessment is now imbedded in most RI projects, assessing value or impact beyond scientific
production is much more challenging for VLRIs b ecause of the diversity of their s takeholders, who often
have different expectations and different approaches to impact assessment. Furthermore, VLRIs are
increasingly expected to contribute to solving broad societal challenges, something that they were often
not designed or prepared for. It is necessary that partners in new VLRI initiatives agree at the outset the
full scope of the infrastructure, taking into consideration th eir different priorities. The selection of impact
assessment methodologies and indicators should then respond to the needs of all partners and be flexible
enough to adapt to new requirements.
VLRIs produce vast amounts of data. Data management is therefore a massive challenge. This has
become an even greater issue as the demand for ac cess to VLRI data has increased because of the
growth and geographic expansion of traditional user communities. Many VLRIs have also seen a steep
rise in the demand for data from expert users from other disciplines in order to address new scientific and
societal challenges. This creates an extra burden and cost for VLRI management that is often not planned
for nor sufficiently funded. There is a need for new approaches to provide data to experts and non-experts
in different disciplines beyond the VLRIs’ traditional user communities. This requires the development of
new data access mechanisms , user-friendly data products and services and standardised interoperable
data formats. It also require extensive training for new categories of users . All of the relevant costs need
to be incorporated into the recurrent operational budgets of VLRIs, which is rarely the case at the moment.
Finally, although VLRIs are themselves complex structures that may be distributed over different sites and
are connected to a diversity of research partners, there are often valuable opportunities for them to develop
synergies with other RIs. There are thr ee main drivers for the development of more integrated VLRI
ecosystems: to enable researchers to tackle complex/interdisciplinary scientific questions; to rationalise
and improve a VLRIs own activities; and, to avoid duplication of efforts. VLRIs also need to work together
to develop their scientific and technological know-how and provide mutual support, training and career
paths for the professional staff on whom they depend. However, the development of networks and
synergies with other RIs is not yet fully integrated in the plans of many VLRI managers and funders. There
is an opportunity to enhance collaboration at the global level to fully benefit from the potential of a broader
diversity of VLRI stakeholders and develop more resilient efficient and effec tive VLRI ecosystems.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Policy Recommendations
The following recommendations emerged from an analysis of the responses from VLRI managers, funders
and decision makers to surveys, and discussions held at two international workshops conducted as part
of thi s project. VLRIs, in this context, are understood as RIs with a high degree of uniqueness and
complexity, and a strong international dimension. While the recommendations focus on issues relevant to
recent and emerging VLRI initiatives – some may also be relevant to other RIs. More specific and practical
policy options and examples that relate to these recommendations are described in section 3 of this report.
Strategy and Planning
As the scale, complexity and role of new VLRIs increase, RI foresight and strategic planning instruments
used for landscaping and decision -making must evolve to fully capture the international context and
strengthen their societal and interdisciplinary dim ensions. Such instruments should be developed at
different scales (international, national and individual VLRI) and enable closer collaboration among
research communities and decision -makers. Throughout their development, the following should be
considered:
- Convening appropriate international discussion fora, to help identify opportunities, scan the
horizon for emerging policy and research opportunities and threats, address challenges, and
reconcile national interests and competition with the need for international collaboration;
- The implementation of a portfolio management approach by government and funders to assess
the priority needs of their scientific communities and to achieve an appropriate balance between
the various options for contributing to different VLRIs (i.e., as host, major or minor stakeholder, in-
kind contributor, through access agreements etc.);
- Agreeing on the definition and actual s cope of VLRI projects among stakeholders, taking into
consideration their national and regional research landscapes and priorities. Joint scoping should
define the scientific and societal domains to be addressed, while ensuring flexibility to adapt to
emerging challenges and priorities;
- Developing policy awareness for all VLRI stakeholders within strategic planning processes that
assess the changing global research context and landscape. This can help all actors anticipate
the need for adjustments in their approaches.
Governance and Management
VLRIs are highly complex organisational structures with a need for specific rules and procedures to operate
efficiently:
- A critical element for the functioning of VLRIs is their capacity to in volve international partners .
Hence, their legal status and governance structure must allow for the participation of a diversity of
stakeholders. Innovative and flexible solutions should be developed to allow new memberships
and partnerships to emerge and develop throughout the lifetime of a VLRI. This includes being
open to partners who contribute in ways that do not involve direct financing;
- Expectations from each VLRI partner should be clearly expressed at the outset (and revisited at
regular intervals) in terms of scientific impact, industrial/economic return (juste -retour), job
creation, societal and environmental benefits. The potential risks associated with VLRI projects
should be openly discussed among potential partners;
- Interactions between funders and members of a VLRIs’ governing and management bodies must
be efficient and based on mutual trust. Return on investment now incorporates many
different metrics that should be selected with attention to the scientific, economic, social and
environmental impacts and discussed regularly in an effort to ensure the satisfaction and
motivation of all stakeholders;

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  9
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

- VLRI policymakers, funders and managers are encouraged to share experiences and exchange
good practices internationally in the areas of RI policyma king and funding, road -mapping and
landscape analys es, user strategies and access policies, governance and management, and
monitoring and assessment, thereby feeding into strategy debates at both expert and political
levels in relevant international fora. International cooperation should be based on balanced and
reciprocal openness, and should promote a level playing field underpinned by fundamental shared
values and ethics.
Business model and life-cycle funding
As the share and amount of funding for VLRIs is on the rise , many funders are reaching their maximum
capacity and have therefore become increasingly selective in the ir investments. While alignment with
national priorities remains a key driver in decisions to invest, budget limitations are pushi ng funders
towards resource sharing and international cooperation to realise VLRI projects;
- Governments and funders should seek to develop a regular assessment of research
funding/expenditures being allocated to VLRIs such that stakeholders benefit from a more
accurate picture of the funding trends and anticipated needs at the global level;
- VLRI policymakers and funders are encouraged to treat VLRIs as long-term commitments in order
to create a stable, reliable and predictable funding environment that encompasses the entire VLRI
life-cycle and takes account of evolving user needs at the global level. The conceptual phase of a
VLRI being considered particularly fraught with challenges, funders should ensure that resources
and mechanisms are in place to adequately support this critical phase;
- VLRI policymakers and funders are invited to further develop inclusive and flexible international
in-kind contribution and access models that recognizes different forms of contributions to facilitate
the participation of broader communities of stakeholders and countries;
- VLRI business plans should integrate a comprehensive risk assessment framework that is shared
among partners to ensure common understanding and awareness of risks, and help achieve
consensus on appropriate mitigation strategies, including provisions for sc hedule and budget
contingencies.
Impact
VLRIs are long-term enterprises which are developed primarily to produce frontier knowledge. However,
they are also increasingly expected to deliver a broad range of societal and economic benefits. Responding
to t his wide range of objectives is challenging, especially as these emerge from a diverse mix of
international stakeholders and stakeholders;
- VLRI stakeholders should define and agree, at the outset, the scope of their VLRI projec t, taking
into consideration the different interests and priorities – e.g., what scientific, political and societal
domains will be addressed; and what flexibility will be required to adapt to new challenges and
priorities. An agreed impact assessment methodology should be developed from VLRI project
inception, covering its entire life-cycle, and designed to meet the needs of different stakeholders.
- Where appropriate, VLRIs should have processes for keeping abreast of the evolving policy
landscape in relation to major societal challenges such as energy security and addressing climate
change. Further more, VLRIs should embed environmental impact assessments within their
planning and design and take appropriate measures to minimise their climate footprints;
- VLRI strategies need to give greater consideration to training, education and skills development
for the next generation of professional scientists, engineers and skilled technical workers , and
integrate more creative public outreach strategies to ensure enhan ced public policy and
community support. This needs to be supported and valued by funders as part of the core activities
of a VLRI.
Data management including data sharing and access

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Increasingly, d ata management is becoming a major issue for VLRIs and ther e is a strong push for
international data sharing and openness. However, there are a number of challenges that VLRIs need to
address for optimising data management and data access:
- VLRIs should explore new approaches to provide data to non-experts and to experts in disciplines
beyond their traditional user communities in order to respond to the increasing demand for VLRIs
to have a broader impact on complex societal challenges. This requires the development of new
data access mechanisms, user-friendly data products and services and standardised interoperable
data formats. It also implies that new staff and resources will need to be allocated towards these
activities, driving up operational costs − something that funders need to be fully aware of;
- As current policies and practices are heterogenous, a consensus on the implementation of open
data, including access to software and codes, should be developed among VLRI stakeholders.
This in turn needs to be translated into a data policy at the level of an individual VLRI and provide
the basis for a fully costed data management and access plan that addresses human resources
and training needs as well as technical requirements;
- Data management needs, including those related to open acce ss and access for non -experts,
should be fully integrated in VLRI operational costs to avoid putting an additional burden on VLRI
management. Potential gains in efficiency and effectiveness in data management as a result of
cooperation between VLRIs and ot her RIs, including cyber -infrastructures and data repositories,
should be considered in assessing data management needs and costs.
Policy Support within the VLRI Ecosystem
VLRIs, as large enterprises that often include many in -house ancillary facilities and are i nvariably
connected to a complex network of partners. There is an imperative to develop and maintain effective
linkages with these partners and develop synergies with other RIs in order to fulfil broader scientific and
socio-economic needs and expectations:
- VLRI policymakers and funders are encouraged to consider VLRIs as strategic investment s and
recognise that the establishment of VLRIs , embedded in regional and national development
strategies, has potential to accelerate socio-economic development. A well-balanced geographical
distribution of VLRIs, can help harness the full potential of the research and innovation excellence
that exists around the world;
- VLRIs should be embedded in national and international networks as an integral part of the
essential infrastructure, which is critical for mobilising science in responding to crises. All VLRIs
have unique technical capacity and expertise that can be leveraged in this regard ;
- VLRI policymakers, funders and stakeholders are encouraged to engage in dialogue using
appropriate international fora to promote more effective international cooperation , including the
sharing of strategies and good practices.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  11
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Introduction
Background and rationale
Very large research infrastructures (VLRIs) have been the focus of many reports and initiatives in recent
years with a focus on improving their governance, efficiency and sustainability (OECD, 2017[1]; 2014[2];
2010[3]; GSO, 2019 [4]; ESFRI, 2017 [5]). During this period , changes in the socio -economic and scientific
contexts have been challenging earlier models for these ambitious scientific and technological projects
and raise several issues:
• VLRIs are increasingly complex: this is linked not only to technological
developments but also to the diversity of stakeholders involved and, in creasingly,
to their distribution over multiple sites; what are the impacts of this complexity on
governance and financial models?
• VLRIs may be expected to generate new wider impacts alongside their main
scientific aims that go beyond socio -economic benefits; these might include broad
societal benefits such as social innovation, responses to challenges and crises, and
positive impact s on the whole scientific ecosystem . The potential environmental
impacts of VLRIs are also increasingly considered. How are th ese expectations
affecting their management and operations?
• VLRIs are of interest to many countries, expanding beyond those traditionally
leading in such scientific enterprises. What are the potential challenges in balancing
increased competition and the n eed for both a collaborative approach to solving
global issues and the pooling of resources among nations ? How can national
interests be aligned?
• There is an increasing policy emphasis on open science and inter -disciplinarity,
linked with the rapid evolution of digital technologies . N ew challenges include
ensuring fairness and equity, with regards to data sharing, as well as the
requirements for sustainable data management and storage of very large amounts
of data . What are the resulting consequences regarding the expectations and
operating environment for VLRIs?
• Current crises, with the pressure th ey are exerting on public budgets, may require
a more strategic approach to VLRIs from decision makers. How does this situation
affect national investments (e.g. choosing between national or international RIs)
and impact the overall research landscape? What are the action that could be
undertaken to prevent and mitigate different types of risks?
• The potential role(s) and importance of these facilities to address major societal
challenges has been highlighted during the COVID -19 crisis, which led many RIs
to quickly re-organise their priorities and working processes to respond to new
demands from both the scientific community and decision -makers. What are the
lessons learned from this crisis that can inform optimisation of the future operation
and use of VLRIs?
• Considering the impact and scale of VLRIs, how can the sustainability over their
whole life-cycle, including their decommissioning or repurposing, be addressed?
Owing to the increasing complexity of these ambitious projects, their financial cost has been steadily
increasing, leading to a need for funders and decision-makers to be more selective, and for VLRI managers
to develop more robust and sustainable business plans. Considering these issues, t he Global Science
Forum authorised at its 44 th meeting on 21 -22 April 2021 a new activity focused on optimising the

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

organisation and use of VLRIs, which was carried out by an Expert Group (listed in Appendix 1), nominated
by interested delegations.
Terms of Reference and focus
The Terms of Reference for this activity w ere determined by a scoping group nominated by in terested
delegations, which preceded the formal launch of the activity.
The objective of this GSF activity is to provide options for facilitating the development, operation and use
of VLRIs, to make these more responsive to global crises or major disciplinary shifts, and to provide long-
term perspectives for their development worldwide.
While there is no consensus on the definition for what constitutes a VLRI, only those that had most, if not
all, of the following characteristics were considered by the Expert Group for this activity:
• Uniqueness: The RI is unique or quasi unique worldwide and provides world -leading
capabilities;
• Complexity: The RI is highly complex in its organisational structure, technology and /or
operation. Its s cale is usually very large in terms of the required human and/or capital
resources;
• International dimension: The RI possesses an international dimension which is reflected in
its governance, its operational footprint and user base.
The Expert Group established a list of VLRIs that meet these criteria, together with a few interesting cases
that provided complementary information despite only partially meeting the criteria. A small subset of VLRIs
were then further examined as case studies in support of this activity.
The activity was set up to include the following components:
1. A horizon-scanning exercise that included VLRIs in operation, under construction
and in the planning stage, to provide a vision of the future landscape of research
infrastructures. The activity considered VLRIs at different stages of their life cycle,
i.e., new projects at the conceptual and design stages, VLRIs under construction,
VLRIs under steady -state operations, as well as VLRIs towards their end
(decommissioning or repurposed) . The activity also explored different areas and
disciplines, with financing aspects at the core, recognising that national budgets
are finite and acknowledging the reality of a possibly lengthy post-covid economic
recovery. This scanning exercise was completed by an analysis of existing strategic
instruments used for decision -making, as well as contextual policy drivers, to
identify emerging challenges for VLRIs.
2. A review of a series of key challenges, based on literature, questi onnaire and
interview surveys and workshop feedback. This included:
a. The governance, financing and business models for VLRIs as well as
implications on human resources management, partnerships and networking
with other RIs. This review took into account the increasing diversity of partners
involved and their expectations, the need for long -term sustainability and the
lessons learned from the COVID-19 and other major crises, where appropriate.
b. An analysis of data management and delivery challenges for VLRIs,
investigating how these facilities can manage and provide access to extremely
large amounts of data in the context of Open Science and of new and potentially
non-expert user communities.
c. An analysis of the evolution of expected im pacts (and impact assessment
methodologies) for these VLRIs.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  13
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

3. This study was also an opportunity to address the topic of collaboration vs
competition, i.e., how can governments work better together to jointly develop and
decide on the needs for, and investment in, VLRIs by looking at the ecosystem of
VLRIs at a global scale, taking into account both scientific and political drivers.
Methodology and definitions
This activity was supervised by an internationa l Expert Group nominated by the OECD Global S cience
Forum (Appendix 1) and was co -chaired by Dr. Heidi Bandulet (Canada Foundation for Innovation ) and
Prof. Willy Benz (University of Bern). Experts from international organisations interested in RI policy were
also invited. The Terms of Reference of the work were proposed by a Scoping Group and approved by the
Global Science Forum in April 2021.
Preliminary fact -finding and discussion with the Expert Group were conducted to identify existing and
upcoming VLRI projects worldwide (and agree on a set of common definition s) and identify existing
challenges to provide a basis for the surveys. In parallel, a horizon-scanning exercise was carried out with
the support of a consultant (Paul Dufour) to identify issues from existing national /regional research
infrastructure roadmaps as well as upcoming challenges. The activity also examined emerging drivers
behind institutional and national strategies for VLRIs . This revealed a large diversity of practices and
approaches (see chapter 2).
Two surveys were carried out by the Expert Group
Two different s urveys were designed to obtain detailed information , insights and feedback from VLRI
managers, funders and decision -makers, the results of which were further discussed with relevant
stakeholders at international workshops.
• Targeting RI managers , t he first survey consisted of a d etailed questionnaire focused on six key
challenges and issues as identified by the Expert Group: Governance, funding and business model s,
data management, human capital, training and education, impact assessment, and VLRI ecosystems.
A broad range of VLRIs was selected covering different scientific domains, VLRI types, geographical
areas and life cycle stages (see Figure 1) to ensure appropriate representation and variety.
Figure 1. VLRIs included in the first (VLRI managers) survey

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

• Targeting funders and policy -makers, t he second survey was conducted initially through a written
questionnaire, followed up in several instances by interviews carried out by Expert Group members .
The questions raised were complementary to those of the managers’ survey and were distributed along
four main themes: financing, VLRI portfolio and ecosystem, governance, management and operations,
including data, as well as broad impact and benefits. Funders and decision-makers consulted in this
activity (see Figure 2) were selected on the basis of their involvement in the choice to invest in VLRIs
and their country’s participation in supporting those VLRIs included in the managers’ survey to obtain
complementary feedback.
Figure 2. Funders and decision-makers consulted in the second survey

It is important to note that the two surveys were designed to be illustrative rather than statistically
representative and were focussed on elucidating interesting cases from a diversity of examples. Survey
responses do not reflect the full range of VLRI, but were deemed sufficiently diverse to capture both
heterogeneities and commonalities in VLRI portfolios.
Two international workshops specific to this activity were organised, one held virtually on 1 5 June 2022,
and another held in-person on 17 October 2022 in Brno , Czech Republic , as a satellite event of the
ICRI2022 conference. The workshop programmes and participants are available on the GSF web pages
(workshop 11, workshop 22). Input was also garnered from a GSF panel discussion organised at the 2021
International Conference on Research Infrastructures (ICRI)3.
Both workshops included case study presentations from VLRI stakeholders illustrating the challenges they
face and providing some interesting and practical solutions and options. The first workshop discussed
issues from the VLRI managers’ perspective , and the second from the funders ’ and decision -makers’
perspective. Stakeholder inputs from the surveys and workshops on practices and policies provided more
detailed information on key challenges and good practices, which are included in the report.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  15
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Definition
As indicated earlier, stakeholders often have different definitions of what is a VLRI. Hence, throughout this
activity, it has been important to provide the various stakeholders with a standard working definition to
ensure a common understanding . The research infrastructures selected for the purpose of this activi ty
have the following combined characteristics:
• Uniqueness: The RI is unique or quasi unique worldwide and provides world -leading
capabilities.
• Complexity: The RI is highly complex in its organisational structure, technology and/or
operation. Its scale is usually very large in terms of the required human and/or capital
resources.
• International dimension: The RI possesses an international dimension which is reflected in its
governance, its operational footprint and/or user base.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

1. Policy context and horizon scanning
Priority-setting is a critical matter as the envelope for funding research and governance surrounding VLRIs
is being scrutini sed more closely for its returns – economic, as well as social and environmental. As a
result, various strategic i nstruments ranging from decadal surveys to roadmaps and national research
vision strategies are being re-imagined at the same time as the ongoing operation, planning and design of
VLRIs.
International cooperation in big science projects and programmes became more imperative in the late 80s’
as these were becoming more common in the forefront fields of research. As the OECD Ministerial meeting
in March 1992 underscored, a central challenge was to make intelligent choices regarding both the science
and the funding and management of such projects and programmes, When the OECD Megascience Forum
(MSF) was launched in 1992, the ITER program had just approved its second engineering design phase.
And in the first three years, the Megascience Forum examined six scien tific fields in which international
projects could play a larger role: astronomy, deep drilling, global change research, oceanography, neutron
beams and synchrotron radiation sources, as well as particle physics. Most of these fields are still under
active research today with new partners and increasingly ambitious projects–and science diplomacy along
with shifting geopolitical issues play an increasing part in their development. Not to be overlooked as well
are the built-in inspirational outcomes of large-scale science projects. As one commentator recently wrote4:
While megaprojects may well have huge economic and scientific benefits, they can also create a more
aspirational and adventurous culture . Indeed, a powerful case for more long -term funding has be en
demonstrated with the success of the Webb telescope and the new research horizons surrounding novel
genomics and global health infrastructures.
Of course, the fast-moving, global geopolitical situation and policy challenges have meant that the issues
facing the funding, design, operation, maintenance and ongoing governance of VLRIs are only becoming
more complex. But at the heart of this is the continuous push and pull of international competition and
cooperation to move discovery research forward (Smith, 2007[6]).
A Changing Research Landscape for VLRIs
Very large-scale research infrastructure collaboration occupies a highly complex and fast -moving, and at
times, risky policy space. All large laboratories and research infrastructures need to be to proactive, as
well as react to, and act within this evolving context.
VLRIs are not just national in scope — they often demand international partnerships with relevant
governance and funding protocols. Science and its know ledge production is a global enterprise, and so
too are the politics and geography of location. It has become so due to the increasing complexity and cost
of the infrastructures needed to address evolving “grand challenges” , often beyond the scope of even the
largest countries. Another element to consider is the stability international collaboration produces.
Stakeholders involved in VLRIs are very much aware that their long -term commitments are needed and
that such collaborations are difficult to terminate, hence this introduces a stability element which is critical
for the resilience in the research infrastructure, although unforeseen issues can affect such stability.
It is also important to bear in mind where these R&D investments are highly concentrated across the globe.
While effort is underway to strengthen scientific excellence in many developing countries, new strategies
are required to incorporate an inclusive and interdisciplinary approach to this funding, including t he
geographic spread of these facilities, easier mobility of their talent, along with access to their
instrumentation and data.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  17
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The Research and Innovation Strategies Driving VLRIs
In the early 90s, many countries were struggling with how to develop strategies around the selection of
large-scale or mega science research. Some of these were bottom -up activities initiated organically by
small groups of individual researchers to pursue basic or fundamental science questions. Others were top-
down arrangements with significant effort and expense required to sign formal international agreements
where other goals were envisaged along with the advancement of knowledge. Criteria for decision-making
were developed that essentially outlined key questions such as:
1. What are the prospects in terms of the advancement of knowledge?
2. What are the views of the research community using the facility?
3. How interdisciplinary will the user community be?
4. What opportunities exist for international links or collaboration?
5. What impact will the infrastructure have on education, training, applications and spin -offs?
Today, these criteria for choice are still with us – but they have evolved into more sophisticated policy and
governance questions that require input from many stakeholders, both within and outside of the ecosystem
of research. Ultimately, the scale and scope of approaches in supporting and funding VLRIs is dependent
largely on the framing of these e xisting or new infrastructures within national or regional /multi-national
strategies. Some countries have taken a strategic approach to this by integrating the research
infrastructure within these frameworks. And they have evolved over time to address the shifting pace of
research and its larger scale reach across the globe.
Moving Roadmaps from Rhetoric to Reality
Although n ational strategies to focus investment in science and technology are necessary exercises
carried out in most countries, linking these seamlessly to the necessary research infrastructures and data
platforms-both at home or in partnership with other countries is quite another challenge. One favoured
approach is through the use of research infrastructure roadmaps.
Typically, roadmaps cover several key issues, including the scientific scope of the RIs; their geographic
and/or administrative scope; their temporal scope, along with the size of considered RIs. Most roadmaps
are framed within a larger context of a national strategy or approach to supporting the overall research and
innovation ecosystem. VLRIs are included in a number of roadmaps but in a more heterogenous way as
they present a number of specific challenges, often linked to their international dimension. The GSF 2008
report on Roadmapping of Large Research Infrastructures highlights some of these key issues around the
methodology and process of these ' feuilles de route' (OECD, 2008 [7]). That report noted other issues
associated with roadmaps and relates to some work of the Group of Senior Officials (GSO) established in
2008 by G7 Science Ministries in recognition of the potential for increased international cooperation on
global research infrastructures (Group of Senior Official on Global Research Infrastructures, 2017[8]). First
published in 2006, with 35 projects, the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI)
has developed its own regional roadmap which has been regularly updated in 2008, 2010, 2016, 2018 and
2021, bringing the number of RIs of pan -European relevance to 63 , and is now including a number of
international RI initiatives of interest to European countries.
As existing VLRIs hav e evolved and new ones are being developed, there has been increased attention
to larger, more complex shifts in the way in which research itself is funded and conducted.
In the early days of the CERN experiments for example (which date back several decad es), physics and
astrophysics ruled the science world and engineering was a much sought after expertise to ensure sound
functioning of the facilities. But global approaches have now pivoted to the fast -moving pace and growing
interdisciplinary nature of research and knowledge production.
Indeed, the organi sational structures for international VLRIs can range from highly structured and
centralized, like CERN, to decentralized and loose, like the LIGO collaboration. Some of these facilities

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

may well become game changers, like CERN was over 60 years ago and will at times lead to Nobel prizes
or other recognition. For example, ITER was born with an ambitious objective and, beyond its seven official
members, represents a collaboration of 35 nations trying to prove the feasibility of fusion as a carbon-free
source of energy.
Today, newer grand challenges for VLRIs have emerged centred on climate change, genomics,
biodiversity, oceans management and environmental sustainability, cutting across scientific disciplines and
statecraft. These VLRIs require multiple sites and mobile or virtual capacities. By their very nature, they
are conceived and deployed at a global scale that strives to match the scope of the targeted problems.
Table 1. Roadmaps and Other Strategic Planning Platforms for VLRIs
National strategies Roadmaps-
decadal surveys
Landscape analyses Integrated, regional fora Metric and impact
analyses
National strategic efforts
designed to frame and
fund emerging science,
technology and innovation
approaches through
dedicated policy and
public outreach processes

Examples include the
innovation and research
strategies in the United
Kingdom, Australia, the
Netherlands
Blueprints that set
investments for RIs within
national STI priorities or
decadal surveys working
with various stakeholders
both nationally while
globally assessing and
scanning the next frontiers
for astronomy,
astrophysics, ocean
sciences, high-energy
physics etc.

Examples include NASA's
Decadal Strategy for
Planetary Science and
Astrobiology 2023 - 2032,
and the Canadian Space
Agency's Science and
Space Health Priorities for
Next Decade and Beyond
Comprise a survey of all
RIs that are accessible for
researchers within the
country; often mapping
growing linkages among
fields of research

Examples include the
French 'feuille de route"
research infrastructure
plans-latest in 2021
ESFRI-
ERIC are key examples
across the EU, but so too
are geo-specific VLRIs
requiring specialised sites
or unique platforms and -
or instrumentation such as
in polar areas, icebreaker
consortia or in specialized
locations,

Examples include ARICE
on futures for polar
research infrastructure
Emerging metrics and
analyses to assess
economic, social impacts
as well as training and
public outreach.
These can involve grand
challenge approaches
such as linking to
sustainable
developmental goals
(SDGs), health and
genomics, climate
change, green-clean
energy impacts, etc.
Strong and effective roadmap -like visions have also been developed for research infrastructure within a
narrower domain. For example, in astronomy and space science, decadal surveys are often the preferred
approach. Such surveys are usually developed by na tional science and research bodies working with the
various stakeholders nationally while globally assessing and scanning the next frontiers for the fields. The
United States National Academies of Science , Engineering and Medicine and NASA have produced
several of these reports to map emerging new frontiers in space and planetary science (Committee on the
Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey et al., 2022[9]). The European Space Agency has its
own vision 2025 document5 that defines five immediate priorities as well as working closely with the EU.
There are other more integrated approaches to link networks of VLRIs. Take the case of the ESFRI, the
European Strategy Forum on Research Infr astructures. Established in 2002 to bring together the various
national research approaches to RIs in Europe, it has now moved forward with its Roadmap 2021 6, which
identifies vital new European research infrastructures in six thematic fields (energy, hea lth & food,
environment, physical sciences & engineering, social and cultural innovation, and digital platforms). With
a vision to maximise the impact of pan -European investments in research infrastructures in terms of
science, European and international c ollaboration and innovation, the updated roadmap includes a
comprehensive analysis of the current infrastructure landscape. It reviews progress of ESFRI projects
currently being implemented; and provides strategic guidance on issues of general interest to national
governments and research infrastructures themselves.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  19
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

On occasion, efforts are made to explore the state of the art of certain disciplines. This is the case currently
with the long-range Snowmass review of particle physics. The Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
(P5) recommends a 10 -year research agenda for the United States Department of Energy and National
Science Foundation7. In another case, the European Strategy for Particle Physics update8 recommends a
so-called Higgs factory as t he highest priority to follow the LHC, while pursuing a technical and financial
feasibility study for a next -generation hadron collider in parallel, in preparation for the long -term.
Maintaining the existing European support for neutrino physics in the United States and Japan is also
strongly recommended. A comprehensive report, it also covers areas of synergy with neighbouring fields
such as astroparticle and nuclear physics, and it includes societal aspects ranging from training and
knowledge transfer to minimising the environmental footprint of future facilities.
National multidisciplinary strategies for roadmaps that include VLRIs may also extend worldwide . The
United Kingdom and Australia highlight examples of these. At times, certain countries or locales may have
assets, geography or capabilities that larger countries may not possess — hence the need to expand the
roadmaps to consider the importance of location such as the ca se of the Square Ki lometre Array (SKA)
project, the world's largest radio astronomy facilities in Southern Africa and Australia, or the South Pole for
the unique ICECube neutrino facility.
In the landscape analysis offered by many of the roadmaps, a common thread is to consider how best to
integrate the emerging fields of research, as well as ensuring equity, diversity and inclusion in the research
capacity.
Table 2. Selected Roadmaps linked to National Strategies
United Kingdom Australia Netherlands
R&D Roadmap 2020
New funding offers investments to ensure the
United Kingdom can further benefit from the
opportunities of international scientific
partnerships. Integrated with the 2021 United
Kingdom Innovation Strategy
2021 Research Infrastructure Roadmap-
national survey about how National RIs are
used now, and how it can address future
trends, needs and challenges
2021 Large-Scale Research Infrastructure
Roadmap (updated from 2016)
more alignment among science fields in NSE,
Social sciences and Medical-Health,
engagement and attention to Equity, Diversity
and Inclusion
Provides long -term flexible investment into
infrastructure and institutions managed through
the UKRI portal as well as data and analytics
research environments Builds on opportunities
report and landscape analysis

https://www.ukri.org/what-we-offer/creating-
world-class-research-and-innovation-
infrastructure/
Designed to drive a more integrated NRI
ecosystem; improve industry engagement with
NRI; dev elop a National Digital Research
Infrastructure Strategy
Prepares Australia to tackle future challenges
in four key infrastructure areas: digital
research; synthetic biology research; research
translation; environmental and climate
research infrastructures
Will inform the 2022 Research Infrastructure
Investment Plan
https://www.education.gov.au/national-
research-infrastructure/2021-national-
research-infrastructure-roadmap
Builds on national strategy to strengthen
research and innovation ecosystems- and links
to the EU's ESFRI

https://www.nwo.nl/en/researchprogrammes/n
ational-roadmap-large-scale-research-facilities
Emerging Horizon Planning Issues and Policy Considerations
Roadmaps and their landscape cousins are evergreen in nature. They are continually being benchmarked,
evaluated and updated. But they can run into roadblocks and detours from time to time. The impact of the
current crisis in the Ukraine shifts cooperation from Russia among EU nations while affecting the evolution,
funding and governance of their VLRI frameworks now in place. For instance, the VLRI under construction
in Germany, Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research (FAIR), faces increased costs for the other members
given the suspended cooperation with Russia . In the case of the European -XFEL, which is funded by

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Russia for slightly more than a quarter of its budget, a statement from the stakeholder countries notes that
they will not start n ew agreements with Russian institutions and will suspend existing ones, while
respecting the legal obligations of the VLRI. In Arctic research and space cooperation, this too will have
significant impacts to existing and planned VLRIs as sanctions and official science ties with Russia are cut
or suspended and take hold across the globe.
Funding and sustainability remain critical. The pandemic has affected some of the planned VLRIs and their
development. For instance, the Swedish government has stated that it will provide an extra 300 million
kronor to address the delay caused by the Covid -19 pandemic to the European Spallation Source (ESS),
a major international particle accelerator-based neutron research facility being built in Lund, Sweden.
New challenges and revised strategic orientations will be required. And emerging technologies are coming
online that will offer opportunities for creative research platforms. A recent article has listed just some of
the futures for RIs in the fields of gravitational wave observatories and the link with other physics RIs for
example (Bailes et al., 2021[10]). Indeed, one of the new experiments involves the United States and India
currently working together to build a detector in India, a collaboration between LIGO and three Indian
institutes (Padma, 2019[11]). The United States is providing hardware, data, training, and assistance, while
India is providing the site, infrastructure, labour, and materials.
The increased focus on climate change and biodiversity as well as meeting key SDG targets has impacted
the roadmaps and vision for some VLRIs. For example, the European Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage
Laboratory Infrastructure (ECCSEL) underscores the attention that is being given to addressing energy
and climate9. A proposed North Atlantic Carbon Observatory (NACO) from a Canadian consortium is yet
another distri buted facility being put forth focussing on the carbon sinks in the oceans 10. Yet another
emerging, distributed model is the Global Ecosystem Research Infrastructure (GERI) (Loescher et al.,
2022[12]). The GERI position paper indicates that: “it is an integrated network of analogous, but
independent, site -based ecosystem research infrastructures (ERIs) dedicated to better understand the
function and change of indicator ecosystems across global biomes. Bringing together these ERIs,
harmonizing their respective data and reducing uncertainties enables broader cross-continental ecological
research. It will also enhance the research community capabilities to address current and anticipate future
global scale ecological challenges. Moreover, increasing the international capabilities of these ERIs goes
beyond their original design intent, and is an unexpected added value of these large national investments.”
The life sciences have also seen a boost in n ew distributed models for VLRIs, especially in the context of
the global pandemic fallout. Genomics networks to track new variants of the novel coronavirus emerging
across the globe are now well linked. The aptly -named ELIXIR11 VLRI, with its 23 nodes acro ss Europe,
has made clear the need to pay attention to how the benefits of investment can impact many sectors of
society, economy and policy.
Increasingly important is the need to address public and community outreach as well as effective
communication of the impacts of VLRIs. This is especially hitting home in many countries where resources
are constrained. Some attention is being paid to targeting policy -makers and elected officials in providing
them with on-site visits in addition to explaining the poten tial for globally governed RIs as instruments of
enhanced science diplomacy.
Australia's NRI report has examined new mechanisms for public education about the RIs through social
media and surveys of users. ITER is marketing a digitized exhibit and providing digital materials to schools,
universities and museums. CERN is moving forward on a large investment for a public education centre
(CERN Science Gateway) to better inspire and inform students and citizens about the value of discovery
research. LIGO main tains a K -12 educational program through a science and education centre at the
Livingston Observatory and a new LIGO Exploration Center at the Hanford Observatory is designed to
grow the engagement of students with frontier science. SKA has devoted some co nsiderable effort to
engaging the public on the value of astronomy, especially in the context of Africa’s research developments
and is currently engaged in building a SKA Exploratorium for the public.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  21
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

A related issue is encouraging and supporting next gene ration talent s to work in these new RIs. The
pandemic had some impacts on the ability to retain and attract top talent in certain fields, and some of the
RIs are exploring new incentives on how to address this challenge. South Africa’s research minister has
noted that the country: “has awarded about 2000 bursaries over the past 15 years for undergraduate and
postgraduate studies in astrophysics, data science, engineering and artisanal skills. The bursaries are
intended to develop a pipeline of skills that will grow the a stronomy community to undertake scientific
research through access to the telescopes that we have in Africa, as well as engineers to develop
instrumentation and maintain the telescopes12.”
Open science and the digital transformation are two powerful forces now impacting the shape and scope
of VLRIs across the globe. Security issues on what data can be made available remain problematic for
many VLRIs. Indeed, open science is facing its own challenges post-COVID-19 and in a changing geo -
political environment. Some of these issues are discussed in the recently released GSF report on integrity
and security in the global research ecosystem (OECD, 2022[13]).
Clearly, advancing the frontiers of knowledge will require a more joined -up interdisciplinary approach, in
areas such as health, energy and biodiversity. But attention will need to be given to community
engagement and public acceptance and trust. For examp le, in the stewardship case of the construction
surrounding a Thirty-Metre Telescope and other telescopes in Hawaii, along with any future developments,
a new authority with indigenous expertise membership has been established with a focus on mutual
stewardship in which “ecology, the environment, natural resources, cultural practices, education, and
science are in balance and synergy.” It will administer rules that will establish limits on astronomical
development and may limit commercial use and activities on Maunakea. In another case with the launch
of the Square Kilometre Array Low in Western Australia, the site has been named Inyarrimanha Ilgari
Bundara – an Indigenous name meaning ‘Sharing the Sky and Stars’. The lessons learned from these and
other similar cases can help shape a framework for ensuring greater success in garnering the public and
policy attention and support for these critical research experiments.
Cooperation and complementarity can go hand in hand when designin g VLRIs. While access to research
results and exchange of data are clearly needed to move projects forward, there is often a need for
complementarity in the design of new facilities. The current discussions in the U nited States over a new
neutrino observatory—the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment to be installed in the Long -Baseline
Neutrino Facility ( LBNF/DUNE), and the construction of the Japanese Hyper -Kamiokande VLRI— is an
example where operators are making clear that the facilities can and need to work together. As the director
of the DUNE VLRI underscored: “complementarity and confirmation of parameters is essential to our
understanding” 13.
A strategic and international approach to VLRIs
The 2021 International Conference on Research Infrastructures (ICRI) hosted by the Canadian Foundation
for Innovation in Ottawa 14 outlined some key issues that are emerging. Building on this, the 2022 ICRI
conference in the Czech Republic15 highlighted some of themes that are emerging around socio-economic
benefits and impacts of RIs (including new metrics) as well as the multifaceted key challenges centred on
sharing of data more globally.
But ICRI and other fora have made clear that there is a need for conversation space on emerging VLRIs
issues (examples of existing fora are given in Table 3).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 3. International policy fora on RI policy
International fora Mission-objectives
OECD Global Science Forum

Body of the OECD dedicated to science policy, originally created as “the
Megascience Forum” to address specifically policy issues related to large
international RIs, and which is producing regular analyses and
recommendations on RI policy. The GSF is a platform where national science
policy makers can debate issues and priorities.
Group of Senior Officials on Global Research Infrastructures Body originally created by the G7 that has developed a set of criteria for
defining Global RIs, which enables new facilities around the world to
understand various access mechanisms and to join global networks.
International Conference on Research Infrastructures (ICRI)
https://www.icri2022.cz/
Conference, every two years, bringing together experts from different fields to
discuss challenges and trends for research infrastructures around the world.
European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures
(ESFRI)

Forum set up by European countries to support a coherent and strategy-led
approach to policy-making on RIs in Europe, and to facilitate multilateral
initiatives leading to the better use and development of research
infrastructures, at EU and international levels.

Ultimately, it is important to recognise that there will be new, emerging science partners around the world
that can be important scientific collaborators. Scientific talent and research capacity is rising around the
globe as many countries invest in build ing a more robust S&T enterprise. While national interests will
always play an important role in VLRIs decision -making, collaboration across borders can yield greater
results for all involved. Many of the most pressing scientific questions are not defined by national
boundaries and will clearly require enhanced global collaboration for advancement. Most VLRIs have been
scientifically de -risked; that is, it is reasonably clear that the research to be undertaken is technically
challenging but achievable—but will require more resources than any one nation is willing to commit. After
all, no country is self-sufficient in any of the new emerging knowledge and research frontiers.
However, priority setting, governance and funding choices around these new ex periments will face new
challenges. Resiliency will be the new watchword. Efforts to enhance strategic foresight and attention to
future-proofing risks will be required to anticipate any new futures for VLRIs. Critically, how can the VLRI
research communit y engage more strategically with the poli cy level, its users, the social and outreach
networks and the larger research networks? How can policy and horizon scans be integrated in these
future experiments? Can the organisations conducting roadmap exercises exchange common lessons
and learn from each other in a more deliberative fashion? These are some of the key issues on the horizon.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  23
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2.1. Governance
As mentioned in the definitions, the term “governance” encompasses the set of structures, principles, rules
and procedures through which a collaboration operates, and through which decisions are made by the
parties to the collaboration. More specifically, this includes two major items:
• The VLRI’s formal status and everything related to its membership, legal structure, foundation
documents, link to the host country, etc.
• How the VLRI is run: administrative and operating structures, decision -making processes, role of
funding agencies, secretariat structure and personnel issues, role of the host, etc.
The 2010 OECD report on large RIs largely addresses all the challenges raised by all these items, and
this report provides some updates on emerging issues and options related to new VLRIs. The fundamental
legal/administrative structure of a VLRI remains a very important element since it will drive the agreement
characteristics that bind the various partners of the VLRI together and documents their commitment to the
project. The surveys conducted during this work revealed a variety of legal structures currently being used
by VLRIs, which are summarised in Table 4, and which each have various pros and cons.
Table 4. Existing legal structure models for VLRIs
International dimension Legal statute VLRI examples Pros Cons
Fully international International organisation ITER, ESO (ELT), CERN
(LHC), JINR (NICA), SKA,
ELIXIR
Long-term stability,
resilience
Very long birthing process
International agreement IFMIF, IODP, ALMA Flexibility Lighter commitments
International with major
national members
Non-profit company or
foundation based on an
international agreement
XFEL, ESRF Stability Vulnerability to the main
member(s) difficulties;
may be less acceptable
for some partners
Regional with international
partners
ERIC ESS, ECCSEL, ELI Stability, resilience Difficulty to include non-
EU members
Consortium agreement ARICE Flexibility Difficulty to secure long-
term financial
commitments
National with international
partners
National Institute Super Kamiokande
KSTAR, SARAO, EAST
Stability Restricted international
participation
University + national
research funding agency
ICECube, LIGO, JWST, Proven and flexible
system, open to
international
collaborations
Mostly United States-
specific, no real
international governance
Consortium of national
stakeholders/not for profit
organisation
TRIUMF Stability Restricted international
participation
What this analysis indicates is that there is no obvious one -size-fits-all solution for VLRIs and that recent
projects have been using various legal status according to their own specificities. Recent events (COVID-
19, war in Ukraine, rise in energy costs) have served as crash tests for many VLRIs and have demonstrated
2. Analysis of challenges

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

the advantage that robust agreements have in the face of unexpected events. Feedback from VLRI
managers indicate d a strong demand for stable and resilient models and suggested that, despite their
flexibility, loose collaboration agreement may not be suitable for ambitious and long -term projects. High-
level agreement and a strong legal statute not only symbolise the strong commitment of the partners, but
also help the management in developing a long -term visio n for the project and may be useful when
difficulties are encountered and the strength of the partnership is put to the test.
On the other hand, strong but rigid agreements may represent a liability when there is a need for
adjustments or even major modif ications. In the case of ITER, while the international agreement makeup
leads to the incomparable richness of the project, it has also added a level of complexity to day -to-day
management and, in some cases, to the misalignment of goals and incentives that has led to project delay
and cost increases. It is also interesting to note that, for example, TRIUMF’s model was changed in 2021,
from a Joint Venture to a not -for-profit corporation. The changes that were made were intended to allow
TRIUMF to operate more efficiently through a more streamlined Board structure, supporting more proactive
decision-making, greater accountability, and a stronger focus on both the science and the stewardship of
TRIUMF. This new model also accounts for geographic and diversity considerations. Overall, the re is a
need to include in the VLRI statutory agreements a mix of stability and flexibility.
For VLRIs, a critical element is also the capacity of the project to include international partners since those
are usually a key requirement not only for financial reasons but also to ensure a maximum scientific quality
and reach/usefulness to the scientific community. As indicated in Table 1, some legal structure s and
arrangement models are clearly more adapted to international partnerships, even though they often require
longer preparatory and negotiation phases , and there may be legal barriers to the participation of some
partners. For example, the European ERIC model allows , in principle, easy and flexible ways to increase
participation from new (EU) member countries and / or new facility owners in current member countries ,
and there are significant efforts to welcome non-EU members. However, some countries have issues in
obtaining the required signatories at the ministry level for becoming a member of an ERIC. Similarly, setting
up a national non-profit organisation may also be challenging for some countries as this usually implies
paying membership fees from government bodies to a nationally registered company. The European XFEL
or ESRF avoided that obstacle by using a hybrid model whereby an international convention between
partners was set up alongside their national legal structure.
There is an obvious link between the formal agreement and the legal structure: formal collaboration
documents sometimes state explicitly whether the terms of the agreement are “legally binding” (or “not
legally binding”) on the signatories. International organisations will typically require binding agreements
while consortia will often not. Even if the clause is adopted, the practical implications may be unclear,
especially if the signing parties are governments, and in the absence of an international constraint or
enforcement mechanism. In negotiating the agreement, a potentially useful strategy is to agree on concrete
actions that would be taken in the event of explicitly specified departures from the terms (for example, if
one of the partners wishes to leave the collaboration).
The governance organisation of VLRIs often follows a fairly standard model (see Figure 1) which is
however adapted to the size and complexity of the project.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  25
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 3. VLRI generic governance structure

Source: adapted from (OECD, 2010[3])
The governance structure plays a fundamental role in defining the strategy of the VLRI, in the decision -
making process and in the overall management. Because of the complexity of many VLRIs, the simple
generic s tructure described Fig ure 1 is often adapted to the diversity of stakeholders, to the possible
distributed or mobile nature of the RI and to the science requirements (see IceCube governance model16
as an example).
Furthermore, there may also be a transition of the governance structure between the pre-construction and
the construction phase, or between the construction and the operation phase. In the SKA example, a legal
status was required when entering the preconstruction phase of the project to bind part ners within a
‘interim’ legal framework to facilitate major project decisions (site decision, headquarter decision, science
case, project scope etc) necessary for the next (construction) phase; the interim governance structure
was also used to prepare a more sustainable legal and governance structure (that of an intergovernmental
organisation) for SKA’s construction and operation phases.
The strategic directions of VLRIs are usually defined by a governing body representing the project partners.
While this is, in theory, fairly straightforward for single-site and well-structured VLRIs, it may become more
challenging for other more complex settings. For example , the strategic mandate of ECCSEL is
codeveloped between its Operations Centre, the Research Infrastructure Coordination Committee and the
country nodes.
In all cases, since the key strategic decisions are taken by the governing body, it is essential that the
project partners define a proper procedure by which they will exchange their views ( which can differ
significantly) and come to decisions that all partners can accept. Generally, this involves some form of
voting which can be done following the “one partner one vote” model or can be weighted according to
some pre-defined scheme. Changing this later on as a result of the evolution of the VLRI might not be
straightforward but is sometimes desirable.
Human resource management is another challenging issue connected to the VLRI governance structure.
It is also one that is complex to address, na mely because of the often -international nature of VLRIs and
their distribution over serval sites and countries. The staff (whether full- or part-time) of a given VLRI, while
paid by funds provided by its members, can often be hired and managed under a variety of statuses
depending on the VLRI’s legal statute and its operational structure. They may thus be directly employed
by VLRI (under diverse types of contracts), or, as detailees/secondees, they may retain an affiliation with
a national institution. Although VLRIs are very long-term enterprises, the nature of their legal structure, and

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

sometimes lack of long-term financial perspective, mean that only a few of them (usually only those VLRIs
that have the legal statute of an international organisation) can offer indeterminate contracts. Although a
number of VLRIs are addressing this through close relationships with neighbouring research institutions or
with other RIs to facilitate staff mobility, a number of VLRIs surveyed reported that the absence of lo ng-
term funding commitments created both stress for the management body and risks of there being gaps in
expertise.
The international nature of many VLRIs may also lead to issues that relate to their governance: while no
VLRI investigated established staff quotas for its members, the under -representation of some member
countries in the overall staff structure is often problematic, and in such cases warrants pro-active measures
from the human resource management.
An emerging issue that was raised during the survey is that of the legal structure and governance of
networks of VLRIs. Indeed, even VLRIs increasingly work in networks or even consortia to exploit synergies
and complementarities among the various facilities. For example, in the domain of gravitational wave
observation, the three main existing VLRIs which are LIGO (in the United States), VIRGO (in Europe) and
KAGRA (in Japan) have developed agreements between them (in the form of Memoranda of
Understanding or Memoranda of Agreement), which have enabled sharing of data and the formation of
meta-collaborations (collaborations of collaborations) that function as a single scientific entity that analyses
all gravitational -wave data. This greatly enhances the scientific output of the network with respect to
individual observatories. The structure of these agreeme nts explicitly allows for future growth of the
ground-based gravitational-wave observing network as new observatories are built and come online. While
these agreements have been successfully implemented over a period of years, they have faced challenges
when trying to ‘merge’ two functioning and independent projects/collaborations with separate and
independent organisational structures, governance models, cyberinfrastructure platforms and policies, and
funding sources. Thus, future generation international VLRI networks, such as the gravitational -wave
observatory networks now under consideration (including the US Cosmic Explorer and the European
Einstein Telescope) would benefit from establishing joint collaboration governance models and polici es
well in advance of the beginning of operations, even though the right governance model for such meta
collaboration still needs to be properly defined (in the case of the Einstein Telescope, some preparatory
work is being carried out to determine what formal connexions with other gravitational waves facilities may
be set up17).
2.2. Financing and business models
As discussed in previous chapters, the number, scale, complexity, and variety of proposed VLRIs are all
increasing. Each new generation of VLRIs in the traditional 'big science' disciplines, namely physics, space
science, and astronomy , in further pushing scientific and technology boundaries, is becoming more and
more costly, with new investments routinely in the billions if not tens of billions of euro s for construction,
let alone operation costs which typically span decades. Meanwhile, the need, opportunities, and incentives
• VLRIs governance structures need to balance long-term sustainability and flexibility. The need for
robustness has been underlined by the recent crises and should be a major criteria for VLRI
stakeholders when deciding on governance structure. However, such structure should be able to
adapt to the life-cycle phases of the VLRIs as well as to the international diversity of their members.
• As VLRIs increasingly need to work in synergistic networks, serious consideration should be given
to develop governance models f or large international collaborations between VLRIs, to improve
their capacity to share or delegate some strategic decisions at the collaboration level.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  27
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

for establishing VLRIs in other disciplines are also growing, especially when considering the trend towards
integrating and consolidating facilities and data across multiple sites and establishing them as VLRIs. Two
of the Extreme Light Infrastructures sites, while were originally funded as distinct projects, evolved into
Europe’s leading laser VLRI, with a third expecting to join. And while the lion’s share of public investments
into VLRIs still seem to be in those traditional disciplines, their proliferation in other domains (e.g., health,
oceans) is adding significant pressure on national science budgets. This much is confirmed by the funders
in this activity.
Governments, big and small, are thus confronted – to maintain or gain scientific leadership, or else to build
research capacity - with having to make investment decisions that are more strategic . While budget
constraints are nothing new, and strategic planning tools have become more sophisticated, many funders
report reaching a ceiling in their ability to support VLRIs, and therefore anticipate having to become
increasingly selective in their investments . For many, this is a lso because they themselves need to
advocate for budget increases from their own governments to meet growing demand which is often difficult
given the short-term line of sight of most governments , and the increased expectations of demonstrable
returns that enhance national prosperity.
The flipside, as some have observed, is that this situation favours more cooperation among funders, even
domestically, as well as more cooperation and strategic planning among science groups/disciplines – from
joint priority setting to collaboration in design and use of research facilities . The NSF reports for example
that this spurs more joint funding with other federal agencies ( i.e., Department of Energy, NASA, United
States Geological Survey, etc.) to improve financial models for support of VLRIs.
Moreover, the recent and emerging challenges stemming from the shifting geopolitical and science policy
contexts, discussed in chapter 2, which can affect funding partner s very differently, are, on the one hand,
pushing decision-makers and funders to modify their approaches to funding VLRIs, and on the other hand,
pushing those leading VLRI projects to adapt their business models towards becoming more resilient and
sustainable. Unsurprisingly, the challenge of financing VLRIs, which by and large come from public funds
pooled across domestic and foreign sources, remain at the top of the agendas of both funders and VLRI
managers surveyed in this activity.
Although this report chiefly aims to draw attention to new challenges, improvements and lessons learned,
it is clear from survey responses and case studies that many of the considerations and recommendations
that were discussed at length in the OECD report on Large RIs (2010[3]) in sections regarding funding and
contributions, as well as the negotiation of agreements remain as relevant today as they were a decade
ago. It is worth noting that the funding schemes of a large number of facilities on the VLRI list predate the
strategic tools and funding mechanisms presented here. These have evolved considerably since the time
initial agreements for financing of these VLRIs were negotiated – for example the idea for the European
XFEL was conceived in the 90s’ but it became operational in 2017. Nevertheless, as they matured as
VLRIs, several have shared valuable lessons during this work that can be u seful to new projects. Inputs
into this activity also highlighted the difficulty in identifying challenges that are particular to VLRIs; instead,
most appear to overlap with those of other international and/or large RIs but where they distinguish
themselves is in their scale and level of complexity. Hence this chapter will also reiterate some of the most
prevalent and persistent challenges that ought to be considered by today’s VLRI stakeholders, and by
extension those of other medium to large RIs.
Investments into research infrastructure
According to OECD data18, the Gross Domestic Expenditures on Research and Development (GERD) are
growing in nearly all countries represented in this activity. In fact, the average GERD among OECD
countries grew from 2.24% in 2010 to 2.67% in 2020. Several countries are setting aspirational goals; for
example, the United Kingdom, currently at 1.71% aims to reach 2.4% by 202719, Germany to 3.5%, and
Finland to 4% by 2030 20. Similarly, the EU had set the goal to reach 3% of GD P21 by 2010. The GERD,

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

being normalised to the size of the economy, is not entirely telling of a given country’s ‘purchasing power’:
Germany’s 2019 investments are 110B€ whereas those of Korea at estimated at approximately 70B€
despite its much higher GERD.
While data is readily available on total research funding in each country, the same cannot be said for the
share of funding specific to RIs, and even less so to VLRIs. This activity revealed that only a few countries
are currently able to provide rough estimates, and even in such cases, estimates do not always reflect the
contributions from all domestic players. But the examples, however limited, do support the rationale for
this activity in that RI investments are indeed increasing steadily. It is, however, unclear whether the share
dedicated to infrastructure is growing commensurately or faster than total public investments into R&D.
Data provided by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research in Germany, for example, shows that
funding specific to VLRIs has grown by about 9% per year in recent years , this increase being largely
driven by an increase in the cost of RIs . In Korea, the cost of large to very -large RIs built from 2013 to
2020 is expected to more than double by 2024 (see Figure 4). Total estimated funding for infrastructure by
UKRI is also forecast to increase by about 15% per year for the next two years 22. In Sweden, RIs have
been representing over 30% of the Swedish Research Council spendings for several years, with a peak at
36,8% in 2021 (source: Annual report Swedish Research Council 202123). In the Netherlands, one of trends
in the national Research and Science Policy is that more attention is paid to research infrastructures in
general and to the (increasing) costs of (new) memberships and upgrades, especially the further expanding
European RIs portfolio. An additional (recent) source of governmental funding for big investments in
knowledge development, research and innovation is the National Growth Fund (NGF) 24. The Dutch
government has earmarked € 20 Billion in total for the period 2021 -2025 for project investments which
have the highest potential for structural and durable economic growth. Although not directly designed for
RIs, the NGF fund is enabling the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science to link the economical aspect
to big investments in new VLRIs such as the upcoming Einstein Telescope.
Figure 4. Evolution of Korea’s number of constructed large RIs and funding allocation for their
construction

Source: Korea National Research Facilities and Equipment Center

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  29
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The gathering of RI funding data (e.g., RI funding trends, possibly VLRI) alongside trends in research
funding would enrich discussions around RI planning and financing for the international community. At the
European level, ESFRI has recently set up a group working on the financing of RIs that will examine this
question, although the issues extend beyond Europe.
Government and funders’ decision-making approaches and funding instruments
The funders and decision -makers surveyed for this activity formed a mix of government ministries,
departments and agencies (with varying degrees of independence in their decision -making) as well as
entirely independent not-for-profits mandated by their government to coordinate and deliver funding (e.g.,
the Canada Foundation for Innovation). Survey q uestions on the financing of VLRIs probed on main
domestic challenges, opportunities and barriers for investing in VLRIs, and the external challenges a nd
opportunities for coordinating funding with other countries.
As discussed in chapter 2, in the last decade many research-intensive countries have developed strategic
tools, such as national and regional RI roadmaps, and established or refined decision-making frameworks
on large investments into RIs. The approaches used by funders and decision -makers who responded to
the survey are summarised in a separate Annex document (DSTI/STP/GSF(2023)5/ANN/FINAL)
Whether it is a decision to partake in an operational VLRI via membership fees, or for setting up a new
VLRI as host or funding partner , surveyed funders qualify their own decision -making as either top -
down/centralized (strongly guided by government policies and priorities), bottom up /community-driven
(with projects instigated by the community), or else a mix of the two. South Africa’s National Research
Foundation, although it also pairs its approach to a strong Science Engagement strategy with the wider
community, is primarily top -down and strongly driven by regional capacity building, socio -economic
development and skills. The U nited Kingdom and European countries, as well as Canada seem to adopt
a more bottom-up approach. However, many agreed that the bottom-up approach in one country can be
difficult to reconcile with partners whose approaches are top-down.
Not many countries have a decision-making framework specific to VLRIs. Funding mechanisms often make
no differentiation between VLRIs and smaller RIs, and between national and international projects; projects
often compete within a limited pool of funding , although funding for smaller RIs can be used to support
VLRIs: in the Netherlands, for example, an RI’s own funding may contribute to VLRI projects through
upgrades, special projects, preparatory work, or even membership fees for an initial period. Many countries
reported that balancing investments among domestic vs international RIs , and different size RIs, is a
challenge that comes with various trade -offs. The Research Council o f Norway resorts to continuous
detailed cost-benefit analyses to help optimise its portfolio, for example to compare the value of continuing
current memberships or embarking on new ones. And although most countries recognize the need and
value of internati onal cooperation around VLRIs, there is still a high degree of competition and national
interests present, which can be misaligned between partners. Funding decisions are first and foremost
based on criteria such as the potential gain in competitiveness, s cientific leadership, and broad impact at
the national level to justify use of tax-payers’ contributions. There are also different requirements and risk
assessments between VLRIs’ hosts and participants, and between minor vs major partners that influence
decision-making. Countries, or agencies, with budget limited VLRI portfolios, like the Canadian Space
Agency, reported needing to be particularly strategic in selecting which project they engage in as they are
then far more vulnerable to decisions taken by majority players.
Some funders are mandated to establish VLRI in a given priority area (e.g., the United States Department
of Energy which has specific areas targeted for funding , like the Fusion Energy Sciences programme )
while others support the full spectrum of disciplines out of a single budget envelope. This then poses a
challenge in portfolio optimisation, for instance in Canada’s, Netherlands’ and Sweden’s cases. The United
States National Science Foundation attempts to assess balance within disciplines through conducting

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

portfolio reviews but these only occur within programmes with so far no explicit attempt to achieve balance
at the agency level.
As stated in chapter 2, for most countries, initial guidance in prioriti sation comes from a national strategy
for research, sometimes coupled with a strategy for international engagement, for example the United
Kingdom’s Research and Development Roadmap and UKRI’s international strategic framework. Generally,
the reliance on long-term strategies is found to be very important to building sustainable funding models.
A partner’s l ack of such high-level strategies may be seen as a risk that reduces its attractiveness as a
partner to others. In Canada, where funding decisions on large investments rely heavily on assessments
made by international experts, many voices call for the development of similar tools that would help assess
international opportunities, in light of Canada’s needs and areas of strength and within the national and
international landscapes.
There are different types of strategic tools specific to infrastructure most relied upon in VLRI decision -
making and identification of priorities. Communit y plans continue to be widely used to prioritize and
coordinate projects within specific disciplines. Some funders play the role of convenor in calling for
communities to come together and develop a common vision of their future RI needs, including VLRIs.
Dedicated funding programs support development of large international proposals for joint facilities (e.g.
the arctic vessel network, ARICE, which seeks to integrate services and projects across multiple vessels
worldwide). However, the sole use of domain -specific plans leaves out huge gaps of the actual needs in
other disciplines. Therefore, many countries, even smaller economies like Denmark and Finland, engage
in RI landscaping and road mapping exercises to identify broad needs, help anticipate future needs,
prioritize their spending, and since there is rarely a single national funder, help galvanize domestic funding
partners and institutions around opportunities.
These national exercises vary greatly in scope as well as in purpose. In the United Kingdom, although the
landscape analysis presents as a guide to support strategic investment decisions, it offers no guarantee
of funding for those in it. In Norway and Sweden, the calls for proposals for funding are held jointly with the
road mapping exercise meaning that those who are selected to be on the roadmap also obtain financial
support (or become earmarked for support as more funds are appropriated). In Australia, the roadmap is
renewed every 5 years whereas investments decisions are made every 2 years. Similarly, in the
Netherlands, there is a periodical update of the roadmap every 4 or 5 years and, in principle every 2 years,
a call for funding for projects on the roadmap.
There are also joint road mapping exercises across multiple countries – ESFRI being the notable example
- which are useful to determine whether national needs align with those of potential external funding
partners. Such a transnational roadmap helps define areas of opportunity and of mutual benefit where the
institutional, national, and communal roadmaps intersect. All EU funders surveyed affirmed that the ESFRI
roadmap resulted in greatly enhanced cooperation. There has been at least one case where Germany did
not participate due to differing prioritisation in the national process . In Norway, consolidating roadmaps
involves drawing up an analysis document for decision -making and put ting forth recommendations
regarding Norwegian participation in individual research infrastructures on the ESFRI Roadmap.
Another advantage of road mapping is that it can decouple the roadmap qualification process from funding
decisions and immediate budget constraints. The qualification process ensures that a rigorous vetting of
the science case of the VLRI is realised, thereby acquir ing a ‘seal of quality . This decoupling allows for
VLRI stakeholders to solidify the business case in the meantime. It avoids having to reassess the same
proposals at each new round of decision -making as it is the case namely in Canada. It also signals to
potential funding partners the funder’s commitment. ELIXIR is good example of a facility developed from
the original 2006 ESFRI roadmap which greatly benefitted from the process in building a successful
consortium of partners over time.
Financial threshold s often appear explicitly in frameworks to determine the mechanism or process for
decision-making and associated levels of decisional and signing authorities, namely for memberships and

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  31
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

treaty agreements. As expected, processes tend to be more rigorous with the number and types of reviews
(assessing, for example, the science case, technical readiness and feasibility, maturity of the project, socio-
economic impacts, etc.) increasing as the investment value increases. Reviews typically involve several
internal and/or external advisory and assessment committees. In France, VLRIs costing more than 100M€
are subject to a counter-expertise socioeconomic impact review mandated by top Government in addition
to the ministry’s process. The United States, both the DOE and NSF, have had in place very detailed and
comprehensive frameworks for a long time that are often referred to by other countries in establishing their
own. Korea’s is recent: based on the experience of developing KSTAR (1995~2007), the completion of the
first phase of development of RAON (Rare Isotope Accelerator Complex for Online Experiments)
(2011~2023) with a total project cost of more than 1B€ in total costs, and the promotion of the construction
of KPS (KOREA PHOTON SOURCE,2022~2027) from 2023. How ever, In Korea, 38 government
ministries are involved in R&D, and this multiple investment structure adds to the complexity. Because
large-scale investment decisions require coordination across multiple ministries, and the number of
partners adds to the co mplexity and lengthens the process, several funders and VLRI managers cite the
mismatch between decision -making timing and funding cycles as a significant challenge to international
cooperation on VLRIs. In general, inconsistencies within and between natio nal funding mechanisms are
difficult to overcome.
Some countries established principles guiding respective roles and responsibilities, and signing authorities,
among ministries and other funders, namely in Norway, which go as far as determining how Norway will
be represented, by whom, on the governance bodies of facilities of which it becomes a member . Some
legal structures impose strict requirements, for example, ministry level approval to join an ERIC facility as
a member. In Canada, the lack of clearly defined authorities for facilitating negotiations, managing the
interface with other funders abroad, and enter ing into agreements of some funders, like the CFI, while
mandated to deliver on a decision -making framew ork, is often seen as an impediment to international
engagement. This is in contrast, with funders like the United States DOE which defined a threshold-based
authority and decision matrix. For most VLRIs, the final step in decision -making resides with the highest
authority, for example parliament, cabinet, congress, etc., with allocations for such investments added as
a permanent budget item in the national budget, outside the funder’s regular envelope. In the Netherlands
for example, decisions for long -term commitments to VLRIs are taken beyond the regular funding
procedures for roadmap projects and are taken on a case -by-case basis at the highest level, by
cabinet/government – generally following a long and outstanding track record of Dutch scientific
involvement and Dutch membership of the international science collaboration in that particular field of
science and/or instrumentation/technology development.
While most countries strive to establish transparent review processes and criteria for decision-making, the
survey revealed that there are often political considerations that will invariably influence final decisions.
Sheer political will to move a project forward is sometimes the impetus for green lighting a VLRI project. In
the reverse case, roadmaps offer a long-term view of VLRI needs that can shield against an unfavourable
negative political climate or instability. For many EU countries, being included in the national or ESFRI
roadmap is thus a critical element for the decision process.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

VLRI business models
An RI’s business model refers to the financial arrangements (i.e., sources of funding and their
management) as well as range of activities, and services, that allow the RI to meet its mission and strategic
goals. Since it determines the way the RI structures itself, interfaces with stakeholders, approval of the
budget and finances, reactions to external events, etc., the business model is intimately linked to the
governance model, and both typically evolve conjointly. The considerations discussed in the Governance
section 3.1 on the legal structures, nature of partnerships and agreements, evolution along the lifecycle
stages of VLRIs are relevant in that they also carry implications for business models. For example, the loss
of a major partner will affect both the governance and the financial stability of the VLRI. A useful way of
regarding governance is that of ‘custodianship of the business model’. As such, a well-adapted governance
is key to ensuring the efficient use of financial and human resources and for weathering difficult times and
crises.
Being relatively few, a nd with each possessing peculiar constraints and challenges, VLRIs require
business models tailored to th eir unique circumstances. The business models of the surveyed VLRIs are
therefore diverse and difficult to generalize but there are similarities in the funding challenges the y face
depending on their nature, their services offer ed, or their physical location, this in addition to their legal
structures.
More than half of VLRIs surveyed are membership -based and therefore pool contributions from several
governments and funders. In such cases, the number of partners usually equates with the number of main
sources of financial support to the project’s construction and/or operations, whether as in-kind and/or cash;
although other revenue streams sometimes comp lement member funding, such as from industry,
foundations, non-member countries, and funding for specific subprojects, e.g. via EU funding programmes.
• Although d ecision-making framework s specific to VLRIs are rare, many countries establish
financial thresholds for different decision-making processes. Many funders report reaching a
ceiling in their ability to support a growing cohort of VLRIs, and therefo re anticipate having to
become increasingly selective in their investments and accordingly rely more and more on
sophisticated strategic tools . Funders are confronted with b alancing investments, often from the
same pool of funding, among domestic vs intern ational RIs, and different size RIs, which is a
challenge that comes with various trade-offs.
• Most countries are guided by a national strategy for research, sometimes coupled with a strategy
for international engagement . The use of national RI roadmaps is gaining momentum; they help
galvanize domestic funding partners and institutions . Transnational roadmaps further help define
areas where the institutional, national, and communal roadmaps intersect. Funders can play a role
in convening communities to assemble around a common vision of their VLRI needs.
• Road mapping can also be useful in decoupling the qualification process – which attributes a ‘seal
of quality’ to the project − from funding decisions and immediate budget constraints . Roadmaps
offer a lon g-term view of VLRI needs that can shield against an unfavourable negative political
climate or instability.
• The number of partners exacerbates the complexity of financing negotiations. Not only does each
partner aims to get their fair share of returns, but they often have different funding approaches and
conflicting approaches to decision making (top-down/centralized vs bottom up/community-driven).
• There are different requirements and risk assessments for VLRIs’ hosts and other partners, and
between minor vs major partners that influence decision -making. Sheer political will to move a
project forward is sometimes the impetus for green lighting a VLRI project.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  33
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Some VLRIs have subsidiary forms of membership as well (e.g., associate memberships) or receive
contributions outside their convention, for example ITER’s technical cooperation agreements with Australia
and Canada, ESO’s partnership with Australia . Not all these additional contributors will be represented in
decision-making bodies but can be observers or participate in committees, such as ECCSEL’s Industry
advisory group. Agreements often have clauses setting requirements regarding the length of partner
funding commitments: at least 10 years for ESO and 5 years for ERIC’s, whereas to limit the risk of failure,
ITER’s constitution includes a ’non -quitting’ clause for the construction phase. This explains why Russia
remains part of the collaboration despite sanctions due to the military invasion of Ukraine. Even when there
is no immediate funding shortage, many VLRIs actively seek new members (this despite sometimes adding
complexity to financial management); a partnership strategy, clearly demonstrating benefits for each type
of stakeholder, is said to be important in that regard . However, th e process to become a new member
being often very slow and complex - not from the VLRI’s side but mainly due to national decision -making
processes − is an oft-cited challenge.
Member contributions can be calculated according to a standard formula approved by the governing body,
typically based on each country’s net national income. This is the case for CERN, ESO and ECCSEL. For
other VLRIs, like SKA and ITER, partners must negotiate the sharing of costs, a process which can be
quite long, and delicate sinc e each must be satisfied in getting their fair share of returns and benefits.
Then, there are different requirements for a host vs participant: the host needs a solid business case and
must be committed on the long-term, also carrying most of the risks. Ty pically, the host country will cover
a larger portion, as a ‘premium’ for highest returns on investments. For example, Germany covered 5 8%
of European XFEL’s construction, and Europe, 45% for ITER, and the three hosts of SKA, 55%.
ESO and JINR, both interg overnmental organisations involving many member countries, are interesting
cases because they oversee a portfolio of RIs and VLRIs, rather than a single RI. Membership fees are
pooled into a central budget that is then used to fund several projects, in effect acting like their own funding
organisation, with projects ’ priorities determined by its members according to a long -term plan. When a
new country joins ESO, a special contribution is paid to reflect the new member’s share of the accumulated
net investment value and financial assets, including depreciation, already funded by the existing members.
Although the convention stipulates that the contributions of acceding countries be used to decrease the
payments of the existing members by default, thus far new contributions have instead been added to the
baseline to allow growth of the RI portfolio. This type of model provides stability and long-term financial
sustainability, but also gives central management the flexibility to quickly respond to a changing si tuation,
such as project cost escalations.
In contrast, some VLRIs get majority support from a single funder. For example, TRIUMF, KSTAR, EAST,
LIGO and IODP. While this comes with the advantage of simplicity, reliance on a single source can be a
risk if the funder, for any reason, be it budgetary pressures, change in priorities, etc., fails to renew funding.
Although revenue is often complemented with project funding from public and private sector sources
domestically and internationally, it is often a marginal source of income. For example, the percentage taken
up by government funds in the operating cost of a large research facility in Korea is a round 80% of its
operating cost; compared with 2/3rds for TRIUMF. Although for the latter, since the use of commercial
revenue is unrestricted, it can help mitigate costs overruns and serve to fund activities unsupported by
other means. For IODP, reliance on ad-hoc revenue sources for specific expeditions is proving too volatile
in the recent global financial context, and a new model is being contemplated. A challenge for this type of
funding model is that it is not always best adapted to the long lifespan of the facility, and its overall risk
profile, especially if the funding cycle is short.
Distributed VLRIs, such as ELIXIR and ECSSEL, operate according to a mix of the above models, where
the central hub or operations centre is funded through membership fees (in addition to in -kind personnel
in the case of ECCSEL) whereas the nodes are largely funded through national- and EU-level investments.
ELIXIR redistributes membership fees back to nodes for implementing its scientific programme with the
aim of creating a coherent, pan-European research infrastructure for life science data25.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Regional centres that are not part of the VLRI -organisation but which are nevertheless essential for the
use of the facilities may also contribute in kind. This is the case for the SKA which is developing together
with the international science communi ty a collaborative ecosystem referred to as the global network of
regional centres. This network requires substantial separate/additional national funding to establish and
operate these centres in the member countries or regions26. Similarly, there are European ALMA Research
Centre nodes in several member countries of ESO. This is an interesting concept, because the distributed
centres bring additional benefits to the members of the VLRI. This nuances the dichotomy between single
sited and distributed facil ities and represent an interesting example of VLRIs ecosystems (see chapter
3.5), linking global/international to regional/national facilities.
Managing cash and in-kind contributions
The financing of VLRIs usually involves some degree of cash and in-kind contributions. The latter come in
the form of buildings, structures, components and systems, services, personnel, etc. However, there is no
recommended ratio applicable to all VLRIs as each approach has its pros and cons that must be weighted
in light of the VLRI’s unique context, including the expectation of partners. But any VLRI manager today is
preoccupied with striking the right balance. From the VLRI’s included in this study, at one end, ITER is the
example with the highest in-kind ratio, at 80-90%, while the ESO is essentially all cash as an organisation,
but receives in-kind contributions towards building instruments.
A high ratio of in -kind contributions allows a project to capitali se on the strengths of the partners , thus
favouring complementarities, and spreading the economic and societal benefits , often in the form of
national procurement/contracts, all the while limiting partners’ respective responsibilities to a more
constrained portion of the project. In-kind contributions help distribute some of the risk and liability among
partners, for example in protecting partners from operations costs beyond their responsibility. It is seen as
an effective and natural mechanism for international partners to contribute their best to the project in terms
of scientific and technical expertise, engineering resources, manufacturing capability, etc. I t also avoids
the undesirable situation where it is mainly the host that benefits from everyone else’s investment. This
type of arrangement can also be used to create lasting capacity in partner countries to support next phases
or generations of the project, for example ITER and its next phase, DEMO.
• A VLRI’s business model is intimately linked to its governance model, and both typically evolve
conjointly. A well-adapted governance is key to ensuring the efficient use of financial and human
resources and for weathering difficult times and crises. Choosing the right business and
governance model early on can help setup the VLRI for sustainability.
• Business models for networks of regional centres that further add to the capacity of VLRIs should
be further examined.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  35
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

On the flipside, in -kind contributions make project management much more difficult as they add other
elements of risks related to quality control, schedule, integration of systems, and more. For example, t he
promised equipment may not be delivered on schedule , or at all , because of technical or financial
obstacles, the responsible partner leaving the collaboration or because of global supply chain issues. This
complexity tends to increase with the number of partners. Feedback from ESS management indicated that,
for them, a ratio of 35% overall was just about manageable. In-kind contributions from members also need
to be reliably valued. Therefore, adopting an in -kind contribution valuation methodology, shared among
partners, is an important consideration. Normally, a formal assessment is carried out by an in-kind review
committee.
Case study: ITER
ITER is largest nuclear fusion experiment in the World. Due to its complexity and degree of sophistication, it is still
being used today by both VLRI funders and managers as a blueprint for managing collaborations. It constitutes a
unique enterprise especially regarding the distributed construction with components being developed and built in
three different continents; it therefore had to develop a robust mechanism for international technological
cooperation and coordination.
Each domestic partner developed its own contribution to the project according to required specificat ions, as 80-
90% of member contributions are provided in kind. Domestic agencies dedicated to the project were set -up by
each member country. Specific agreements had to be developed to establish the contribution of each member to
the various steps and parts of the project, taking into account the role of the host and that of other members.
Domestic agencies usually issued procurement contracts to their own contractors. In addition, all members are
guaranteed access to 100% of the intellectual property. Whil e in -kind contributions represent the majority of
investment, a central reserve fund under the control of the Director-General was established in 2015 to empower
the quick resolution of project change requests and to offset the risk that unavoidable design changes result in
further delay to project execution.
As attaining a high degree of precision in executing each piece of the puzzle is critical, this model of in -kind
procurement proved to be extremely challenging. This was especially the case for first-of-a-kind components given
the immense technological challenges and associated risks. Plus, each major component had to be transported
from one country to another to be completed before it could be shipped to the ITER site; steps for which the
Fukushima nuclear incident and COVID-19 caused problematic delays. Also, the prohibition on cost and schedule
contingencies imposed by some partners because of national rules has presented a major challenge.
Adopting an approach of continuous improvement is an imperative for ITER’s success. The above scheme nearly
failed until quality -control policies were reinforced, something which over the last seven years have proven
successful. In fact, ITER is known to have one of the most refined ‘Risk and Opportunity Management frameworks’
as it has been substantially strengthened over the years, and includes risk assessments at multiple levels of the
project. An interesting aspect of the framework is the active identification of opportunities to compensate for risks,
a good example of which was the integration of a system called the Disruption Mitigation System that was not in
the original design but was incorporated following its success in other projects. Overall, ITER’s risk management
practices are now on par with those of other large, complex undertakings outside science; for example, ITER uses
industry-grade product lifecycle management.
ITER also regularly undergoes assessment of its management structure and practices. A sweeping organisational
reform, addressing and correcting problems identified in one such review, was executed in 2015. This integrated
the ITER Organization Central Team and several domestic agencies so that they could function as a single entity,
thereby simplifying the decision -making process, reducin g bureaucracy, and maximizing the efficiency of the
project management.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

While many partners expect a return on their investment in the form of supporting their own industry and
and scientific capacity, other forms of return can be negotiated such as intellectual property, reciprocity in
use of VLRIs, access to VLRI data. For the SKA, the large members were guaranteed 70% minimum of
return on investment in procurement . However, such negotiations can be challenging if new partners are
sought to fill a remaining funding gap even though nearly all of the procurement has already been allocated.
Sometimes collaborating through in-kind contributions is not the most cost -efficient way to proceed but is
nonetheless pursued for other reasons, for example to build a working relationship with another country,
as a means for diplomacy and/or international development.
Whatever the situation relating to in -kind support, centrally held cash is also important. Inevitably, a
significant amount of cash will be spent in the host country, where local services and administrative/support
staff can be obtained at the lowest cost and with the least effort. It also provides the ability to purchase a
large, costly item that is not of sufficient technological interest to be an in-kind contribution from one of the
partners, but which is critical to the operation.

Evolution along the VLRI’s lifecycle
While each phase in a VLRI’s lifecycle is fraught with its own set of challenges, for both VLRI managers
and funders, most respondents charac terized the conceptual phase as one of the most challenging as it
requires strong commitments, particularly from the host nation , and often the result of pooling resources
from different domestic players. In some cases, early partners initially bidding to become the host site for
a VLRI, or its headquarters, may retract from the project entirely (as did Canada in ITER) or lessen their
support. Launching a new VLRI requires careful planning, and choosing the right business and governance
model early on can help setup the VLRI for sustainability.
On that, Dr Womersley, the former CEO of the ESS, argued that “a lack of a credible funding plan −
therefore rigorous lifecycle cost estimates − as well as inadequate stakeholder engagement are probably
the worst pitfalls that can jeopardize the viability and sustainability of a VLRI, more so than any weakness
in the science case”. A solid business case should be developed from the start in addition to the science
case. For ESS, assembling a consortium early on that could provide both the political mandate and funding
took considerable time and inevitably influenced the business model of the project. ESS had the additional
challenge that it was being constructed on a green-field site without the dedicated support of an established
laboratory. However, industry partners were on board and advocating for the facility from the start, whic h
made a more convincing case for attracting investments. For ELI, this process was quite difficult as it was
initially proposed as a single -sited facility for which no single country was able justify such a large sum.
Several initial partners withdrew and later the project was descoped into three smaller facilities.
Most national funders reported having mechanisms that consider most, if not all, lifecycle phases.
However, where seed funding to explore a VLRI’s feasibility at an early stage is not readily accessible, this
was said to cause issues downstream, namely because it could mean locking in project costs at a later
phase before they are fully understood , leading to unrealistic expectations by funders. Hence, a funding
mechanism providing adequate resources for the early development phase of a VLRI was seen as critical.
While the financing of VLRIs usually involves a mix of cash and in -kind contributions , there is no
recommended ratio as each approach has its pros and cons that must be weighted considering the
VLRI’s unique context, including the expectation of partners. In-kind contributions help distribute some
of the risk and liability among partners and is seen as a natural mechanism for international partners
to contribute their best to the project. Centrally held cash, however, remains important to provide a
much needed flexibility and a capacity to respond quickly to unexpected events .

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  37
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

A recent example is the £3.2 million investment announced by UKRI to advance plans for its own XFEL
facility27.
Even the best planned projects can face unexpected cost overruns, such as the impact of the COVID crisis
that required a re -baselining of ITER’s costs. However, many issues can be mitigated by the setting of
rigorous costs estimates, factoring in risks, using a standardized methodology and terminology that are
shared by all stakeholders. As Figure 5 illustrates, the capital investment to build a VLRI is just the tip of
the iceberg; most VLRI costs are ‘under the sea ’, and a superficial approach will only look at short -term
visible inputs. In other words, for decisions to be made based on complete information, stakeholders need
to be made aware of the VLRI’s lifecycle costs, reflecting the full range of activities deemed necessary to
accomplish its mission. For its road mapping process, the French Ministry for Higher Education an d
Research developed and optimized such a methodology, including both direct and indirect as well as
hidden costs, which it said proved useful in negotiating participation in international projects. Some VLRIs
have implemented a methodology employed at CERN called “earned value management” which tracks the
real progress and true cost situation of a project using performance indicators.
One cost that seems frequently overlooked or under-estimated is cyber-infrastructure. While an integral
component of any type of modern VLRI (whether actually within the VLRI itself or as supporting facilities
to the VLRI) , this is an area that is still not always considered in budget planning. Many agreed that
investment in computer resources for calculation, analysis, storage and digital communication, as well as
in high -speed and high -volume networks, and in the personnel to manage those resources, needs to
increase to meet rapidly growing data volumes, and expectations on data sharing.
Transnational physical access is also an area that several VLRI managers reported was underfunded.
Many national funding programs only fund national access thus leaving out many potential
users/researchers, especially those coming from underdeveloped countries.
Figure 5. Illustration of how VLRIs are perceived by decision-makers and of actual VLRI costs
beyond the construction phase

Source: Korea National Research Facilities and Equipment Centre
The transition from construction to financing operations for the long term and in a sustainable way is a
challenge for many VLRIs. For some, this is due to a disconnect between funding streams for construction,
upgrades, and operations, with sometimes investment decisions made in isolation from each other, leading
to inconsistencies. Or else completely flat operating budgets that do not allow the VLRI to operate optimally
unless it seeks to diversify its sources of income. Predictability and timing of funding are concerns for those

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

relying on a mix of contributions coming in a succession of short-sighted investments and investments
covering the full scope with longer term engagement. This can hinder a VLRI’s ability for long -term
planning, and exacerbate staffing issues, for example.
It is also quite difficult to maintain the engagement of funding partners over the entire lifespan of the VLRI.
Political instability and loss of funding partners are common challenges. There are also VLRIs that are built
for a specific purpose, and efforts to extend that mandate can lead to complex negotiations, especially if
major upgrades are required to keep it relevant. Others exceed the lifespan that was planned initially (e.g.,
space telescopes) and raise the issue of continued funding when the funders’ budgets are constrained.
As with governance, the business model typically needs to adapt to its life phases to reflect the change in
the makeup of partners, and broader stakeholders. Several reported a transition between the construction
and operations phases, and /or sometimes between the planning and construction phases, such as ELI,
and SKA. There can also be more intermediate steps, for example ESS is putting together a business
model for the initial operations phase which will run in parallel to that of the construction phase. The overlap
is planned to last for about 7 years. It then anticipates a change in model when it reaches steady -state
operations. LIGO was in a similar situation when it managed two parallel but disti nct budgets while it
underwent upgrades for the Advanced LIGO. For member-based organisations, members’ shares tend to
change between construction and operations. ESS’s host nations, Sweden, and Denmark, covered nearly
50% of construction costs, but only 15% of operations. For ELI, while the initial operations phase is covered
at 90% by the three hosts, the aim is to recruit more members to reduce this to 50% during steady -state
operations.
Models also evolve with the VLRI’s mission, for instance towards increased industry support, or with
changes in the landscape, for example when a next -generation project takes the lead, the original VLRI
may redefine its mission or be repurposed entirely, if not decommissioned.
Managing contingencies, and risk
The scale and complexity of VLRIs makes them inherently risky , therefore sound risk management is a
prerequisite for any VLRI project. NSF, DOE and some s pace agencies, for example, have developed
robust risk and project management frameworks wh ich are recognized as best practices worldwide . The
risk and opportunity management system of ITER is considered one of the most, if not the most,
sophisticated for a VLRI. However, given mounting global economic and geopolitical risks, there is broad
agreement that risk management is an area that needs to be given particular attention moving forward by
both funders and VLRI managers, and that more robust tools must be developed based on this experience.
Typically, schedule, budget and scope contingencies are used to manage foreseen risks, provided these
risks are properly identified using sound methods. If costs escalate, there is always an option to descope
the project, or else reduce the level of activity during the operation phase, but not without some loss or
negative consequences. It is then critical that these contingencies be included as part of the risk-adjusted
total project costs to set realistic expectations. Additionally, a mechanism should ideally be in place to allow
coping with the consequences of unpredictable challenges , the so -called ‘unknown unknowns’. Many
funders and VLRIs hold a cash reserve, separate from the contingency, for that purpose, but not always.
The business model needs to adapt to a VLRI’s life phases – often between the construction and
operations phases – to reflect the change in the makeup of partners, and broader stakeholders. The
conceptual phase of a VLRI remains one of the most challenging as it requires strong commitments,
particularly fr om the host nation . S eed funding to explore a VLRI’s feasibility at an early stage is
important. It is also quite difficult to maintain the engagement of funding partners over the entire
lifespan of the VLRI.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  39
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The feedback from the surveys revealed that not all respondents have adequately protected themselves
against the post-pandemic effects, and the crisis generated by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine,
and that their risk’s analyses showed their limits. For instance, funders reported that most projects in the
construction stage experienced delays and cost increases, which required re-baselining of their costs, such
as in the case of the ESS. For the NSF, this meant additional funds were requested in the annual budget
appropriation of the organi sation to address these unexpected costs. These r ecent crises stressed the
need for agility and flexibility from the part of funders to respond to unexpected events.
The survey also revealed incongruities in the approaches to risk management across partners which
exacerbate challenges for projects with multiple partners – mainly in terms of tolerance to risk, mitigation
strategies, flexibility towards allowing schedule, budget and scope contingencies and reserve funding in
budgeting. Some partners are constrained by national rules that prohibit cost and schedule contingencies.
Developing frameworks u sing common terminology , with clearly defined responsibilities, which are well
understood by all partners from the outset is seen as key to success. Furthermore, adjustments to the risk
management strategy are necessary when transitioning from one phase to the other.
2.3. Data management
VLRIs produce vast amounts of data, and those are probably their most valuable output. But this bring its
own set of challenges, not only for the management, curation and maintenance of these data but also for
their access by various categories of users. Although these issues may seem common to all RIs, they are
amplified and more complex for VLRIs.
VLRIs’ approach to data management has been significantly refined o ver recent years . Not only as the
result of the amount of generated data growing exponentially but also the fact that various regulatory and
security constraints need to be integrated. For example, ESS has put in place a formal, codified scientific
data policy in 2020. It covers the collection, access, curation, use, disposal and storage of scientific
research data collected from the neutron beam instruments located at ESS under all access modes -
except proprietary access - and fully embraces FAIR principles (i.e., findable, accessible, interoperable,
and reusable). As VLRIs often work in synergy with many external laboratories, data mirror sites are
sometimes set up in cooperative institutes, also ensuring robustness in data access. In the case of VLRIs
which are more oriented towards external users, such users will often maintain research data sets under
their own data access and management policies . There are also VLRIs that are in essence data RIs, in
which case even more extensive guidance and policy rules are developed, such as for ELIXIR 28.
Based on the su rvey results, data management challenges for VLRIs can be grouped into four main
categories:
- Data growth
• Given mounting global economic and geopolitical risks, there is broad agreement that risk
management is an area that needs to be given particular attention moving forward by both funders
and VLRI managers, and that more robust tools must be developed. Schedule, budget, and scope
contingencies should be considered as risk mitigating measures provided lifetime project costs
are well estimate d and risks are properly identified using standardized methodology and
terminology that are shared by all stakeholders.
• VLRI cost estimates should factor in costs for the required computer resources for calculation,
analysis, storage and digital communication, as well as in high-speed and high-volume networks,
and personnel to manage those resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

- Data sensitivity
- Data access/ownership
- Data access for non-expert users
Data growth
Despite the extraordinary growth of data sets produced by VLRIs, our survey indicated that most had set
up solutions for storing and processing the data. In some specific cases such as JWST, not only a high -
capacity database technology and relevant database tools for the users had to be available but also a high
data rate communication system had to be set up from the satellite’s telescope to the earth, and this
appears to work satisfactorily29. As data sets grow, some VLRIs such as KSTAR are considering updating
their current file system to more advanced ones (hierarchical structure, partial data access) but there are
no reports of real technical difficulties and, while these may be costly, they are usually well integrated into
the financial requirements of the VLRI. These large amount s of data also create a challenge for data -
sharing: a number of VLRIs report that transferring all raw data to users is nearly impossible, hence data
analyses need to be performed on-site and only the digested data are being transferred.
Data sensitivity
The topic of the sensitivity of the data, whether for ethical or security reasons, is treated very differently
between VLRIs. While this is also a challenge common to all RIs, the international dimension of the VLRIs
adds a level of relevance. Ethical issues will mostly concern human -related data. Because national
regulations are often different from one country to another, VLRIs that handle human -related data must
develop specific secured storage and access policies. For example, as sensitive human data cannot leave
the jurisdiction in which they were generated, ELIXIR has developed technological solutions to allow
researchers to discover potentially useful data in other countries and then request access through the
relevant channels. For example, the ELIXIR-operated Life Science Login30 allows data access committees
to verify the request comes from a bonafide insti tutional account, and ELIXIR’s Federated European
Genome-Phenome Archive31 (EGA) provides solutions for sensitive data that cannot be transferred across
national boundaries. This means that the same VLRI may have to develop several access policies to their
data. The COVID-19 crisis highlighted potential difficulties in sharing sensitive but necessary health data
and new policies are being developed to combine security and fast access to such sensitive data.
Other data may need to be protected for security reasons. For example, during the COVID pandemic many
RIs were subjected to external unauthorised attempts to access their data 32. Data theft may occur for
economic reasons, as they may have strong intellectual property value. If data is prematurely or
inappropriately released to the public without proper supporting information this can also lead to dangerous
misinterpretation. Thus, a number of VLRIs that manage sensitive data have developed strong
cybersecurity protection mechanisms, although this is not considered as a high priority issue for VLRIs in
less sensitive scientific domains.
Data access/ownership
Most VLRIs don’t just produce large amount s of data, they produce data from a structure which is
composed of various national stakeholders, or at least that collaborate with many stakeholders from
different countries, and their data are often produced for a very broad international community. These
factors add a layer of complexity in the data use policy they need to set up. While most agree on general
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable ( FAIR) principles, the reality behind is more complex and
nuanced. Our survey reveals five main categories of policies among VLRIs , several different access
policies being potentially developed for different types of data by a given VLRI:
- Open access to both the scientific community and the general public; this is usually for data
produced by public funding, sometimes with a grace (embargo) period of 1-5 years that allows the
scientists who produced the data to publish in scientific journals before the data being fully open .

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  41
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

- Open access in theory but restricted access in practice; this is often for data that require advanced
skills and tools to be of any use. VLRIs may pro vide a “digested” version of these data for non -
expert users (see next subchapter on access) but this is not always the case. Another case is
when users need to apply for an access authorisation to the VLRI management (for example, for
EAST); in this case, different user groups may have access to different data sets.
- Restricted to VLRI members and VLRI staff; this is a way to provide a return on investment to the
VLRI funders who may have to support a very expensive RI or because the topic is highly
competitive (such as fusion).
- Restricted/closed for IP reasons; this is typically the case for data generated by for -profit entities
at the RI, and for subsets of data that can be used to produce patents and generate revenues.
- Restricted/closed for security reasons; while this is fairly rare in the field of VLRIs, some data sets
may have dual use potential , be of use for national secu rity and are thus fully classified , or else
would compromise basic operations.
In addition, there may be specific access policies related to the host country of the VLRI, wh ose research
community may benefit from a priv ileged or additional access capacity. For example, many astronomy
VLRIs in Chile make provision for greater or earlier access to data for Chilean scientists as part of the
agreement signed between the VLRIs governance and the host country.
Data access for non-expert users
Providing access to the data controlled by VLRIs to non-experts (and experts in new disciplines) is probably
the biggest challenge regarding VLRI data management. The pressure that arose in recent years for
increasing the socio -economic impact of VLRIs as well as ensuring reproducibility means th ey are
compelled to develop new data access mechanisms, user-friendly data products and standardized formats,
all of which potentially entail costly technical solutions. This often implies that new staff and resources need
to be dedicated towards these activities which drive up operational costs.
Despite a trend towards open science/open data principles, VLRIs still have very different data
access/ownership policies. This is partly inherited from domain -specific cultu res (in astronomy, or
some ocean sciences VLRIs, for example, the traditional practice has always been a grace/embargoed
period followed by open access to the general community) but there is also an influence of the legal
structure and international nature of the VLRI. Although embargo period tends to get shorter with the
movement to open science, even the most recent VLRIs and those in development usually have/plan
for some sort of restricted access to some data sets or embargoed access for a specific duration. VLRI
stakeholders thus need to work towards achieving a greater degree of consensus on open data
principles.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

As discussed during the first GSF workshop on VLRIs 33, broadening access of VLRI data is often
challenging when it implies having to compromise between the needs of the traditional experts and those
of the new user communities. Experts, on the one hand, most often require access to high volumes of raw
data, and benefit from the VLRI offering a system of tools and resources (e.g., application programming
interface or API) enabling them to create their own software applications. Non-experts, on the other hand,
face barriers in making sense of the data and therefore require more data services and support from the
VLRI, as well as data in accessible formats.

Another challenge is that of matching data access to n ew science, such as multi-messenger astronomy.
In the case of gravitational wave VLRIs , gravitational wave detectors now share publicly data and results
from low-latency analyses within minutes that can be picked up by telescopes for follow -on observations.
External users just require the location of the signals and not the actual data . It is striking that 90% of the
science in this domain was probably achieved using 1% of the data. This illustrate s the overall challenge
for VLRIs with non -experts requiring a small amount of “digested” data and support while experts still
require large amounts of data to conduct detailed analyses. This requires from VLRIs an additional effort
(and relevant resources) to provide what non -experts require, something which is no t yet integrated into
many VLRIs financial and operational models.
Case study: LIGO
According to LIGO, opening up data access to non -experts is similar to the “last mile” problem in transportation:
there are gaps in access, knowledge and resources that need to be solved. While lots of VLRI scientific data are,
in theory, “open” and public, even when restricted access is not set up, there are practical obstacles to overcome:
- Are the data easy to find and download?
- Do I recognise the file format? Can I figure out how to open it?
- Can I load the data in a spreadsheet or text file?
- Are there “secret steps” to processing the data?
- Can I find the software? Can I get it installed on my computer?
- Once the software is installed, can I figure out how to use it?
- Do I know where to ask for help when I get stuck?

To solve this data gap, L IGO has set up a diversity measures. The Gravitational Wave Open Science Center
(GWOSC) ensures FAIR public data release, through an accessible web server, standardised formats between
LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA data, and open -source software. The open data pol icy has encouraged data use, with
about 6000 visitors per month to the GWOSC and 250 publications in 2020 -2021. Open data workshops have
encouraged non experts to use the available data. The GWOSC event portal includes a cumulative catalog ue of
all LGO-Virgo-KAGRA detections which can be picked up by astronomers to follow up discoveries using different
instruments. And a strong effort has been developed to support the user communities through discussion forums,
help desk, online course, web apps, tutorials and workshops: in 2022, open data workshops gathered over 1000
participants in 15 locations and virtual events.
Despite the strong external push for providing access to VLRIs’ data to non -experts (for example, to
encourage VLRIs to respond to SDGs), many VLRIs do not consider this a high priority and still have
strong barriers in their data access policies and mechanisms. Furthermore, up to now, there has been
relatively little direct incentive or directives from funders and decision-makers to remove those barriers
or to support data sharing to non -expert users. VLRIs stakeholders need to provide the necessary
incentives and resources to enable new approaches to open up data to non-experts and to experts in
other disciplines in order to fully unlock the potential of these facilities.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  43
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2.4. Impact assessment and expectations
VLRIs are long -term scientific initiatives developed to produce frontier knowledge. While this is still very
much at the core of the strategic objectives of even the most recent VLRIs, there are growing expectations
that they also deliver a broad range of societal and economic benefits. The se benefits include spreading
knowledge to the public, strengthening and expanding scientific networks, training future scientists,
engaging with society, creating jobs and boosting economic growth in local communities, fostering
innovation through technology development, and collaborating with other scientific organisation s and
industry. Some VLRIs also include in their missions the contribution to public policies and, more widely, to
solving major societal challenges. This wide range of objectives, especially if they were not clear at the
outset, creates a number of challenges for the VLRIs. The situation is all the more complicated as VLRIs
must meet the needs and expectations of a diverse mix of international stakeholders and stakeholders.
Assessing impact
Assessing the impact of an RI is always strongly related to the vision and objectives that have been
established by its funders and community. VLRIs typically collect a range of scientific performance and
output metrics (e.g., publications), in line with their core mission. The duration of usage of the infrastructure
by the different stakeholders can be monitored as an indicator of the interest of the corresponding
community. Contracts and procurement metrics are often used to monitor individual stakeholder industrial
return, where applicable, and there is also a growing interest/emphasis by policy makers and stakeholders
for VLRIs – industry collaboration and technology transfer, e.g., investments and support for co-design and
co-development of advanced (key)technologies and scientific instrumentation through collaborations
between VLRIs and industry34.
However, many VLRIs have yet to develop formal assessment procedure s for broader socio -economic
impact. This is because these additional expectations are more recent and the metrics by which such
impacts can be measured may vary among stakeholders, making a clear definition difficult. As a result,
VLRIs often periodically assess this broader impact by commissioning external studies from specialised
consultancy firms.
A number of VLRIs also take a dual approach to impact assessment. A regular/annual exercise related to
expected deliverables/milestones, and a more in -depth assessment, often conducted externally, that can
be linked to a proposal for upgrades or other significant life-cycle events. For example, TRIUMF conducts
a specific assessment every five years prior to its funding renewal. Through a formal evaluation, which
takes over a year to complete, TRIUMF is comprehensively assessed against a range of key measures,
including s cientific excellence, socio -economic impact, relevance, cap acity, and governance . These
external assessments often come with specific recommendations that the VLRIs must address in
subsequent years.
The impact assessment methodology is more challenging for VLRIs that are spread over multiple sites. To
meet this challenge, for example, ELIXIR has set up a two-pronged approach: (1) a high-level impact
assessment at the level of the entire infrastructure and (2) another at the level of individual nodes thereby
strengthening the capacity of country nodes to carry out assessments related to their own national situation
and particular set of stakeholders ( namely those funding the node’s activities, and other influential
stakeholders at the national level ). In some cases, some of the ELIXIR nodes are supported by expert
impact evaluators who are able to produce ad-hoc assessments of a more limited scope.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

More recently, however, some VLRIs have adopted a more systematic approach to impact assess ment,
using new tools and methodologies such as those described by the OECD (OECD, 2019[14]) or by the EU
RI-PATH project35. The European spallation source , for example, has developed an impact assessment
model that takes into account the whole impact pathway throughout the full life cycle of the infrastructure.
However, the ESS return on experience also indicated that stakeholders had very different expectations
and interpretation of impact indicators, and that a more consensus methodology and philosophy might be
needed for future VLRIs.
Broadening the scope/new demands
The impact on training and education, both at the expert level and for a wider audience, is one of the key
impacts of VLRIs that has taken an increasing importance in recent years. Due to their unique nature and
their international dimension (CERN facilities are a good example), VLRIs have traditionally played a role
in the training of both scientists and engineers, but this has escalated in priority for several reasons:
• VLRIs are constantly evolving with different project phases requiring different staffing profiles and
competencies in an international environment. Several VLRI managers reported difficulties in
recruiting during the survey given that VLRIs require highly trained staff in specific domains , who
are not easy to find on the traditional job market. VLRIs thus need to develop training for their own
internal needs but also to build up a broader workforce that can operate in different RIs. In
response, ITER has for example created a “ITER ACADEMY” Training Programme that addresses
the capacity-building and development of staff comp etencies and organ isational needs that are
required to achieve the Project's goals. Similarly, XFEL set up a PhD school to increase cohesion
and attractiveness, with about 50 positions. ESO introduced a 3 -year Engineering & Technology
research fellowships to develop engineers that contribute to building and operating state -of-the-
art facilities for the advancement of astronomical research. The main impact has been the creation
of an internationally networked community with shared standards of quality and ex cellence.
Furthermore, demand for diversity and gender equality also means that VLRIs need to provide
Case study: ESS
The European spallation source (ESS) has in its mission goals to produce research outputs that are best-in-class
in terms of scientific quality as well as in terms of socio -economic impact. Contrary to many VLRI projects, ESS
decided to develop an impact assessment mechanism starting from the conception phase, and that would be
progressively adapted as the life -cycle evolved. This makes it possible to evaluate in detail the impact during
each phase with, for example, 42 impact indicators and metrics for the construction phase, and 41 for the
operation phase, with only a partial overlap.
The metrics had to be developed in response to the expectations of the different stakeholders and therefore
regroup indicators that assess the overall impact of the ESS globally as well as a number of indicators that provide
feedback of interest to individual ESS members. Selected key indicators include co-publications among member
countries, new partners in grant projects, the number of new suppliers , the innovation level of products and
services supplied to the ESS, their origin and nature (in-kind…) etc.
The experience of developing of a specific impact assessment methodology for the ESS which was initially based
upon the assessment framework developed by the OECD and the EU RI -PATH project yielded a series of
important lessons:
- Socio-economic indicators (SEI) can be measured from the concept phase through the complete lifecycle of
a RI
- SEI parameters should not be static and need to be fine-tuned:
- When phase milestones are achieved
- If context or surrounding parameters have changed
- SEI should be seen as a continuous project for a RI with reporting dates e.g., on an annual basis
- SEI does not have the same shape and form for all RI stakeholders:
- ESS created narratives for each member country
- SEI were “translated” along the lines of “what does it mean for you”

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  45
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

attractive training to under-represented groups. Distributed VLRIs also face specific challenges to
maintain expertise throughout the whole infrastructure ; ELIXIR has for example developed an
internal staff exchange programme36 to respond to that need.
• Stakeholders increasingly expect VLRIs to deliver impact in the form of training, both for the
country’s own human resource requirement but also as a mean s of conveying the country’s
attractiveness. In Canada, TRIUMF is for example is expected to play a critical role in the training
of the next generation of innovators and leaders from across the country and beyond. VLRIs
provide education across a unique multidisciplinary high -tech workplace, bringing together talent
from a wide range of institutions. VLRIs often provide training from the undergraduate level to the
highest expertise for established professionals, thus playing an important role for the VLRI
stakeholders. This is often developed in close association with local universitie s and academic
centres but also with academic partners of the various stakeholders for international VLRIs: JINR
has for example developed partnerships not only with the local Dubna University but also with the
departments of leading Universities of the me mber states associated with JINR. In some cases,
training is actually one of the main purposes of the VLRI; this is the case for IFMIF which was set
up not only to test materials but also as a place for training in the design, construction, maintenance
and operation of future fusion and accelerator facilities.
• An increasing number of VLRIs are located, or have some of their facilities located , in less
scientifically productive countries. Training local scientists and engineers is “part of the deal”
agreed with the host countries and hosting VLRI facilities may also spur national education
systems in STEM areas. Typical examples are in the astronomy domain where many new facilities
are located in the Southern Hemisphere in Chile, Argentina or South Af rica. When South Africa
submitted its expression of interest to host the SKA in 2003, there were fewer than five radio
astronomers in the country. Since then, over 1400 grants at various levels have been awarded by
the South African Radio Astronomy Observa tory (SARAO) - a significant return on South Africa’s
investment in the international SKA effort. In Chile, ESO also funds (via its Joint Committee) post-
doctoral programmes in astronomy at Chilean academic institutions.
• As VLRIs progressively broaden thei r user-base to non -expert communities, there is a need for
training these new users . As described in chapter 3.2, considerable efforts were for example
developed by LIGO to provide tutorials and specific training for non-experts users.
New demands have also emerged in recent years, often linked to the societal role expected of VLRIs .
Hence, VLRIs in the field of environment or health are expected to contribute to the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) or to support national or regional decision -making in these areas . For
example, ECCSEL is expected to have a positive impact on the EU Green Deal climate focus areas, and
for the first time in the history of the conference, nuclear fusion had a seat at the table during the COP26
in Glasgow, with ITER playing a significant role. The Republic of Korea has also placed greater emphasis
on the fusion energy program recently to meet the needs of its energy mix in 2050 with minim al carbon
production. This has led to new expectations for KSTAR facilities that come with an anticipated budget
increase. Various VLRIs in the physical sciences (e.g., TRIUMF) contribute to societal demands through
life sciences and materials science programs, conducting research with direct applications to society and
industry. Breakthroughs in life sciences facilitated by RIs can dramatically improve health care outcomes
and other RIs support the production of medical isotopes and development of radiopharmaceuticals –
critical tools in the treatment of cancer. The COVID-19 pandemic illustrated the potential of many RIs to
mobilise effectively in crises. Many non-health related VLRIs have responded quickly to th e emergency
needs by allowing fast -track projects related to COVID-19 (such as providing synchrotron facilities for
structural analyses) or by providing access to their high -capacity computing facilities to support modelling
projects. This has highlighted the potential role of VLRIs in addressing global challenges, which usually
requires a multidisciplinary approach.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Despite these very positive examples, societal expectations are currently rarely translated into formal
impact assessment exercise s and do no t benefit from established/robust methodologies mixing
quantitative and qualitative indicators.
Beyond specific outputs, momentum is also being given to mobilizing VLRIs – including their staff and
students – to help address systemic issues not only within research communities, but in society at large.
For example, some VLRIs such as IceCube have created a Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Working Group
to respond to and monitor these aspects.
Responding to stakeholders’ expectations
As the most recent VLRIs have been established through complex agreements involving a wide variety of
stakeholders, potential differences and even conflicts can arise from differences in expectations, which the
VLRI management need to address. To begin addressing these issues VLRIs need to develop high-quality,
targeted communications to ensure strong working relationships with their partners and stakeholders.
Target audiences include member country decision -makers, domestic agencies communication offices ,
industrial suppliers, national laboratories, scientific conference organisers, professional associations and
educational organisations, each requiring a specific communication policy.
Managing different stakeholders ’ expectations require s extensive dialogue. For example, the European
XFEL is developing performance indicators that include measures related to training, patents, procurement
and development of specific equipment from companies and technology exchanges , as a response to a
strong demand from stakeholders. This is not just taking into account the value but also the nature of
knowledge and technology transfer to member countries . In order to manage the different expectations
from different stakeholders , the European XFEL organises annual meetings to analyse their relative
expectations.
Diversity among partners also affects the definition of success. For example, the scientific impact for
gravitational wave VLRIs is optimized by network success, i.e. , achieving the maximum possible
sensitivities and uptime for each detector in the network. Hence, h aving common configurations of
detectors in the network would lead to a more efficient maintenance and offer the development of greater
sensitivity. However , this level of commonalit y often clashes with funding, proposal -review, and career
progression values. Originality and innovation as a measure of individual performance are often at odds
with uniform procedures and configuration controls that promote efficiency and robust performance. This
diversity of values has made it more difficult to effectively collaborate between VLRIs operating in different
funding and accountability environments . Thus, complex membership can negatively affect the impact of
a VLRI, and this is even more true for networks of VLRIs as discussed below.
Multi-sites VLRIs need to consider both their overall impact for their stakeholders, and the specific impact
of their various facilities located at different sites and hosted by different countries . The national
bioinformatics infrastructures that are part of ELIXIR develop and operate hundreds of bioinformatics
resources which are funded through a myriad of public and charitable sources, and in some cases the
private sector. Funders all have individual missions and associated strategic objectives, and hence specific
requirements in terms of evidence to support of the m. Increasingly, ELIXIR (its coordinating secretariat
and its national nodes) is being asked to provide such evidence, through a diverse set of questions , to
demonstrate public value. ELIXIR's approach has been to progressively develop its understanding of
funders’ expectations and needs and, on this basis, to proactively gather a body of evidence (Martin et al.,
2021[15]).

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  47
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Providing such an impact assessment to stakeholders is also a challenge for some astronomical
observatories which have their headquarters and telescopes spread over several continents. For example,
the SKA is distributed at two main sites situated in South Africa and Australia, with the main headquarters
in the United Kingdom, and several additional sites in different African countries are foreseen for the next
phases of the project. As SKA is now starting its construction phase, survey feedback indicated that while
SKA plans to use the OECD framework to establish appropriate assessment metrics, they are still in the
process of aligning the expectations of the different countries in terms of impact assessment.
2.5. VLRIs ecosystems
While VLRIs are themselves ambitious and complex structures , they are also imbedded into an even more
complex ecosystem of regional and national RIs, res earch institutes, universities and private sector
organisations allowing for complementarities and synergies. VLRIs are connected to a complex network
of partners and are increasingly developing synergies with other RIs.
Responses to our survey indicate t hat for VLRIs there are typically four main drivers for developing and
fostering networks with other RIs and research organisations:
- to look for opportunities of collaboration for the exchange of knowledge and allow researchers to tackle
complex/interdisciplinary scientific questions
- to lobby for resources and rationalise their own activities and avoid duplication of efforts
- to provide scientific and technological know-how and human resources capable of supporting them in
their tasks
- to provide the necessary computing network and capacity required
Broadening scientific impact
Despite their capacities, even VLRIs may not host all the equipment and resources required to add ress
complex scientific challenges, particularly when these are multi- or inter-disciplinary in nature.
Many VLRIs have forged partnerships to develop or invite joint research proposals, and this is of course
facilitated when VLRIs are situated in the same geographical area (such as the European XFEL and DESY
in the Hamburg region, or EAST with other RIs in the Hefei city area). Similarly, VLRIs often develop
partnerships with other RIs of the same domain that have complementary equipment and modalities to
allow for more complex experiments . IceCube, the neutrino observatory , for example, formed
collaborations on topics of common interest with other neutrino telescopes deployed in the Mediterranean
and in Lake Baikal through cooperative agreements. Recognizing that it cannot by itself meet all scientific
needs, SKA partners with several national and regional facilities such as LOFAR, the VLBI network, and
the Event Horizon Telescope, itself a network of observatories. The magnetic-confinement fusion research
community of RIs is also very closely linked and there are strong collaboration s among fusion facilities
(EAST in People’s Republic of China, hereafter “China” , DIII-D in United States, JET in EU, etc .) as well
VLRIs’ impacts are necessarily diverse and evolve during the life of the project and VLRI managers
are facing a stream of demand s and expectations from their stakeholders which can be difficult to
address. This illustrates the need to define and agree at the start of any VLRI project what are they
expected to deliver during their life -time, what are and will be the priorities , and robust impact
assessment methodologies. VLRIs stakeholders and managers should also anticipate that VLRIs may
need to adapt to new expectations and thus agree on a level of flexibility given to management to
adapt operation to new priorities.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

as joint experiments dedicated to address issues critical to ITER such as fusion material facilities to test
whether chosen materials can sustain the extreme conditions . Similarly, around the two neutron VLRIs in
Europe, ESS and ILL, there is a vibrant ecosystem of small, medium and large facilities used by European
researchers which are critical to the productive functioning of the flagship facilities. In this domain, the VLRI
community in Europe has self-organised in a network (the European Synchrotron and Free Electron Laser
User Organisation37) together with users to enable various kinds of experiments in fields ranging from
physics through life sciences to cultural heritage . There are, however, limitations to networks, that can
negatively affect their potential impact. This has been the case for gravitational wave VLRIs where there
is a diversity of national efforts and legal frameworks to accomplish similar goals. Working together has
been hindered by different national regulations regarding export controls, intellectual property, privacy, etc.
Responding to the demands of stakeholders across several dozen nations, each of which could change
its regulations at any time, is a massive legal challenge and there is a need for stronger international efforts
to create uniform standards for scientific collaborations.
There is also an interest in close cooperation to develop synergies on key core technology research, as
many of the instruments required are quasi unique and necessitate specific know-how that can be shared
between RIs . For example, t he ESO instrumentation is built by con sortia of institutes (often including
contracts to companies) in the member States. The networking among these ESO partners has allowed
the emergence or reinforcement of centres of expertise and collaboration networks around specific
instruments and techno logies, which in the longer term may lead to various spill -over effects from ESO
research and instrumentation to other fields and institutions. The effort spent by these partner institutes is
reimbursed in guaranteed observing time. Going one step further , the ATTRACT project aims to harness
the innovation potential of VLRIs and create a model by which innovative technologies can be brought to
market. Using the technological and instrumentation communities fostered by organisations including
CERN, ESO, EMBL , ESRF, European XFEL and ILL, the ATTRACT project provides seed funding and
then scale-up funding for technology projects in the detector and sensor field.
The development of RI network s is also particularly important to provide support for interdisciplinary and
frontier research. Multi-messenger astronomy provides a very good example. In this domain, cooperative
agreements have been developed between IceCube, the gravitational wave VLRIs LIGO, VIRGO and
KAGRA, the NASA Fermi satellite, the VERITAS ground-based gamma ray telescope, the new Cherenkov
Telescope Array (CTA), the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and other astronomical telescopes and cosmic
ray particle arrays . These agreements already foresee and plan for growth in order to absorb new
observatories as they come online which is an interesting example of imbedded flexibility.
The COVID-19 crisis a lso accelerated the development and/or expansion of networks of RIs. Although
there are relatively few VLRIs in the field of bio/health science, those that make available relevant data
such as ELIXIR (and its Node EMBL -EBI) partnered with other data RIs to quickly establish a COVID-19
Data Portal that enabled the sharing of infectious disease data. Very recently, some COVID-19 portals
were repurposed for the monkeypox virus 38, illustrating the how existing infrastructures can quickly be
mobilised to tackle new threats.
Optimising resources
Considering the cost of VLRIs and the competition that exist s to obtain funding, many VLRIs have
established close network relationships with similar facilities to optimise their use and potentially lobby
research funders as a community rather than as a single entity. In the domain of ocean research, the
International Research Ship Operators network , which regroups the world’s leading marine scientific
research vessels operators (including for polar research) , will typically support the exchange of ship time
and equipment between countries, foster benchmarking and co-operation in support of marine research
and the developments in national research fleets. This promotes collaboration and avoid s duplication of
efforts. In some other domains, networks are set up to develop common strategies . For example , the
League of advanced European Neutron Sources developed a landscape assessment of the European

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  49
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

neutron source ecosystem to form the baseline fo r future discussion between funders, facility operators
and other stakeholders about the new neutron ecosystem needed for Europe to remain competitive and
actively engaged in resolving social -economic challenges facing society. The EUROfusion consortium is
an even more integrated network which brings together most European fusion-related RIs through common
scientific and technological projects and experiments.
Supporting operation
VLRIs do not just require important financial support but also a range of critical input for their operation. As
described above, this is true for technological developments that may be common to different types of
VLRIs, such as in the domain of detectors , optics etc., but even more in their need for highly specialised
human resources. Experts in some of the scientific or engineering disciplines required by VLRIs are scarce,
and VLRIs may not be able to provide the stable contracts that would be required t o attract and retain
these experts. Networking among VLRIs and relevant RIs may help provide opportunities for skills and
career development for these experts that single facilities alone might not be able to offer. Again, this
exchange can be facilitated by close geographical proximity, such as between European XFEL, DESY and
other RIs in the Hamburg region, or the ESS and the Max IV light source in the Lund region.
High-performance computing facilities
Although most VLRIs have developed their own advanced computing facilities to collect and analyse the
vast amount of data they produce, several have also established partnerships with cyber-infrastructures to
enhance these capacities. ESCAPE (European Science Cluster of Astronomy & Particle phys ics ESFRI
research infrastructures) brings together the European astronomy, astr ophysics and particle physics RI
communities in a common cluster with aligned challenges of data -driven research, with demonstrated
capabilities in addressing various stages of data workflow, and establishes a functional link with these RIs
and the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) . Similarly, ELIXIR work s closely with other e-
Infrastructures, especially in the context of implementing the European Open Science Cloud and is
involved in a range of EOSC integrating projects.
Case study: EUROfusion
EUROfusion consortium was created in 2013 and is funded at 55% by the European Commission and the rest by
its national members EUROfusion supports and funds fusion research activities on behalf of the European
Commission’s Euratom programme within 26 EU member states, while Switzerland, Norway and the United
Kingdom participate in the activities with their national fusion budgets. It therefore brings together all the major
European fusion laboratories and research infrastructures and also includes three majors VLRIs projects: ITER,
IFMIF and the future DEMO.
The originality of this consortium is that it developed a EUROfusion roadmap with the ultimate goal to develop a
functional fusion reactor, covering the whole developmental aspects from research to applications. Although
developing this roadmap was met with some political resistance, it provides a dynamic and momentum to the
consortium and a clear final objective. The initial phase serve to gain mutual trust between partners and the
challenge was to build cohesion and solidarity between members of different sizes and priorities but it is now a
major driving force for fusion. It is playing an important role in the ITER development through the development of
many experimentations in the various national fusion RIs and has on board the whole EU industry as stakeholders,
thus promoting innovation and competitiveness to EU industry and many spinoffs. It is currently developing public-
private partnerships to expand its work programme.
The lesson learned from EUROfusion is that integration is key; this is very much a transdisciplinary effort that
requires many different expertise, and there is a strong added -value in the network, which is expanding its
connection at international level. The current energy crisis has in addition boosted the interest for fusion research
and development.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Providing rapid access to VLRI data to all stakeholders and users is also a challenge that may require
partnerships. For example , ITER uses the advanced pan -European backbone network GEANT that
connects National Research and Education Networks (NRENs) across Europe , which offers broad
geographical coverage, high bandwidth, and innovative hybrid networking technology. IceCube also makes
extensive use of grid computing infrastructure , at the forefront of high throughput distributed and cloud
scale computing, for example through the GPU Cloudburst Experiment39.

There is a growing development of networks and synergies between VLRIs themselves and with other
RIs, based on common interests, but that this has only rarely been developed into more integrated
cooperation such as in the case of fusion research in Europe. Indeed, as mentioned for gravitational
wave VLRIs, there is a lack of governance models for effective meta-collaboration, which are needed
to overcome barriers between very different and independent s tructures. Little incentive for the
development of such synergies was found from the funders and decision -makers survey, which
suggests that this is a policy topic whose importance should probably be better underscored.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  51
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

RIs have been a major topic for analysis and discussion ever since the creation of the OECD Megascience
Forum in 1 992. They play a key role in enabling and developing research in all scientific domains and
represent an increasingly large share of research investment . VLRIs present specific challenges to their
stakeholders that are linked to their size, complexity and international dimension. They are increasingly
expected to generate broader impacts alongside their main scientific aims , including playing a role in
addressing major societal challenges. They are of interest to a growing number of countries, expanding
beyond the traditional scientific power-houses, and they are increasingly expected to make their data and
other outputs available to much larger and more diverse user communities.
This policy report presents a series of lessons learned regarding the establishment of VLRIs, options for
improving their use and operation, as well as more strategic considerations that VLRI stakeholders should
take into account in their planning of future projects. Considering the si ze and complexity of VLRI s and
that many research funders are reaching their limit in funding capacity, these initiatives require growing
synergies between the different stakeholders from their planning and inception stage to their operation.
VLRI managers, funders and decision-makers will need to work together at international level to develop
the strategies and synergies required to reap the full benefit of these large-scale investments.
The recommendations summarised at the outset of this report should allow VLRI stakeholders to address
the emerging challenges that were identified by experts during this project . These recommendations are
supported by a number of examples of good practices that are described in section 2.
3. Conclusions

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Notes

1 Very Large Research Infrastructures: issues and options - OECD
2 Very Large Research Infrastructures: issues and options - part 2 - OECD
3 http://icri2021.ca/conference-proceedings/
4 https://fasterplease.substack.com/p/my-god-its-full-of-stars
5 https://esamultimedia.esa.int/docs/ESA_Agenda_2025_final.pdf
6 https://roadmap2021.esfri.eu/media/1295/esfri-roadmap-2021.pdf
7 https://www.slac.stanford.edu/econf/C210711/SnowmassBook.pdf
8 https://europeanstrategy.cern/european-strategy-for-particle-physics.
9 https://www.eccsel.org/about-eccsel/mission-vision/
10 https://www.ofi.ca/impact/policy/ocean-carbon/carbon-observatory
11 https://elixir-europe.org/
12 https://www.dst.gov.za/index.php/media-room/media-room-speeches/minister/3590-address-by-the-south-african-
minister-of-higher-education-science-and-innovation-dr-blade-nzimande-at-the-second-annual-scientific-conference-
of-the-african-astronomical-society-on-14-march-2022
13 https://www.aip.org/fyi/2022/lab-leaders-address-threats-flagship-neutrino-and-nuclear-physics-projects
14 http://icri2021.ca/
15 https://www.icri2022.cz/
16 IceCube Collaboration Governance Document (cloudinary.com)
17 https://etpp.ifae.es/work-package/2-organization-governance-legal/
18 Main Science and Technology Indicators | OECD Science, Technology and R&D Statistics | O ECD
iLibrary (oecd-ilibrary.org)
19 UKRI infrastructure roadmap - Progress report
20 Finland’s roadmap for research inf - Academy of Finland (aka.fi)
21 Investing in European Research - The 3% objective: brief history (europa.eu)
22 UKRI-090822-BudgetAllocationExplainer-2022To2023-2023To2024-2024To2025.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  53
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

23 https://www.vr.se/analys/rapporter/vara-rapporter/2022-02-24-arsredovisning-2021.html
24 https://www.nationaalgroeifonds.nl/english/mission-of-the-national-growth-fund
25 https://elixir-europe.org/about-us/impact/node-interactions
26 https://www.skao.int/en/explore/big-data/362/ska-regional-centres
27 CLF £3.2m in Funding Announced for UK XFEL Research and Development (stfc.ac.uk)
28 https://elixir-europe.org/what-we-offer/guidelines
29 James Webb Space Telescope –L2 Communications for Science Data Processing (nasa.gov)
30 https://elixir-europe.org/AAI-migration
31 https://ega-archive.org/federated/
32 https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/Research-Infrastructures-mobilisation.htm
33 https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/vlri-issues-and-option.htm
34 https://enriitc.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/ENRIITC_D3.2_deliverable_final.pdf
35 https://ri-paths-tool.eu/files/RI-PATHS_Guidebook.pdf
36 https://elixir-europe.org/internal-projects/staff-exchange-programme
37 https://www.esuo.eu/
38 https://by-covid.org/news-events/monkeypox-pipeline/
39 SDSC, WIPAC Conduct GPU Cloudburst Experiment – WIPAC – Wisconsin IceCube Particle
Astrophysics Center

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

References

American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2021), Bold Ambition: Internatioanl Large-Scale
Science, https://www.amacad.org/sites/default/files/publication/downloads/2021-CISP-Report-
2_Large-Scale-Science.pdf.
[20]
Bailes, M. et al. (2021), “Gravitational-wave physics and astronomy in the 2020s and 2030s”,
Nature Reviews Physics, Vol. 3/5, pp. 344-366, https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00303-8.
[10]
Committee on the Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey et al. (2022), Origins,
Worlds, and Life, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.,
https://doi.org/10.17226/26522.
[9]
ESFRI (2017), Sustainable European Research Infrastructures, a call for action, EC Publications
Office, Luxembourg, https://ec.europa.eu/research/infrastructures/pdf/swd-
infrastructures_323-2017.pdf#view=fit&pagemode=none.
[5]
Flexner, A. (1939), “The Usefulness of Useless Science”, Harper’s Magazine, pp. 544-552,
https://www.ias.edu/sites/default/files/library/UsefulnessHarpers.pdf.
[16]
Flexner, A. (1939), “The Usefulness of Useless Science”, Harper’s Magazine, pp. 544-552,
https://www.ias.edu/sites/default/files/library/UsefulnessHarpers.pdf.
[17]
Group of Senior Official on Global Research Infrastructures (2017), Progress report 2017,
http://www.gsogri.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/gso_progress_report_2017.pdf.
[8]
GSO (2019), Framework for Global Research Infrastructures, GSO, http://www.gsogri.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/gso_framework_criteria.pdf.
[4]
Harding, T. (2012), “International Fusion Energy Cooperation: ITER as a case study”, Science
and Diplomacy, https://www.sciencediplomacy.org/article/2012/international-fusion-energy-
cooperation.
[19]
Loescher, H. et al. (2022), “Building a Global Ecosystem Research Infrastructure to Address
Global Grand Challenges for Macrosystem Ecology”, Earth’s Future, Vol. 10/5,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020ef001696.
[12]
Martin, C. et al. (2021), “Demonstrating public value to funders and other stakeholders —the
journey of ELIXIR, a virtual and distributed research infrastructure for life science data”,
Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, Vol. 92/3, pp. 497-510,
https://doi.org/10.1111/apce.12328.
[15]
OECD (2022), “Integrity and security in the global research ecosystem”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 130, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1c416f43-en.
[13]
OECD (2019), “Reference framework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic impact of
research infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 65,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/3ffee43b-en.
[14]

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS  55
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

OECD (2017), “Strengthening the effectiveness and sustainability of international research
infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 48, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/fa11a0e0-en.
[1]
OECD (2014), International Distributed Research Infrastructures, OECD, Paris,
http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/international-distributed-research-infrastructures.pdf.
[2]
OECD (2010), Establishing Large International Research Infrastructures: Issues and Options,
OECD, Paris, http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/47057832.pdf.
[3]
OECD (2008), Roadmapping of Large Research Infrastructures, OECD,
https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/41929340.pdf.
[7]
Padma, T. (2019), “India’s LIGO gravitational-wave observatory gets green light”, Nature,
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-00184-z.
[11]
Riordan, M. (2022), “High-energy physics: are the days of international collaboration coming to
an end?”, Physics World, https://physicsworld.com/a/high-energy-physics-are-the-days-of-
international-collaboration-coming-to-an-end/.
[18]
Smith, C. (2007), “How the LHC came to be”, Nature, Vol. 448/7151, pp. 281-284,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06076.
[6]

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56  VERY LARGE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES: POLICY ISSUES AND OPTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 1. OECD GSF Expert Group on VLRIs
Country Name Affiliation
Australia Jacqueline Cooke Manager, Astronomy Strategy, Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources
Belgium Alberto Fernandez Director/ Nuclear Applications, Federal Public Service (FPS) Economy, SMEs, Self-Employed
and Energy
Canada Heidi Bandulet (co-chair) Associate Director for Research Facilities, Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI)
China SONG Yuntao Vice President, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences (HFIPS)
& Director General, Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ASIPP)
Czech Republic Jan Hrusak Scientific advisor at the Czech Academy of Sciences
France Elena Hoffert Mission officer, Department of Major Research Infrastructure, Ministery for Higher education
and research
Germany
Simon Bohleber BMBF
Andrea Fischer Head of division “Large International Research Facilities”, BMBF
Lisa Sarah Fruhner DESY Science manager
Christoph Peshke DLR project management agency
Japan Takaki Hatsui Team Leader, RIKEN SPring-8 Center (RSC)
Korea
Yong-Joo Kim Policy team, National Research Facilities and Equipment Center (NFEC)
Sun Kun Oh Konkuk University
Netherlands Patricia Vogel Strategic policy advisor, NWO
Norway Helmer Fjellvåg Professor in inorganic materials, University of Oslo
South Africa Daniel Adams Chief Director, Emerging Research Areas and Infrastructure, Department of Science and
Technology (DST)
Spain Inmaculada Figueroa Vice Deputy Director General for the Internationalisation of Science and Innovation General
Secretariat for Research Ministry of Science and Innovation
Switzerland Willy Benz (co-chair Director, National Center for Competence in Research (NCCR) PlanetS
United Kingdom
Christopher Matthews Head of Public Engagement with Research, BEIS
Beth House Associate Director of International affairs, STFC
Victoria Wright Head of Research and Innovation Strategy Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC)
UK Research and Innovation
Joe Toogood International Science and Innovation, BEIS
Andrew Smith Head of External Relations, ELIXIR
United States
Matthew Hawkins Head, Large Facilities Office, National Science Foundation (NSF)
Linnea Avallone Chief Officer for Research Facilities, NSF
G7 GSO Patricia Postigo McLaughlin Policy officer, DG Research & Innovation, Unit A.3
Science Europe James Morris Science Europe office
ESFRI Jana Kolar Executive Director of CERIC-ERIC, ESFRI chair
OECD
Frédéric Sgard GSF secretariat
Paul Dufour Consultant GSF secretariat
Masatoshi Shimosuka GSF secretariat
Carthage Smith GSF secretariat
