
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
A MAPPING OF POLICY INSTRUMENTS
AND THEIR INTERACTIONS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
April 2019 No. 66

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

This paper was approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee for
Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP) on 14 March 2019 and prepared for publication
by the OECD Secretariat.

 Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on ONE M&P under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/TIP(2017)7/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the
status of or sovereign ty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and
boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant
Israeli authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the
Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of
international law.

© OECD (2019)

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include
excerpts from OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own
documents, presentations, blogs, websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable
acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright owner is given. All requests for
commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to rights@oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 3

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE: A MAPPING OF
POLICY INSTRUMENTS AND THEIR INTERACTIONS
José Guimón* and Caroline Paunov**

ABSTRACT
Countries deploy a variety of financial, regulatory and soft policy instruments to promote
science-industry knowledge exchange. While these instruments are often discussed in
isolation, they are implemented collectively and may reinforce and complement but also
weaken or even negatively affect each other and add excessive complexity. This paper
develops a conceptual framework to map policy instruments for knowledge exchange and
assess the interactions between them. The framework also considers how national contexts
and global trends influence the choice of policy instruments . Policy examples drawn from
the EC-OECD STIP Compass database and from case studies show that there are significant
differences across countries in the relative importance given to each policy instrument in
terms of budget, target groups, eligibility criteria, time horizon and implementation. These
differences are also a consequence of different country conditions.

Keywords: policy-mix, policy instrument, knowledge transfer, co-creation, public research,
intermediary organisations, evaluation, interaction, intellectual property, collaboration, spin-
offs.
JEL codes: H11, I23, I28, O38

Acknowledgements: This study forms part of the OECD Working Party on Innovation and
Technology Policy (TIP) project on assessing the impacts of knowledge transfer and policy
(2017-2018). Contributions from TIP national delegates are gratefully acknowledged. Earlier
drafts of thi s paper were presented at the E U-SPRI Forum Annual Conference (Paris, 6 -8
June 2018) and at the Technology Transfer Society Annual Conference (Valencia, 17 -19
October 2018), where useful comments were received. The authors are particularly grateful
to Martin Borowiecki, Claudia de Fuentes, Catalina Martinez, Paloma Sánchez, and Sandra
Planes Satorra for their detailed reviews of earlier drafts.

* Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM)
** OECD

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table of contents
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 7
2. Mapping policy instruments ......................................................................................................... 7
2.1. The diversity of policy instruments: relevant classifications .................................................... 7
2.2. Multi-level governance of the policy mix ............................................................................... 12
2.3. Trends in policy instruments ................................................................................................... 13
3. Evaluating the policy mix and assessing the interaction between policy instruments ........... 16
3.1. Assessing interactions between policy instruments ................................................................ 16
3.2. Evidence on the policy mix across countries: similarities and differences ............................. 21
3.3. Searching for a coherent policy mix adapted to country contexts ........................................... 26
4. Conclusions ................................................................................................................................... 28
References ......................................................................................................................................... 29

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 5

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Executive summary
This paper develops an ontology of the policy instruments to support science -industry
knowledge transfer and offers insights on the policy mix across OECD countries. Adopting
a policy mix approach involves paying more attention to the interactions between policy
instruments.
Mapping policy instruments
The mapping exercise identifies 21 types of policy instruments that are used to support
industry-science knowledge transfer in OECD countries. These include grants for
collaborative research; tax incentives for firms that purchase services from universities and
public research institutes (PRI); financial support to university spin -offs; mobility schemes
for researchers; open access to publicly-funded research; and networking events or joint road-
mapping exercises with the actors involved in science-industry links.
Most OECD countries use similar policy instruments but in different ways in terms of budget,
target groups, eligibility criteria, time horizon and implementation.
Policy instruments are classified according to several criteria, including: i) whether they are
financial, regulatory or soft instruments; ii) whether they target primarily firms/industry,
researchers or universities/PRIs; iii) the type of knowledge transfer channels being
addressed; and iv) the instruments’ supply- or demand-side orientation.
New forms of policy intervention are also emerging and include adapting knowledge
exchange to the digital age (e.g. by building digital platforms), emphasizing knowledge co-
creation (e.g. by facilitating joint labs) and connecting to the global knowledge base (e.g. by
attracting leading universities from abroad).
Assessing the policy mix
Assessing the policy mix for knowledge transfer requires analysing the different types of
policy instruments and the int eractions between them, while considering the influence of
national contexts and global trends of relevance to knowledge transfer (Figure 1).
The combination of several policy instruments may create synergies but also weaken the
success of individual instruments. An example is offering grants for collaborative university-
industry research projects without providing support services and appropriate regulations and
guidelines for IP management. In addition, t he coexistence of too many different policy
instruments may weaken the impact of single instruments with funding split among a large
number of programmes. Co-ordination challenges may also arise when actors find themselves
with diverse funding options.
Aside from the interactions between policy ins truments aimed at supporting knowledge
transfer, potential interactions with other science and innovation policies and with economic
and social policies also need consideration . For example, labour market policies influence
the mobility of researchers, which is an important channel of knowledge transfer.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 1. Conceptual framework

A cohesive policy mix requires co -ordination across multiple actors from government and
from outside the government. Policies to foster knowledge transfer are also designed and
implemented at the institutional level i.e. by public universities and research institutes
themselves and different kinds of “intermediary organisations” to implement knowledge
transfer policies, including innovation agencies, technology transfer offices (TTOs), research
and technology organisations, business incubators, etc.
Country characteristics and the policy mix
Evidence of innovation policies for knowledge transfer across the OECD from the EC-OECD
STIP Compass database, shows that there are significant differences across countries in the
relative importance given to each, in terms of budget, target groups, eligibility criteria, time
horizon and implementation.
Structural and institutional conditions of each c ountry, as well as industry demand for
research inputs and the conditions of supply of universities and PRIs , explain a number of
differences. The following factors need to be considered when evaluating a country’s policy
mix:
a) the country’s business sector, including firms’ size, sector of activity, technological
capabilities, and ownership structure;
b) the universities and PRIs, including their level of investment in research, orientation
towards basic or applied science, and governance systems;
c) countries’ general macroeconomic conditions as they influence the public resources
available, the broad strategies of private firms, and the mobility of researchers.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 7

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

1. Introduction
With large public investment in research and mounting budgetary pressures, governments of
OECD countries have placed increasing emphasis on boosting the impact of these
investments, specifically by building stronger science-industry links. Knowledge transfer is
not an end in itself but an intermediate objective that contributes to be tter attaining the
broader goals of science, innovation and, more generally, economic policies to promote more
inclusive growth. These goals include, first, the diffusion of public research results to
stimulate private sector innovation. Second, by transfo rming scientific breakthroughs into
new products and services, knowledge transfer may contribute to addressing more efficiently
grand societal challenges (e.g. climate change, public health, energy, food and water supply,
etc.) (OECD, 2016a).
The notion of knowledge exchange or transfer refers to relationships between
universities/PRIs and firms that are not unidirectional and linear but rather interactive and
collaborative, as it is not only universities and PRIs that are relevan t to firms but also firms
are an important source of knowledge for universities and PRIs. What is more, the
co-creation of knowledge where mixed teams of researchers from universities and PRIs and
industry engage in joint knowledge creation is increasingly recognised as important for strong
innovation performance.
Policies to promote knowledge transfer are a subset of a country’s science, technology and
innovation (STI) policies, and are thus influenced by broader developments such as the
increasing adoption of “mission-oriented” programmes or the development of cluster policies
and “smart specialis ation strategies” at the regional level. Thus, interactions between the
policy instruments focussing on knowledge transfer, but also with broader innovation,
economic and social policies need to be taken into account.
This paper provides an overview of the different types of policy instruments to promote
knowledge transfer and discusses the interactions between policy instruments. It departs from
the prevailing focus on evaluating individual instruments in isolation , which is problematic
because often several policies simultaneously target the same types of actors (Cunningham
et al. 2016; Flanagan et al. 2011; Martin 2016). The term “policy mix” is used to refer to the
policy instruments implemented to deliver public action in this specific policy domain and
their interactions.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 maps the policy instruments
used to support knowledge transfer and discusses recent policy trends. Section 3 focuses on
the positive and negative interact ions between policy instruments, and the role of country
conditions in shaping policy mix choices. Section 4 provides some concluding remarks.
2. Mapping policy instruments
2.1. The diversity of policy instruments: relevant classifications
Policies commonly used across OECD countries comprise a diverse mix of financial,
regulatory and “soft” instruments. Financial instruments include different kinds of economic
transfers from the state to firms, universities or PRIs, on the condition that the y collaborate
among each other. Regulatory instruments aim at providing incentives to the different parties
involved in science -industry knowledge transfer , including laws af fecting the careers of
researchers, the funding of universities or the ownership of patent rights, among other
relevant issues. Finally, “soft” instruments include less interventionist modes of public policy
focussed on facilitating relationships, mobilizing, networking, integrating and building trust.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 1 presents the results of a mapping exercise of the main policy instruments available
to support industry -science knowledge transfer , resulting in 21 different types of policy
instruments. This taxonomy builds on the existing academic literature ( useful reviews are
provided in Bozeman, 2000 and Kochenkova, Grimaldi and Munari, 2016) , as well as on
previous work of the OECD on knowledge transfer (e.g. OECD, 2002, 2003, 2013, 201 7).
Besides the distincti on between financial, regulatory and soft instruments, other relevant
criteria to classify policy instruments are the target groups, the main channel of knowledge
transfer addressed, and whether the policy is a supply - or demand-side oriented instrument.
The instruments shown in Table 1 do not constitute a final and closed inventory of policy
instruments to promote knowledge transfer as public policies in this as in other fields are
subject to change.
Table 1. A taxonomy of policy instruments to support knowledge transfer
Type of policy
instrument
Brief description Target groups Main channels Supply
vs.
demand
Financial instruments
1. R&D and
innovation subsidies
or grants
Direct financing of collaborative
projects, ranging from generic to
mission-oriented calls, and from small-
scale, challenge-driven competitions, to
large consortia.
Researchers,
universities/PRIs and
Firms
Collaboration Supply
2. Tax incentives Tax credits (i.e. indirect financial
instruments) for companies that
engage in collaborative research or
purchase services from
universities/PRIs.
Firms Collaboration,
contracts,
consulting
Supply
3. Financial support
to academic spin-offs
Including proof-of-concept, seed funds,
business plan competitions, public
venture capital, etc.
Researchers and
Entrepreneurs
Spin-offs Supply
4. Grants for IP
applications
Covering the costs of registration in
patent offices, to encourage
researchers to disclose and
commercialise their inventions.
Researchers IP licencing Supply
5. Financial support
to recruit PhDs or
post-docs
Financial support for firms to recruit
PhDs or post-docs, covering part of the
salary.
Firms and Researchers Researchers’
mobility
Supply
6. Financial support
to host industry
researchers
Financial support schemes for
universities to host industry
researchers temporarily.
Universities/PRIs and
Researchers
Researchers’
mobility
Supply
7. Public procurement
of technology
When firms are encouraged to
collaborate with universities or PRIs to
develop innovative solutions.
Firms Collaboration,
contracts
Demand
8. Innovation
vouchers
Small financial support for firms
(especially SMEs) to purchase R&D
services from certified researchers from
universities/PRIs.
Firms Contracts,
consulting
Demand

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 9

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

9. Public-private
partnerships creating
joint research
laboratories
To create joint research centres co-
funded by the public sector and a
company. Sometimes called
collaborative, co-created, or
competence centres.
Universities/PRIs and
Firms
Collaboration Demand /
Supply
10. Performance-
based funding
systems
To reward linkages with industry, e.g.
providing earmarked funding based on
number of contracts with industry, IP
licenses, spin-offs, etc.
Universities/PRIs Publications,
spin-offs, IP
licencing
Supply
11. Funding of
infrastructures and
intermediaries
Including technology transfer offices
(TTOs), science parks, business
incubators.
Universities/PRIs IP licencing,
spin-offs,
collaboration,
networking
Demand/
Supply
Regulatory instruments
12. IP rights regime Ownership of IP resulting from public-
private research. Allocation of IP
revenue from publicly funded research.
Researchers, Firms
and Universities/PRIs
IP licencing,
spin-offs
Demand/
Supply
13. Regulation of
spin-offs founded by
researchers and
students
Conditions for university’s involvement
as shareholder, distribution of revenue,
implications for academics’ salaries,
contractual possibilities for university
staff to participate in spin-offs, etc.
Researchers and
Universities/PRIs
Spin-offs Supply
14. Career rewards
for professors and
researchers
Rewards for mobilizing private research
funds, earning income from IP
licensing, creating spin-offs.
Regulations can also facilitate industry
financed chairs, as well as part-time
positions for practitioners.
Researchers All channels Supply
15. Sabbaticals and
mobility schemes
Regulations allowing sabbaticals for
scientists to join industry and temporary
recruitment of industry researchers.
Researchers and
Universities/PRIs
Researchers’
mobility, spin-
offs
Supply
16. Open access and
open data provisions
Requirements to publish in open
access results of publicly-funded
research and to make the data freely
available.
Researchers and
Universities/PRIs
Publications Supply
Soft instruments
17. Awareness-
raising
Outreach activities to raise awareness,
including information brochures and
websites, conferences and seminars.
Universities/PRIs and
Firms
All channels Demand/
Supply
18. Training
programmes
Training delivered by government
agencies covering different aspects of
knowledge transfer.
Researchers, TTO staff All channels Supply
19. Networking Events, workshops, and fairs where
firms can express their technology
needs and scientists can present the
results of their research.
Universities/PRIs and
Firms
Networking Demand/
Supply
20. Collective road-
mapping and
foresight exercises
Initiatives bringing together actors from
business and academia to identify
technological opportunities and
priorities for future research.
Universities/PRIs and
Firms
Networking Demand/
Supply
21. Voluntary
guidelines, standards
and codes of conduct
Guidelines for the management of IP
developed through collaborative
projects; sample contracts for
collaborative research, etc.
Universities/PRIs and
Firms
Collaboration,
IP licencing
Demand/
Supply

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Target groups
Policy instruments may target universities, PRIs or firms. Public policies should provide
incentives for both sides to collaborate , with the aim of attenuating barriers associated to
transaction costs and misalignment of expectations (Bruneel, D’Este and Salter, 2010).
The target of policies may be set below the institutional level of universities, PRIs or firms.
For example, competitive funding schemes often target individual researchers , research
groups or students. Policy programmes can also be targeted to a certain type of firms (e.g.
start-ups, SMEs, large firms, foreign multinationals, etc.) or universities (e.g. top ranked
universities, polytechnics, research universities, universities in backward regions, etc.).
Policy instruments may be generic or targeted to selected actors. Some policy instruments
target the whole population , as is the case of tax -based reliefs or IP rights schemes and
different types of regulations. Others focus on selected researchers/universities and/or firms
(as is the case for different grant schemes that only apply to those selected).
Policy instruments and different channels of knowledge transfer
Knowledge transfer between industry and universities or PRIs occurs through a wide variety
of formal and informal channels (Box 1). Formal channels can be more easily measured, but
informal channels are equally important and are often a necessary condition to build up and
maintain formal knowledge transfer interactions (Grimpe and Hussinger, 2013).
Acknowledging the variety of channels is important for public policy instruments to
adequately support knowledge transfer and the diversity of its motivations, activities and
outcomes. Individual policy instruments may focus on a single channel of knowledge transfer
or address several channels jointly. Conversely, a single channel of knowledge transfer can
be promoted through a mix of financial, regulatory and soft policy instruments.
Supply- vs. demand-side policy instruments
A further distinction can be made between supply-side policies that focus on supporting firms
and research centres in the generation of new knowledge that may eventually lead to new
products and services, and demand-side policies, which focus on stimulating the demand for
innovative products, thus providing incentives for firms to innovate by reducing risks
(OECD, 2011a).
In recent years, a shift towards a more demand -side focussed policy mix can be observed
across OECD countries (OECD, 2016a). For example, Finland’s policy mix has evolved from
a more supply -driven approach towards a stronger focus on developing competences and
incentives for demand or user -driven innovation activity, promoting public -private
partnerships, increasing citizens’ particip ation opportunities, and developing new co -
operating models and platforms (Halme at al., 2019). Likewise, the UK government has been
placing more attention on the demand side, with new funding aimed at promoting
collaboration of firms with universities and other initiatives such as the Konfer platform for
businesses to identify potential academic partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 11

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 1. Channels of science-industry interaction
Science-industry knowledge transfer can take multiple forms that can be divided into formal and
more informal channels (OECD, 2013). The different channels are often interconnected: for example,
networking in conferences may later lead to collaborative research and this may lead to facility
sharing.
Formal channels include the following:
 Collaborative research: This is about research projects carried out jointly by public researchers
and private firms. It can be fully or partly funded by industry, and can range from small -scale
projects to strategic partnerships with multiple stakeholders.
 Contract research: This is research commissioned to universities or PRIs by a private firm. It
generally involves the creation of new knowledge per the specifications or goals of the client,
and is frequently more applied than collaborative research.
 Academic consultancy: This refers to research and advisory services provided by public
researchers to industry clients. It sometimes accompanies contract research or IP licencing by
providing a means to transfer know-how and tacit knowledge.
 Intellectual property (IP) transact ions: This refers to licensing and selling of IP generated by
universities and PRIs to industry.
 Researchers’ mobility: This refers to both university researchers working in industry and the
reverse, including temporary assignments.
 Academic spin-offs: That is, the entrepreneurial route to commercialising knowledge developed
by public research.
 Labour mobility: This refers to university graduates that join industry.
Informal channels include the following:
 Publication of public research results in scientific journals and other specialised media.
 Conferencing and networking: the interaction between public researchers and industry actors
can take place in the context of formal conferences or dissemination eve nts (e.g. expositions),
but also in more informal settings (e.g. meetings of former class -mates that are employed in
public research and industry sectors).
 Networking facilitated by geographic proximity: informal interactions between public research
staff and industry researchers might be facilitated, for example, by the location of science parks
near to university campuses, or firms’ laboratories within university campuses.
 Facility sharing between industry and public research (e.g. laboratories, equipment).
 Courses and continuing education provided by universities to enterprises, and lectures at
universities held by industry employees.
Source: Paunov, Planes-Satorra and Moriguchi, 2017.

Other categorisations
The time horizon of policy instruments, i.e. whether they are oriented to short-term linkages
(setting up a first contact) or forming long -term linkages (long term collaborations in
research) also differs across instruments. The need to invest over the long run in building
effective linkages between universities and firms is increasingly recognised (Frølund, Murray
and Riedel, 2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Other relevant attributes to consider when evaluating policy instruments are their flexibility
(i.e. there are possibilities to adapt to specific cases where justified), stability (i.e. actors can
rely on the instrument being available to them as specified), cost efficiency, and operational
complexity.
2.2. Multi-level governance of the policy mix
Different levels of governance intervene in designing and implementing policies to promote
knowledge transfer, including the national, regional and supra-national levels. In addition to
policies designed at national level, regional governments are increasingly active in promoting
science-industry links, complementing national government initiatives in various ways, but
also adding an additional element of complexity to the policy mix. In recent years, regional
governments are becoming increasingly involved in knowledge transfer policies, as
universities and science-industry links are considered as key drivers of regional development
(OECD, 2017). In addition, some policies developed at supra-national also target knowledge
transfer, complementing those developed at national or regional levels. The most evident case
is the European Union, which has various policy instruments to support knowledge transfer
such as large funding schemes for collaborative research projects, mobility grants for
researchers, support for entrepreneurship, knowledge and innovation communities, and
support for industrial PhD programmes, among others. Likewise, t he World Tra de
Organisation has had a strong influence over national intellectual property rights regimes,
through the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).
Beyond the government level, policies to foster knowledge transfer are also designed and
implemented at the institutional level (i.e. by public universities and research institutes
themselves). Over the last decades universities and PRIs have received more autonomy
across the OECD (Borowiecki and Paunov, 2018), allowing them to deploy their own support
programmes for knowledge transfer, including specific grant schemes, incentives to
researchers, and support for patenting, on top of those offered across the board by the national
or regional governments. This allows for a wide variety of approaches to promote knowledge
transfer across different universities and PRIs.
Moreover, governments rely on different kinds of “intermediary organisations” to implement
knowledge transfer policies, including innovation agencies, technology transfer offices
(TTOs), research and technology organisations, business incubators, etc. (Clayton, Feldman
and Lowe, 2018; OECD, 2013). In particular, a growing number of TTOs have been
developed across OECD countries since the mid -1990s to support different st ages of the
commercialisation cycle such as patent applications, invention disclosures, pilots and
prototypes, establishing spin -off companies, contracts with industry, identifying business
needs, searching for partners and funding sources, etc. (Geuna and Muscio, 2009; OECD,
2013). These institutional settings often play a transformative role in framing the conditions
for knowledge transfer between industry and science. Intermediar y organisations differ in
their size, mission, activities, ownership, and funding structure (Russo et al., 2018). Some
are autonomous agencies tasked with promoting knowledge transfer and innovation more
generally while others are established as units of a specific university, as is often the case of
TTOs and science parks. Over the years, OECD countries have developed a complex network
of intermediary organisations to promote knowledge transfer, and they continue to
experiment with new institutional models.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 13

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2.3. Trends in policy instruments
Policy instruments are not static but change over time. This section discusses important
changes from policy learning as a result of past failures in building effective knowledge
exchange and the impacts of the digital transformation. It also discusses two developments:
greater emphasis on co-creation and global research networks.
Policy learning
Policy instruments have changed in response to policy learning on a number of fronts.
Importantly, there is increased awareness that encouraging patenting by research institutions
is not necessarily a source of enhanced industry-science knowledge transfer. Such incentive
schemes may lead to wasteful investments in patent applications that ultimately are not taken
up by industry. Instead, much more emphasis is now placed on policies to encourage mobility
of individuals between industry and science and in building effective knowledge
collaboration. Recent policies to support academic spin-offs are increasingly focu sing on
projects demonstrating higher potential, rather than supporting the creation as many spin -
offs. This resulted from experiencing a number of failures. There is also increased awareness
that knowledge transfer instruments need to be adapted to sectors that have traditionally had
fewer connections with industry and to research institutions that have no connections with
industry to build effective ties.
Digital transformation
Current global trends that are driving the reform of knowledge transfer policies include the
digital transformation, which increases the need for industry -science collaborations due to
the increasing complexity of innovation (Guellec and Paunov, 2019). The digital
transformation also offers new opportunities for collaboration (notably digital platforms).
The digital transformation is changing the way that economic interactions and business
models are organised. New forms of open innovation have emerged including more intense
collaborations between firms and universities or PRIs than in the past, through new practices
including online communities of experts, tournaments, open calls and crowdsourcing.
Digital platforms such as InnoCentive, IdeaConnection or Presans, to name a few, help to
match supply and demand for technology by connecting firms with global networks of public
research centres, individual scientists and freelancers to solve specific technological
problems. Such platforms benefit from network effects, as they are able to reach to a wide
range of experts across the world. In other cases, firms create their own platforms, sometimes
managed by companies such as Yet2. Several governments and universities have also built
open innovation platforms. For example, Citizenscience.gov is an initiative designed by the
US government to accelerate t he use of crowdsourcing to engage the public in addressing
social needs and accelerate innovation. Against this variety of digital platforms to connect
science with industry, a number of open questions emerge: To what extent and under which
conditions do t hey create opportunities for innovation and for whom? How can scientists
working at public research organisations be motivated by their institutions to participate
further in these platforms? How should technology transfer offices of public research
organisations interact with these digital platforms? Is there a need for additional public policy
support?
Digital platforms play an increasingly relevant role in disclosing technology and creating
opportunities for universities and firms to identify potential p artners, thereby increasing
transparency and substantially reducing transaction costs. In addition, research results and

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

data are becoming more easily (and freely) available through open data and open access
practices, while the interactions of science and the civil society are being enhanced through
open science. These developments are influencing the mechanisms for science -industry
knowledge transfer and call for new policy approaches (a more detailed discussion is
provided in OECD, 2019). However, physical spaces and intermediaries will remain critical
to build trust: digital platforms can only complement, but not replace, human interactions.
Co-creation
The concept of science-industry knowledge transfer has often been contested on the grounds
that it su ggests unidirectional and linear flows, while in reality these are two -way and
interactive relations. Indeed, the "co-creation" (rather than simple transfer) of knowledge by
firms and research institutions is critical to allow innovation ecosystems to optimally benefit
from scientific research. Co-creation means that more intense science-industry relations are
built, compared to a simple process of knowledge transfer, as knowledge is jointly developed
through shared facilities and mixed teams.
One way to promote co-creation is the development of joint research labs. Governments of
OECD countries are increasingly supporting the development of joint research laboratories
through public -private partnerships , which allow universities, PRIs and firms to share
resources and risks by engaging in long -term joint research activities (Frølund, Murray and
Riedel, 2018).
Several OECD countries have launched new policy programmes to support knowledge co -
creation. A relevant example is the Catapult programme in the UK, launched in 2015 by
Innovate UK. The Catapult centres bring together businesses, scientists and engineers to work
on late-stage R&D in strategic fields (Kerry and Danson, 2016). To date 10 Catapults have
been established, each specializing in different in dustries/technologies (Cell and Gene
Therapy; Compound Semiconductor Applications; Digital; Energy Systems; Future Cities;
High Value Manufacturing; Medicines Discovery; Offshore Renewable Energy; Satellite
Applications; Transport Systems). Each Catapult has several physical centres spread across
the UK, but working modes differ (MacAulay, 2017).
Portugal’s collaborative laboratories (CoLAB), launched in 2018, are private, non -profit
foundations or private companies that integrate activities of research units of higher education
institutions, public research laboratories, intermediate organisations, companies, and
business associations (Encarnação, 2017). With a high share of private funding (>50%), they
focus on performing market -driven research and providi ng professional R&D services to
industry
The French LabCom programme was launched in 2013 to support the establishment of joint
labs between universities/PRIs and firms (with a particular focus on SMEs). Selected projects
are awarded up to EUR 300,000 for maximum duration of 36 months.
In Hungary, the Centres for Higher Education and Industrial Cooperation (FIEK) programme
was launched in 2017 to encourage new organisational models for long -term university -
industry links. Such centres are established withi n the premises of universities, as
autonomous organisational units under the direct control of the rector, to enhance their
flexibility and reduce bureaucracy.
The Industry-University Cooperative Research Centres programme of the National Science
Foundation (NSF) in the United States represents an early example of this policy approach.
Launched in the mid -1970s and still active today, the program me develops long -term
partnerships among industry, academe, and government. Selected centres receive an initial

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 15

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

investment from the NSF and are later mainly supported by the industry partners. Another
long-standing initiative worth mentioning is the Christian Doppler Research Association
programme, which has been operating in Austria since 1995 to develop public-private
partnerships for application-oriented basic research (Harms, 2018).
Global research networks
Knowledge transfer policies across OECD countries are embracing a stronger international
scope in order to connect with global innovation networks and to build the necessary critical
mass to deal with grand societal challenges , such as climate change. For instance, Japan’s
Science and Technology Research Partnership for Sustainable Development (SATREPS)
funds research cooperation in science and technology b etween Japan and developing
countries aimed at developing new knowledge and technologies that help addressing global
issues, such as climate change, disaster prevention or public health.
In addition, new policy approaches are emerging to benefit from the spread of global
innovation networks. In particular, governments are increasingly aware of the importance of
attracting multinationals’ R&D centres, and for this purpose policies to suppor t knowledge
transfer should adopt a broad scope to ensure that the ecosystem is attractive not only for
local players but also for foreign multinational enterprises (OECD, 2011b).
More recently, some countries have also launched dedicated programmes to at tract
international universities and PRIs to establish new research centres locally in collaboration
with national universities and firms. Similar to the case of incentives to attract foreign direct
investments from multinational corporations that generate spillovers on local firms, the
expectation is that attracting “world-class” universities or PRIs will enhance the country’s
science base and improve science-industry links.
Some pioneering examples are the cases of Georgia Tech in France and MIT in the UK. The
first campus of Georgia Tech outside the US was established in the early 1990s in Lorraine,
France, with financial support from the French government. Although initially focused on
graduate education and research, with time the campus increased its engagement with local
industry to foster knowledge transfer (Schmid, Kolesnikov and Youtie, 2017). For example,
in 2014 the Lafayette Institute was launched within the campus to stimulate
commercialisation of technologies developed in the region, providing proof-of-concept
services and legal and business advice. In the UK, the government financed a partnership
between MIT and Cambridge University in 2000 aimed at developing and implementing
innovative approaches for knowledge transfer between the academic a nd industry sectors,
based on the so-called “Knowledge Integration Community” model (Acworth, 2008).
More recently, in Portugal, the International Partnership Programme (IPP) was developed in
2006 with three US research universities (MIT, Carnegie Mellon University and the
University of Texas at Austin), with the aim of enhancing the industrial orientation of
Portuguese universities’ graduate programmes and providing opportunities for doctoral
students and early career researchers to engage in industry -relevant projects (Horta and
Patrício, 2016). In this context several initiatives have been implemented to support academic
entrepreneurship and technology transfer, such as the Building Global Innovators programme
created in 2010 by MIT in partnership with ISCTE-Lisbon University Institute.
In Singapore, the government’s Campus for Research Excellence and Technological
Enterprise (CREATE) programme, launched in 2006, has established partnerships with ten
international universities (including MIT, Cambridge, and UC Berkeley, among others) to
establish new research centres closely aligned with the national economic development

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

strategy (Youtie et al., 2017). Some of these foreign universities have created specific
programmes to promote technology commercialisation in the country, such as the Singapore-
MIT Innovation Centre, which provides grants to researchers for the development of
prototypes and proof of -concept work, and links researcher to local mentors to provide
commercialisation guidance and access to relevant networks.
The International Centres of Excellence programme in Chile, launched in 2009, has provided
public funding to eight international universities and PRIs (UC Davis, University of
Queensland and Fraunhofer Institute, among others) to create new R&D centres in Chile that
collaborate intensively with local firms in relevant industries. By bringing into the country
foreign research institutions with demonstrated experience in linking with industry and
commercializing technology, the aim was to tri gger a systemic change in the national
innovation system (Klerkx and Guimón, 2017). Some of the centres have developed new
intermediary institutions to promote technology transfer, such as the Research to Business
Catalyst (R2B) programme of UC Davis Chile, which provides support to start-ups including
legal advice, access to venture capital, mentoring, and access to research labs and equipment.
3. Evaluating the policy mix and assessing the interaction between policy instruments
Beyond the composition of the policy mix, it is important to assess the interactions (both
positive and negative) between its elements, the evolving institutional architectures, and the
different trajectories of policy learning and change depending on country conditions. This
section looks at the interactions and combined effects of policy instruments, the coherence
of the policy mix and how country contexts affect policy mix choices.
The choice of a policy mix is not the simple result of one-off optimisation decisions subject
to a budget constraint, because the cost-benefit structure of different combinations of policy
instruments is highly uncertain and context -specific. Moreover, policy mixes develop
incrementally over many years as path -dependent outcomes influenced by previous policy
choices and by different interest groups. Thus, policy mixes reflect complex social relations,
changing rationales, and historical dynamics of government intervention. As such, the
analysis of policy mixes is an extremely complex task a nd any attempt to search for the
optimal policy mix should be avoided.
3.1. Assessing interactions between policy instruments
Different kinds of positive and negative interactions may ar ise when policy instruments are
combined in a policy mix (Table 2).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 17

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 2. Types of interactions between policy instruments
Type of interactions Description Example
Positive interactions
Precondition X is necessary in
order to implement Y
(i.e. the sequence by
which policy
instruments are
introduced matters).
The case study of Colombia (Botero, Sánchez and Pontón, 201 9) shows
how, following the introduction of new grants for spin-offs in 2010, it was later
deemed necessary to remove regulatory barriers that impeded employees of
public universities and research institutes to create a new company or hold a
second post, leading to the enactment of a new law in 2017.
Facilitation X increases the
effectiveness of Y, but
Y has no impact on X.
In 2015 the Japanese government launched the “Guidelines for IP
Management in Government-commissioned Research and Development” to
facilitate the implementation of the Japanese version of the Bayh -Doyle Act
dating back to 1999.
Synergy X increases the
effectiveness of Y,
and vice versa
The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programme, implemented
by the US Federal Government since 1982, has benefited substantially from
complementary outreach programmes and matching grants offered at US
State level (Lanahan and Feldman, 2015).
Negative interactions
Contradiction X decreases the
effectiveness of Y,
and vice versa.
New policy approaches aimed at promoting knowledge sharing through open
access, open data, open software etc. may be in contradiction with more
traditional policies aimed at protecting IP rights (Herstad et al., 2010).
Complexity Using too many policy
instruments results in
confusion for target
groups, operational
difficulties, and
increased
administrative costs
for the government.
In view of the vast and complicated array of programmes in place to support
business innovation, the Government of Canada announced in 2018 a major
reform aimed at simplifying the policy mix by making it easier to navigate and
more adapted to the needs of target firms. As a result, total overall funding
for business innovation programming will increase, but the total number of
business innovation programmes (currently 92), will be reduced by up to two-
thirds.
Positive interactions
The combination of several policy instruments may increase their individual impacts. Such
positive interaction s may occur in the form of precondition, facilitation or synergy.
Precondition effects imply that, besides the combination of policy instruments, it is also
important to consider the sequence whereby they are introduced. For example, a precondition
to the implementation of policy instruments that provide financial support to academic
spinoffs is to ensure that university employment regulations do not act as a barrier . In
Colombia, for example, following the introduction of new grants for spin-offs in 2010, it was
later deemed necessary to remove regulatory barriers that impeded employees of public
universities and research institutes to create a new company or hold a second post, leading to
the enactment of a new law in 2017 (Botero, Sánchez and Pontón, 2019). A more careful ex-
ante assessment of this precondition would have improved the impact of the policy mix.
Governments of OECD countries are increasingly aware of the importance of soft policy
instruments given their facilitation effect over other financial and regulatory instruments to
support knowledge transfer. For instance, several countries have complemented Bayh-Dole-
type regulatory frameworks on the ownership of IP rights generated from publicly funded
research and the distribution of revenues from commercialisation with “soft instruments” to
facilitate implementation. In the UK, the so -called Lambert toolkit provides guidelines and
model contracts for the management of IP in collaborative research projects between
universities and industry. Likewis e, in 2015 the Japanese government launched the
“Guidelines for Intellectual Property Management in Government -commissioned Research
and Development” to support the implementation of the Japanese version of the Bayh-Doyle
Act dating back to 1999.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Finally, a synergy will occur, for example, when two different grant programmes offer
funding for different activities or focus on different stages of the commercialisation cycle. A
single research project can benefit from being funded by different sources, with each source
funding different elements (e.g. personnel, equipment, etc.) or simply because the amount
needed for the whole project is higher than what a single source can provide. Obtaining
funding from one source, even a small amount, may be used as a ‘quality signal’ to leverage
funding from other private or public sources. For example, Lanahan and Feldman (2015)
discuss how the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programme, implemented by
the US Federal Government since 1982, has benefited substant ially from complementary
outreach programmes and matching grants offered at State level. This case also illustrates the
positive interactions of complementary policy instruments across different levels of
government.
Scattered evidence from evaluation stud ies point to different possible synergies between
policy instruments. Some have found that grants for collaborative R&D projects between
universities and firms will result in more joint projects if combined with policies that promote
exchange of post-graduate students to gain experience of project management in an industrial
context (Cunningham and Gök, 2016). Similarly, t he development of infrastructure and
intermediary organisations for knowledge transfer (i.e. incubators, science parks, TTOs) has
more impact if accompanied by other regulatory and financial instruments. For example, a
recent OECD review of innovation policies in Lithuania argued that the development of
science parks is more efficient if combined with reforms in universities’ regulations fo r
technology transfer (OECD, 2016c). With regard to financial policy instruments, business
incubators work better if accompanied by financial support to provide early stage funding for
entrepreneurs, for example through public venture capital funds. This is especially important
in laggard countries where the business environment is weak and financial markets are
underdeveloped. In the absence of such complementary policies, science parks often become
pure real estate ventures with unsustainable financials, as discussed in a World Bank review
of university-industry collaboration in Sri Lanka (Larsen et al., 2016).
The combination of demand and supply side measures may also lead to synergies (Guerzoni
and Raiteri, 2015), but the evidence available is limited (Cunningham et al., 2016). In line
with TIP work on systems innovation (OECD, 2015), Kivimaa and Kern (2016) have
emphasised that policy mixes to address grand societal challenges (such as the transition to
renewable energy) will be more efficient if suppo rt to the ‘creation’ of new technologies is
combined with measures to facilitate structural change and shift consumer demand to new
and more sustainable products.
In view of positive interactions, several policy instruments are often grouped together under
one broader initiative or policy programme. For example, “cluster programmes” frequently
group together several policy instruments to foster knowledge transfer, including financial
support schemes to promote collaboration in innovation and soft instrumen ts such as
networking events, in addition to policy instruments belonging to other domains such as joint
international promotion and export support.
Negative interactions
Negative interactions between policy instruments for knowledge transfer also need
consideration. For example, there might be a contradiction between policy initiatives that
aim at providing incentives for inventors by enhancing the IP rights regime, and those that
aim to foster knowledge sharing through open access and open data (Herstad et al., 2010).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 19

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

In addition to possible contradictions, negative interactions can derive from the complexity
of using too many policy instruments simultaneously. In particular, the coexistence of
different financial instruments targeting simultaneously the s ame types of actors can create
confusion and result in higher administrative costs. Moreover, when similar financial
instruments are offered both by the national and the regional governments, this might lead to
undesired situations where the same collaborative project is funded twice. The proliferation
of public support programmes at different levels can lead to inconsistencies, bureaucratic and
political conflict, and lack of consensus when setting priorities.
In addition to national -regional coordination , some supranational organisations have
developed innovation strategies and policy instruments that complement those deployed by
their member countries , as discussed in Section 2.1 . Synergies with those supra -national
policy instruments are of course criti cal. For example, the National Innovation Agency in
Portugal has adapted its research funding schemes to better integrate with European funding
programmes, by focussing on the final stages of the innovation cycle such as pilot projects
(Caldeira, 2017).
More at the horizontal policy level, the challenge is that the responsibility for the design and
implementation of public policies in support of knowledge transfer is often scattered across
different ministries, notably, ministries of science and innovation, education, the economy,
health as well as ministries of finance. This leads to complex systems of governance that
require effective inter -ministerial co -ordination. In particular, the co -ordination between
higher education and research policies is a frequent concern across many countries, as is the
co-ordination of research and innovation policies.
Besides those multi -level governance issues , a key concern relates to the total number of
policy instruments available and the overall complexity of the policy mix. Using too many
policy instruments can lead to higher administrative costs for the government and confusion
for target firms/universities. Indeed, the policy mix may improve by adding complementary
policy instruments, but only up to a certain point (Braathen, 2007; OECD, 2010). The “policy
layering” process whereby new policy programmes tend to be piled on top of one another,
sometimes as a result of sequential changes in government, may lead to over -complex and
incoherent policy mixes. For example, in view of the vast and complicated array of
programmes in place to support business innovation, the Government of Canada announced
in 2018 a major reform aimed at simplifying the policy mix by making it easier to navigate
and more adapted to the needs of target firms. As a result, total overall fund ing for business
innovation programming will increase, but the total number of business innovation
programmes (currently 92), will be reduced by up to two-thirds.
Similarly, the development of new intermediary organisations for knowledge transfer might
create an overly complex system. For example, the development of regional TTOs, which
provide services to several universities and PRIs, may facilitate knowledge transfer by
building the necessary critical mass to provide professional services across a range of
industries and knowledge transfer services. However, the diversity of technology transfer
institutions (TTOs from universities, regional/sectoral TTOs, private organisations, etc.),
when combined with the lack of a coherent information system, increases the complexity of
the system for different stakeholders (research groups, firms, etc.) and may lead to
coordination-failures, as discussed in the OECD review of innovation policies in France
(OECD, 2014a).
Moreover, there may be negative interactions between regulatory instruments and efforts to
build new infrastructure for knowledge transfer. For example, the development of TTOs will
not be efficient if career incentives for university researchers continue to focus only on

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

publications or if university e mployment regulations hamper spin -offs by prohibiting
academics from holding a second post, as it was found in the OECD review of innovation
policies in Colombia (OECD, 2014b).
Policy instruments that focus on a specific channel of knowledge transfer may exert a
negative effect over other alternative channels. For example, an excessive emphasis given to
technology commercialisation through patent transactions can work in detrimen t of other
modes of knowledge transfer such as R&D collaboration, contracting and two-way mobility
of researchers, as suggested in the OECD review of innovation policies in Malaysia (OECD,
2016d). Thus, it is important to seek for a balanced use of various policy instruments targeting
alternative channels for knowledge transfer.
Policy makers’ choice of performance indicators to evaluate intermediary organisations (such
as number of spin -offs, patent licencing contracts, research contracts, or joint resear ch
projects) can lead to undesirable effects if performance indicators are not well aligned with
policy objectives or if indicators focus only on a few channels of knowledge transfer just
because they are easier to measure (Russo et al., 2018). For example , Gulbrandsen and
Rasmussen (2012) found that using the number of spin -offs as a performance indicator for
technology transfer offices in Norway led to the adverse effect of pushing them to launch as
many firms and as fast as possible, even if their surviv al chances were low. Other authors
have warned that the frequent practice of evaluating TTOs based on the revenues they
generate may slow down the dissemination of knowledge and inhibit other more open forms
of knowledge transfer (Litan , Mitchell and Reedy et, 2007). Therefore, it is important to
reflect further on how to design performance indicators that better align intermediary
organisations with policy objectives.
More broadly, an increasing pressure on universities to foster commercialisation and industry
engagement may create conflicts with the spheres of research and teaching, which calls for
policy frameworks that enhance the integration of those three missions of universities
(OECD, 2017). Besides the opportunity cost in terms of attention being diverted away from
teaching and research, other potential risks that policy-makers should be aware of include the
privatisation of public research outputs and the unethical behaviour of researchers due to
conflicts of interest (Arza, 2010).
Interactions with other policy domains
Policies to promote knowledge transfer are a subset of a country’s overall science and
innovation policies, and are thus influenced by broader developments such as the increasing
adoption of “mission -oriented” programmes or the devel opment of clust er policies and
“smart specialisation strategies” at the regional level. Thus, it is important to consider not
only interactions between the policy instruments focussing on knowledge transfer, but also
other science and innovation policy ins truments that do not aim directly at promoting
knowledge transfer are also important even if their influence is more indirect.
Broader social and economic policies also shape the scope of knowledge transfer. These
include all policies that affect what innovations are undertaken, including health, energy and
environmental policies as they influence the demands for certain types of technologies
(Caiazza, 2016). Policies that affect the business framework conditions are also important, in
particular labour mar ket policies, education and training policies, financial market
regulations, competition policy, the international trade regime, etc. For example, labour
market policies (such as the characteristics of work contracts and the regulation of
unemployment and retirement benefits) influence the mobility of researchers, an important
channel of knowledge transfer. In particular, the need for more temporary mobility between

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 21

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

research and industry and vice versa is often made difficult by the nature of labour contracts
at research institutions which, in turn, are a reflection of general labour market contracts in
the public sector (for countries where such contracts apply to researchers).
Implications for policy evaluations
These interactions suggests that, when it comes to evaluating the success of policy
instruments, it is important to take into account the entire policy mix, as several policy
instruments simultaneously target (or affect) the same actors, and thus observed outco mes
are the result of the combined effect of several policies. So far, typical evaluations focus on
individual policy instruments in isolation, without considering how different instruments
interact within a policy mix (Borrás and Laatsit, 2018; Edler et al., 2012). Greater efforts are
necessary to move towards evaluation methods that consider the combined effects of policy
instruments, as well as potential redundancies, contradictions and remaining problems that
could be addressed with new instruments (Edler et al., 2008; Magro and Wilson, 2013).This
could be done by more systematic evaluations of entire policy mixes and by introducing,
within the templates used to evaluate individual policy instruments , a specific section that
focusses on their interaction with the broader policy mix.
At the time of introducing a new policy instrument, it is important to link up with existing
policy mixes and implementation structures. An ex-ante evaluation of the policy mix may
help improve policy design by avoiding negati ve interactions between policy instruments.
For example, in Greece, at the time of launching a new public venture capital fund to promote
spin-offs in 2017, concerns were expressed about the potential overlap with a programme
providing direct grants for spin-offs, which had been in place since 2001. As a result, it was
decided to fine-tune the eligibility criteria, so that the grant programme would focus on the
earlier stages, and to delay the next call of the grant programme until the first results of the
venture capital fund would be available (Spilioti, Gongolidis and Gypakis, 2019).
3.2. Evidence on the policy mix across countries: similarities and differences
An analysis of the STIP Compass database (Box 2) shows that OECD countries tend to use
the same type of policy instruments, in line with previous studies (e.g. Veugelers, 2015). This
convergence may be due to peer learning and “policy diffusion”, including policy
recommendations by international organisations and information exchange among countries
(Knill, 2005).
Box 2. Analysing knowledge transfer policies through the STIP Compass database
The EC/OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) Compass Database
(https://stip.oecd.org/stip.html) collects country responses to a biannual STI poli cy survey. The
analysis conducted for this paper focused on country responses under Section D of the questionnaire
(titled “public -private knowledge transfer and linkages”). This section collects policy initiatives
grouped under six themes, each correspond ing to a specific question in the questionnaire: 1)
Transfer and linkages strategies; 2) Collaborative research; 3) Cluster policies; 4) Commercialisation
of public research results; 5) Inter-sectoral mobility; and 6) IP rights in public research. The data for
this analysis was extracted on July 2018 (referring to the 2017 edition of the questionnaire) and
comprised 820 policy initiatives related to knowledge transfer across 48 countries.
Source: https://stip.oecd.org/stip.html

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

However, the STIP Compass database also shows significant differences across countries in
the relative importance given to each type of policy (e.g. in terms of budget or number of
initiatives) and in the detailed design or implementation of the policy instrument (e.g. in terms
of target groups, eligibility criteria, time horizon, monitoring methods, etc.). The divergence
of policy mixes can be associated with the specific structural and institutional characteristics
of countries, as discussed in previous research (e.g. Seppo, Roigas and Varblane, 2014).
To provide an example of those differences , competitive grant programmes to fund
collaborative R&D projects have become widely used across OECD countries, but a large
variety appears in terms of their budget, grant duration, direct beneficiaries, selection criteria,
and eligible activities (Table 3). The most common approach is to offer a maximum grant of
more than EUR 1 million (40% of cases) over 25-36 months (75%), but some countries offer
lower grants over a shorter period. Likewise, recent policy reports show how other financial
policy instruments that influence science-industry knowledge transfer, such as performance
based funding of universities (Borowiecki and Paunov, 2018; Debackere at el., 2018) and
mission-oriented research funding (European Commission, 2018), have become increasingly
popular albeit with a large variation of design and implementation practices across countries.
This “divergence within convergence” can also be observed across policy instruments
targeting other channels for knowledge transfer. For example, when it comes to promoting
industry-academia mobility of researchers, some countries focus on mobility from firms to
universities, others from universities to firms, and others on bo th simultaneously (Table 4).
Only some programmes offer financial subsidies, while others are limited to providing
guidelines and networking services. Among those providing financial subsidies, the
proportion of the salary subsidised and the average duration of the subsidy also differ.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 23

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 3. Grant programmes for public research requiring collaboration with industry partners
129 policy initiatives from 34 countries in 20171
Descriptive statistics
Maximum amount of grant awarded, EUR
 Less than 100K 14%
 100K-500K 31%
 500K-1M 15%
 More than 1M 40%
Annual budget range, EUR2
 Less than 1M 10%
 1M-5M 21%
 5M-20M 17%
 20M-50M 19%
 50M-100M 8%
 100M-500M 10%
 More than 500M 15%
Maximum grant duration
 12 months or less 6%
 13-24 months 19%
 25-36 months 75%
Direct beneficiaries3
 Established researchers 44%
 Undergraduate/master students 14%
 Post-doctoral researchers 28%
 PhD students 33%
 Higher education institutes 57%
 Public research institutes 53%
Type of activities funded3
 Basic research 46%
 Applied research 92%
 Experimental development 37%
Selection criteria3
 Scientific impact anticipated 65%
 Commercial impact anticipated 57%
 Track record of applicant 53%
 Societal impact anticipated 43%
 Alignment with national priorities 36%
 Social inclusion in research 8%
 Geographical location 7%
Notes: 1 The 34 countries in the sample are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, the
People’s Republic of China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Germany, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Russia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey and UK.
2 Only for this question, the sample size is 103 because 26 observations with missing answer are excluded.
3 Notice that the sum is not 100% because each initiative may have several different beneficiaries, eligibility
criteria, and type of activities funded.
Source: STIP Compass database.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 4. Policy initiatives to promote mobility of researchers: selected examples
Country Name of initiative Mechanisms Share of
salary
subsidised
Average
duration of
subsidy
Mobility
destination
Guidelines
and
information
Financial
subsidy
Networking HEIs
or
PRIs
Private
firms
Canada Mitacs - Elevate Yes Yes Yes >80% >18 months No Yes
Colombia Integration of
PhDs into
Colombian
companies
No Yes No >80% >18 months No Yes
France Vade-Mecum of
Public Private
Linkages
Yes No No - - No Yes
Korea 3rd Basic Plan for
Nurturing S&T
Human
Resources
Yes No Yes - - Yes Yes
Norway Research-Based
Regional
Innovation
No Yes No 40-80% 6-18 months Yes Yes
Peru Article 86 of the
University Law
30220
No Yes No 40-80% 6-18 months Yes No
Thailand Talent Mobility No Yes Yes >80% 6-18 months No Yes
United
Kingdom
CASE
Studentships
No No Yes - - Yes Yes
Source: STIP Compass database (retrieved on July 2018), considering only policy initiatives active in 2017 .
Complemented with information provided by country representatives to TIP.

Several OECD countries also offer innovation vouchers to promote contract research and
academic consultancy, but the design of such vouchers varies largely (e.g. in terms of voucher
amount and eligibility criteria) (Table 5). Many focus on providing those incentives to SMEs,
on the condition that they use it to contract services from a certified knowledge provider from
a university or PRI.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 25

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 5. Innovation voucher programmes that support the acquisition by firms of specialised services from
universities and PRIs: selected examples
Country Name of initiative Estimated budget
range per year,
EUR
Voucher
amount, EUR
Eligibility criteria
Firm size
(SMEs or
start-ups)
Firm receives
no other public
aid for
innovation
Knowledge
provider is
certified
Austria Innovation Voucher 1-5 million <10 000 Yes No No
Australia Innovation Vouchers
Programme
Missing answer 2 000 - 6 000 Yes No No
Chile Innovation Vouchers 1-5 million 6 000 - 10 000 No No No
Czech
Republic
Innovation Vouchers Missing answer varies Yes No Yes
Estonia Innovation Voucher <1 million 2 000 - 6 000 Yes Yes Yes
Estonia Development Voucher 1-5 million varies Yes Yes Yes
Hungary Innovation Voucher <1 million <16 000 Yes No Yes
Korea R&D Voucher System 5-20 million 6 000 - 10 000 Yes No Yes
Lithuania Innovation Vouchers 1-5 million 2 000 - 6 000 No Yes Yes
Netherlands SME Innovation
Support Top Sectors
20-50 million 2 000 - 6 000 Yes Yes Yes
Portugal Innovation Voucher 5-20 million varies Yes Yes Yes
Russia Innovation Vouchers for
Enterprises
50-100 million varies No No No
Switzerland Innovation Cheque <1 million <2 000 No No No
Turkey Techno-preneurship
Support Programme
1-5 million varies Yes No No
Source: STIP Compass database (retrieved on July 2018), considering only policy initiatives active in 2017 .
Complemented with information provided by country representatives to TIP.
On the regulatory front, most countries have reformed their IP regimes in order to stimulate
academic patenting, but the directions and rhythms of these reforms have varied substantially
across countries (Martinez and Sterzi, 2018; Weckowska et al., 2018). While most countries
have transferred ownership of publicly-funded research results from the state (go vernment)
to the (public or private) agent performing the research, where countries (and institutions
within countries) differ is in the allocation of ownership among performing agents (research
institution vs. individual researcher) (Borowiecki and Paunov, 2018).
With regard to intermediary organisations, comparative studies reveal a large variety of TTOs
with respect to their size, their institutional configuration and their focus on a specific set of
services (Bengtsson, 2017; Cartaxo and Godinho, 2017; Cesaroni and Piccaluga, 2016 ;
Schoen, de la Potterie and Henkel, 2014). TTOs are usually ascribed to individual universities
or PRIs, although some operate in a more autonomous manner, as non-for-profit associations
or even as self-sustainable public-private partnerships. In recent years, new models involving
regional or sectoral associative structures have also emerged, often based on the association
of several universities and PRIs that pool services to improve efficiency and quality (Table
6).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table 6. Examples of off-campus TTOs established through consortia of universities/PRIs
Country Year
launched
Scope Brief description
Belgium 2014 Regional TTO Flanders is a joint initiative of the TTOs of the 5 Flemish Universities. The TTO aims
to be a unique point of contact for industry and to increase the international orientation of
technology transfer, notably via its online portal.
Chile 2016 Sectoral Three “Technology transfer hubs” were created in priority sectors (agriculture, health, and
industrial production and energy). The hubs are decentralised entities whose
shareholders are a group of at least six universities/PRIs. Hubs complement individual
TTOs of participating universities, e.g. by centralizing some functions such as
international commercialisation of technologies.
Colombia 2013 Regional Six regional TTOs have been created building alliances between universities, research
centres and firms in order to build sufficient critical mass to operate more efficiently and
to be able to provide high quality specialist services.
France 2011 Regional A total of 14 “transfer acceleration companies” (SATTs) have been created to co-ordinate
the TTOs of universities/PRIs within the regions. They have pooled certain functions of
their member organisations (e.g. IP management) and developed new activities (e.g.
innovation development).
Ireland 2013 National A national TTO called Knowledge Transfer Ireland (KTI) was established in 2013 as a
partnership between Enterprise Ireland and the Irish Universities Association, to
complement existing in-campus TTOs with a more centralised structure to promote
knowledge transfer. Among other activities, KTI has created a web for companies to
explore the research resources available throughout the country.
New Zealand 2011 National The Kiwi Innovation Network (Kiwinet) is a consortium of 16 universities and PRIs that
aim to share resources and provide common services to leverage the country’s
technology transfer capabilities.
Norway 2015 Regional The Bergen Teknologioverføring (BTO) was set up in 2005 to serve all universities and
PRIs in the region of Bergen. Over time, other regions of the country have also
established joint TTOs or merged existing ones to encourage critical mass and
specialised expertise.
Source: STIP Compass database (retrieved on July 2018), considering only policy initiatives active in 2017 .
Complemented with information provided by country representatives to TIP.
This set of examples illustrates the variation that appears across countries; such divergence
may be well justified and reflect the specific country context in which they are applied,
including the country’s level of socio-economic development, size, R&D intensity, and other
structural and institutional factors. The following section explores further the kind of country-
specific factors that may influence the choice of policy mixes.
3.3. Searching for a coherent policy mix adapted to country contexts
Country differences play a role when it comes to evaluating the policy m ix, as actors and
institutions differ along a number of dimensions. The most appropriate channels and policy
mixes to promote knowledge transfer depend on a country’s level of socio -economic
development, size, R&D intensity, and other structural and institutional factors.
The following three factors are particularly important when evaluating a country’s policy
mix: i) the characteristics of the business sector, ii) the characteristics of HEIs and PRIs and
of their research, and iii) macroeconomic conditions.
Characteristics of the business sector
Knowledge transfer depends on the characteristics of the country’s business sector,
specifically firms’ size, sector of activity, technological capabilities, and ownership structure.
First, the challenges faced by SMEs are different from those of larger firms. Informal
channels of knowledge transfer (e.g. networking, facility sharing, on the job training, etc.)

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 27

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

are often very important for those SMEs with lim ited capabilities to engage in more formal
channels of collaboration. Intermediary organisations and industry/regional associations may
also help SMEs access global markets that otherwise would not be possible. SMEs are of
course diverse, and also include dynamic technology-based start-ups.
Second, the mechanisms for knowledge transfer in high tech industries are quite different
from those in low tech industries and services (Bekkers and Bodas Freitas, 2008; Paunov,
Planes-Satorra and Moriguchi, 2017 ; Perkm ann et al., 2013 ). For example, the
pharmaceutical and chemical industries rely more extensively than other sectors on
technology transfer through patent transactions, drawing heavily on scientific research in the
fields of life science, medical science and chemistry (Paunov, Planes-Satorra and Moriguchi,
2017). In contrast, firms operating in services sectors tend to rely to a large extent on informal
channels for linking with universities, with a focus on tacit knowledge, recombination of
existing knowledge, and specific problem-solving (Johnston and Huggins, 2017).
Third, different policy approaches may be necessary to support knowledge transfer towards
firms with weak technological capabilities . For example, innovation vouchers and
technology extension services may be useful policy instruments to initiate a virtuous circle
between the demand for innovation and the offer of innovative solutions in environments
where there is a lack of formalised demand for innovation. Where such connections exist,
those policies may have little additional effects while policies aimed at building effective co-
creation may have a better grounding.
Finally, the ownership characteristics of firms are also important to understand their
innovative behaviour and the potential of different policy instruments to promote knowledge
transfer. In particular, a better understanding of how foreign -owned multinational
subsidiaries collaborate with universities in the host country may offer insights to shape
knowledge transfer policies (Gu imón and Salazar-Elena, 2015). The same applies to state -
owned enterprises, the collaborative behaviour of which may be influenced more directly by
government prescriptions (Tonurist, 2015).
Characteristics of universities and PRIs
Differences in the characteristics of universities and PRIs should also be considered when
analysing the policy mix for knowledge transfer. While there is a trend towards greater
autonomy and increasing use of performance-based systems of public funding, the relative
importance and the division of labour between universities and PRIs, and between different
kinds of universities, varies substantially across OECD countries. Some countries, such as
Germany and Portugal, are characteris ed by institutional configurations where res earch
universities (driven toward excellence but under mounting pressure to also produce useful
research-based innovation) coexist with universities of applied research or ‘polytechnics’
(which engage in practice -based research and professional development , with close
relationships with local communities and SMEs, in particular through innovation).
There also tends to be a strong concentration of universities within countries, with many
smaller universities and a few very large institutions that concentrat e the bulk of academic
research. The disciplinary structure of universities and PRIs and their research quality are
critical factors to understand the channels through which they link with industry (Paunov,
Planes-Satorra and Moriguchi, 2017). Smaller and less research-intensive universities often
rely on different channels for knowledge transfer, focusing less on patent transactions or joint
research projects, and more on student entrepreneurship and informal networking.
Governments should be sensitive to this heterogeneity when evaluating their policy mix to
support knowledge transfer.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Macroeconomic conditions
It is also necessary to consider the g eneral macroeconomic conditions when analysing the
policy mix, as these will influence the public resources available, the broad strategies of
private firms, and the mobility of researchers. Given the long -term nature of innovation
processes, a stable policy environment is invaluable , providing continuous public support
independently of political and financial c ycles. But this is a daunting challenge in many
countries, particularly in the event of severe crises. For example, following a deep economic
depression in recent years, Greece has faced challenges that affect knowledge transfer
directly, such as the emigr ation of high-quality researchers, the rise of corporate taxes that
affect entrepreneurship and the constraints to state support to innovation due to financial
austerity measures (Spilioti, Gongolidis and Gypakis, 2019). This has also been the case in
other Southern European countries such as Italy, Portugal and Spain, leading to a growing
divergence in innovation performance between advanced and catching -up European
countries during the recent economic downturn (Archibugi and Filippetti, 2011; Cruz-Castro
and Sanz-Menéndez, 2016).
4. Conclusions
This paper provides a conceptual framework to analyse the policy mix for knowledge transfer
by mapping policy instruments; assessing interactions between different policy instruments;
and considering the influence o f countries’ institutional and structural conditions. The
combination of several policy instruments may create synergies but may also reduce the
success of individual instruments. To have maximum synergies and avoid negative
interactions of the policy mix, existing policy instruments should be mapped and the
implications of different combinations of policy instruments evaluated. This requires moving
away from assessing the impacts of single instruments in isolation. Such evaluations will be
valuable at the moment of deciding whether and, if so, how to introduce new policy
instruments to the existing policy mix.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 29

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

References
Acworth, E.B. (2008), “University –industry engagement: the formation of the Knowledge Integration
Community (KIC) model at Cambridge –MIT Insti tute”, Research Policy, 37, pp. 1241–1254,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2008.04.022.
Archibugi, D. and A. Filippetti (2011), “Is the Economic Crisis Impairing Convergence in Innovation
Performance across Europe?”, Journal of Common Market Studies, 49, pp. 1153 –1182,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5965.2011.02191.x.
Arza, V. (2010), “Channel s, benefits and risks of public -private interactions for knowledge transfer:
conceptual framework inspired by Latin America”, Science and Public Policy , 37, pp. 473 -484,
https://doi.org/10.3152/030234210X511990.
Bekkers, R. and I.M. Bodas Freitas (2008), “Analysing knowledge transfer channels between universities
and industry: To what degree do sectors also matter?”, Research Polic y, 37, pp. 1837 -1853,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2008.07.007.
Bengtsson, L. (2017), “A comparison of university technology transfer offices’ commercialization strategies
in the Scandinavia n countries”, Sci ence and Public Policy, 44, pp. 565–577,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scw086.
Borowiecki, M. and C. Paunov (2018), "How is research policy across the OECD organised?: Insights from
a new policy database", OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 55, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/235c9806-en.
Borrás, S. and M. Laatsit (2018), “Towards system oriented innovation policy evaluation? Evidence from
EU28 member states”, Research Policy, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.08.020.
Botero Ospina, M., A.E. Sánchez Salazar, J. Pontón Silva (201 9), Technology Transfer in Colombia. Case
study produced for the OECD TIP Knowledge Transfer Project.
Braathen, N.A. (2007), “Instrument mixes for environmental policy: how many stones should be used to kill
a bird?”, International Review of Environmental a nd Resource Economics, 1, pp. 185–235,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/101.00000005.
Bruneel, J., P. D’Este, P. and A. Salter (2010), “Investigating the factors that diminish the barriers to
university–industry collaboration”, Research Policy, 39, pp. 858 –868,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2010.03.006.
Caiazza, R. (2016), “A cross -national analysis of policies affecting innovation diffusion”, Journal of
Technology Transfer, 41, pp. 1406-1419, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-015-9439-2.
Caldeira, J.C. (2017), Knowledge and collaborative innovation at the heart of ANI mission, Presentation at
the Workshop “Stimulating knowledge transfer: challenges and policy responses”, 8 November 2017,
Available at:
https://www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/system/files/Panel%205.5_Caldeira%20_ANI.pdf (Accessed
20 November 2017).
Cartaxo, R.M. and M.M. Godinho (2017), “How institutional n ature and available resources determine the
performance of technology transfer offices”, Industry and Innovation, 24, pp. 713 -734,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2016.1264068.
Cesaroni, F., and A. Piccaluga (2016), “The Activities of University Knowledge Transfer Offices: Towards
the Third Mission in Italy.” Journal of Technology Transfer, 41, pp. 753–777,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-015-9401-3

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Clayton, P., M. Feldman and N. Lowe (2018). “Behind the scenes: Intermediary organisations that facilitate
science commercialization through entrepreneurship”. Academy of Management Perspectives, 32(1), pp.
104-124, https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2016.0133.
Cruz-Castro, L. and L. Sanz -Menéndez (2016), “The effects of the economic crisis on public research:
Spanish budgetary policies and research organisations”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
113, pp. 157-167, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2015.08.001.
Cunningham, P. et al. (2016), “The innovation policy mix”, in: Edler, J. et al. (eds.), Handbook of Innovation
Policy Impact, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Cunningham, P. and A. Gök (2016), “The impact of innovation policy schemes for collaboration”, in: Edler,
J. et al. (eds.), Handbook of Innovation Policy Impact, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Debackere, K, et al. (2018), “Performance-Based Funding of University Research”, European Commission,
Directorate General for Research and Innovation, Brussels.
Edler, J., M. Berger, M., M. Dinges, M. and A. Gök (2012), “The practice of evaluation in innovation policy
in Europe”, Research Evaluation, 21, pp. 167-182, https://doi.org/10.1093/reseval/rvs014.
Edler, J., B. Ebersberger and V. Lo (2008), “Improving policy understanding by means of secondary analyses
of policy evaluation ”, Research Evaluation, 17 , pp. 175–186,
https://doi.org/10.3152/095820208X331667.
Encarnação, J.L. (2017), Collaborative Laboratories - for the stimulation and reinforcement of the innovation
and technology transfer in Portugal, Presentation at the Workshop “Stimulating knowledge transfer:
challenges and policy responses”, 8 November 2017, Available at:
https://www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/system/files/Panel%201.2_Encarnacao_CoLABS.pdf.
European Commission (2019) European Research Area – Coordination of Re search Programmes “Joint
Programming”, Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/joint-programming_en.html (accessed on
25 January 2019)
European Commission (2018), “Mission-oriented research and innovation: Inventory and characterisation of
initiatives. Final Report”, European Commission, Directorate General for Research and Innovation,
Brussels.
Flanagan, K., E. Uyarra, E. and M. Laranja (2011). “Reconceptualising the “policy mix” for innovation”.
Research Policy, 40, 702–713, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.02.005.
Frølund, L., F. Murray and M. Ri edel (201 8), “ Developing successful strategic partnerships with
universities”, MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter Issue, pp. 71-79.
Geuna, A. and A. Muscio (2009), “The governance of university knowledge transfer: A critical review of
the literature”, Minerva, 47, pp. 93-114, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-009-9118-2.
Grimpe, C. and K. Hussinger (2013), “Formal and informal knowledge and technology transfer from
academia to industry: Complementarit y effects and innovation performance”, Industry and Innovation,
20, pp. 683-700, https://doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2013.856620.
Guellec, D. and C. Paunov (2018), « Innovation policies in the digital age », OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers, n° 59, OCDE Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/eadd1094-en.
Guerzoni, M. and E. Raiteri (2015), “Demand-side vs. supply-side technology policies: hidden treatment and
new empirical evidence on the policy mix”, Research Policy, 44, pp. 726-747,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.10.009.
Guimón, J. and J. Salazar-Elena (2015), “Collaboration in innovation between foreign subsidiaries and local
universities: evidence from Spain”, I ndustry and Innovation, 22, pp. 445-466,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2015.1089034.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 31

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Gulbrandsen, M. and E. Rasmussen (2012), “The use and development of indicators for the
commercialisation of university research in a national support programme”, Technology Analysis &
Strategic Management, 24, pp. 481-495, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2012.674670.
Halme, K. et al. (2019), “Overview of the Policy Mix for Science-Industry Knowledge Transfer in Finland”,
Case study produced for the OECD TIP Knowledge Transfer Project.
Harms, H. (2018) , “The funding model of the Christian Doppler Research Association ”, OECD-TIP
Workshop on Boosting knowledge transfer between science and industry: Paris, 14 March 2018,
https://www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/system/files/Panel%201.2_Harms.pdf.
Herstad, S.J. et al. (2010), “National innovation policy and global open innovation: exploring balances,
tradeoffs and complementa rities”, Science and Public Policy, 37, pp. 113-124,
https://doi.org/10.3152/030234210X489590.
Horta, H. and M.T. Patrício (2016), “Setting-up an international science partnership program: A case study
between Portuguese and US research universities”, Technological Foreca sting & Social Change, 113,
pp. 230-239, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2015.07.027.
Howlett, M. (2004), “Beyond good and evil in policy implementation: Instrument mixes, implementation
styles, and second generation theories of policy instrument choice”, Policy and Society, 23(2), 1 -17,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1449-4035(04)70030-2
Johnston, A. and R. Huggins (2017), “University-industry links and the determinants of their spatial scope:
A study of the knowledge intensive business services sector”, Papers in Regional Science, 96, pp. 247 -
260, https://doi.org/10.1111/pirs.12185.
Kerry, C and M. Danson (2016), “Open innovation, triple helix and regional innovation systems: exploring
CATAPULT centres in the UK”, Industry and Higher Education, 30, pp. 67-78,
https://doi.org/10.5367/ihe.2016.0292.
Kivimaa, P. and F. Kern (2016), “Creative destruction or mere niche support? Innovation policy mixes for
sustainability transit ions”, Research Policy, 45, pp. 205-217,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.
Klerkx, L. and J. Guimón (2017), “Attracting foreign R&D through international centres of excellence: early
experiences from Chile”, Science and Public Policy, 44, pp. 763 –774,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scx011.
Knill, C. (2005), “Cross -national policy convergence: concepts, approaches and explanatory factors”,
Journal of European Public Policy, 12, pp. 764-774, https://doi.org/10.1080/13501760500161332.
Kochenkova, A., R. Grimaldi and F. Munari (2016), “Public policy measures in support of knowledge
transfer activities: a review of academic literature”, The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41, pp. 407-429,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-015-9416-9.
Lanahan, L. and M.P. Feldman (2015), “Multilevel innovation policy mix: A closer look at state policies that
augment the federal SBIR program”, Research Policy, 44, pp. 1387 -1402,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.04.002
Larsen, K. et al. (2016), Promoting University -Industry Collaboration in Sri Lanka: Status, Case Studies,
and Policy Options, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Litan, R.E., L. Mitchell and E.J. Reedy (2007), “Commercializing university innovations: alternative
approaches”, Innovation Policy and the Economy, 8, pp. 31-57, https://doi.org/10.1086/ipe.8.25056198.
MacAulay, B. (2017), I ntermediation in support of effective knowledge transfer – the role of Catapults,
Presentation at the Workshop “Stimulating knowledge transfer: challenges and policy responses”,

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 │ SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

8 November 2017, Available at:
https://www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/system/files/Panel%205.2_MacAulay_Panel_DigitalCatapult
.pdf (Accessed 20 November 2017).
Magro, E. and J. R. Wilson (2013), “Complex innovation policy systems: Towards an evaluation mix”,
Research Policy, 42, pp. 1647-1656, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.06.005.
Martin, B.R. (2016), “R&D policy instruments – a critical review of what we do and don’t know”, Industry
and Innovation, 23, pp. 157–176, https://doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2016.1146125.
Martinez, C. and V. Sterzi (2018), “University patenting and the quest for technology transfer policy models
in Europe”, in: Varga A. and Erdos K. (Eds.), Handbook of Universities and Regional Development,
Edward Elgar (forthcoming).
OECD (forthcoming), Seizing the opportunities for digital innovation: Options for innovation policy, OECD
Publishing, Paris.
OECD (2017), Knowledge Triangle Synthesis Report: Enhancing the Contributions of Higher Education and
Research to Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris.
OECD (2016a), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2016-en.
OECD (2016b), Boosting Kazakhstan’s national intellectual property system for innovation, OECD
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264260955-en.
OECD (2016c), OECD Reviews of Innovati on Policy: Lithuania 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264259089-en.
OECD (2016d), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Malaysia 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264255340-en.
OECD (2015), System Innovation: Synthesis Report, OECD Publishing, Paris.
OECD (2014a), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: France 2014, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264214026-en.
OECD (2014b), OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Colombia 2014, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264204638-en.
OECD (2013), Commercialising Public Research: New Trends and Strategies, OECD Publishing , Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264193321-en.
OECD (2011a), Demand side innovation policy: theory and practice in OECD Countries, Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264098886-en.
OECD (2011b), Location factors for international investment in innovation: attractiveness for innovation,
OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264104815-en.
OECD (2011 c), Regions and innovation policy, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264097803-en.
OECD (2010), “The Innovation Policy Mix”. In: OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2010,
OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/sti_outlook-2010-48-en.
OECD (2003), Turning Science into Business: Patenting and Licensing at Public Research Organisations,
OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264100244-en.
OECD (2002), Benchmarking Industry -Science Relationships, OECD Publishing, Paris,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264175105-en.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
SCIENCE-INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE │ 33

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Paunov, C., S. Planes -Satorra and T. Moriguchi (2017), "What role for soc ial sciences in innovation?:
Re-assessing how scientific disciplines contribute to different industries", OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers, No. 45, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/8a306011-en.
Perkmann, M. et al. (2013), “Academic engagement and commercialisation: A review of the literature on
university–industry relations”, Research Policy, 42, pp. 423-442.
Russo, M. et al. (2018), “Innovation intermediaries and performance -based incentives: a case study of
regional innovation poles”, Science and Public Policy, 16 March 2018,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy028.
Seppo, M., K. Roigas, and U. Varblane (2014), “Governmental Support Measures for University -Industry
Cooperation-Comparative View in Europe”, Journal of the Knowledge Economy, 5, p p. 388 –408,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-014-0193-8
Schmid, J., S. A. Kolesnikov and J. Youtie (2017), “Plans versus experiences in transitioning transnational
education into research and economic development: a case study”, Science and Public Policy,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scx051.
Schoen, A., de la Potterie, B. V. P., & Henkel, J. (2014). Governance typology of universities’ technology
transfer processes. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 39(3), 435-453.
Spilioti, A., V. Gongolidis and A. Gypakis (201 9), Supporting the establishment and development of spin -
offs, Greece. Case study produced for the TIP Knowledge Transfer Project.
Tonurist, P. (2015), “Framework for analysing the role of state owned enterprises in innovation policy
management: The case of energy technologies and Eesti Energia”, Technovation, 38, pp. 1-14,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2014.08.001.
Veugelers, R. (2015), “Mixing and matching research and innovation policies in EU countries”, Bruegel
Working Paper 2015/16.
Weckowska et al. (2018), “University patenting and technology commercialization –legal frameworks and
the importance of local practice”, R&D Management, 48, pp. 88-108, https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12123
West, J. and K.R. Lakhani, (2008), “Getting clear about communities in open innovation”, I ndustry and
Innovation, 15, pp. 223-231, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13662710802033734.
Yoo, Y. et al. (2012), “Organizing for innovation in the digitized world”, Organisation Science, 23, pp. 1398-
1408, https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1120.0771.
Youtie, J. et al. (2017), “Institutionalization of international university research ventures”, Research Policy,
46, pp. 1692-1705, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.08.006.
