
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS
TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC
AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY
PAPERS
April 2023 No. 352

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

This paper was prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat in consultation with the
delegates of the Working Party on Artificial Intelligence Governance (AIGO). The paper was
approved and declassified by written procedure by the Committee on Digital E conomy Policy
(CDEP) on 10/03/2023.

Note to Delegations:

This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:

DSTI/CDEP/AIGO(2022)1/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the
status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and
boundaries and to the name of any territory, city, or area. The statistical data for Israel are
supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli author ities. The use of such data
by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem, and Israeli
settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.

© OECD 2023
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be
found at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  3
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Abstract
AI language models are a key component of natural language processing
(NLP), a field of artificial intelligence (AI) focused on enabling computers to
understand and generate human language. Language models and other
NLP approaches involve developing algorithms and models that can
process, analyse, and generate natural language text or speech trained on
vast amounts of data using techniques ranging from rule-based approaches
to statistical models and deep learning. The application of language models
is diverse and includes text completion, text-to-speech conversion,
language translation, chatbots, virtual assistants, and speech recognition.
This report offers an overview of the AI language model and NLP
landscape with current and emerging policy responses from around the
world. It also explores the basic building blocks of language models from a
technical perspective using the OECD Framework for the Classification of
AI Systems. Finally, the report presents policy considerations associated
with AI language models through the lens of the OECD AI Principles.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Abrégé
Les modèles de langage d’intelligence artificielle (IA) sont un élément clé
du traitement du langage naturel (NLP), un domaine de l’IA qui vise à
permettre aux ordinateurs de comprendre et de générer le langage humain.
Le NLP implique le développement d’algorithmes et de modèles capables
de traiter, d’analyser et de générer des textes ou des discours en langage
naturel. Ils sont formés sur de grandes quantités de données, en utilisant
des techniques allant des approches basées sur des règles aux modèles
statistiques et à l'apprentissage en profondeur. Les applications des
modèles de langage sont diverses et comprennent notamment l’auto-
complétion de texte, la conversion texte-parole, la traduction linguistique,
les chatbots, les assistants virtuels et la reconnaissance vocale. Ce rapport
offre une vue d’ensemble du paysage des modèles de langage IA et du
NLP avec les réponses politiques actuelles et émergentes du monde entier.
Il explore également les éléments de base du NLP d’un point de vue
technique en utilisant le cadre de l’OCDE pour la classification des
systèmes d’IA. Enfin, le rapport présente des considérations politiques
associées aux modèles de langage IA à travers le prisme des Principes sur
l’IA de l’OCDE.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  5
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Acknowledgements
The paper “AI language models: Technological, socio-economic and policy considerations” was prepared
under the aegis of the OECD Working Party on Artificial Intelligence Governance (AIGO) and the OECD
Committee for Dig ital Economy Policy (CDEP). AIGO delegates and national contact points for the
database of national AI policies of the OECD.AI Policy Observatory contributed significantly.
This report was a collective effort co-ordinated by the AI Unit in the OECD Digital Economy Policy division.
Research, interviews, stock -taking and drafting were conducted by Andras Hlacs, Sharon Ho and Laura
Galindo. Analysis and writing were conducted by Karine Perset and Luis Aranda.
The team gratefully acknowledges the contributions made by individuals and institutions that participated
in expert interviews: Sebastian Hallensleben (CEN -CENELEC JTC 21); Amir Banifatemi (AI Commons);
Alexandra Belias, Conor Griffin, and Laura Weidinger (DeepMind); Jan Hajic, Katrin Marheinecke, Georg
Rehm, and German Rigau (European Language Grid); Mathilde Bras, Margaret Mitchell, Carlos Muñoz
Ferrandis, Giada Pistilli, Anna Rogers, Yacine Yernite, and Thomas Wolf (Hugging Face); Antonella Zarra
(META); Alexander Huggins (Nuance); Ferenc Kása and Lászl ó Boa (Digitalis Jolet Nonprofit); and Mark
A. Finlayson (Florida International University).
In addition, the quality of the report benefited significantly from the engagement and written contributions
of Stuart Russell (University of California, Berkeley) , Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis (Hugging Face), Nobuhisa
Nishigata and Takayuki Honda (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Japan), Miguel Valle Del
Olmo (Spanish Permanent Representation to the EU), Yasmin Azhari (Permanent Delegation of Israel to
the OECD), Sarah Box (Belgotex New Zealand), Christine Hafskjold (Norwegian Ministry of Local
Government and Regional Development), Suhyeon Kang (Ministry of Science and ICT, Korea), Katya
Klinova (Partnership on AI), Mohammed Motiwala (United States Departm ent of State), Luis Ricardo
Sánchez Hernández (INAI, the National Data Protection Authority in Mexico), Arnis Skraučs (Ministry of
Environmental Protection and Regional Development of the Republic of Latvia), Prateek Sibal (UNESCO),
and Gustavo Ziemath (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Brazil).
Finally, the team acknowledges the helpful input and reviews by OECD team members: Celine Caira ,
Jamie Berryhill, Alistair Nolan, Giuseppe Bianco and Andras Molnar. The team also greatly thanks John
Tarver for his help editing this report and Orsolya Dobe, Andreia Furtado, Angela Gosmann, and Sebastian
Ordelheide for editorial and publishing support.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Table of contents
Abstract 3
Abrégé 4
Acknowledgements 5
Acronyms and abbreviations 8
Executive summary 9
Résumé 11
1 National AI policies and initiatives for language models 14
OECD countries 14
Partner economies 18
2 Understanding the evolving ecosystem for AI language models 20
People and planet 20
Economic context 21
Data and input 21
AI language model 22
Task and output 28
3 Policy considerations 30
Benefit people and planet (Principle 1.1) 31
Human-centred values and fairness (Principle 1.2) 33
Transparency and explainability (Principle 1.3) 35
Robustness, security and safety (Principle 1.4) 35
Accountability (Principle 1.5) 36
Investing in R&D (Principle 2.1) 37
Fostering a digital ecosystem (Principle 2.2) 38
Fostering an enabling policy environment (Principle 2.3) 39
Building human capacity and preparing for labour transitions (Principle 2.4) 39
International, interdisciplinary, and multi-stakeholder co-operation (Principle 2.5) 40

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  7
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

References 41
Annex A. Language acquisition and learning 49
Annex B. GPT-3 in the context of the OECD Framework for the Classification of AI
Systems 50

FIGURES
Figure 1. AI datasets on Hugging Face by language, 2023 15
Figure 2. Five dimensions of the OECD Framework for the Classification of AI Systems 20
Figure 3. Large language models are getting very big, and many are open source 25

TABLES
Table 1. Selection SLMs sorted by year and by number of parameters 27

BOXES
Box 1. Language resources in the context of the European Language Grid and the European Language
Equality initiatives 22
Box 2. Notable Large Language Models (LLMs) 23
Box 3. What is Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)? 25
Box 4. Training neural networks to be more efficient 26
Box 5. Research on risks of harm to people and planet associated with AI language models 30

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Acronyms and abbreviations
AI Artificial intelligence
ASR Automatic speech recognition
EU European Union
IP Intellectual property
IGO Intergovernmental organisation
LM Language model
LLMs Large language models
LT Language technology
NLP Natural language processing
NLPL Nordic Language Processing Laboratory
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
RNN Recurrent neural network
R&D Research and development
S2T Speech-to-text
SLMs Smaller language models
T2S Text-to-speech
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  9
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Executive summary
AI language models are part of an increasingly critical subset of AI technologies known as natural language
processing (NLP). NLP uses language as an input, produces language as an output, or both. Although
deployment is at a relatively early stag e, language models are widely viewed as transformative, as
evidenced by rapid growth in investment and widespread adoption of applications such as the
conversational agent ChatGPT.
AI language models promise to unlock significant opportunities to benefit p eople by conducting
tasks in human natural language at scale.
AI language models are being deployed across sectors, such as public administration, healthcare, banking,
and education, boosting productivity and decreasing costs. They enable language recognit ion, interaction
support and personalisation. They also enable interactive dialogue systems and personal virtual assistants.
AI language models can help safeguard minority or endangered languages by allowing them to be heard,
taught, and translated.
Policy makers want an enabling policy environment while mitigating the risks of AI language
models.
As individuals and organisations integrate language models into their functioning and services, questions
are being raised about how policy makers can ensure th at these transformative models are beneficial for
people, inclusive and safe. The 2019 OECD AI Principles state that “AI systems should be robust, secure
and safe throughout their entire life cycle so that, in conditions of normal use, foreseeable use or misuse,
or other adverse conditions, they function appropriately and do not pose unreasonable safety risk.” Yet
increasingly powerful AI language models raise significant policy challenges related to their trustworthy
deployment and use.
AI language model need quality control and standards to address issues of opacity, explainability,
accountability and control.
Many AI language models use neural networks that are opaque and complex. The lack of understanding
of their internal principles of operation and how they reach specific outputs, even by those who develop
them, leads to unpredictability and inability to constrain behaviour. Policy makers must encourage all
actors, notably researchers, to develop rigorous quality control methodologies and standards f or systems
to meet, appropriate to the application context.
The complexity of language models also means that it can be difficult and costly to understand which
parties and what data are involved in their development, training, and deployment to enable accountability
by those best able to mitigate specific risks. In addition, many language technologies in use today leverage
pre-existing models into which users have little visibility. Human overreliance on the outputs of language
models is another risk to accountability.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

AI language models pose risks to human rights, privacy, fairness, robustness, security, and safety.
AI language models are a form of “generative AI”. Generative AI models create new content in response
to prompts, based on their training data. The training data itself can include biases, confidential information
on individuals and information associated with existing intellectual property claims and rules. Language
models can then discriminate, leak or infer confidential or rights-infringing information.
AI language models can help actors manipulate opinions at scale and automate mis - and
disinformation in a way that can threaten democratic values, which is particularly challenging.
AI language models can facilitate and amplify the production and distribution of fake news and other forms
of manipulated language -based content that may be impossible to distinguish from factual information,
raising risks to democracy, social cohesion, and public trust in institutions. AI “hallucinations” also oc cur,
where models generate incorrect outputs but articulate them convincingly. The combination of AI language
models and mis- and disinformation can lead to deception at a wide scale that traditional approaches like
fact checking, detection tools, and media literacy education cannot readily address.
Continued dialogue and research can help to mitigate the risks of complex language models.
Further research is essential to understand these complex models and find risk mitigation solutions. In
addition, looking to the future, guardrails may be called for to control some forms of powerful language
models that can directly affect the real world. One question with significant societal implications remains:
should powerful language models be able to take actions d irectly, such as sending emails, making
purchases, and posting on social media, as opposed to their current use as passive question -answering
systems?
Language and computing resources as well as language models are key.
The limited availability of digital ly readable text to train models remains an important issue for many
languages. The most advanced language -specific models use the languages for which significant digital
content is available, such as English, Chinese, French, or Spanish. Policy makers in countries with minority
languages are promoting the development of digital language repositories, plans, and research.
Multilingual language models can foster inclusion and benefit a broader range of people. Access to
computing hardware is also crucial but needs more R&D to reduce financial and environmental costs in
favour of more efficient mechanisms to train and query large language models.
To ensure the benefits of language technologies are widely shared, actors will have to prepare for
economic transitions and equip people with skills to develop and use AI language models.
Language models have the potential to automate tasks in many job ca tegories. AI language models such
as OpenAI’s Generative Pre -trained Transformer 4 (GPT -4) are increasingly used to help perform tasks
previously conducted by people, including high -skill tasks such as writing software code, drafting reports
and even creat ing content. GPT -4 exhibits human -level performance across several standardised tests.
Policy makers will have to experiment with new social models and re -evaluate education needs in an era
of ubiquitous AI language models.
International, interdisciplinary , and multi -stakeholder cooperation for trustworthy AI language
models is required to address harmful uses and impacts.
Stakeholders, including policy makers, are beginning to explore related societal impacts and risks.
Collaboration is taking the form of sharing best practices and lessons learned in regional and international
fora and developing joint initiatives in multilingual language data and models. Yet, work remains to develop
viable policy and technical solutions that can effectively mitigate risks from language models and other
types of generative AI while fostering their beneficial development and adoption. All actors in the AI
ecosystem have key roles to play.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  11
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Résumé
Les modèles de langage de l’IA font partie d'un sous-ensemble de plus en plus important de technologies
d'IA, connu sous le nom de traitement automatique du langage naturel (NLP). Le NLP utilise le langage
comme source d'information et produit du langage comme résultat, ou les deux à la fois. Bien que leurs
déploiements n'en soient q u'à leurs débuts, les modèles de langage sont largement considérés comme
étant transformateurs, comme en témoignent la croissance rapide des investissements et l'adoption
généralisée d'applications telles que l'agent conversationnel ChatGPT.
Les modèles de langage de l'IA offrent des possibilités considérables d'améliorer la vie des gens
en effectuant des tâches en langage naturel humain à grande échelle.
Les modèles de langage d'IA sont déployés dans des secteurs tels que l'administration publique, les
services de santé, les services financiers et l'éducation, pour accroître la productivité et réduire les coûts.
Ces modèles permettent la reconnaissance de la langue, l'aide à l' interaction et la personnalisation. Ils
permettent également de mettre en place des systèmes de dialogue interactif et des assistants virtuels
personnels. Les modèles de langage d’IA peuvent contribuer à la sauvegarde des langues minoritaires ou
menacées en leur permettant d'être entendues, enseignées et traduites.
Les décideurs politiques veulent un environnement politique favorable tout en atténuant les
risques liés aux modèles de langage d'IA.
Alors que les individus et les organisations intègrent les modèles de langage dans leur fonctionnement,
des questions se posent sur la manière dont les responsables politiques peuvent s'assurer que ces
modèles transformationnels sont bénéfiques pour les personnes, inclusifs et sûrs. Les Principes sur l'IA
de l'OCDE stipulent que « Les systèmes d’IA devraient être robustes, sûrs et sécurisés tout au long de
leur cycle de vie, de sorte que, dans des conditions d’utilisation normales ou prévisibles, ou en cas
d’utilisation abusive ou de conditions défavorables, ils so ient à même de fonctionner convenablement, et
ne fassent pas peser un risque de sécurité démesuré. » Pourtant, des modèles de langage d'IA de plus
en plus puissants soulèvent d'importants enjeux de politiques publiques liés à leur déploiement et à leur
utilisation en toute confiance.
Les défis posés par les modèles de langage d'IA nécessitent un contrôle de la qualité et des normes
en matière de transparence, d'explicabilité, de responsabilité et de contrôle.
De nombreux modèles de langage d'IA utilisent de s réseaux de neurones opaques et complexes. Le
manque de compréhension de leurs principes internes de fonctionnement et de la manière dont ils
obtiennent des résultats spécifiques, même par ceux qui les ont développés, conduit à l'imprévisibilité et
à l'incapacité de contraindre les comportements. Les décideurs politiques doivent encourager tous les
acteurs, notamment les chercheurs, à développer des méthodologies et des normes rigoureuses de
contrôle de la qualité adaptées au contexte d'application des sys tèmes.
La complexité des modèles linguistiques signifie également qu’il peut être difficile et coûteux de
comprendre quelles parties et quelles données sont impliquées dans leur développement, leur formation
et leur déploiement, et ainsi de responsabilise r les personnes les mieux à même d’atténuer les risques

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

spécifiques. En outre, de nombreuses technologies linguistiques utilisées aujourd’hui s’appuient sur des
modèles préexistants sur lesquels les utilisateurs n’ont que peu de visibilité.
Les modèles de langage d'IA présentent des risques pour les droits de la personne, la vie privée,
l'équité, la robustesse, la sécurité et la sûreté.
Les modèles de langage d'IA sont une forme d’« IA générative ». Les modèles d'IA générative créent de
nouveaux contenus en réponse à des invites, sur la base de leurs données d'apprentissage. Les données
d'apprentissage elles -mêmes peuvent inclure des préjugés, des informations confidentielles sur des
personnes et des informations couvertes par la protection de la propriét é intellectuelle existante. Les
modèles de langage peuvent alors discriminer, divulguer ou déduire des informations confidentielles ou
qui portent atteinte aux droits des personnes.
Les modèles de langage d'IA peuvent aider à manipuler les opinions à grand e échelle et à
automatiser la désinformation d'une manière qui peut menacer les valeurs démocratiques.
Les modèles de langage d'IA peuvent faciliter et amplifier la production et la diffusion de fausses nouvelles
et d'autres formes de contenu manipulé basé sur le langage, qu'il peut être impossible de distinguer
d'informations factuelles, ce qui présente des risques pour la démocratie, la cohésion sociale et la
confiance des citoyens dans les institutions. On assiste également à des « hallucinations » de l'IA, lorsque
les modèles génèrent des résultats incorrects mais les expriment de manière convaincante. La
combinaison des modèles de langage de l'IA et de la désinformation peut conduire à une tromperie à
grande échelle que les approches traditionnelles tel les que la vérification des faits, les outils de détection
et l'éducation aux médias ne peuvent pas facilement corriger.
La poursuite du dialogue et de la recherche peut contribuer à atténuer les risques liés aux modèles
linguistiques complexes.
Il est es sentiel de poursuivre les recherches pour comprendre ces modèles complexes et trouver des
solutions d'atténuation des risques. En outre, si l'on se tourne vers l'avenir, des mécanismes de sécurité
pourraient être nécessaires pour contrôler certaines formes de modèles linguistiques puissants qui
peuvent avoir une incidence directe sur le monde réel. Une question quant aux implications sociétales
importantes demeure : les modèles de langage puissants devraient -ils pouvoir agir directement, comme
envoyer des courriels, faire des achats et publier des messages sur les médias sociaux, alors qu'ils sont
actuellement utilisés comme des systèmes passifs de réponse à des interrogations ?
Les ressources linguistiques et de calcul ainsi que les modèles linguistiques sont essentiels.
L'accès à des textes lisibles numériquement pour former des modèles reste un problème important pour
de nombreuses langues moins utilisées. Les modèles linguistiques les plus avancés utilisent les langues
pour lesquelles un contenu numérique important est disponible, comme l'anglais, le chinois, le français ou
l'espagnol. Dans les pays où les langues sont minoritaires, les décideurs politiques encouragent le
développement de dépôts, de plans et de recherches sur les langues numériques. Les m odèles
linguistiques multilingues peuvent favoriser l'inclusion et profiter à un plus grand nombre de personnes.
L'accès au matériel informatique est également crucial, mais il nécessite davantage de R&D pour réduire
les coûts financiers et environnementau x en faveur de mécanismes plus efficaces d'apprentissage et
d'interrogation de modèles linguistiques de grande taille.
Pour que les avantages des technologies linguistiques soient largement partagés, les acteurs
devront se préparer aux transitions économiques à venir et former les personnes à l'élaboration et
à l'utilisation de modèles de langage d'IA.
Les modèles linguistiques ont le potentiel d'automatiser des tâches dans de nombreuses catégories
professionnelles. Les modèles linguistiques d'IA tels que le Generative Pre-trained Transformer 4 (GPT-
4) de l'OpenAI sont de plus en plus utilisés pour aider à réaliser des tâches auparavant effectuées par des
personnes, y compris des tâches hautement qualifiées telles que l'écriture de codes de logiciels, la

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  13
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

rédaction de rapports et même la création de contenu. Les GPT -4 affichent des performances égales à
celles des humains à des tests standardisés. Les décideurs politiques devront expérimenter de nouveaux
modèles sociaux et réévaluer les besoins en matière d' éducation à l'ère de l'omniprésence des modèles
de langage de l'IA.
Une coopération internationale, interdisciplinaire et multipartite pour des modèles de langage d'IA
dignes de confiance est nécessaire pour lutter contre les utilisations abusives et les e ffets
néfastes.
Les parties prenantes, y compris les décideurs politiques, commencent à explorer les impacts et les
risques sociétaux connexes. La collaboration prend la forme d'un partage des meilleures pratiques et des
enseignements tirés dans les forums régionaux et internationaux et d'initiatives conjointes en matière de
données et de modèles linguistiques multilingues. Il reste cependant du travail à faire pour élaborer des
solutions politiques et techniques viables permettant d'atténuer efficacement les risques liés aux modèles
linguistiques et à d'autres types d'IA générative, tout en favorisant leur développement et leur adoption
bénéfiques. Tous les acteurs de l'écosystème de l'IA ont un rôle clé à jouer.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Language models underpin natural language processing (NLP) that automates a variety of natural
language functions

Natural language processing (NLP) refers to computer programs and tools that automate natural language
functions by analysing, producing, modifying, or responding to human texts and speech. NLP is a subset
of artificial intelligence (AI) that uses language as an input, prod uces language as an output, or both.
Language models take centre stage in NLP. They are models designed to represent the language domain
that often use machine learning . Chatbots, machine translation systems, and virtual assistants that
recognise speech are all applications that use language models.
Policy makers are actively encouraging or guiding the development and deployment of NLP in national
languages
National governments are recognising the growing importance of AI language models and other NLP
applications to enhance public services, promote national languages, boost productivity and decreas e
costs. This section explores current and emerging policy initiatives, including national action plans and
strategies, to encourage or guide the development and deployment of NLP in national languages.
A key trend in this space is investment in developing digital language resources in non-English languages,
including less commonly used languages or indigenous languages, particularly due to the lower availability
of AI training data in languages other than English. According to Hugging Face, a repository of open-source
NLP models, datasets , and libraries, resources in English represents 38% of all language resources,
followed by Spanish, German, and French (Figure 1), while training data in Chinese is reportedly significant
but less well reported on that specific platform. NLP research centres and collaborative platforms have
been created with networks of partner s from the private sector, academia , and civil society. A growing
number of cross -border initiatives aim to share know-how and best practices and to facilitate the
interoperability of national language data systems.
OECD countries
In Canada, the National Research Council's multilingual text processing team carries out R&D in
multilingual AI language models, including machine translation and other NLP systems for multilingual
contexts (National Research Council Canada, 2021[1]). Notably, the Canadian indigenous languages
technology project provides AI language models in support of Indigenous language schools, educators,
students, communities, and technology developers. Collaborative projects generate new speech- and text-
based resources for these groups and help increase the accessibility of audio and video recordings.
In Denmark in 2021, the government committed to investing EUR 4 million in a Danish language resource
as part of the Danish National Strate gy for AI (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark, 2021 [2]). Now, the
Danish Gigaword Project assembles the first dataset with over one billion Danish words, which can
1 National AI policies and initiatives
for language models

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  15
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

increase the accuracy of automated translation services and other NLP applications. The University of
Copenhagen’s Centre for Language Technology research focuses on five themes: Language Processing
and Resources; LT applications; machine learning; multi -modal communication which integrates text and
other modes of communication; and language research infrastructure (University of Copenhagen, 2023[3]).

Figure 1. AI datasets on Hugging Face by language, 2023

Note: Top 20 languages from Hugging Face AI datasets, from a list of 225 languages. Given that the biggest portion of the datasets belongs to
smaller languages, selecting the top 20 languages was needed for visualisation purposes.
Source: OECD.AI (2023), visualisations powered by Joseph Stefan Institute (JSI) using data from Hugging Face, www.oecd.ai/data.
In Estonia, the LT R&D programme, which is called “Estonian Language Technology 2018 -2027,” helps
achieve the LT-related objectives for “Knowledge-based Estonia 2014-2020” and the “Estonian Language
Strategy 2018 -2027” (Estonian Ministry of Education and Research, 2018 [4]). This programme aims to
ensure that the essential components of Estonian language models comply with international standards
and that Estonian language systems can be used more widely. The government also announced the
development of a central translation platform with the overarching goal of increasing the digital accessibility
of the Estonian language (Multilingual, 2021[5]).
In France, the government created the National AI Research Programme, which includes LT programs in
four interdisciplinary AI institutes in Toulouse, Nice, Grenoble and Paris (Ministère de la Culture, 2021[6]).
It developed the “PIAF” (Pour des IA Francophones) (Piaf, 2023 [7]) project to build French -language
datasets for AI in an open and contributory way (Ministère de la Culture, 2021 [6]). PIAF will produce a
dataset of 25 000 questions and answers in French. The government has a number of LT policy initiatives,
including a national AI roadmap for AI language models and NLP systems, the opening of the Cité

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

internationale de la langue française et de la Francophonie that should become an LT laboratory , and a
proposed International Centre for Digital and LTs (Ministère de la Culture, 2021[6]).
In Finland, the Prime Minister’s Office awarded Latvian company Tilde a four -year contract to provide
machine translation services to the Finnish government and its ministries (Tilde, 2022 [8]). It developed
AURA, which generates translations of documents and texts for Finnish -Swedish, Swedish -Finnish,
Finnish-English and English -Finnish. These custom machine translation engines are based on machine
learning algorithms with integrated dynamic terminology for the unique terminology and linguistic
requirements. There is a Finnish Government Termbank Valter, a multilingual databank containing
glossaries compiled by the Terminology Service of the Prime Minister's Office (LT-Innovate, 2023[9]).
In Germany, the German version of the GPT -2 model has been trained on a massive German language
dataset. As well, the German Society for Computational Linguistics and LT offers research, teaching and
professional work in NLP (LT-Innovate, 2023[10]). The German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action created the SPEAKER project to develop a “made-in-Germany” voice assistant platform.
The German Research Centre for AI houses the German Competence Centre in S peech and Language
Technology. The German Society for Computational Linguistics and Language Technology is the German-
speaking countries and regions’ scientific association for NLP research and teaching.
In Hungary, LT initiatives focus on linguistic resources carried out at the Research Institute for Linguistics
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (LT-Innovate, 2023 [11]). The Research Institute has also
participated in several international projects aimed at adopting specific processes developed for Western
European languages. The Hungarian National Corpus, a reference corpus of present -day Hungarian,
which consists of 187.6 million words, exists thanks to the work of the Hungarian Language Offices and
the Department of Corpus Linguistics (LT-Innovate, 2023[11]). The AI Coalition, founded by the Ministry of
Innovation and Technology, has an NLP group . It works on training a smaller Hungarian version of the
GPT-3 language model. The government is in talks to share this language model with the governments of
Slovenia, Slovakia and Czech Republic to develop a collection of language corpuses.
In Israel, NLP is one of the main pillars of the National Programme for AI Infrastructure initiated in March
2021. The programme, which is promoted by several entities including TELEM (Israel’s National
Infrastructure Forum for Research and Development) includes an investment of USD 55 mil lion in
infrastructure for Hebrew and Arabic. This program me plans includes developing an extensive set of
technological assets and with an open access provision for the R&D community to promote innovation in
the academic, private and public sectors. The programme’s deliverables are expected to include a rich set
of datasets and corpora, state -of-the-art large -scale LMs for Hebrew and Arabic, Automatic Speech
Recognition (ASR) modules, a Hebrew -Arabic bi -directional translation model and a set of pre -trained
models for everyday NLP tasks such as document summarisation, named entity recognition, sentiment
analysis and text-based question answering, and more.
In Japan, the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) conducts research
in a few LT areas. Under the Global Communication Plan 2025, the government discussed developing and
using NLP resources (Cabinet Office of Japan, 2021 [12]). Its objectives include promoting global and free
communication, enhancing global business capability, realising an inclusive and multicultural society, and
increasing Japan’s visibility in the global arena. A notable project under the Plan is between the NICT, the
Ministries of Internal Affairs and Communications and of Health, Labour and Welfare to further enhance a
multilingual translation system for the labour field (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of
Japan, 2021[13]).
In Korea, the Government has released its National AI Initiative for NLP systems. It has been building
Korean data since 2017 – which is difficult for companies, researchers , and individuals to build on their
own due to time and cost constraints. It does this through surveys covering the private and public sectors.
It has released 49 types of data, including text summaries of Korean language documents, voice data of
Korean dialects and Korean -foreign language translation corpora. In 2022, the government was planned

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  17
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

to release 44 additional types of Korean language data, including texts of Korean dialogue and multi -
speaker voice datasets constructed in 2021.
In Latvia, the importance of AI language models, along with the need for digital language resources and
language repositories, is highlighted in policy planning documents for 2021 -2027, including the Digital
Transformation Guidelines, the State Language Policy Guidelines and the report “On the development of
AI solutions”. State Research program mes such as “ Digital resources for humanities: integration and
development” and “Letonika” address AI LTs, focusing on creating and extending language resources. In
Latvia’s Recovery and Resilience Facility Plan, investments are allocated to developing and implementing
high-level skills in AI language models (Viksna et al., 2022[14]).
The Latvian National Corpora Collection (LNCC) includes a vast collection of open-access text and speech
corpora created by the digitalhumanities.lv community a ccessible through the korpuss.lv web platform.
There has been substantial progress in digitising archive, library and museum collections, such as those
of the National Library of Latvia (Periodika.lv) and the Latvian State Archives of Audio-visual Documents
(redzidzirdilatviju.lv). The CLARIN (Common Language Resources and Technology Infrastructure) Centre
of Latvian language resources and tools supports and collaborates with digital humanities and AI language
model developers and provides sustainable access to Latvian language resources and tools in accordance
with Open Data and FAIR Data Principles. Finally, the Latvian state administration has developed a
platform known as Hugo.lv, which makes AI language mod els and services available to public
administrations and the general public.
In Lithuania, the State Commission of the Lithuanian Language released the Guidelines for the
Development of the Lithuanian Language in the Digital Environment and the Progress o f NLP for 2021-
2027 (Gaidienė and Tamulionienė, 2022 [15]). The Guidelines aim to ensure the full functioning and use of
the Lithuanian language in the digital environment and the progress of its “Lithuanisation,” also to promote
the development of technologies adapted to the Lithuanian language and to improve the quality of public
services based on such technologies. Also, Latvian company Tilde has collaborated with Vilnius University
to develop a free machine translation platform for Lithuanians in order to ensure information and service
accessibility (Tilde, 2021[16]).
In Norway, the Norwegian Language Bank serves as a national infrastructure for NLP resources and offers
datasets with Norwegian speech and text (UNESCO, 2020[17]); (National Library of Norway, 2023[18]). The
Language Bank was established in 2010 with a yearly funding of NOK 10 million. In 2019, the government
allocated an additional NOK 9 million to the project. The government is working with public - and private-
sector partners on a few collaborative projects related to AI language models. For example, the Research
Council of Norway is funding the SCRIBE project, whose mission is to design a Norwegian Speech-to-Text
Transformer ( S2T) transcription system for multi -party conversations in realistic recording conditions
(SCRIBE, 2021[19]). The Council is funding CLARINO (CLARINO, 2020[20]), which is Norway’s part of a
broader EU initiative called CLARIN to promote greater access to language resources (CLARIN, 2022[21]).
Norway also plays a vital role in t he Nordic Language Processing Laboratory (NLPL) , a collaboration of
university research groups in NLP in Northern Europe (Nordic Language Processing Laboratory, 2021[22]).
The NLPL comprises NLP research groups in Norway, Finland, Denmark , and Sweden and the national
e-infrastructure providers of Finland and Norway. Its vision is to implement a virtual laboratory for large -
scale NLP research by (a) creating new ways to enable data - and compute-intensive NLP research by
implementing a common software, data and service stack in Nordic High Performance Computing (HPC)
centres; (b) pooling competencies within the user community and among expert support teams ; and (c)
enabling internationally competitive, data-intensive research and experimentation on a scale that would be
difficult to sustain on commodity computing resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

In Slovenia, the Research Infrastructure Development Plan 2011 -2020 identified a need to set up an
infrastructure for language resources and technologies (LT-Innovate, 2023[23]). This plan includes CLARIN
(Common Language Resources and Technology Infrastructure) as a priority research infrastructure. Three
departments at the Jožef Stefan Institute (JSI), a key technical partner of the OECD.AI Policy Observatory,
are involved in AI language model research for both Slovenian and English: AI Laboratory, Department of
Knowledge Technologies, Department of Intelligent Systems (LT-Innovate, 2023[23]).
In Spain, the government funded a National Plan for the Advancement of Natural Language Technologies
(OECD.AI, 2021 [24]). In December 2020 , Spain presented its National AI Strategy (ENIA) to guide the
country’s AI plans and strategies over the period 2020-2025. ENIA’s measures include the promotion of a
new National Language Technologies Plan. In 2022, the government launched its New Language
Economy project to mobilise public and private investments to promote Spanish and the country’s co-
official languages Catalan, Valencian, Galician, Basque, and Aranese (Kückens, 2022[25]). A total of EUR
1.1 billion is planned to be invested in the initiative by early 2026.
Spain’s co-official languages are supported by regional government initiatives, including the ongoing AINA
project generating new NLP resources and annotated datasets for Catalan. Similarly, NÓS, GAITU and
VIVES respectively address Galician, Basque and Valencian, which currently have a significantly lower
number of linguistic resources. The Spanish Secretary of State for Digiti sation and Artificial Intelligence
co-funds these projects and promotes other initiatives, such as the Spanish Language and Artificial
Intelligence (LEIA) project led by the Spanish Royal Academy.
The Republic of Türkiye (hereafter ‘Türkiye’) launched its “National Artificial Intelligence Strategy 2021 -
2025” in 2021, including a competition and support program me to promote the emergence of at least one
global Turkish NLP actor. T he “2023 Industry and Technology Strategy” established “Open-Source
Platform Türkiye” to host open source projects, including NLP projects, to strengthen the country’s open-
source ecosyst em, upskill software developers and develop Turkish language models. The Ministry of
Industry and Technology also developed an NLP Project to make available high-performance libraries and
datasets required for the processing of Turkish language text.
In the United Kingdom, Wales, the Welsh Language Technology Action Plan was launched in 2018 out
of the Welsh government’s language strategy “Cymraeg 2050: A mi llion Welsh speakers” (OECD.AI,
2021[26]). The Action Plan aims to plan technological developments to ensure that the Welsh language can
be used in different contexts, whether through voice, keyboard, or other means of human -computer
interaction. Its focus areas include Welsh Language Speech Technology, Computer-Assisted Translation,
and Conversational AI.
Partner economies
In Brazil, the Brazilian Computer Society organised regular meetings called the “Workshop on Information
Technology and Human Language” (STIL, in Portuguese) to bring together researchers, academics and
businesses working on computing and linguistics. STIL has become the central NLP forum in Brazil and
brings together multidiscip linary communities to advance the computational processing of human
languages.
In the People’s Republic of China (hereafter ‘China’ ), the government -funded Beijing Academy of AI
(BAAI) announced the first two versions of its Wu Dao LM in 2021. It has been reported that Wu Dao 2.0
contains more than 1.75 trillion parameters, which surpasses the number of parameters contained by
Google’s Switch Transformer, OpenAI’s GPT -3 and Google’s GLaM (Romero, 2021 [27]). BAAI has
partnered with a total of 22 Chinese companies, including smartphone company Xiaomi, delivery service
company Meituan and media company Kuaishou.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  19
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

In Egypt, the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology is engaged in a three -year
agreement with Chinese company iFlytek to encourage R&D in NLP and machine translation in the Arabic
and Chinese languages (Marking, 2020 [28]). The Ministry’s Applied Innovation Centre and iFlytek are
creating research projects in Arabic speech recognition, speech synthesis and Chinese-Arabic translation
(iFlytek, 2020[29]). In addition to technical co-operation, the two parties are co-ordinating the programme's
implementation and exchanging information.
In India, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) established the Technology
Development for Indian Languages (TDIL) Programme (Government of India, 2021[30]). The objective is to
create information processing tools to facilitate human -machine interaction in Indian languages and
develop technologies to access multilingual knowledge resources (Government of India, 2021 [30]). The
Ministry is also working on a technology to translate vernacular Indian languages in real-time to enable the
exchange of communications between two persons not speaking the same language (Press Trust of India,
2021[31]). The government announced the National Language Translation Mission , which uses NLP and
NLU to make governance- and policy-related knowledge available and to make knowledge texts accessible
in all 22 official languages of India while enhancing access to digital content and online services for Indian
users (Digwatch, 2021 [32]). The National Language Translation Mission focuses on local language
translation to enhance access to science and technology -related content in local communities via digital
platforms. The AI4Bharat (AI4Bahrat, 2022[33]) project of the Madras Indian Institute of Technology aims
to “Bring parity with respect to English in AI technologies for Indian languages with open -source
contributions in datasets, models, and applications and by enabling an innovation ecosystem” .
In Qatar, the Arabic Language Technology Group at the Qatar Computing Research Institute conducts
research in NLP areas, including speech recognition, machine translation and question answering for the
Arabic language (Arabic Language Technology Group, 2022[34]). It collaborates with local and international
organisations, such as Al Jazeera, MIT CSAIL, and the Qatar Supreme Education Council.
In South Africa, the South African Centre for Digital Language Resources (SADiLaR) is a platform, which
creates and manages digital resources and software to support NLP R&D and related studies in the
nation’s eleven official languages (Government of South Africa, 2019[35]). It is a collaborative infrastructure
with a vast network of partner organisations, including the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research,
the Universities of South Africa and Pretoria, the Inter-institutional Centre for Language Development and
Assessment and North-West University’s Centre for Text Technology. SADiLaR is hosted by North -West
University at the Potchefstroom Campus. The Masakhane NLP organisation (Masakhane, 2020[36]) is a
grassroots organisation whose mission is “to strengthen and spur NLP research in African languages, for
Africans, by Africans”.
In Thailand, the National Electronics and Computer Technology Centre desig ned the AI FOR THAI
platform as a digital infrastructure for the Thai people (Tapsai, Unger and Meesad, 2021[37]). The platform
is in the form of API services for users and developers to create and develop applications to benef it
businesses and society. AI FOR THAI offers a total of eleven services related to language technologies,
including basic NLP; tag suggestion; machine translation; sentiment analysis; character recognition; object
recognition; face analytics; persons and activity analytics; speech-to-text; text-to-speech transformers
(T2S); and chatbots.
In Viet Nam , the Ministry of Information and Communications developed an AI -based Vietnamese -
language S2T generator called VAIS and a T2S engine called Vbee (Dharmaraj, 2020 [38]). AIS can
recognise Vietnamese accents from all northern, central and southern regions with an accuracy rate of up
to 95 per cent and immediately produce results. It has been used by the Office s of the Party Central
Committee, the Government and the National Assembly, the Ministry of Information and Communications
and the Hanoi People’s Committee.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

This section examines the techn ological dimensions of AI language technologies through the lens of the
OECD Framework for the Classification of AI Systems – namely, how they impact people and planet, the
economic context in which systems operate, the data and input i.e. language resources used, AI models
and the tasks and outputs of the systems. It provides an overview of the technical components of language
models and stakeholders. Although the OECD Framework for the Classification of AI Systems is primarily
designed to classify applied AI systems, this report also applies the Framework to general -purpose AI
language models that are then integrated into specific applications. Notably, the general-purpose Large
Language Model (LLM) GPT-3 serves as a use case (Annex B).
Figure 2. Five dimensions of the OECD Framework for the Classification of AI Systems

Source: (OECD, 2022[39])
People and planet
Impacted stakeholders include the general public, workers, consumers, and those without access to LMs
The people and planet dimension is at the centre of the OECD Framework and focuses on “… human
rights and well-being in considering how people as a whole interact with and are affected by an AI system
throughout that system’s lifecycle” (OECD, 2022[39]). Users of AI language models and applications include
the public, who may lack AI competency, businesses, research institutions and government agencies. In
practice, they are currently skewed towards English speakers, as many existing language resources and
models are in English. Within this broad category of users, key impacted stakeholders include workers and
consumers, as AI language models could lead to the automation of s ome tasks, such as translation and
question-answering. Another group of impacted stakeholders includes those non-users who may not have
2 Understanding the evolving
ecosystem for AI language models

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  21
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

access to AI language models and in turn are at a disadvantage in unlocking the economic benefits an d
opportunities that these systems can provide.
Economic context
The economic impact of AI language models is already considerable and poised to be transformational
The economic context “constitutes the economic and sectoral environment in which an AI system is
deployed” (OECD, 2022 [39]). This includes the sector for which it is developed and deployed, business
function and model, critica lity and its scale and technological maturity. Actors in AI language models
include system operators and users, such as large technology companies and AI research organisations
and firms involved in studying computational linguistics. Several technology companies are researching ,
designing and deploying general-purpose NLP systems on a large scale, especially in the United States
and China (e.g. ChatGPT by OpenAI, Claude by Anthropic, Bard by Google, etc.). They have applications
in many sectors including public administration, healthcare, law, and retail.
The economic impact of language models is considerable and continuing to grow, particularly considering
the rise of large AI language models . Language, in written, spoken, or visual -manual form, is the main
vector of human communication as it helps people to function in society, teaching them how to socialise
and learn (see also Annex A). Language skills can provide economic benefits to individuals and societies,
enhance intercultural skills and global co -operation and lead to new and innovative ways of thinking and
working across cultures (Marconi et al., 2020 [40]). By extension, AI language models can significantly
impact both industry and government.
AI language models are already starting to impact approach es to learning and using language – for
example, through applications like Duolingo, Busuu and Grammarly. Language models provide innovative
solutions to break some of the language barriers associated with transnational communication in areas
such as international trade and are being used to optimise the efficiency of operations in sectors such as
healthcare, commerce, banking, insurance, and public administration (Dilmegani, 2022[41]).
Data and input
Data and input include language resources, grammar and terminology databases, annotated corpora and
human feedback
The data and input dimension is defined as “the data and/or expert input with which an AI model creates
an artificial representation of the physical environment” (OECD, 2022[39]). In the LM context, the data refers
to language resources, including written and spoken corpora (such as CommonCrawl and WebText ) and
grammar and terminology databases (Box 1). In addition to raw data for unsupervised language models,
another critical piece of the data is supervised training data, usually in the form of annotated corpora. Some
modern AI language models such as GPT-4, are also trained on human feedback provided in response to
generated outputs. While most existing language resources are in English , this is changing, as non -
English-speaking countries recognise the importance of language data and de veloping language
resources in their own languages.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Box 1. Language resources in the context of the European Language Grid and the European
Language Equality initiatives
The European Language Grid (ELG) and the European Language Equality (ELE) are related projects
that focus on closing the digital language divide. ELG is an online platform which catalogues European
language technologies, language resources and members of the European language community. ELE’s
areas of focus include Machine Translation, Speech Technologies, Text Analytics and Natural
Language Understanding and Data.
In the Report on the State of the Art in Language Technology and Language -centric AI (Rodrigo et al.,
2021[42]), ELE outlined catalogues where European language resources can be found, including the
European Commission’s ELRC -SHARE, the European Language Grid, the European Language
Resources Association (ELRA) Catalogue, the Common Language Resources and Technology
Infrastructure (CLARIN) and ME TA-SHARE. Beyond Europe, ELE refers to the Linguistic Data
Consortium as both a repository and a distribution point for language resources. ELE notes that even
though there are notable language resources in English, French, German, Spanish and Italian, to date
English remains far ahead of the rest.
Source: (European Language Grid, 2023[43]; European Language Equality, 2023[44]).
Data selection and curation are essential for trustworthy AI language models
The selection and curation of data is essential for the development and deployment of trustworthy AI
language models. It is important for model developers to consider the representativeness or accuracy of
the data in datasets since models can reproduce inaccurate or incorrect information present in the training
data. It is also essential to assess whether the data contains private information or biases (OECD, 2022[39]).
Selecting datasets that consider these factors provides a solid foundation for training language models. In
addition to selecting reliable and accurate datasets, it is important to curate selected datasets, i.e. label
and clean data for inconsistencies and remove personal information and biases where necessary.
AI language model
AI language models are often characterised by their parameter count and layers and accuracy
The OECD Framework for the Classification of AI Systems defines an AI model as "a computational
representation that encompasses processes, objects, ideas, people and interactions. Language models
vary in language and size. AI language models are often characterised by their parameter count and layers
and accuracy. A parameter refers to a value that the model changes independently through training for a
specific task (Wiggers, 2022 [45]). Parameters are distributed and applied across layers, which refer to
various stages of processing or iteration for an input sequence (Simoulin and Crabbé, 2021[46]).
Progress in AI LMs since 2015 has been notable, thanks to neural networks, large datasets and compute
While NLP has existed since the 1940s, significant strides in research and development have be en made
over the past few years. Progress since 2015 has been notable, thanks to machine learning neural network
models, alongside the availability of large volumes of data and computational power. Neural networks have
enabled state -of-the-art results in n atural language tasks and notably in the development of language
models. For example, the “Google Translate” service, which switched from statistical machine translation
to neural machine translation in 2016, uses machine learning and deep neural network models trained on
large volumes of full sentence translations of various official data sources of such as United Nations and
European Parliament documents (Ye, 2020[47]). Rather than individual words, it is trained on full sentences,
dramatically improving quality and accuracy and enabling new functionalities.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  23
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

The 2017 “Transformer” architecture was a critical conceptual breakthrough that enabled powerful LLMs
The “Transformer” architect ure developed in 2017 was the critical conceptual breakthrough that brought
further significant progress to language models. It is more efficient than its predecessor, Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNN), because Transformers can process natural language input in parallel rather than merely
in sequence. This reduces training and computing time and allows the development and deployment of
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Vaswani et al., 2017[48]). The Transformer’s architecture comprises three
technical concepts: positional encodings, attention and self -attention (Bilogur, 2020 [49]). “Positional
encoding” provides information on the position of each part of an input sequence, e.g. a sequence of text.
“Attention” draws connections between the different parts of the sequence, allowing a language model to
focus on previously hidden vectors in an input sequence to predict an output sequence . “SeIf-attention”
allows both previously hidden vectors and later parts of the input sequence to interact with one another
(Bilogur, 2020 [49]). Actors developing Large Language Models (LLMs) include OpenAI, Google and
Deepmind, Meta, as well as Baidu, the Beijing Academy of AI (BAAI), Amazon, Hugging Face, Yandex
and Anthropic (Box 2).
Box 2. Notable Large Language Models (LLMs)
Many LLMs have been released by companies and other organisations in recent years.
OpenAI
In 2020, OpenAI unveiled the Generative Pre-Trained Transformer 1 (GPT-1) in 2018 and subsequent
versions GPT-2 in 2019 and GPT -3. GPT-3 is a pre -trained LLM which upon receiving a text prompt,
GPT-3 is able to return a text completion in natural language.
In 2022, it released a conversational AI language model called ChatGPT using an enhanced GPT -3.5.
According to OpenAI, the dialogue format of ChatGPT enables it to answer follow -up questions,
acknowledge its mistakes, challenge incorrect premises and reject inappropriat e requests. ChatGPT
was trained using “Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback”, which involves using methods from
reinforcement learning to directly optimise an LM with human feedback (Hugging Face, 2022[50]).
In 2023, OpenAI launched a multi-modal LLM called GPT-4, which accepts image and text inputs and
emits text outputs. GPT -4 is now used on ChatGPT for some users. According to the company, the
post-training alignment process results in improved performance on measures of factuality and
adherence to desired behaviour (OpenAI, 2023[51]).
Google and Deepmind
In 2018, Google launched its “Bi -directional Encoder Representations from Transformers” (BERT)
(Devlin and Chang , 2018 [52]). BERT was the first bi -directional and unsupervised language
representation to be pre-trained on a plain text corpus (Devlin and Chang, 2018[52]).
In 2021, Google launched its Switch Transformer and the Generalist Language Model (GLaM), which
allows the reduction of computational and financial costs by reducing the number of “experts” (i.e.
submodels) activated (e.g. for each query) (Google, 2021[53]).
Also in 2021, Google’s subsidiary Deepmind unveiled Gopher , a Transformer -based AI language
model, with 280 billion parameters. It outperformed many other models at the time, especially in
knowledge-intensive domains.
In 2022, the company put out its 540 -billion-parameter Pathways Language Model (PaLM), which
outperformed similar LLMs such as GLaM, GPT -3, Megatron -Turing NLG and Gopher in few -shot
performance (i.e. its ability to generalise information using few examples). The same year, D eepmind

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

introduced its 70-billion-parameter AI language model called Chinchilla, which is reported to outperform
Gopher and GPT-3 on a range of downstream evaluation tasks.
Meta
In 2022, Meta launched its Open Pre -Trained Transformer (OPT -175B), which is t he first 175-billlion-
parameter LLM made available to the broader AI research community (Meta, 2022 [54]). The release
includes both the pretrained models and the code needed to train and use them. Its performance is
estimated to be comparable to GPT-3, but with only one-seventh the carbon footprint (Synced, 2022[55]).
In 2023, Meta released LLaMA, a foundational LLM designed to help researchers advance their work
in AI by providing a smaller LLM that does not require major infrastructure to operate (Meta, 2023[56]).
Others
Baidu. In 2019, Chinese technology giant Baidu launched the first version of its AI language model
ERNIE (“Enhanced Representation through kNowledge IntEgration”), which was followed by ERNIE 2.0
that same year and ERNIE 3.0 in 2021 (Synced, 2021[57]). According to Baidu, the training data for
ERNIE 3.0 is the largest Chinese language dataset to date.
The Beijing Academy of AI (BAAI) . In 2022, BAAI announced the first two versions of its Wu Dao
LLM, which contains more parameters than GPT-3 (Rodriguez, 2021[58]).
Amazon. In 2022, Amazon released its 20-billion-parameter language model called the Alexa Teacher
Model 20B (AlexaTM 20B) (Amazon, 2022[59]). It outperformed some larger models in few-shot learning
and requires lower carbon consumption in its training (Gupta, 2022[60]). Amazon has also applied ML
techniques in an effort to debias and detoxify the model (Amazon, 2022[59]).
Hugging Face . In 2022, Hugging Face released its BigScience Large Open -science Open -access
Multilingual Language Model (BLOOM) in co -operation with several French governmental agencies
(Hugging Face, 2022 [61]). BLOOM includes 176 billion parameters and was in complete transparency
on France’s Jean Zay public supercomputer (Hugging Face, 2022 [61]). Hugging Face has stated that
BLOOM is the first multilingual open LLM whose training an d deployment has been made transparent
to the broader community.
Yandex. In 2022, the Russian firm published its 100 -billion-parameter open-source LM called YaLM
100B, which the company describes as a bilingual neural network for generating and processing text
(Yandex, 2022[62]).
Anthropic. In March 2023, the company launched Claude, an “AI assistant based on Anthropic’s
research into training helpful, honest, and harmless AI systems” (Anthropic, 2023[63]).
Parameter count has been central to AI LM research, but other factors such as training efficiency matter
Parameter count is at the centre of research for AI language models. With the Transformer architecture,
AI developers were able to design larger models with an exponential rise in the number of parameters
(Figure 3). A higher number of parameters enables the AI language model to be more comprehensive in
nature and in turn, in model performance. However, increasing the number of parameters may not always
translate into an equivalent increase in performance within large language models and diminishing
marginal returns may come into play at some point (Simon, 2021[64]).

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  25
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Figure 3. Large language models are getting very big, and many are open source
The evolution of select large language models and their parameter counts (billions), 2020-2023

Note: This figure samples large language models and is not exhaustive. *The number of parameters for GPT-4 is an estimate by external sources
and at the time of writing has not been disclosed by OpenAI.
Source: Based on research from OECD, (Sevilla et al., 2022[65]; Benaich et al., 2022[66]).
Researchers are exploring whether transformers can allow the creation of a generalist AI model
Some researchers are exploring whether transformers can allow the creation of a “generalist” AI model
capable of performing hundreds of different tasks. While some researchers suggest such advancements
pave the way for human - or superhuman level intelligen ce, known as Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)
(Box 3), these models remain applicable to relatively narrow contexts, exhibiting imperfections like
“hallucinations” (making up facts if a right answer is not found in the training data), and often requiring
human assistance and oversight for correct functioning.
Box 3. What is Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)?
With Artificial General Intel ligence (AGI ), autonomous machines would become capable of general
intelligent action. Like humans, they would generalise and abstract learning across different cognitive
functions. AGI would have a strong associative memory and be capable of judgment and decision
making. It could solve multifaceted problems, learn through reading or experience, create concepts,
perceive the world and itself, invent and be creative, react to the unexpected in complex environments
and anticipate.
Despite significant technological advances over the last two decades, including the emergence of LLMs
and generative AI, narrow AI largely remains the current state -of-the-art. However, the impressive
performance of some recently released AI models have prompted claims of progress towards AGI. For
example, researchers at Microsoft (Bubeck et al., 2023 [67]) believe that OpenAI’s GPT -4 could
“reasonably be viewed as an early (yet still incomplete) version of an [AGI] system”, exhibiting some
elements of a th eory of mind - the capacity to understand people by ascribing mental states to them
(Wellman, 1992[68]). Although such AI models can generalise pattern recognition by transferring learning
between text, speech, image, and video recognition with degree s of precision, they can still be prone

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

to factual inaccuracy, hallucinations (making up facts if a right answer is not found in the training data),
inconsistency, and misunderstanding in new contexts.
With respect to a potential AGI, views vary widely. Experts caution that discussions should be realistic
in terms of time scales. They broadly agree that narrow AI will generate significant new opportunities,
risks, and challenges. They also agree that the possible advent of an AGI, p erhaps sometime during
the 21st century, would greatly amplify these consequences.
Sources: (Russell and Norvig, 2016[69]; OECD, 2019[70]) (Bubeck et al., 2023[67])
To date, higher parameter counts have been viewed as automatically improving model performance
To date, language models trained on small volumes of language data have tended to work less well than
models trained using large volumes of data (Paullada, 2021[71]). There has been a perception that the
higher the parameter count the better the model perform ance. However, this attitude has started to shift
among developers because: 1) the sheer scale of AI language models has raised ethical, environme ntal
and security challenges that have prompted the development of smaller language models and 2) higher
performance can also be achieved by optimising the efficiency of the training (Box 4). Compared with large
language models, small language models tend to consume less computing power and focus more closely
on specific operational needs. Yet depending on the specific language function(s) that one is looking to
perform, less can be more. Small language models have lower hardware requirements and lower
environmental and financial cost. At the same time, small language models may require significant R&D
investment to achieve similar performance to large language models.
Box 4. Training neural networks to be more efficient
The OECD report Measuring the environmental impacts of AI compute and applications : The AI
Footprint describes several good practices for sustainable AI, including the use of pre -trained models
and powering data centres with renewable resources. For example, researchers involved in a project
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and start-up MosaicML are training neural networks up
to seven times faster by configuring AI algorithms to learn more efficiently. Efficiency gains for both
computing hardware and software can be explored to maximise positive sustainability impacts in
training and using AI systems. The goal for future machine learning models is to balance performance
and efficiency as demand for AI computing grows with the creation of bigger and more complex AI
language models.
Source: (OECD, 2022[72])
Small language models that use methods to make training more efficient hold significant promise
The immense resources required to develop and execute large models have raised ethical, environmental,
and digital security challenges, which will be further di scussed in the following section on policy
considerations. Research institutions and large technology firms have thus also been developing leading
small language models ( Table 1). Higher parameter count and model size are not the sole performance
indicators for language models. Other key factors include the size of the training dataset and the amount
of compute used in training (Kaplan et al., 202 0[73]). Optimal model performance involves finding an
appropriate balance among these factors (Hoffman et al., 2022 [74]). A growing number of researchers
acknowledge that the size of an AI language model is not all that matters in optimising model performance.
They illustrate that performance similar to GPT -3 can be achieved with smaller language model s such as
ALBERT, using additional training methods to make training more efficient (Schick and Schütze, 2021[75]).

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  27
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Table 1. Selection SLMs sorted by year and by number of parameters
Model Year of release Developer (country) Transformer type Number of parameters
(Millions)
ALBERT 2019 Google (US) Autoencoding 31
BART 2019 Facebook (US) Seq2seq 406
KoGPT 2021 Kakao (Korea) Autoregressive 6 000
RETRO 2021 DeepMind (US) Retrieval-Based 8 000
ERNIE 3.0 2021 Baidu (China) Autoregressive;
Autoencoding 10 000
T0 2021 BigScience (US) Seq2seq 11 000
Sources: (Sun et al., 2021[76]; Borgeaud et al., 2022[77]; Lee, 2021[78]; Hugging Face, 2023[79]; Hugging Face, 2023[80]; Hugging Face,
2023[81]).
There is also growing interest in developing multilingual AI language models
Multilingual language models have been relatively limited in number because , until recently, much of the
focus has been placed on mono linguafl or bilingual models. However, there is growing interest in
developing multilingual AI language models, such as M -BERT by Google and XLM -R by Meta (Moberg,
2020[82]). Even though multilingual language models carry breadth in the number of languages they can
detect and process, they can be less accurate for specific language pairs. This is because the amount of
training data can vary by language and the model’s different layers may require more language -specific
information (Pires, Schlinger and Garrette, 2019[83]).
However, monolingual and bilingual language models are still very much in demand
Consequently, monolingual and bilingual language models are still very much in demand. As evidenced
by the examples of leading language models, many are designed with and for high -resource languages
such as English and Chinese due to the considerable amount of computing resources and training data
required to develop and deploy them. Larger countries subsequently create their own versions of these
language models in their native languages (Barba, 2020[84]). The next natural progression is that single
multilingual language model s are produced for the next one hundred most popular languages . This
observation is reinforced in a 2021 European Language Equality (ELE) report on existing strategic
documents and projects in NLP systems and AI: after English, only a handful of Western European
languages dominate the field – in particular, French , Spanish and German – and even fewer non -Indo-
European languages (European Language Equality, 2021[85]).
Offshoots of leading English language models have been adapted in other languages
As a temporary solution to the systemic i ssue of fewer AI language model s in non -English-speaking
countries, several offshoots of leading English language models have been adapted in other languages.
For example, Facebook AI released the French version of BERT called CamemBERT. When compared to
that of multilingual models in a number of downstream tasks, CamemBERT was superior in most (Martin
et al., 2020[86]). Most recently, FlauBERT was also launched, which outperformed CamemBERT with all
neural network architectures used for intent and slot prediction (Blanc. et al., 2022[87]). There are Spanish
versions, including BETO, BERTIN and MarIA, and Norwegian versions, including NB-BERT and NorBERT
(Rojas et al., 2020[88]; Hugging Face, 2021[89]; Kummervold et al., 2021[90]; Kutuzov et al., 2021[91]).
Language-specific models can be extended to other languages
Language-specific models can be ex tended to other languages through cross -lingual transfer learning,
which involves leveraging labelled data from other source languages (Chen et al., 2019[92]). In effect, this
method allows for the development of AI language models for low-resource languages through training
data from higher-resource languages.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

AI language models are the closest that has been achieved to date to what has been widely referred to in
the AI community as generative AI. They can process immense amounts of natural language input and
generate natural language output – and visual output in some cases, such as DALL-E. The Transformer’s
architecture which underlies many of the recent leading AI language models constitute a revolutionary
development in NLP with tremendous potential for the global economy and society more broadly. At the
same time, if not regulated properly, it is important to recognise that their capabilities can pose a significant
risk to fairness, privacy, and security.
Task and output
The final dimension – task and output – includes the tasks performed by the AI system , its outputs, and
resulting action(s) that influence the overall context . This section provides an overview of various NLP
categories and their corresponding tasks.
Tasks include name entity recognition, part-of-speech tagging, text categorisation, syntactic parsing, and
machine translation
AI language models can process text as input and/or generate text as output. NLP tasks include name
entity recognition, part-of-speech tagging, text categorisation, syntactic parsing , and machine translation
(Koradiya, 2019 [93]; Dilmegani, 2022 [41]). “Name entity recognition ” involves persons, locations , and
companies as the named entities. “Part-of-speech tagging” means that parts of speech are assigned to an
input sequence. With “text categorisation”, text in an input sequence is classified into pre -defined groups.
With “syntactic parsing”, an input sequence is broken down by grammatical structure. Finally, “machine
translation” involves converting text in an input sequence from one language to another.
Natural language comprehension involves making natural language machine-understandable
The first subcategory of NLP involves natural language comprehension . It involves converting natural
language input into a machine -understandable form. Examples of natural language understanding tasks
include relationship extraction, semantic parsing, sentiment analysis and text summarisation (Koradiya,
2019[93]; Dilmegani, 2022[41]). “Relationship extraction” extracts semantic relationships between texts in an
input sequence. “Semantic parsing ” breaks down a n input sequence into formal representations of its
meaning, which can involve identifying the role of each piece of an input sequence, e.g. the agent, the task
and the theme (Raj, 2017[94]). “Question answering” generates a response for a natural language input
question. “Sentiment analysis ” extracts e motional meaning from an input sequence. Finally, “t ext
summarisation” shortens an input sequence without compromising its meaning.
Natural language generation refers to producing natural language, e.g. natural language conversation
A second subcategory of NLP is natural language generation, which refers to natural language production.
Examples of N atural Language Generation tasks include discourse generation, lexical choice, sentence
generation and document structuring (Koradiya, 2019 [93]). “Discourse generation ” generates natural
language conversation between an NLP and a human agent. “Lexical choice” selects specific words in
response to an input sequence , including generating a specific output word more suitable than others
(Pandey, 2022[95]). For example, this involves mapping a concept (a person whose sex is male and whose
age is between 13 and 15 years) to a word (a boy, kid, teenager, youth, child, young man, or schoolboy).
Sentence generation means aggregating sentences in context by virtue of their relevance to an input
sequence (Pandey, 2022 [95]). For example, the input “ Sam has high blood pressure . He has low blood
sugar.” would generate the output “ Sam has high blood pressure and low blood sugar. ” “Document
structuring” generates a narrative structure in response to an input sequence (Pandey, 2022[95]).

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  29
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Automatic speech recognition refers to processing speech data as input, e.g. recognising the speaker
Another concept associated with NLP systems is automatic speech recognition, which refers to processing
speech data as input. Common processes for improving Automatic Speech Recognition models for a
specific application include language weighting, speaker labelling, acoustics training and profanity filtering
(IBM, 2020[96]). “Language weighting” is when words spoken frequently are given a higher weight. “Speaker
labelling” recognises speakers and cites or tag s their contributions to a conversation. With “Acoustics
training”, a system adapts to an acoustic environment –for example a level and type of background noise–
and speaker styles –for example , certain acc ents–. Finally, “p rofanity filtering ” identifies and filters out
certain words or phrases and sanitise speech output.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

A growing number of policy challenges and considerations are associated with the adoption of AI language
models and applications by individuals and organisations. This section leverages the 2019 OECD AI
Principles to structure a discussion of salient policy considerations associated with AI language models .
The OECD AI Principles are composed of five values-based Principles and five policy recommendations.
Research efforts also exist to categorise the risks to people and planet associated with AI language models
(Box 5).
Box 5. Research on risks of harm to people and planet associated with AI language models
Researchers at DeepMind noted the following six risk areas to people and planet associated with
language models:
• Discrimination, exclusion and toxicity: Harms that arise from the AI language model producing
discriminatory and exclusionary speech.
• Information hazards: Harms that arise from the AI language model leaking or inferring true
sensitive information.
• Misinformation harms: Harms that arise from the AI language model producing false or
misleading information. Misinformation is shared unknowin gly and is not intended to
deliberately deceive, manipulate, or inflict harm on a person, social group, organisation or
country (Lesher, Pawelec and Desai, 2022[97]).
• Malicious uses: Harms that arise from actors using the AI language model to intentionally cause
harm.
• Human-computer interaction harms: Harms that arise from users overly trusting the AI language
model or treating it as human-like.
• Automation, access and environmental harms: Harms that arise from the AI language model’s
environmental or downstream economic impacts.
Source: (Weidinger et al., 2021[98]).

3 Policy considerations

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  31
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Benefit people and planet (Principle 1.1)
AI language models can unlock tremendous opportunities across economies and societies
Natural language has long affected how people live and work. By extension, AI language models can make
a positive difference in many contexts and sectors for inclusive growth, sustainable development, and well-
being. AI language models are beginning to unlock tremendous opportunities by conducting tasks in
human natural language on a large scale. They are being deployed across sectors, such as in public
administration, healthcare, banking and law. They enable language recognition, intera ction support and
personalisation. Major NLP tasks include natural language understanding and generation and automatic
speech recognition. For example, AI language models enable interactive dialogue systems and personal
virtual assistants. In addition, LMs unlock socio-economic opportunities by decreasing language barriers
on a large scale and by automating some language tasks.
While multi-lingual models help, limited training data remains an issue for many languages
However, populations without access to NLP applications in their dominant language miss opportunities,
which is one reason that developing NLP models and applications in languages other than those that are
widely used in AI -leading countries is a priority for many governments, academi c and industry
organisations. Recently, BigScience unveiled a multilingual open LLM called BLOOM that is available in
46 languages (Hugging Face, 2022[61]). Meta AI open-sourced NLLB-200, an AI model that can translate
over 200 languages. A first step is generating sufficient digitalised natural language data to train language
models. Otherwise, improvements in AI language models risk exacerbating the prominence of some
languages (Borgonovi, Hervé and Seitz, 2023[99]).
Environmental concerns
The environmental and financial costs of developing and deploying AI LMs are significant
With all other factors remaining equal, a s AI models grow in size and complexity (such as with LLMs), so
do their computing demands. This results in environmental impacts including energy use, water
consumption and CO2 emissions . Although researchers have tried to quantify the precise environmental
impacts of AI language models , particularly for CO2 emissions, estimates vary and measurement
methodologies and indicators could be further standardised to allow for comparability, benchmarking and
mitigation of negative environmental impacts (OECD, 2022[72]).
Attempts to estimate the environmental costs of AI LMs are beginning
In spite of a lack of consensus among researchers on the amount of carbon emitted by AI language models,
a number of experts and publications that attempt to estimate these. One expert estimated that integrating
LLMs into search engine processes could require up to five times more computing power per search, with
a commensurate increase in energy use and carbon emissions (Stokel-Walker, 2023[100]). Strubell et al.
measured a big Transformer model's LM training and development costs in estimated CO2 emissions
(Strubell, Ganesh and McCallum, 2019 [101]). According to their research, training a large Transformer
model produces 284 000 kilogrammes of CO2, which is equivalent to the CO2 emissions of five cars over
their lifetime. However, Patterson et al. argue d that the estimate was in fact 88 times lower (Patterson
et al., 2021[102]). Patterson’s study also found that training GPT-3 required the equivalent of over 552 000
kilogrammes of CO2 (Patterson et al., 2021[102]). Despite the significant scale of this statistic, they point
out that LLMs such as GPT -3 bring potential energy benefits , one of which includes few -shot
generalisation. Few-shot generalisation means that LLMs do not require re-training for every new task, in
contrast to smaller models (Patterson et al., 2021[102]; Wang et al., 2020[103]).

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Considering “model, machine, mechanisation and map” can reduce energy requirements
Few estimates measuring the energy footprint of AI systems exist. These estimates also rarely differentiate
between AI training and use, or “inference”, workloads. According to a study by Google in 2022, the energy
use for machine learning workloads consistently represented less than 15% of its data centres’ total energy
use over the three -year period from 2019 to 2021 (Patterson, 2022 [104]). Google found that machine
learning energy requirements could be reduced by considering four aspects (“4M”): model, machine,
mechanisation and map, as follows.
• Model: the computer software or algorithm to address a specific problem
• Machine: the computer hardware running the AI model
• Mechanisation: the data centre housing the machine
• Map: the geographic location of the data centre
Google released its Generalist Language Model (GLaM ) in 2021 , which reportedly optimised the
4Ms — improved models, ML-specific hardware, efficient data centres and data centres located in optimal
geographies — approach to reduce the carbon emission of machine learning models by a factor of fourteen
(Patterson, 2022[104]). Google released GLaM, which is reported to optimise the 4Ms — improved models,
ML-specific hardware and efficient data centres — approach to reduce the carbon emission of machine
learning models by a factor of fourteen (Patterson, 2022[104]).
Financing and other barriers to producers and users
The financial costs of training and using AI LLMs are substantial
The financial cost of substantial amounts of computing power and other compute resources are another
barrier to training and using LLMs. For example, a 2020 study reported that OpenAI’s GPT-3 model training
would cost USD 4.6 million (Dickson, 2020[105]). According to a paper by AI21 Labs, it can cost between
USD 2 500 and USD 50 000 to train a 110 -million-parameter model, between USD 10 000 and
USD 200 000 to train a 340 -million-parameter model and between USD 80 000 and USD 1.6 million to
train a 1.5 -billion-parameter model (Sharir, Peleg and Shoham, 2020 [106]). To put this into context, AI
language models such as BLOOM and GPT-3 contain over 170 billion parameters.
Costs of AI LLMs are a barrier for SMEs, which can nonetheless fine-tune existing LMs
The high financial cost to train AI language models creates a significant barrier for smaller companies
wishing to develop their own models in -house, while providing larger technology compan ies with a first
mover advantage. At the same time, however, it is worthwhile to note that small and medium -sized
businesses that may not have the resources to build their own model can nevertheless benefit from fine -
tuning existing language models where appropriate (Wiggers, 2022[45]).
Costs of AI LLMs are also a barrier for models in minority languages
The cost barriers for training AI language models also apply to minority languages. Most of the leading
language models are trained in English and developed by large technology companies. AI language
models for minority languages are still few and far behind in terms of performance. There has nonetheless
been progress. For example, Nagoudi et al. have developed IndT5, the first Transformer language model
for Indigenous languages that is built on a corpus of ten indigenous languages and Spanish (Nagoudi
et al., 2021[108]). Room for progress remains in terms of minority-language AI language models and thus a
window of opportunity for companies seeking to penetrate untapped segments of the NLP market.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  33
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Human-centred values and fairness (Principle 1.2)
Considerations related to respect for human rights, democratic values and fairness, including democratic
institutions, privacy, and human agency, are particularly important given the increasing capacity and reach
of AI language models. The selection and curation of training data play a major role in this regard.
Misinformation and disinformation
The combination of AI LMs and disinformation can lead to wide scale deception
As language models are deployed across sectors , a major concern is the increasing us e of AI language
models to produce “disinformation” – deliberately fabricated untrue content designed to deceive, e.g.
writing untrue texts and articles – or “misinformation” – false or misleading information that does not intend
to harm, e.g. creating falsehoods for entertainment – that can damage public trust in democratic institutions
(Lesher, Pawelec and Desai, 2022[109]).
Users may not be able to distinguish between human and AI-generated text
The rapid development and widespread availability of increasingly sophisticated and easy -to-use AI
language models has dramatically increased the ease of producing mis - and disinformation and of
manipulating opinions at scale , particularly with language models that behave “human-like”. Language
models and other generative AI tools can enable the production of fake news, deepfakes, and other forms
of manipulated content that may be impossible to distinguish from real ones, yet can threaten democracy,
social cohesion, and public trust in institutions. The combination of AI and disinformation can lead to
deception at a wide scale that traditional approaches like fact checking, user education and media literacy,
or detection tools would be challenged to address.
Yet LMs can also help detect some “untruths” online
AI language models have also in the past been able to help detect “untruths” online. Efforts in this regard
include European Union’s (EU) Fandango project, where researchers buil t software tools using NLP to
help journalists and fact -checkers detect and fight fake news and disinformation based on semantic
features that are characteristic of fake news (European Commission, 2018 [110]). Another EU -financed
project is GoodNews, which aims to build the technological capability for algorithmic fake news detection
in social media by analysing the patterns of news spread in social networks and the observation that fake
news is shared online differently from real news stories (for exmaple, with far more “shares” than “likes” on
Facebook) (European Commission, 2020[111]). Based on these patterns, GoodNews attaches a credibility
score to news items.
New viable solutions to address generative AI’s impact on mis and disinformation are crucial
Without appropriate guardrails for LMs and other types of generative AI, they can exacerbate mis- and dis-
information and reinforce harmful stereotypes. The OECD and other intergovernmental organisations
participating in the globalpolicy.ai coalition have been discussing the possibility of launching a Global
Challenge on Digital Trust with several other partners to deepen understanding of the risk that generative
AI poses for mis and disinformation. The goal of the challenge would be to incentivise stakeholders around
the world to develop innovative and viable solutions to mitigate the risks of dis and misinformation for
generative AI.
Fairness and bias
AI language models can replicate biases present in their training data
AI language models can replicate stereotypes and discrimination through biases contained in language
resources used as training data and in language models themselves (including pre-trained models). Often,

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

language resources on which AI language models are trained reflect data about dominant social grou ps,
which can raise diversity and inclusion concerns. Using balanced training datasets that represent different
groups more e qually is essential to minimise biases of AI language models. Model validation and
verification is also crucial to assess and eliminate biases before a system’s deployment.
Biases in language models include historical bias (e.g. pre-existing patterns in the training data and societal
bias); representation bias (e.g. incomplete information due to missing variables, inadequate sample s ize,
etc.); measurement bias (e.g. omission or inclusion of variables that should or should not be in the model);
methodological and evaluation bias (e.g. errors in the use of evaluation metrics); monitoring bias (e.g.
inappropriate interpretation of a sys tem’s outputs during monitoring); and feedback loops (e.g. a few
popular items are recommended frequently to users, creating a feedback loop) (OECD, 2023[112]).
Larger parameter count can decrease certain types of bias but cause other issues
The number of parameters used to train a model can also lead to biases. In general, the greater the number
of parameters, the less the model is exposed to certain types of bi as ( omitted-variable bias ) (Goel,
2020[113]). However, a greater number of parameters often increases a model’s privacy considerations and
energy requirements.
Tools are being developed to help address biased or toxic data and feature on oecd.ai/tools
Approaches to auditing AI language models include data representativeness audits, using bias metrics
such as equalised odds, and human evaluators to determine whether the results generate any type of bias
or discrimination (Holistic AI, 2023 [114]). For example, OpenAI uses machines and humans to monitor
content used and produced by ChatGPT (Hsu and Thompson, 2023[115]). Human AI trainers and feedback
from users identify and filter out toxic training data and teach ChatGPT to produce better responses.
Some researchers are also using one AI language model to try to identify biases in another. For example,
DeepMind published a paper on “red -teaming” language models , that is, resolving biases in a target
language models by using test cases from another model (Perez et al., 2022 [116]). This approach has
limitations, as the underlying bias of the “red -teaming” model may conceal the real amount of bias and
discrimination of the red-teamed model.
Privacy concerns
LMs can lead to privacy breaches through leaking or inference of private information
Privacy is another important consideration for LMs, particularly for LLMs . Given that AI language models
process vast amounts of unstructured data, there is a concern that even normal use of data by a LM can
lead to personal data breaches through inadvertent leaking or inference of private information (Weidinger
et al., 2021[98]). Privacy issues can also be caused by security breaches. The potential theft of training data
that can include personal data is yet another risk. AI language models can also facilitate both legitimate
and illegitimate surveillance and censorship.
Developers of AI language models need training and tools
In the selection of training data, specific datasets may contain confidential information that may be illegal
to process under privacy laws such as the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation harmonises regional
privacy laws (European Union, 2016 [117]). Yet developers of AI language models may not have the
necessary training and expertise to understand and apply these regulations. Practical tools are needed to
help guide them. One such tool is PLOT4AI, an open-source library with models and methods to protect
against 86 threats to privacy. The O ECD.AI Catalogue of Tools and Metrics for Trustworthy AI
(oecd.ai/tools) provides a one-stop shop for AI actors to share tools to address risks to the AI Principles,
including risks to privacy in the LM context. Privacy-enhancing technologies as well as privacy-by-design
processes are important in the development and use of AI language models.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  35
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Transparency and explainability (Principle 1.3)
The opacity and complexity of LMs challenges transparency and explainability
Most AI LMs today rely on neural networks -- sophisticated statistical modelling techniques that are opaque
and complex –, posing a central challenge to transparency and explainability of LMs . Even those who
develop AI language models often do not understand how variables are comb ined to make predictions.
Neural networks are often referred to as “black boxes” due to their complex, multi -variable probabilistic
correlations that are most often difficult for the human mind to understand without additional tools (OECD,
2022[72]).
Meaningful information regarding the development and use of LMs is needed
Transparency associated with the use of language models includes disclosing when they are being used,
establishing clear guidance on appropriate use, and warnings for misuse. Gaining access to meaningful
information regarding the development and use of LMs is important to foster a general understanding of
these technologies. Fairly recent releases of open-source models such as BigScience’s BLOOM and
Meta’s OPT-175B have provided substantial public information about these language models.
People adversely affected by an LM’s outcome should be able to challenge the outcome
Explainability means enabling people affected by the outcome of an AI system to understand how it was
arrived at and entails providing easy-to-understand information that can enable those adversely affected
by an AI system to challenge the outcome . Explainability is a rising issue in AI language models due to
their complexity and opacity, particularly when it is necessary to challenge an outcome. In general, the
more complex a model is, the harder it is to explain (OECD, 2022[39]).
Robustness, security and safety (Principle 1.4)
The 2019 OECD AI Principles state that “ AI systems should be robust, secure and safe throughout their
entire life cycle so that, in conditions of normal use, foreseeable use or misuse, or other adverse conditions,
they function ap propriately and do not pose unreasonable safety risk .” Yet increasingly powerful AI
language models raise significant policy challenges related to ensuring that these transformative and
increasingly powerful future models are safe , robust , secure and benef icial for individuals and
organisations who are adopting them rapidly and widely.
Lack of human understanding of LM internal operation can lead to unpredictability and inability to
constrain behaviour
A few companies with commercial imperatives and signi ficant advance regarding language models are
understandably competing to develop and deploy useful popular tools. Yet lack of understanding of their
functioning leads to unpredictability and inability to constrain behaviour. Policy makers must encourage all
actors, notably researchers, to develop rigorous quality control methodologies and standards for systems
to meet at all stages of their lifecycle, appropriate to the application context. Mechanisms include investing
in these areas of research and establishing minimum requirements in public procurement, in addition to
standards and regulations.
Addressing AI language model safety challenges should be prioritised
Proactive and human -centred approaches can be helpful in addressing the safety chal lenges of AI
language model. For example DeepMind recently released research on building safer dialogue agents
powered by language models (DeepMind, 2022[118]). Sparrow is an information-seeking dialogue agent
trained to be hel pful, accurate, and harmless (e.g. not giving advice that could lead to physical safety or

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

breaking the law). Sparrow uses reinforcement learning from human feedback to increase the usefulness
of its answers and its behaviour is constrained by simple rules around possibly harmful advice.
Language models can be misused to develop malicious software code or create personalised scams and
fraud
AI language models can generate security risks if they are misused (Weidinger et al., 2021[98]):
• To develop malicious software code for viruses and malware and cyberattacks in a number of
different programming languages for cybercrime.
• To create personalised scams or fraud at scale, e.g. by drafting very realistic text or impersonation
of specific individuals or groups for phishing attacks, fraud or disinformation.
• Intended or unintended leaking or inference of private or sensitive information can occur, with
serious consequences for individual or group safety and security in both physical and digital
environments.
Open-source AI language models are double-edged swords in terms of digital security
The development and use of open-source AI language models are a double-edged sword in terms of digital
security. On the one hand , a broader community of developers and users can proactively identify errors,
correct them, block hacking attempts and launch regular updates. Security by design can help in this regard
to develop ensure information integrity, transparency and confidentiality in language models. On the other
hand, malicious actors can also identify errors and exploit model vulnerabilities (Sagar, 2021[119]).
Building the evidence base can inform discussions on the safety of AI language models
The widespread deployment of AI language models is already producing new data on their capabilities,
risks and incidents, which can help inform discussions of future AI safety risks with empirical evidence. In
particular, the OECD is developing an AI incidents monitor to identify incidents reported in the press in
real-time from reputable sources and start building the evidence base to inform discussions on the safety
of AI language models and other AI technologies.
Accountability (Principle 1.5)
As the capacity and impact of AI language models increase, so does the importance of accountability when
developing, deploying and operating these solutions. Debate is ongoing about who should be accountable
for the proper functioning of AI language models , including general -purpose systems, and how liabilities
should be determined.
 AI actors should manage AI risks throughout the AI system lifecycle
Discussions since early 2020 in the OECD.AI network of experts have underlined that accountable actors
should manage risks to the AI Principles throughout the lifecycle of their systems. This applies to actors
involved in the development, deployment and use of NLP systems. Four steps can help to manage AI risks
throughout the lifecycle: (1) Defin ing scope, context, actors and criteria; (2) Assess ing risks at individual,
aggregate and societal levels; (3) Treat ing risks in ways commensurate to cease, prevent or mitigate
adverse impacts; and (4) Governing the risk management process (OECD, 2023[112]).
Useful resources exist but focused international and multi-stakeholder effort is needed on quality control
and standards enabling accountability and control of powerful models
Several initiatives exist to develop industry standards, codes, and regulations to promote accountability in
AI, including for AI language models . This includes existing OECD frameworks, such as the OECD AI
Principles, the AI system lifecycle, and the OECD Framework for Classifying AI S ystems. The proposed
EU AI Act , currently under d iscussion, includ es provisions pertaining to general -purpose AI systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  37
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Furthermore, some developers of AI language models, such as BLOOM, have created playbooks, model
cards and data cards for their developer community, containing guidance on good practices. The recently-
launched Catalogue of Tools & Metrics for Trustworthy AI (oecd.ai/tools) provides a one-stop shop for AI
actors to share approaches, mechanisms and practices to implement trustworthy AI in a comparable and
easily accessible manner, including tools to promote accountability for the development and use of large
language models (OECD, 2023[120]).
Humans tend to trust AI system outputs, risking over-reliance
A well-known risk related to accountability is the human tendency to trust AI systems’ recommendations
somewhat blindly, including in critical decision -making. As AI language models become increasingly
accurate, there is a risk of over relying on them despite their flaws. At the same time , several types of
narrow AI systems may help improve humans’ ability to operate or in terpret AI systems and discourage
overreliance by, for example, using AI systems specifically designed to help human operators interpret or
critique certain answers provided by other AI systems.
Guardrails may be called for to control some forms of powerful language models
Looking to the future, guardrails may be called for to control some forms of powerful language models that
can directly affect the real world. A question with significant societal implications is whether powerful
language models should be able to take actions directly, such as sending emails, making purchases, and
posting on social media, as opposed to their current use as passive question-answering systems.
Investing in R&D (Principle 2.1)
Some analysts estimate VC investment in generative AI increased by 500% in just 2 years
In 2022, as with the global VC market, overall VC investments in AI firms experienced a significant drop of
over 40%. This reflects broader VC trends, with investors exercising more caution after the tech boom of
the COVID-19 pandemic years, rising interest rates, and inflationary pressures. An exception to the cooling
trend in VC investments is generative AI, which some analysts estimate has increased in VC investments
by nearly 500% in just 2 years (from USD 230 mil lion in 2020 to USD 1.37 billion in 2022) (Temkin,
2022[121]).
More benchmarks and assessment techniques are called for
Investment in the research and development of benchmarks and techniques for assessing language
models and data is needed to evaluate their performance on criteria including accuracy, security, safety,
explainability, fairness and bias on different tasks an d at different degrees of difficulty. The General
Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark, for example, assesses the technical
performance of AI language models and measures their performance on three categories: single-sentence
tasks, similarity and paraphrasing and inference tasks.
R&D in more energy-efficient mechanisms to train and query language models is critical
Given the environmental and financial computational costs associated with the development and training
of NLP, R&D on more efficient mechanisms to train and query language models is also critical.
Co-operation and foresight are needed more than ever
AI language models are rapidly evolving and improving. Close cooperation on foresight and forecasting
research to identify and antici pate future developments are needed to mitigate possible future risks to
society. Progress in AI language models may happen at a steady pace but also through significant
hardware and software breakthroughs that could affect the trajectory of AI progress in previously

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

unexpected manners. Societal implications require major concertation and cooperation between all
stakeholders, and particularly between researchers and policy makers.
Fostering a digital ecosystem (Principle 2.2)
Access to compute capacity is currently a pre-requisite to develop large language models
The development and deployment of AI language models and applications often requires extraordinary
amounts of data and computing power. However, these resources come at a significant cost and are not
accessible to everyone. Based on current trends, AI language models can be expected to continue to use
greater and greater amounts of input data, parameters and compute, to perform increasingly difficult tasks,.
Yet if this trend persist s, a few large companies could continue to dominate the market as smaller
companies or academic institutions may not have the resources to create or train large enough language
models to compete.
“Ground truth” data, often human-based and contextual, is essential to language model training
Current AI language models often rely on human-labelled data as the “ground truth”, which limits scalability.
To overcome this challenge, developing ways to produce ground truth data at scale is vital. Some are
attempting to teach AI systems “unaligned physics .” For example, by understanding mom entum and
impact, an AI model could understand whether and why someone was injured in a car crash – instead of
relying on human labelling. Yet, given societal and cultural differences, “ground truth” for AI language
models may often be contextual. The use of synthetic data has also gained widespread adoption in the ML
community, as it allows to simulate scenarios that are difficult to observe or replicate in real life and improve
representativeness of incomplete data sets.
Yet language models decreasing overall quality of data online is a risk that needs to be mitigated
A data-related risk posed by AI language models is the possibility of producing low -quality or inaccurate
outputs that would then decrease the overall quality of data online. For example, low -quality AI -based
translations may lower the aggregate quality of online translations and, in consequence, online content.
Training models on synthetic text is also typically less accurate than training on human text. It is thus
possible that the data produced by AI language models could harm the online “commons” and produce a
vicious cycle whereby AI systems are trained on ever lower quality data produced by AI language models
themselves.
Language resources development in specialised domains and minority languages is promising
Investing in language resources and data repositories in minority languages is important, as most existing
open source language models and datasets cover the more commonly used languages – namely, English,
German, Spanish and French. Many national governments are already engaging in concrete initiatives to
this end (see National AI policies and initiatives for language models).
Opening access to language models, including via open-source licensing, is promising but risky
Opening access to AI language models can increase inclusiveness and participation in the AI ecosystem,
allowing individuals, organisations, and communities to develop and use language models regardless of
their financial resources. Open sourcing the underlying code of language models so that it is public and
modifiable can help improve transparenc y and inclusiveness. However, open -source models come with
risks, as they can be reused and manipulated by malignant actors.
Organisations and SMEs with less resources can fine-tune existing language models
Organisations and SMEs with fewer economic and technological resources can investigate fine-tuning
existing language models to their operations, as well as improve customer service, e.g. with

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  39
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

personalisation and interactive chatbots. A key obstacle to LM diffusion in firms is the availability of
digitalised data and AI skills, but SMEs’ use of AI could in some cases take place via specific AI modules
of business operation and customer relation management (CRM) software like SAP, such that SMEs using
AI may even be able to do so seamlessly, without even realising they are using AI.
Fostering an enabling policy environment (Principle 2.3)
AI language models should be included in national AI strategies and action plans
Including language models in national AI strategies and action plans is important to encourage the ir
trustworthy development and deployment. Some governments have already started to engage in this effort.
For example, in the UK, in Wales the government has unveiled the Welsh Language Technology Action
Plan (OECD.AI, 2021[26]), while the Government of Spain has introduced its Plan for the Advancement of
Language Technology (OECD.AI, 2021[24]).
Policy makers are considering different mechanisms to ensure safe and beneficial LMs
Reaping the benefits of language models and generative AI while addressing their challenges and risks
requires an enabling policy environment and thoughtful mechanisms to ensure safe and beneficial LMs .
Discussions are ongoing to identify seek the best ways to account for generative AI in hard and soft law.
Some jurisdictions are taking a cross -sectoral “horizontal” approach to AI regulation (Canada, European
Union), while others consider a more sectoral or “vertical” approach (United States, United Kingdom).
Questions remain related to interoperability, defining high -risk AI systems, how to treat general -purpose
AI, and effective enforcement mechanisms, among others.
AI-specific legislation is being considered in jurisdictions such as the proposed AI Act in Europe and the
AI and Data Act in Canada . The proposed AI Act would include obligations for providers of General
Purpose AI systems that would be considered high -risk. Others are adapting existing legislation and
complementing it with policy guidance and frameworks for AI language models. Several experts have
called for a pause in the development of more powerful AI language models than GPT -4 (Future of Life
Institute, 2023[122]). Intergovernmental organisations (IGOs) also play a crucial role in helping policy makers
share good practices and develop interoperable solutions.
Building human capacity and preparing for labour transitions (Principle 2.4)
AI LMs can automate more and more tasks, including traditionally highly skilled tasks
AI technologies are impacting a wide range of tasks and workers (Milanez, 2023[123]). AI language models
can automate tasks such as transcription and translation, which may impact several occupations. Last-
generation language models are increasingly being used to conduct more complex and creative tasks, like
developing and debugging software code and writing music or poetry. Increasingly capable AI systems,
such as AI language models and agent -like AI systems, are raising concerns about job displacement ,
including of high-wage workers such as programmers and ensuing economic and social disruption. By way
of illustration, r ecent advances in AI language models to automate code writing have been impressive.
Examples of solutions include DeepCoder (developed by Microsoft and Cambridge University), AlphaCode
(developed by DeepMind), Codex (OpenAI’s natural -language coding project) , Co-pilot (developed by
GitHub) and ChatGPT (developed by OpenAI).
Governments should work closely with stakeholders to prepare for the transformation of the world of
work and of society
Governments should empower people to effectively use and interact with AI language models across the
breadth of applications . This includes equipping them with the necessary skills and enabling s ocial

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

dialogue and lifelong learning programmes to ensure a fair trans ition for workers affected by the
development and use of AI language models.
In addition, some AI language models leverage human inputs to clean and label training data or otherwise
contribute human judgment to AI systems. Workers , oftentimes low -skilled, underpaid and hired under
precarious conditions (i.e. “ghost workers”) are tasked with enriching the system’s training data and
improving the quality of the system’s outcomes. Due to the complexity of the supply chain, even well -
meaning firms, consumers and end-users may be unaware of the degree of “ghost work” or other human
involvement in developing AI language models. Worker consultations may offer advantages when it comes
to ensuring that job quality is maintained and even enhan ced by AI and that the gains of AI language
models are shared with all workers (Lane and Williams, 2023[124]).
International, interdisciplinary, and multi-stakeholder co-operation (Principle 2.5)
AI LMs can benefit from international, multi-disciplinary and multi-stakeholder cooperation
Research into trustworthy and beneficial AI language models is a collaborative effort that requires experts
from different disciplines, including linguistics, computer science, cognitive psychology and policy makers.
International research partnerships in this field also allow the share of knowledge and resources.
International, interdisciplinary, and multi-stakeholder co-operation is required to prevent or mitigate harmful
uses of AI language models , including the manipulation of opinions and the creation of mis - and
disinformation at scale. Stakeholders , including policy makers, are already exploring the societal risks of
AI language models, but much more work remains to develop solutions that can effectively mitigate their
risks while fostering their beneficial development and adoption.
Regional and international fora can facilitate such co-operation
Collaboration can take the form of sharing best practi ces and lessons learned in regional or international
fora. It can also take the form of joint initiatives in multilingual data and models. Furthermore, developing
standards for AI language models or including AI language models in existing standards is imp ortant for
interoperability between different systems and for the development and deployment of applications that
work in a trustworthy manner across borders. The OECD and other international fora can leverage their
convening power to shape standards that address risks stemming from the development and use of AI
language models and generative AI more broadly.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  41
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

References

AI4Bahrat (2022), “Nilekani Center at AI4Bharat” was officially launched on 28th July at IIT
Madras.
[33]
Amazon (2022), 20B-parameter Alexa model sets new marks in few-shot learning,
https://www.amazon.science/blog/20b-parameter-alexa-model-sets-new-marks-in-few-shot-
learning.
[59]
Anthropic (2023), Introducing Claude, https://www.anthropic.com/index/introducing-claude. [63]
Arabic Language Technology Group (2022), Arabic Language Technology Group,
https://alt.qcri.org/.
[34]
Barba, P. (2020), Challenges in Developing Multilingual Language Models in Natural Language
Processing (NLP), https://towardsdatascience.com/challenges-in-developing-multilingual-
language-models-in-natural-language-processing-nlp-f3b2bed64739.
[84]
Benaich, N. et al. (2022), State of AI Report, https://www.stateof.ai/ (accessed on
28 February 2023).
[66]
Bilogur, A. (2020), Transformer architecture, self-attention,
https://www.kaggle.com/code/residentmario/transformer-architecture-self-attention/notebook.
[49]
Blanc., C. et al. (2022), FlauBERT vs. CamemBERT: Understanding patient’s answers by a
French medical chatbot,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S093336572200029X?via%3Dihub.
[87]
Borgeaud, S. et al. (2022), Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens, arXiv,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04426.
[77]
Borgonovi, F., J. Hervé and H. Seitz (2023), Not lost in translation: Machine translation
technologies and their implications for the skills and labour market opportunities of language
professionals and for broader society, https://www.oecd.org/publications/not-lost-in-translation-
e1d1d170-en.htm.
[99]
Bovet, M. (1976), Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development and Individual Differences,
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-46323-5_20.
[127]
Bubeck, S. et al. (2023), “Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4”,
arXiv, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.12712.pdf.
[67]
Cabinet Office of Japan (2021), 総務省説明資料,
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/ai/shin_ai/2kai/siryo1.pdf.
[12]
Chen, X. et al. (2019), “Multi-Source Cross-Lingual Model Transfer: Learning What to Share”,
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1299.
[92]

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Chomsky, N. (1959), Review of Skinner’s Verbal Behavior,
http://www.ugr.es/~fmanjon/A%20Review%20of%20B%20%20F%20%20Skinner's%20Verbal
%20Behavior%20by%20Noam%20Chomsky.pdf.
[126]
CLARIN (2022), The research infrastructure for language as social and cultural data,
https://www.clarin.eu/.
[21]
CLARINO (2020), Welcome to CLARINO Bergen Centre, https://repo.clarino.uib.no/xmlui/. [20]
DeepMind (2022), Building safer dialogue agents, https://www.deepmind.com/blog/building-safer-
dialogue-agents.
[118]
Devlin, J. and M. Chang (2018), Open Sourcing BERT: State-of-the-Art Pre-training for Natural
Language Processing, https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/11/open-sourcing-bert-state-of-art-
pre.html.
[52]
Dharmaraj, S. (2020), Vietnam launches AI-based language applications,
https://opengovasia.com/vietnam-launches-ai-based-language-applications/.
[38]
Dickson, B. (2020), The GPT-3 economy, https://bdtechtalks.com/2020/09/21/gpt-3-economy-
business-model/.
[105]
Digwatch (2021), The government of India announces the National Language Translation Mission
to enhance access to digital content, https://dig.watch/updates/government-india-announces-
national-language-translation-mission-enhance-access-digital.
[32]
Dilmegani, C. (2022), In-Depth Guide into Natural Language Understanding in 2022,
https://research.aimultiple.com/nlu/.
[41]
Estonian Ministry of Education and Research (2018), The Language Technology Research and
Development Program “Estonian Language Technology 2018-2027” of the Ministry of
Education and Research, https://www.hm.ee/sites/default/files/estonian_language_tech.
[4]
European Commission (2020), Fake news detection in social networks using geometric deep
learning, https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/812672.
[111]
European Commission (2018), The Fandango project: Fake news discovery and propagation from
big data analysis and artificial intelligence Operations,
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/780355 (accessed on 5 April 2023).
[110]
European Language Equality (2023), European Language Equality: Developing an agenda and a
roadmap for achieving full digital language equality in Europe by 2030, https://european-
language-equality.eu/about/ (accessed on 5 April 2023).
[44]
European Language Equality (2021), D3.1: Report on existing strategic documents and projects in
LT/AI, https://european-language-equality.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/ELE___Deliverable_D3_1.pdf.
[85]
European Language Grid (2023), European Language Grid (release 3): Towards the Primary
Platform for Language Technologies in Europe, https://live.european-language-grid.eu/
(accessed on 5 April 2023).
[43]
European Union (2016), Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the
Council, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679.
[117]

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  43
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Future of Life Institute (2023), Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter,
https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/.
[122]
Gaidienė, A. and A. Tamulionienė (2022), Report on the Lithuanian Language, https://european-
language-equality.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2022/03/ELE___Deliverable_D1_23__Language_Report_Lithuanian_.pdf.
[15]
Goel, M. (2020), The Bias-Variance Trade-Off : A Mathematical View, https://medium.com/snu-
ai/the-bias-variance-trade-off-a-mathematical-view-14ff9dfe5a3c.
[113]
Google (2021), More Efficient In-Context Learning with GLaM. [53]
Government of India (2021), Technology Development for Indian Languages (TDIL),
https://www.meity.gov.in/content/technology-development-indian-languages-tdil.
[30]
Government of South Africa (2019), Government Establishes A New Digital Centre To Promote
Indigenous Languages, https://www.dst.gov.za/index.php/media-room/latest-news/2885-
government-establishes-a-new-digital-centre-to-promote-indigenous-lang.
[35]
Gupta, K. (2022), Amazon’s 20B-Parameter Alexa Model Sets New Marks In Few-Shot Learning
Along With Low Carbon Footprint During Training (One-Fifth of GPT-3’s),
https://www.marktechpost.com/2022/08/03/amazons-20b-parameter-alexa-model-sets-new-
marks-in-few-shot-learning-along-with-low-carbon-footprint-during-training-one-fifth-of-gpt-3s/.
[60]
Hoffman, J. et al. (2022), Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556.
[74]
Holistic AI (2023), The Rise of Large Language Models: Galactica, ChatGPT, and Bard,
https://www.holisticai.com/blog/language-models-galactica-chatgpt-bard.
[114]
Hsu, T. and S. Thompson (2023), “Disinformation Researchers Raise Alarms About A.I.
Chatbots”, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/08/technology/ai-chatbots-disinformation.html.
[115]
Hugging Face (2023), ALBERT, https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/albert
(accessed on 5 April 2023).
[80]
Hugging Face (2023), Bart,
https://huggingface.co/transformers/v3.0.2/model_doc/bart.html#:~:text=Bart%20uses%20a%2
0standard%20seq2seq,right%20decoder%20(like%20GPT) (accessed on 5 April 2023).
[79]
Hugging Face (2023), Bigscience T0, https://huggingface.co/bigscience/T0 (accessed on
5 April 2023).
[81]
Hugging Face (2022), Illustrating Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF),
https://huggingface.co/blog/rlhf.
[50]
Hugging Face (2022), Introducing The World’s Largest Open Multilingual Language Model:
BLOOM, https://bigscience.huggingface.co/blog/bloom.
[61]
Hugging Face (2021), BERTIN Project, https://huggingface.co/bertin-project. [89]
IBM (2020), Speech Recognition, https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/speech-recognition. [96]
iFlytek (2020), iFLYTEK signs Arabic-Chinese Language Translation Research Agreement with
Egyptian Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
[29]

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

https://www.prnewswire.com/ae/news-releases/a-i-connects-the-silk-road-iflytek-signs-arabic-
chinese.
Kaplan, J. et al. (2020), Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
[73]
Koradiya, R. (2019), Differentiate Between NLP, NLG, and NLU,
https://iconflux.com/blog/differentiate-between-nlp-nlg-and-nlu.
[93]
Kückens, J. (2022), Spanish government invests 1.1 billion Euros into “New Language Economy”,
including co-official languages, https://european-language-equality.eu/2022/03/04/spanish-
government-invests-into-new-language-economy/.
[25]
Kummervold, P. et al. (2021), “Operationalizing a National Digital Library: The Case for a
Norwegian Transformer Model”, NoDaLiDa, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.09617.
[90]
Kutuzov, A. et al. (2021), “Large-Scale Contextualised Language Modelling for Norwegian”,
NoDaLiDa, https://aclanthology.org/2021.nodalida-main.4.
[91]
Lane, M. and M. Williams (2023), “Defining and classifying AI in the workplace”, OECD Social,
Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 290, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/59e89d7f-en.
[124]
Lee, S. (2021), Kakao Brain unveils ‘KoGPT’, a Korean-specific AI language model, Smart Times,
https://www.smarttimes.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=1371 (accessed on 5 April 2023).
[78]
Lesher, M., H. Pawelec and A. Desai (2022), Disentangling untruths online: Creators, spreaders
and how to stop them,
https://goingdigital.oecd.org/data/notes/No23_ToolkitNote_UntruthsOnline.pdf.
[97]
Lesher, M., H. Pawelec and A. Desai (2022), “Disentangling untruths online: Creators, spreaders
and how to stop them”, OECD Going Digital Toolkit Notes, No. 23, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/84b62df1-en.
[109]
LT-Innovate (2023), Finnish Government Termbank Valter, http://www.lt-innovate.org/lt-
observe/resources/finnish-government-termbank-valter.
[9]
LT-Innovate (2023), GERMANY, http://www.lt-innovate.org/lt-observe/germany. [10]
LT-Innovate (2023), HUNGARY, http://www.lt-innovate.org/lt-observe/hungary. [11]
LT-Innovate (2023), SLOVENIA, http://www.lt-innovate.org/lt-observe/slovenia. [23]
Marconi, G. et al. (2020), “What matters for language learning? The questionnaire framework for
the PISA 2025 Foreign Language Assessment”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 234,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5e06e820-en.
[40]
Marking, M. (2020), Egypt Inks Machine Translation, NLP Deal with China’s iFlytek,
https://slator.com/egypt-inks-machine-translation-nlp-deal-with-chinas-iflytek/.
[28]
Martin, L. et al. (2020), CamemBERT: a Tasty French Language Model,
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.645.pdf.
[86]
Masakhane (2020), A grassroots NLP community for Africa, by Africans. [36]
Meta (2023), Introducing LLaMA: A foundational, 65-billion-parameter large language model, [56]

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  45
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

https://ai.facebook.com/blog/large-language-model-llama-meta-ai/.
Meta (2022), Democratizing access to large-scale language models with OPT-175B,
https://ai.facebook.com/blog/democratizing-access-to-large-scale-language-models-with-opt-
175b/.
[54]
Milanez, A. (2023), “The impact of AI on the workplace: Evidence from OECD case studies of AI
implementation”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 289, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2247ce58-en.
[123]
Ministère de la Culture (2021), AI and language technology in France, https://lr-
coordination.eu/sites/default/files/LRB/LRB-11/2.2%20-
%20Pr%C3%A9sentation%2011th%20LRB%20IA%20in%20France%20v2_EN.pdf?lang=sv.
[6]
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark (2021), Denmark to stregtnen opportunities for NLP
businesses, https://investindk.com/insights/denmark-to-strenghten-opportunities-for-nlp-
businesses.
[2]
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan (2021), Further Upgrading of Multilingual
Translation System Supporting the Labor Field,
https://www.soumu.go.jp/main_sosiki/joho_tsusin/eng/pressrelease/2021/3/30_04.html .
[13]
Moberg, J. (2020), A deep dive into multilingual NLP models, https://peltarion.com/blog/data-
science/a-deep-dive-into-multilingual-nlp-models.
[82]
Multilingual (2021), Estonian Government to Develop Central Translation Platform,
https://multilingual.com/estonia-translation-platform/.
[5]
Nagoudi, E. et al. (2021), IndT5: A Text-to-Text Transformer for 10 Indigenous Languages,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.07483.
[108]
National Library of Norway (2023), The Norwegian Language Bank,
https://www.nb.no/sprakbanken/en/sprakbanken/.
[18]
National Research Council Canada (2021), Canadian Indigenous languages technology project,
https://nrc.canada.ca/en/research-development/research-collaboration/programs/canadian-
indigenous-languages-technology-project.
[1]
Nordic Language Processing Laboratory (2021), Nordic Language Processing Laboratory,
http://wiki.nlpl.eu/index.php/Home.
[22]
OECD (2023), “Advancing accountability in AI: Governing and managing risks throughout the
lifecycle for trustworthy AI”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 349, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/2448f04b-en.
[112]
OECD (2023), Catalogue of Tools & Metrics for Trustworthy AI, https://oecd.ai/en/catalogue/
(accessed on 5 April 2023).
[120]
OECD (2022), “Measuring the environmental impacts of artificial intelligence compute and
applications: The AI footprint”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 341, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/7babf571-en.
[72]
OECD (2022), “OECD Framework for the Classification of AI systems”, OECD Digital Economy
Papers, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/cb6d9eca-en.
[39]

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

OECD (2019), Artificial Intelligence in Society, OECD Publishing,
https://doi.org/10.1787/eedfee77-en.
[70]
OECD.AI (2021), Spain: National plan for the advancement of LTS,
https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards/policy-initiatives/http:%2F%2Faipo.oecd.org%2F2021-data-
policyInitiatives-16665 (accessed on 5 April 2023).
[24]
OECD.AI (2021), The United Kingdom: Welsh Language Technology Action Plan,
https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards/policy-initiatives/http:%2F%2Faipo.oecd.org%2F2021-data-
policyInitiatives-26880 (accessed on 5 April 2023).
[26]
OpenAI (2023), GPT-4, https://openai.com/research/gpt-4. [51]
Pandey, V. (2022), Power of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and its Applications in Business,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/power-natural-language-processing-nlp-its-business-dr-vivek-.
[95]
Patterson, D. (2022), Reducing the carbon emissions of AI, OECD.AI Wonk Blog,
https://oecd.ai/en/wonk/reducing-ai-carbon-emissions (accessed on 15 March 2023).
[104]
Patterson, D. et al. (2021), Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training,
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.10350.pdf.
[102]
Paullada, A. (2021), Data and its (dis)contents: A survey of dataset development and use in
machine learning research,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666389921001847.
[71]
Perez, E. et al. (2022), Red Teaming LMs with LMs, DeepMind,
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.03286.pdf.
[116]
Piaf (2023), Piaf: Pour des IA francophones (beta), https://piaf.etalab.studio/. [7]
Pires, T., E. Schlinger and D. Garrette (2019), How multilingual is Multilingual BERT?,
https://research.google/pubs/pub48247/.
[83]
Press Trust of India (2021), Govt working on real-time translation tool for Indian languages: MeitY,
https://www.theweek.in/news/india/2021/06/19/govt-working-on-real-time-translation-tool-for-
indian-languages-meity.html.
[31]
Raj, D. (2017), Trends in Semantic Parsing — Part 1, https://medium.com/explorations-in-
language-and-learning/trends-in-semantic-parsing-part-1-ba11888523cb.
[94]
Rodrigo et al. (2021), Report on the state of the art in LT and Language-centric AI. [42]
Rodriguez, J. (2021), Five Key Facts Wu Dao 2.0: The Largest Transformer Model Ever Built ,
https://medium.com/dataseries/five-key-facts-wu-dao-2-0-the-largest-transformer-model-ever-
built-19316159796b.
[58]
Rojas, J. et al. (2020), BETO: Spanish BERT, https://github.com/dccuchile/beto. [88]
Romero, A. (2021), Wu Dao 2.0: A Monster of 1.75 Trillion Parameters,
https://towardsdatascience.com/gpt-3-scared-you-meet-wu-dao-2-0-a-monster-of-1-75-trillion-
parameters-832cd83db484.
[27]
Rowe, M. and A. Weisleder (2020), Language Development in Context,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344404419_Language_Development_in_Context.
[128]

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  47
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Russell, S. and P. Norvig (2016), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson Education,
Inc.
[69]
Sagar, R. (2021), Security Risks Of Open Source Software,
https://analyticsindiamag.com/security-risks-of-open-source-software/.
[119]
Schick, T. and H. Schütze (2021), It’s Not Just Size That Matters: Small Language Models Are
Also Few-Shot Learners, https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.07118.
[75]
SCRIBE (2021), SCRIBE – Machine transcription of Norwegian conversational speech,
https://scribe-project.github.io/.
[19]
Sevilla, J. et al. (2022), “Compute Trends Across Three Eras of Machine Learning”,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05924 (accessed on 22 February 2023).
[65]
Sharir, O., B. Peleg and Y. Shoham (2020), The Cost of Training NLP Models: A Concise
Overview, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.08900.pdf.
[106]
Simon, J. (2021), Large Language Models: A New Moore’s Law?,
https://huggingface.co/blog/large-language-models.
[64]
Simoulin, A. and B. Crabbé (2021), How Many Layers and Why? An Analysis of the Model Depth
in Transformers, HAL Open Science, https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03601412/document.
[46]
Skinner, B. (1957), Verbal behavior, Appleton Century, https://doi.org/10.1037/11256-000. [125]
Stokel-Walker, C. (2023), The Generative AI Race Has a Dirty Secret, Wired,
https://www.wired.co.uk/article/the-generative-ai-search-race-has-a-dirty-secret.
[100]
Strubell, E., A. Ganesh and A. McCallum (2019), Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep
Learning in NLP, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.02243.pdf.
[101]
Sun, Y. et al. (2021), ERNIE 3.0: Large-scale Knowledge Enhanced Pre-training for Language
Understanding and Generation, arXiv, https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02137.
[76]
Synced (2022), Meta AI Open-Sources a 175B Parameter Language Model: GPT-3 Comparable
Performance at One-Seventh the Compute Cost, https://syncedreview.com/2022/05/06/meta-
ai-open-sources-a-175b-parameter-language-model-gpt-3-comparable-performance-at-one-
seventh-the-compute-cost/.
[55]
Synced (2021), Baidu’s Knowledge-Enhanced ERNIE 3.0 Pretraining Framework Delivers SOTA
NLP Results, Surpasses Human Performance on the SuperGLUE Benchmark ,
https://medium.com/syncedreview/baidus-knowledge-enhanced-ernie-3-0-7eb37bf098dd.
[57]
Tapsai, C., H. Unger and P. Meesad (2021), Thai Word Segmentation, Springer,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56235-9_2.
[37]
Temkin, M. (2022), VCs try to parse through the ’noise’ of generative AI,
https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/generative-ai-venture-capital-investment.
[121]
Tilde (2022), Tilde Wins a Major Contract to Provide Machine Translation Services to the Finnish
Government, https://slator.com/tilde-wins-a-major-contract-to-provide-machine-translation-
services-to-the-finnish-government/.
[8]
Tilde (2021), Tilde Develops a Unique Public Machine Translation Platform, [16]

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

https://slator.com/tilde-develops-a-unique-public-machine-translation-platform/.
UNESCO (2020), The Norwegian Language Bank (“Språkbanken”) – National Infrastructure for
Language Technology, https://fr.unesco.org/creativity/policy-monitoring-platform/norwegian-
language-bank.
[17]
University of Copenhagen (2023), Centre for Language Technology, https://cst.ku.dk/english/. [3]
Vaswani, A. et al. (2017), Attention Is All You Need, https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762. [48]
Viksna, R. et al. (2022), Assessing Multilinguality of Publicly Accessible Websites, European
Language Resources Association, https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.227.
[14]
Wang, Y. et al. (2020), Generalizing from a few examples: A survey on few-shot learning,
https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05046.
[103]
Weidinger, L. et al. (2021), Ethical and social risks of harm from Language Models,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04359.
[98]
Wellman, H. (1992), The child’s theory of mind, The MIT Press. [68]
Wiggers, K. (2022), The emerging types of language models and why they matter,
https://techcrunch.com/2022/04/28/the-emerging-types-of-language-models-and-why-they-
matter/?renderMode=ie11&guccounter=1.
[45]
Yandex (2022), Yandex publishes YaLM 100B, the largest GPT-like neural network in open
source, https://yandex.com/company/press_center/press_releases/2022/2022-23-06.
[62]
Yang, Z. et al. (2022), CINO: A Chinese Minority Pre-trained Language Model,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.13558.
[107]
Ye, A. (2020), Breaking Down the Innovative Deep Learning Behind Google Translate,
https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/breaking-down-the-innovative-deep-learning-behind-
google-translate-355889e104f1.
[47]

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  49
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Annex A. Language acquisition and learning
Language is the main vector of human communication. It enables people to learn from, interact, and
connect with others. “Natural language” refers to any language that has evolved in humans through use
and repetition without conscious planning or premeditation. Natural language processing (NLP) refers to
computer programs and tools that automate natural language functions by analysing, producing, modifying,
or responding to human texts and speech. NLP and human language learning have similarities in terms of
skills used. Benchmarks are being developed to compare the performance of different language models
as well as to compare them to human performance. Different theories of language acquisition and learning
explain the complexities of human language learning that should be considered in developing and
deploying NLP systems that most closely mimic human performance.
Over the last fifty years, several theories have been put forward to explain the process by which people at
their early stages of life acquire a language:
• the Behaviourist theory (Skinner) (Skinner, 1957[125]) suggests that a child imitates the language of
its parents or caregivers;
• the Innateness theory (Chomsky) (Chomsky, 1959[126]) puts forward that human brain structures
naturally permit the capacity to learn and use languages, making language acquisition a biologically
determined process that uses neural circuits in the brain, which have evolved to contain linguistic
signals;
• the Cognitive theory (Piaget) (Bovet, 1976[127]) places acquisition of language within the context of
a child's mental or cognitive development. In other words, a child has to understand a concept
before s/he can acquire the particular language form, which expresses that concept; and
• the Input or Interactionist theory (Bruner ) (Rowe and Weisleder, 2020 [128]) emphasises the
importance of the language input children acquire from their caregivers. In this context, language
exists for the purpose of communication and can only be learned through interacting with other
people.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Annex B. GPT-3 in the context of the OECD
Framework for the Classification of AI Systems
People & Planet
Core
characteristic Survey question Response
Users of AI
system
What is the level of competency of users
who interact with the system? Amateur
Impacted
stakeholders
Who is impacted by the system (e.g.
consumers, workers, government
agencies)?
Workers (e.g. could lead to automation of some
tasks), consumers
Optionality and
redress
Can users opt out, e.g. switch systems?
Can users challenge or correct the
output?
Optional / can opt out
Human rights and
democratic values
Can the system’s outputs impact
fundamental human rights?
 Possible impact on:
- rule of law,
absence of
arbitrary
sentencing
- freedom of
thought,
conscience and
religion
- equality and non-
discrimination
- quality of democratic
institutions (e.g., free
elections)

Well-being,
society and the
environment
Can the system’s outputs impact areas of
life related to well-being (e.g. job quality,
the environment, health, social
interactions, civic engagement,
education)?

Possible impact on:
- work and job quality
- education

{Displacement
potential}
Could the system automate tasks that are
or were being executed by humans? TBD
Economic Context
Core
characteristic Survey question Response
Industrial sector Which industrial sector is the system deployed in (e.g.
finance, agriculture)?
Section J: Information and
Communication (per ISIC REV 4)
Business function
What business function(s) or functional areas is the AI
system employed in (e.g. sales, customer service, human
resources)?
Any
Business model Is the system a for-profit use, non-profit use, or public
service system?
For-profit use – other model (e.g.
business intelligence) or non-profit
use (e.g. research, journalism)
Impacts critical
functions /
activities
Would the disruption of the system’s function or activity
affect essential services? No
Breadth of
deployment
Is the AI system deployment a pilot, narrow, broad, or
widespread? Narrow deployment
{Technical
maturity}
How technically mature is the system (Technology
Readiness Level –TRL)?
System prototype demonstration in
operational environment – TRL 7

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS  51
OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Data & Input
Core
characteristic Survey question Response
Detection and
collection
Are the data and input collected by humans, automated
sensors, both?
Collected by humans and automated
sensing devices (e.g. collected by
humans with subsequent filtering by
machines and humans)
Provenance of
data and input
Are the data and input from experts; provided,
observed, synthetic or derived? Observed and derived
Dynamic nature Are the data dynamic, static, dynamic updated from
time to time or real-time? Dynamic data updated from time to time
Rights
associated with
data and input
Are the data proprietary (privately held), public (no
intellectual property rights) or personal data (related to
identifiable individual)?
Public and proprietary
Identifiability of
personal data If personal data, are they anonymised, pseudonymised? N/A
{Data quality
and
appropriateness
}
Is the dataset fit for purpose? Is the sample size
adequate? Is it representative and complete enough?
How noisy are the data?
Noisy data, that is, by design, highly
representative and diverse with regard to
a large part of (predominantly English)
text and code found on the Internet;
appropriate data
{Structure of the
data and input}
Are the data structured, semi-structured, complex
structured or unstructured? Unstructured data
{Format of data
and metadata}
Is the format of the data and metadata standardised or
non-standardised? Non-standardised
{Scale} What is the dataset’s scale? Very large
AI Model
Core characteristic Survey question Response
Model information
availability Is any information available about the system’s model? Yes
AI model type Is the model symbolic (human-generated rules), statistical
(uses data) or hybrid? Statistical (data-driven)
{Rights associated with
model}
Is the model open-source or proprietary, self, or third-party
managed? Proprietary
{Discriminative or
generative} Is the model generative, discriminative or both? Generative
{Single or multiple
model(s)}
Is the system composed of one model or several interlinked
models? One
Model-building from
machine or human
knowledge
Does the system learn based on human-written rules, from
data, through supervised learning or through reinforcement
learning?
Acquisition from data,
augmented by human-
encoded knowledge
Model evolution in the
field ML
Does the model evolve and / or acquire abilities from
interacting with data in the field?
Evolution during
operation through
passive interaction
Central or federated
learning ML
Is the model trained centrally or in a number of local servers or
edge devices? Central
{Model development and
maintenance}
Is the model universal, customisable, or tailored to the AI
actor’s data? Context-dependent
{Deterministic and
probabilistic} Is the model used in a deterministic or probabilistic manner? Deterministic
Transparency and
explainability
Is information available to users to allow them to understand
model outputs? Context-dependent

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52  AI LANGUAGE MODELS: TECHNOLOGICAL, SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
 OECD DIGITAL ECONOMY PAPERS

Task & Output
Core characteristic Survey question Response
Task(s) of the system What tasks does the system perform (e.g. recognition,
event detection, forecasting)?
Reasoning with knowledge
structures, interaction support,
recognition, personalisation
{Combining tasks and
actions into composite
systems}
Does the system combine several tasks and actions (e.g.
content generation systems, autonomous systems, control
systems)?
Yes
Action autonomy How autonomous are the system’s actions and what role do
humans play? Low autonomy
Core application
area(s)
Does the system belong to a core application area such as
human LTs, computer vision, automation and / or
optimisation or robotics?
Human LTs
{Evaluation methods} Are there standards or methods available for evaluating
system output? TBD
