
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION
OF COMPETITIVE
RESEARCH FUNDING
SYSTEMS
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
October 2018 No. 57

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH
FUNDING SYSTEMS

POLICY P APER
This paper was approved and declassified by the Committee for Scientific and Te chnological
Policy (CSTP) on 27 July 2018 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.
Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on OLIS under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2018)3/FINAL
This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are witho ut prejudice to
the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers
and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant
Israeli authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of
the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms
of international law.

© OECD 2018

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs,
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright
owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to
rights@oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 3

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Foreword
This report analyses existing competitive research funding mechanisms and their
effectiveness, taking into account a variety of contextual factors. It is aimed both at the
research funding community and policy -makers wishing to adapt competitive research
funding strategies to different objectives. It includes a number of policy recommendations,
which engage different actors and are derived from the analysis including identification of
gaps in the available data and information.
The project that forms the basis for the current report was initiated by the OECD Global
Science Forum (GSF) in 2016. It builds on a variety of work on research funding by the
OECD Committee on Scientific and Technological Policy and focuses on the efficiency of
funding allocation mechanisms relative to their objective s. The initial aims were to:
1. Develop a typology of competitive funding mechanisms and their component parts and
compile existing evidence o n t heir relative effectiveness; 2. Describe the prevalence of
these mechanisms within participating countries, and consider whether contex tual factors
make different components of these mechanisms more or less appropriate ; 3. Gather and
synthesise available qualitative and quantitative evidence on impacts for different
competitive systems. From the outset, it was clear that the diversity and complexity of
existing funding schemes would not allow for a detailed classification, so the analyses were
focused on processes in relation to the objectives of the various schemes.
The main elements of this project have been an extensive survey of indivi dual funding
schemes in different countries, complemented with targeted interviews. A workshop
organised in October 2016 at the OECD provided initial input to identify the major issues
and challenges faced by funders in a changing landscape. Findings from the survey and
interviews, completed with contextual data on national research funding trends, were
analysed to identify major challenges for competitive funding processes and to propose
options to overcome them. Policy recommendations were developed to address some of the
key unresolved challenges.
The project has been overseen by an international Expert Group whose members were
nominated by GSF. This Group was chaired by Tateo Arimoto (Japan), Adam Jaffe (New
Zealand) and Kei Koizumi (United States). Adam Jaffe and Kei Koizumi took the lead in
drafting the final project report, with support from the OECD GSF Secretariat – Qian Dai,
Frédéric Sgard and Carthage Smith.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Table of contents
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS POLICY
PAPER .................................................................................................................................................... 2
Foreword ................................................................................................................................................ 3
Abstract .................................................................................................................................................. 5
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................... 6
1. Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 9
1.1. Rationale ....................................................................................................................................... 9
1.2. Background ................................................................................................................................. 10
1.3. Methodology ............................................................................................................................... 10
2. General research funding context .................................................................................................. 12
3. Findings ............................................................................................................................................ 17
3.1. Taxonomy and general objectives of competitive funding mechanisms .................................... 17
3.2. Funding process .......................................................................................................................... 20
3.3. Success rates ............................................................................................................................... 33
3.4. Monitoring, impact, and measures of success............................................................................. 37
3.5. Perceived challenges and responses ............................................................................................ 40
4. Analysis............................................................................................................................................. 44
4.1. Improving efficiency of competitive funding schemes ............................................................... 44
4.2. Implications of success rates ....................................................................................................... 45
4.3. Encouraging transformative, risky, and multidisciplinary research ............................................ 47
4.4. Matching competitive funding to strategic objectives ................................................................ 48
4.5. Improving monitoring and evaluation ........................................................................................ 49
5. Conclusions and recommendations ................................................................................................ 52
Endnotes ............................................................................................................................................... 54
References ............................................................................................................................................ 55
Appendix 1. Expert Group Members ................................................................................................ 59
Appendix 2. Survey questionnaire ..................................................................................................... 61
Appendix 3: Survey interviews........................................................................................................... 67

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 5

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Abstract
In OECD countries, much science funding is allocated via competitive mechanisms.
Competitive funding schemes are widely favoured for being the optimal method for not
only evaluating but also encouraging scientific excellence, in a process that is controlled
by the community itself. Increasingly however, additional objectives, such as a demand for
socio-economic value, are included in the process. The reliance of competitive systems on
peer review brings up some concerns about the reliability and validity of evaluat ion
processes in assuring the selection of the best proposals considering the breadth of
objectives they are expected to fulfill. Competitive funding processes are also costly, both
to awarding agencies and research performers.
This report analyses existi ng competitive research funding mechanisms and their
effectiveness, taking into account a variety of contextual factors. It is aimed both at the
research funding community and policy -makers wishing to adapt competitive research
funding strategies to different objectives. It includes a number of policy recommendations,
which engage different actors and are derived from the analysis including identification of
gaps in the available data and information.
Key words: public research grants; competitive research funding; call for proposals;
reviewing process

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Executive summary
In OECD countr ies, much science funding is allocated via competitive mechanisms.
Competitive funding schemes tend to have several common features: a call for proposals,
a panel assessment, peer review, scoring, award of funding for a limited time, and follow-
up. Awards may be for individuals, teams, research centres or institutions and can be of
variable size and length. Competitive funding schemes are widely favoured in the science
community for being the optimal method for not only evaluating but also encouraging
scientific excellence, in a process that is controlled by the community itself.
There is widespread agreement that confidence in the integrity and reliability of the
proposal evalua tion process is crucial to acceptance and support of the system by the
researcher community. And in general, that confidence is closely tied to a strong belief that
peer review is the most – perhaps only – valid and reliable way to evaluate the merits of
research proposals. The reliance of competitive systems on peer review, however, brings
up some concerns about the reliability and validity of peer-review processes in assuring the
quality of science. Competitive funding processes are also costly, both to a warding
agencies and research performers. There are also opportunity costs to the research
community in providing peer reviews.
The aim of this project was to analyse existing competitive research funding mechanisms
and their effectiveness , considering contextual factors. This was achieved by collecting
information via a questionnaire on 75 competitive funding programmes from 21 countries
and conducting interviews with programme managers and reviewing panel members as
well as collecting information and data from the literature, experts and data bases.
Despite its recogni sed importance, public research funding has been under budgetary
pressure in recent years across the OECD. Growth of R&D systems in most countries has
led governments and research funding bodies to seek increased efficiency in the use of
funds; one of the responses has been to strengthen competitive funding in order to channel
resources toward specific priorities and/or enhance excellence.
A broad taxonomy of competitive funding schemes can be described. In terms of size, this
ranges from the competitively awarded research-funding grant to an individual investigator
for a research project, to larger awards to teams of researchers in a center, cross-institutional
teams, and sometimes entire institutions. Intersecting with the size of awards are the
purposes for awards, ranging from blue sky or purely investigator -driven research to
mission-led research with societal objectives in mind.
Competitive funding processes show similarities across the many programmes and nations
surveyed. The goal of selecting among proposals for scientific excellence leads
programmes to rely heavily on peer review by external researchers working in the same
fields as applicants. Peer review, by giving the scientific community itself the leading role
in allocating funds for scientific research, is widely trusted by the scientific community and
therefore has legitimacy among researchers. Competition and competitiveness have
become ubiquitous across the global science enterprise. There is evidence in the literature
that scientific excellence is linked to competition among researchers but the literature also
shows contradictory results between the degree of-competition and the overall productivity
of national research systems. The underlying situation is complex but there is considerable
concern that hyper-competitiveness and low rates of success in applications for competitive
funding may be distorting research practice.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 7

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

From the project’s review of the literature, the advantages of competitive funding are: a
tendency to increase the quality and relevance of research project proposals; a way to
ensure that research awards meet a minimum standard of quality; providing researchers an
opportunity to test their ideas among peers; and building trust in the community that awards
are made fairly. But there are also disadvantages: an increasing reliance on competitive
funding can result in shorter-term, lower-risk projects rather than longer-term, higher-risk
research, although the evidence for this is mixed; the resource and time burdens of applying
for and reviewing competitive grants; and the inability of researchers and institutions to do
long-term planning because of uncertain future funding.
The report focuses mainly on two features of the competitive funding process: the call for
proposals and the reviewing process. Within the sample of programmes that were surveyed,
the dominant frequency of calls for proposals was once a year, although there was a wide
range from every month to every three to five years. There have also been experiments with
no-deadline or rolling applications. The nature of the calls varied also: a one-step open call;
a one-step thematic call; a two -step open call in which pre -proposals are followed by a
second full -proposal call for successful first -step applicants; a two -step thematic call;
restricted-eligibility calls where applicants must meet certain criteria to apply; and co -
financing calls. For the review process, most programmes appear to employ a multi -stage
proposal evaluation process, which can include: initial screening, external review of
proposal documents, external review by a committee or panel, and interviews of applicants
by a panel. There w as no common standard for how many reviewers must review a
proposal, although the most common minimum number is 3. Only a minority of funding
schemes has an appeals system, and that there are few mechanisms to gather feedback from
applicants or reviewers after the fact. A few nations are experimenting with novel review
processes.
One key facet of competitive funding schemes is the success rate, the ratio of awards funded
to applications submitted. Within the study sample, there was a wide variation in success
rates, with a clustering between 10 and 20 %. There was no obvious relationship between
the size of a program me, the number of applications, or award size and the success rate.
There is increasing concern that low and declining success rates portend a c risis for the
research community. From the data collected, it was impossible to determine an ideal
success rate, although interviewees stated repeatedly that success rates below 10% are a
concern because below that threshold it is claimed that peer review is ill-equipped to make
meaningful funding decisions. There remains much more research that could be done on
success rates and the extent to which standard ways of allocating competitive funding
become increasingly inefficient as success rates drop.
The Expert Group found wide variation in nations’ monitoring of the peer-review process,
and also a wide variation in evaluation of impact/success measures. There are few
agreed-on criteria for scientific success in general, and therefore little concrete guidance on
how to evaluate success or impact as part of the peer-review process. The survey identified
some promising ad hoc approaches for evaluating impact but few systematic e xamples.
One barrier to evaluating impact is a lack of access by the science -policy research
community to detailed anonymized data on peer review that could allow for comparative
analyses of differing competitive allocation mechanisms in terms of impact.
This study identified four key issues that are recurrent across different competitive funding
systems and that, if addressed, could improve the operation of such systems:

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Accounting for the true costs of competitive funding schemes, including not only
administrative costs for making awards but also evaluation costs and the time and
effort spent by researchers to participate in the competitive funding process.
 Reducing burdens for r applicants, reviewers and agencies by reducing the time,
expense, and administrative burdens of application and review processes.
 Counteracting the widespread worry that peer review, especially as success rates
decline, tends toward conservatism and away from potentially transformative,
breakthrough, and interdisciplinary research.
 Refining competitive mechanisms and evaluation criteria to assess not only
scientific quality and excellence but also societal objectives, such as economic
competitiveness and human development.
To address these issues, the Expert Group offers four corresponding recommendations:
1. Interested countries are invited to initiate further analytical and comparative studies on
the true costs and benefits of competitive funding schemes; this should incorporate not
only the monetary costs of operating competitiv e funding mechanisms but also the
volunteered time of reviewers, the costs of researchers and institutions in applying for
and managing competitive awards , and opportunity costs for the entire research
community.
2. Research funders are encouraged to develop experiments in competitive funding,
especially in e asing the administrative burden often linked to peer review and for
increasing efficiency. Results should be evaluated carefully and shared with other
OECD members, to facilitate collective learning.
3. Governments and research funders should promote experimental approaches that
preserve competition while encouraging potentially transformative, breakthrough, and
interdisciplinary research to counteract any conservative tendencies in peer review in
an environment of declining success rates.
4. Governments are encouraged to further study how public research support can best
contribute to broader societal challenges , looking at better identifying competitive
proposals for potential impact and better evaluating the im pacts funded proposals
create.
In addition to address the lack of data on key features of competitive funding schemes, the
report concludes with a call for governments and the OECD to take steps to improve the
collection, analysis, reporting, and accessibility of data about competitive funding schemes
to allow more-robust comparisons in the future.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 9

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

1. Introduction
1.1. Rationale
Much public, non-governmental organisation (NGO) , and indeed some private, science
funding is distributed via competitive mechanisms. These competitive mechanisms have
been originally adopted in the domain of research funding to allocate limited resources, as
well as increasingly for the promotion of scientific excellence and efficiency. It has been
argued that a shift from institutional core funding to project funding is occurring (e.g.
Lepori et al 2007), although there is limited evidence of a widespread trend in this direction.
Nevertheless, there is increasing debate regarding mechanisms for allocating resources to
research as well as questions regarding their efficiency and effectiveness.
The use of competitive funding mechanisms reflects the use by Research Councils or
Science Funding Agencies of allocation mechanisms that involve the participation of the
research community itself. For the purpose of this report, we will talk about “competitive
funding mechanisms” to describe the program mes or instruments of Funding Agencies,
Research Councils, or Ministries that allocate resources for government-supported research
based on formal contests or competitions, in which applicants apply for funding. The two
main attributes of competitive funding mechanisms are the solicitation of proposals and the
ranking or rating of the proposals.
Competitive mechanisms have a number of common features: a call for proposals, a panel
assessment, peer review, scoring, award of funding for a limited time, and follow -up.
Awards may be to individuals, projects, or centres and can be of variable size and length.
Competitive allocation mechanisms are often favoured in the science community for being
the optimal method for not only evaluating but also encouraging scientific excellence, in a
process controlled by the community itself that therefore has the confidence of the research
community.
A small but growing body of empirical research suggests that some stages of assessment
and award processes are not efficient, or do not necessarily lead to more effective decisions,
in addi tion to potentially contributing to a trend towards conservatism rather than
breakthrough or high-risk research [Horrobin, 1990; Smith, 2006; Stephan et al., 2017) ].
The reliance of competitive systems on peer review brings up more general concerns about
the robustness and validity of peer review processes in assuring the quality of science and
the fairness in the selection (Chubin and Hackett, 1990; Wenneras and Wold, 2001).
Competitive funding processes are also comparativel y costly, both to awarding agencies
and research performers (the latter in time spent preparing applications). There are also
opportunity costs to the research community in providing peer reviews, even on a volunteer
basis, as is often the case. Achieving the optimal balance of high-quality decision making
and cost (given that resources expended on assessment or preparation of applications could
be redirected to the conduct of research) is of critical importance in the design of research
funding systems.
In response to these concerns, some funders have started to innovate and experiment with
other allocation procedures such as lottery, individual expert judgment, or other alternative
processes for awarding competitive funding. Recently, researchers have proposed utilising
artificial intelligence technologies such as advanced data-analysis tools (such as Sheridan)1

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

to replace or augment peer review. Others have proposed radically altering current peer
review processes or experimenting with sandpits and other methods.2
1.2. Background
Many aspects of research funding have been investigated under the lead of the OECD
Committee for Science and Technology Policy (CSTP) in recent years. The OECD
Working Party on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI) regularly collects national
data from research performers about sources of funding and aggregates information from
Government spending for R&D into its Main Science and Technology Indicators (MSTI),
which are published in th e regular OECD S&T Outlook and Scoreboard publications.
These data collections are guided by the recommendations of the Frascati Manual (OECD
2015). Additionally, national research funding policies are also often investigated in
Innovation Policy reviews being carried out under the CSTP and in rec ent CSTP work
related to promoting research excellence (OECD , 2014). The new European
Commission/OECD international survey on Science, Technology and Innovation Policies
(STIP) which feeds into the OECD STI Outlook publication also collects a variety of
information on funding practices . However, more in -depth qualitative and comparative
analysis of research funding practices and efficiency had not been performed in recent
years.
In 2016, t he OECD Global Science Forum initiated an activity to analyse existin g
competitive research funding mechanisms and their effectiveness, considering whether
contextual factors make different components of these mechanisms more or less
appropriate. Contextual factors include specific policy goals, the characteristics of different
national science systems, and the field or focus of the research funding.
1.3. Methodology
The activity was supervised b y an Expert Group (see Appendix 1) whose members were
nominated by national OECD GSF delegations and was co-chaired by Professor Adam
Jaffe (Mottu University, New Zealand ), Professor Tateo Arimoto (Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Japan), and Mr. Kei Koizumi (Office of Science and Technology
Policy and then American Association for the Advancement of Science, United States).
A preliminary review of existing literature on the operation of competitive research funding
systems was first conducted by the GSF Secretariat, with input from the Expert Group. In
addition, some generic national research funding information was collected by Expert
Group members and extracted from existing OECD data sources and reviewed to provide
contextual background.
After discussion within the Expert Group, a first questionnaire was sent to funders to solicit
information on a broad range of funding schemes. A conscious decision was made at this
stage not to limit the study to a particular type of scheme but rather to explore the variety
of approaches that are being adopted across countries. Questions were articulated alongside
seven elements:
 basic funding mechan ism information (number of applications, success rate,
programme size, etc.)
 purpose of the scheme (objectives, recipients, etc.)
 nature of the funding awards (grant duration and size, co-funding, etc.)

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 11

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 request for p roposal (RFP) process (proposal frequenc y, reviewin g approach,
evaluation criteria, etc.)
 proposal evaluation process (initial screening, reviewers ’ tasks and designation,
reviewing panel’s role and composition, etc.)
 studies or evaluation of the scheme
 monitoring and evaluation of the impact.
The responses, covering 75 funding schemes from 21 different countries, were comp iled
and analysed (see appendix 2 for framework questionnaire and funding schemes analysed).
To supplement this first questionnaire survey, a second survey was then conducted through
interviews with over 30 representative funding-body project administrators and managers,
expert panel members and grant recipients (interview framework and l ist of interviewees
in appendix 3) to obtain further information on the following specific issues:
 What is the c ontext/importance of the funding scheme in the national research
system.
 How to match the priorities for the funding scheme with scientific excellence
 What is the target audience and success rate.
 Detailed peer review process.
 How was impact monitored and what element(s) were considered to establish
whether the funding scheme was successful.
 Acceptability to the scientific community/Cost to the research
community/efficiency.
 Perceived challenges in the system and proposed/implem ented (innovative)
solutions.
Further information was also sought regarding specific types of funding targeting young or
senior researchers, breakthrough/innovative science and societal challenges (with
interdisciplinary dimension).
The Expert Group held s everal meetings, and the preliminary results from the interviews
were also discussed during an international workshop , which took place on
12 October 2016 in Paris at the OECD headquarters. There were 70 participants, including
members of the Expert Group, invited experts, GSF and CSTP Delegates, and members of
the OECD Secretariat. The Expert Group’s preliminary findings were also presented and
discussed during an international conference on peer review for research funding held in
Amsterdam (Netherlands) on 29-30 June 2017.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

2. General research funding context
Despite its recognised importance, public research has been under budgetary pressure in
recent years. Government spending for R & D in government budgets (Government budget
appropriations or outlays f or research and development , GBAORD) has in fact slightly
decreased in real terms in many OECD countries between 2008 and 2016 (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Government budget appropriations or outlays for research and development
Index 2008=100 (million 2010 constant USD PPP)

Source: Calculations based on OECD Research and Development Statistics - GBAORD Government budget
appropriations or outlays for RD dataset. Data extracted from IPP.Stat on 1 June 2018.
A large share of government R&D funding in most countries goes to research carried out
in the public sector . The public research sector has seen public research expenditures
largely flat in many OECD countries since a slow down after the economic crisis (Figure 2).
This overall trend on average means a significant decline in research spending in a number
of countries that has affected the resources available for public research, although countries
such as the People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) or Korea have benefited from
continuous growth of public research spending.
The rest of government R&D funding goes to businesses and other private firms either as
direct funding or subsidies (tax concessions). Research funding to companies also declined
over this period, from 9% of the total business enterprise R&D (BERD) expenditure in
2009 to 6% in 2014, from USD 58.6 billion (PPP) to USD 49.6 billion, although this
reduction was significantly offset by an expansion in tax concessions (OECD, R&D Tax
Incentive Indicators, http://oe.cd/rdtax and Main Science and Technology Indicators,

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 13

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

www.oecd.org/sti/msti.htm, March 2017). Hence a rise in indirect support for business
R&D has compensated for a decline in direct support.
Figure 2. R&D funded by higher education and government in selected economies
Index 2005=100

Source: Calculations based on OECD Main Scien ce and Technology Indicators, www.oecd.org/sti/msti.htm and OECD, Research and
Development Statistics Database, www.oecd.org/sti/rds downloaded 1 June 2018.

The growth of the R&D systems in most countries (production of PhDs and number of
researchers) has put pressure on research funding which has led governments and research
funding bodies to seek increased efficiency in the use of funds; one of the proposed
solutions has been to strengthen competitive funding, in order to channel resources towards
specific priorities and/or enhance excellence.
Competitive funding schemes are often cast in opposition to so-called institutional funding
schemes. In this report, institutional, block, or non -competitive funding schemes refer to
methods of allocating research funds that do not rely on selection in a competition among
competing proposals for funding. One common institutional funding scheme is formula
funding, in which research funding is distributed among institutions and then further among
researchers according to a mathematical formula based on quantitative characteristics, such
as number of researchers in an institution or historical patterns of funding. One varia nt of
such formula funding is egalitarian formula funding in which all eligible institutions or
researchers receive an equal amount of funding. Another variant is random funding in
which funding is distributed randomly to certain research ers in an eligible pool. A more
common non-competitive funding scheme is for programme managers or other funding -
agency personnel to make funding allocations at the institution level or laboratory level,
without resort to a competition pitting project ideas against one another. One variant is for
political leaders to make allocation decisions through the political process.
Despite the movement toward competitive funding systems for research and despite a
robust and longstanding OECD effort to aggregate national R&D funding indicators, there
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Canada France Germany Italy
Japan Korea United Kingdom United States

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

is still a lack of robust comparable data on the ratio of competitive funding vs.
institutional/block (non-competitive) funding for many OECD countr ies. The definitional
issues are formidable and there is a lack of cross -country consensus on what are the key
concepts for measurement as well as on their measurability.
Nevertheless, OECD has conducted some experimental data collection on modes of public
R&D funding based on the GBAO RD survey for the years 2008 -13.3 The percentage of
project funding (a proxy for competitive funding) as a share of domestic R&D was collated
for a number of countries (Table 1), showing a large diversity of systems with no obvious
trend over this time period.
Table 1. National public project funding of R&D as % of GBAORD allocated for domestic performers
 2000 2005 2008 2009 2010 2011
Australia (AUS) 30.5 44.7 47.1 49.2 53.9 58.1
Austria (AUT) 16.1 24.1 28.9 24.2 24.3 25.5
Belgium (BEL) - - 55.7 - 54.3 -
Canada (CAN) 31.9 36.5 34.6 - - -
Switzerland (CHE) 25.5 25.3 23.2 - 25.0 -
Chile (CHL) - - - - - 76.2
Czech Republic (CZE) 51.3 43.4 46.7 48.0 48.1 47.6
Germany (DEU) - - 34.6 35.9 37.7 38.6
Denmark (DNK) - - 25.9 36.7 35.9 35.3
Finland (FIN) - 46.2 52.8 50.4 52.3 49.6
Ireland (IRL) - - 52.2 66.1 66.7 64.9
Israel (ISR) 45.7 41.1 35.7 44.4 38.4 37.2
Poland (POL) 29.4 33.2 31.4 - - -
South Korea (KOR) - 69.1 68.9 70.6 70.4 71.1
Netherlands (NLD) 29.7 22.4 27.8 25.7 27.3 28.8
Norway (NOR) - 43.7 41.5 41.7 43.2 42.8
New Zealand (NZL) - 74.6 71.9 68.2 69.1 -
Slovak Republic (SVK) - 40.9 39.5 - - -

Source: OECD, 1st and 2nd experimental survey s on modes of R&D funding through GBAORD (2009,
2012/3).
Recently, EUROSTAT started to collect voluntary information on the share of project and
institutional funding from European countries (Figure 3). Similar information was also
collected i n a more recent project on performance -based funding systems from the
European Joint Research Centre (Jonkers and Zacharewicz, 2016). These data suggest that
the relative importance of project funding is typically between 25 and 50% in the European
countries analysed and has been relatively stable over recent years, with some noticeable
exceptions. It was al so noted that, although data collected during this latter study were
usually similar or identical to EUROSTAT data, significant differences were nevertheless
found for a number of countries, which underlines the methodological difficulty to assess
precise levels of project (competitive) research funding at the national level. This was, for
example, the case for France where discrepancy is about a factor of three, as EUROSTAT
data (not shown) suggested that competitive funding represented less than 10% of research
funding while more recent estimates suggest a French competitive research funding rate of
at least 25%.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 15

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 3. The share of project funding in public R&D in selected European countries.
(Source: EUROSTAT)

For this GSF project we have collected, mainly qualitative information on national funding
systems, when available. The data collected in the first questionnaire included, among other
information, country shares between “institutional and competitive funding” to establish
some contextual information for the analysis. Those data confirmed that there is wide
variation in competitive funding ratios among countries, leaving aside methodological
issues of comparability across economies or each economy’s definition of competitive
funding. Within the limited sample, the reported amount of competitive funding within
total public research funding ranged from 20 to 80 %. Second, the questionnaire also
showed no clear evidence of a trend of increasing co mpetitive funding within the
10 countries for which information was provided, despite the anecdotal evidence
suggesting th at competitive funding is gaining as a share of total research funding
worldwide. Four nations, for example, reported a stable ratio of competitive funding vs.
total funding over t he past 10 years. Countries in C entral/Eastern Europe have seen
increases in competitive funding ratios related to overhauls of their research systems, but
one Nordic European nation reported a declining ratio in recent years. Some countries also
reported the introduction of competitive selection mechanisms in traditional institut ional
funding.
There are however no data at all for many countries, for example the United States. In fact,
the United States has moved from attempting to collect data on competitive vs. institutional
funding of research to halting that data collection in the early 2000s because of concerns
about the definitions of these categories and whether they could be applied reliably
throughout the U.S. government. Complicating matters was the recognition that
competitive vs. institutional is not truly binary in the U.S. funding system: indeed, there
were and continue to be degrees of competition on a continuum between pure competitive

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

funding systems and pure formula -based funding systems with categories such as
competitive review through systems other than peer rev iew, program me-manager
allocations, and performance-informed formula funding systems; in the end, the U.S. data
collection effort collapsed under the weight of determining and then implementing this
continuum of categories in an annual data collection. The U.S. experience is mirrored in
the experiences of other nations, also suggesting that there is a continuum between project
or ‘competitive’ and institutional or ‘non-competitive’ allocations of research funds across
the OECD, for example in the United Kin gdom where institution -based block research
funding increasingly contains competitive elements (Dialogic and Empirica, 2014).
In other nations, we find that many research ministries or funding agencies use formula -
based allocations, and although many nati ons use formulas derived from non -research
indicators such as population, many use funding formulas that are at least partially based
on quantitative research indicators such as research outputs, and some also mix peer review
with quantitative research output data (Jonkers K. and Zacharewicz T., 2015). Other nations
have introduced elements of competition into institutional funding by establishing
(research) performance -based approaches to allocating institutional research funding
(OECD, 2011) which have the effect of being a tool for promoting competition in research
and increasing the impact of national research expenditures just as competitive project
funding does.
In summary, in institutional vs. competitive funding data we are a long way from
standardised classifications and ongoing internationally comparable data governed by the
Frascati Manual that are now the norm for other aspects of national R&D funding systems,
and comparing funding ratios between countries should be avoided. But within nations that
have implemented data collection on competitive vs. non -competitive funding
mechanisms, competitive funding is a key feature of R&D funding and there is also a
general trend toward introducing competitive elements even in block funding or other
traditionally non -competitive funding mechanisms despite concerns, described in the
remainder of the report, over some aspects of competitive funding including cost.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 17

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

3. Findings
3.1. Taxonomy and general objectives of competitive funding mechanisms
The sample of 75 funding schemes analysed in this study is not statistically representative
of all competitive funding mechanisms and so the quantitative analysis should be
considered accordingly. However, cross -checking with recent data from the OECD
Science, Technology and Innovation Policy database and feedback from experts gives some
confidence that the sample is broadly representative of the variety of competitive funding
schemes that are in operation.
Not surprisingly, since the primary stated value of competitive fun ding mechanisms is to
select for scientific excellence, the questionnaire found that ensuring scientific excellence
was the overwhelming goal for competitive research programmes.
But there was wide variation in the stated purpose of compet itive research programmes
(Figure 4). Although supporting interdisciplinary research, supporting “blue -sky” and
investigator-initiated research, and promoting frontier knowledge were the top 3 purposes
of the programmes as stated by managers of the programmes, all of which lend themselves
to some mechanism for identifying scientific excellence, there are other purposes for
competitive research program mes where the value of competition may be less obvious.
These include: promoting international collaboration; responding to societal challenges (of
many kinds); economic competitiveness; and capacity building (infrastructure, human
resources). The wide range of responses demonstrates that competitive funding has been
adapted to respond to multiple purposes beyond evaluating scientific excellence.
Some funding schemes explicitly try to meet multiple purposes simultaneously. The U.S.
National Science Foundation (NSF), for example, evaluates its proposals based on two
equal criteria, Intellectual Merit (roughly equivalent to scie ntific excellence) and Broader
Impacts, though there are lingering questions as to whether the criteria are weighed equally
in practice. New Zealand’s Endeavour program me also weighs Excellence and Impact as
equally important aims.
Figure 4. Purposes of research funding schemes analysed in the questionnaire survey (more
than one answer possible)

0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Funds research projects proposed by firms
Has particular mechanism for funding senior/elite researchers
Economic competitiveness
Responding to societal challenges
Can fund non-national researchers/labs
Has particular mechanism for funding young researchers
Maintaining/developing scientific knowledge in mainstream…
Funds proposals by universities/independent research institutes
International collaboration/competitiveness
Funds “blue sky” or investigator-driven research
Capacity building (infrastructures, human resources…)
Frontier knowledge/exploring new scientific domains
Funds individual researchers or laboratories/teams
Funds interdisciplinary research

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

It is not simple to classify competitive funding schemes in a taxonomy, and no such
authoritative taxonomy exists, but a basic classification can be derived from the sample in
the current project (Figure 5).
Figure 5. General taxonomy of research funding schemes analysed, with some typical
examples

A significant proportion of competitive funding is awarded to i ndividual principle
investigators. Increasingly, many of these ‘individual’ awards actually support teams of
researchers including technicians, students, postdocs, a nd investigators. There are
sub-categories of individual awards, including early-career awards, training awards, special
mechanisms for senior/elite researchers, and an emerging category of ‘people’ awards that
fund not individual research projects but individuals themselves who are free to use a single
award to investigate a research topic or multiple research topics of their choosing.
Overlapping those categories are individual awards specifically targeted to societal
challenges (including economic competitiveness) or predetermined research questions as
opposed to investigator -initiated topi cs. Within the samples analysed, the majority of
research awards are delivered for between 3 to 5 years (Figure 6), with reports of increasing
grant durations in more recent funding schemes, but t here is a wide variation from 1 year
to ‘long term’ (until a research output is produced), longer durations (7 years +) often linked
to funding directed to consortia or centres with lower application numbers There are
however some research projects that do not fit on this taxonomical model, for example
research awards with the aim of building research capacity or specifically for fostering
international science cooperation, that are neither investigator-initiated topics nor targeted
to societal challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 19

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 6. Grant duration (in years) of research funding schemes analysed (multiple response
possible)

Other related mechanisms explicitly support teams of researchers working on a
collaborative project, often in a centre (or Centre of Excellence, or other such organisation
within a sing le institution). Not surprisingly, Centre awards tend to be for longer time
periods than for individual projects. There are also fund ing mechanisms to support
cross-institutional teams, especially industry-academia collaborations/consortia. And there
are funding mechanisms geared to small firms, firms, or other specific organisation types
within the general research community.
There are also competitive funding research mechanisms that are not project based. In
addition to the ‘people’ awards described abo ve, there are mechanisms that support
research infrastructure, specifically support international cooperation and/or researcher
mobility, and support institutions rather than projects.
Another aspect of the taxonomy of funding mechanisms is whether an awa rd requires
co-funding. In the questionnaire, roughly half of the program mes do not require explicit
co-funding, while half do. The co-funding percentage was found to vary greatly, from 5%
to as high as 60%. This can comprise cash and/or in-kind contributions but excludes waived
overhead costs, unrecovered overhead costs, and other forms of implicit co-funding.
Complementary information coming from the OECD STIP database indicates that about
two thirds of recent research funding initiatives in OECD countri es required some sort of
collaboration (most often with other academic partners) (Figure 7).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 15 long
term

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 7. Project grants for public research requiring some form of collaboration

Source: EC/OECD (2017), STIP Compass: International Science, Technology and Innovation
Policy (STIP) Database, edition 2017, https://stip.oecd.org.
Finally, an important element to take into account which could not be properly assessed in
this study is the importance of overheads and their definition (what they actually include)
which can vary greatly between systems.
3.2. Funding process
The competitive funding process shows similarities across the many program mes and
nations surveyed. The goal of selecting among proposals for scientific excellence leads
programmes to rely heavily on peer review by external (not employed by the funding
agency) researchers working in the same fields as the applicants. In this report, peer review
refers to a process by which experts assess the quality and/or the relevance of a proposal,
usually according to predefined criteria (van den Besselaar, 2010).
There are many reasons why peer review is the standard and preferred (by the sci entific
community, and increasingly by policymakers) mechanism for allocating research funding
competitively. Perhaps most importantly, as suggested by the use of the term ‘peer’, peer
review gives the scientific community itself the leading role in select ing proposals for
scientific research rather than having allocations made by a process not under the control
of the community. Support for peer review is not only about control, however; the
longstanding argument that scientists’ proposals are best evaluat ed for scientific
merit/excellence/quality by their scientific peers is a powerful, widely accepted one
although, surprisingly for such a core tenet of the scientific community, there is little
empirical data to support the argument. In fact, the notion th at external peer review is the
best way to select for scientific excellence is unproven, either on efficiency or effectiveness
grounds. The argument, however, dates back to foundational documents such as the British
Haldane principle in the early 20th century, statin g that decisions about what to spend
research funds on should be made by researchers rather than politicians , or for the
United Kingdom Science, the Endless Frontier, which in the immediate aftermath of World
War II sought successfully to have s cientists in control of the allocation of a substantial
portion of United States government research funds (Bush, 1945). The argument was won
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Other partners
International partners
Industry partners
Other academic partners
No

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 21

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

rhetorically and politically, not empirically, and became a core principle for the
United States government research funding system before empirical data on its efficiency
and effectiveness could be collected. Since then, there has been a burgeoning literature on
peer review but no definitive studies showing that it is indeed the best method for selecting
among proposals for scientific excellence or other criteria. However, there are promising
approaches appearing in the literature for how to test the effectiveness of peer review using
network analyses, statistical oversight, and other techniques taking advantage of
burgeoning data created as part of the scientific process (Gush et al., 2017 and Li, 2017).
The widespread acceptance of peer review within the scientific community, then, is
substantially a matter of faith and confidence. There is a strong belief in the sc ientific
community that it works well for the selection of scientific excellence and there is trust in
the process, trust that is notably lacking for alternatives such as lotteries (NWO
International peer -review conference, 2017). And despite the irony of a scientific
community acting on values such as faith and trust, it remains true that social acceptance
of peer review by the community is important for the continued legitimacy and operation
of peer review systems, not least because of the volunteer efforts that are necessary for its
operation. It is surprising indeed that the scientific commun ity continues to trust the
peer-review system even though there is growing evidence (Li and Agha , 2015) that the
process can sometimes be biased, subjective, conser vative, and unable to make fine
distinctions between proposals. The confidence of the scientific community e in peer
review is so strong that some interviewees reported that their nations have expanded
competitive funding and the use of peer review in the hope that the legitimacy of the peer
review process would give their funding agencies greater trust and legitimacy.
Although this report describes an emerging set of good practices for peer review, even after
several decades there is an absence of agreed, defined standards on the core principles
(European Commission, 2015).
Competition and competitiveness have become ubiquitous in the global science community
not only at the project level or in allocation systems but in the discourse about nations’
scientific enterprises and individual scientists’ work. The European Commission, for
example, has stated that funding through open calls for proposals that are evaluated by peer
review incentivizes researchers and their research institutions to be internationall y
competitive (European Commission, 2012). The Japanese government has made
international competitiveness in research a key objective for some of its research funding
schemes (see Box 1). There is clear evidence in the academic literature that excellence in
science is linked to competition between researchers (Franzoni et al ., 2011) and that
scientists who are evaluated through competitive international benchmarks produce higher
research q uality. Some macro -analyses show a link between more -competitive funding
environments for universities and the productivity of a national research system (Auranen
and Nieminen, 2010), but these analyses have been methodologically questioned
(Sandstrom and Van den Besselaar 2018). Additionally, there are also other studies that
show no relationship between competitive funding schemes and a nation’s scientific
performance (Dialogic and Empirica, 2014), and studies showing that the introduction of
performance-based funding schemes has little effect on nations’ scientific excellence
(Jonkers and Zacharewicz, 2015). The broad conclusion is that, while increased
competition in research funding allocations is associated with higher performance, the
underlying situation is complex and is subject to other incentives and to contextual factors
(Georghiou, 2013), leaving unanswered the question of what the most effective ways to
improve research performance are.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 1. Japan’s World Premier International Research Centre Initiative (WPI)
In the last few decades, the Japanese government has established a variety of funding
mechanisms to strengthen the nation’s research innovation capacity. There are
programmes aiming for industry -academia collaborati ve research, interdisciplinary
research, and university reform. One of them, the “World Premier International Research
Centre Initiative (WPI)” was launched in FY2007 by the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), motivated b y intensifying global competition
for the best and the brightest researchers.4
The objective of the WPI programme is to establish globally open and appealing research
centres to attract talent from all over the world. The centres advance leading -edge
research, create and expand new interdisciplinary domains, and help to reform research
institutions (universities or national institutes). This program me differs in nature from
traditional competitive funding program mes intended mainly for research support. Th e
programme offers JPY 5-13 billion per year per centre for 10 years, in principle. At the
same time, it requires each centre to secure resources (competitive funds, donations, in -
kind contributions from affiliated institutions, etc.) equivalent to , or mor e than , the
amount of WPI support. A centre’s host institution must clearly define the centre’s role
within the institution’s mid -to-long-term strategy, and provide the centre with
comprehensive support accordingly.
The selection process for the WPI progra mme consists of three stages of external peer
review: first screening is a m ail review of a proposal outline; the second screening is a
mail review by a panel of full proposals ; and the third screening is a panel review of
in-person hearings (in English) . In this process, only applicants who pass the first
screening submit full proposals , and only a subset of applicants in the second screening
are invited to a hearing . Thus, the time and energy of both reviewers and applicants are
saved.
For awarded centres, an elaborate follow -up system exists. The program me committee,
the programme director (PD), and the program me officers (POs) conduct site visits to
assess progress on all aspects of the project’s implementation and advise on necessary
corrective measures. Such site visits, held for two days every year, are deemed important
for the success of each centre as well as the WPI Programme.
Ten years after the program me’s start, the WPI program me has produced high -quality
research results in several fields . Production of global top 1% papers by the initial five
WPI centres has been calibrated to be higher than the world's top universities. The WPI
programme is also highly rated by industry and other stakeholders. On the other hand,
difficulties have also aris en. Complex challenges include continuously training and
retaining researchers and making the best use of infrastructure after the end of the official
support period. Reflecting on these strengths and challenges, not only the WPI
programme but also other J apanese centre of excellence program mes are expected to
evolve in the future.
One intended or unintended by-product of the push to competition is broad movement, as
perceived by agency program me managers, toward a ‘project mentality’ or a
“projectification” (Serrano-Velarde 2018; Torka 2018). This is characterised by thinking
about research in terms of discrete, fundable projects, accompanied by the development of
skills in articulating the aims of research and packaging the results of resea rch in
measurable units such as publications. Whether a project mentality is a good or bad thing

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 23

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

is not clear, but certainly a competitive funding system requires science to be divided into
projects that can be articulated in proposals and evaluated competitively.
There are many advantages of competitive project funding compared to other allocation
methods. From the analysis for this project and from the literature, the advantages of
competition are: a tendency to increase the quality and relevance (to res earch agency
objectives) of research project proposals; a way to ensure that research proposals are viable
or meet a minimum standard of quality; providing researchers an opportunity to test their
ideas among peers; building trust in the research community that allocations are transparent
and accountable; support from the research community as an equitable way of distributing
funds (fairness); and a viable alternative to relying solely on internal funds (Kubler, 2013;
Schmidt et al., 2006). Competitive funding can also promote institutional diversity, in that
new researchers and institutions can emerge more easily through competition than through
block funding freezing in place existing institutional capacities, although this effect may
not hold true across nations: Japan and the United States, for example, have found that
researchers from small institutions encounter difficulty in receiving funding, perhaps
because of reviewer bias against smaller institutions. The United Kingdom has set up a dual
competitive support system5, under which the Research Councils provide grants for specific
projects and programmes, while the UK Higher Education Funding Council provides block
grant funding to support the research infrastructure and enable institutions to undertake
research of their choosing. This later funding is also competitive and determined by a
periodic assessment exercise whereby expert panels review academic outputs and impact
beyond academia. Finally, despite researcher complaints about the burden of writin g and
submitting proposals, there is widespread agreement in the research community that the
process is worthwhile. This applies both to proposal preparation (organizing research ideas
clearly, the discipline of clarifying and explaining research ideas) an d review (receiving
peer feedback on ideas that can help to improve the research project) (International Peer -
Review Conference, 2017).
There are also disadvantages of competitive project funding compared to other allocation
methods that emerge from this project’s work and from the literature. The most-commonly
stated disadvantage is that increasing reliance on competitive funding can result in an
emphasis on short-term, low-risk projects rather than longer-term, higher-risk fundamental
research (OECD, 201 1). The premise is that block or institutional funding allows
researchers to work with a funding guarantee over the long term to perform high-risk, long-
term research without fear of losing funding. Conversely, competitive funding tends to
favour shorter-term, less-risky research proposals. The evidence in the literature is mixed;
it is not clear that stable institutional funding does indeed result in more longer -term or
high-risk research than competitive funding, nor is it clear that peer reviewers necess arily
favour low-risk research in their evaluations, especially when potentially transformative or
high-risk or breakthrough research is explicitly emphasized in review criteria. Recent
modelling of the cost of competitive funding mechanisms (e.g. Gross an d Bergstrom ,
2018), in comparison with other options, also found that the effort researchers expend in
writing proposals may be comparable to the total scientific value of the additional funding,
especially when only a small percentage of proposals are fun ded: the resource and time
burdens of applying for competitive grants, i.e. the high transaction costs therefore
constitute an issue. Other disadvantages include: the risk of researcher careers being
interrupted or ended if competitive applications are uns uccessful; the inability of
researchers and institutions alike to do long -term planning at both the individual (career)
and institutional level because of uncertain future funding; disincentives for collaboration
in a competitive system; increased bureaucr acy and administration; and the increasing

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

likelihood that winning competitive funding becomes a goal in itself rather than scientific
breakthroughs or other scientific outcomes (Young, 2015). In addition, one potential
problem of peer review is the existence of different forms of bias (for a review see: Lee et
al., 2013).
At the institutional level, research institutions balance institutional and competitive
funding. Institutions, such as universities, face challenges in maintaining long-term stable
investments in research personnel, instrumentation, and infrastructure solely through
discrete, limited-term awards and therefore have to generate some level of institutional or
core funding. At the opposite extreme, few institutions are interested solely in institutional
funding because of the advantages that are associated with competition. In practice, most
universities and public resea rch organisations in OECD countr ies attempt to strike a
balance between the stability and efficiency of core or institutional funding and the
excellence and higher impact expected from competitive funding. Yet there is no agreement
on an optimum balance either at the institutional or national level.
There are alternatives to traditional peer review that are still competitive. In addition to the
allocation of institutional funding based on STI indicators, project funding can also be
competitively awarded without an external peer review process. Some funding agencies,
such as the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency or DARPA, rely on a strong
scientific programme manager to decide which applications to fund in a research portfolio,
a mode that can be summaris ed as one-person internal review by a scientific peer. Some
funding agencies rely on internal review by programme managers who may or may not be
scientific peers of the applicants but who select from applications using scientific and other
criteria. Some program mes have experimented with altering the composition of ‘peer’
review panels by inviting non-scientists to participate: the U.S. Department of Defence, for
example, awards some of its medical research grants by panels that mix scientists with non-
scientists such as patients or patient group representatives; other program mes with an
industry mission include industry representatives on panels, while yet other government
programmes include representatives from other government agencies who are ‘customers’
for the research in their panels. There are also numerous experiments underway to select
applications for funding through competitive means but without using external peers; some
of these experiments are described in this report.
One possible experiment is a lottery. Some research suggests the value of modified lotteries
(e.g., Fang and Casadevall 2016). Lotteries, because of their low transaction costs, are
appealing to funding agencies although there are considerable concerns over whether this
mechanism can select for excellence or whether implementing lotteries is politically
acceptable (Barnett 2016). There may be opportunities to experiment with a lottery for
select programmes, especially for allocating funding to the ‘middle group’ of applicants,
those that are neither clearly excellent nor clearly poor on the premise that peer review
already has difficulties in distinguishing between proposals falling in this middle category.
In other contexts, choosing winners by lottery is perceived as appropriate to break ties;
many participants recognise that the difficulty of distinguishing proposals is often so great
that they are, effectively tied. For example, a lottery system after having passed some form
of performance control has been utilised by the Volkswagen Stiftung.
(https://www.volkswagenstiftung.de/en/funding/our-funding-portfolio-at-a-
glance/experiment) in the funding initiative “Experiment.”
There are other potential experiments, but few are being tried at scale. One alternative
selection mechanism is the ‘sandpit’: already used to some degree in the United Kingdom,
sandpits are interactive workshops over multiple days involving a large number of

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 25

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

participants: the programme director, a team of expert mentors, and a number of
independent multidisciplinary stakeholders. There is a mix of potential research performers
and of participants not eligible to receive funding; at the end of the process, one result is
agreement on research projects that are eligible for funding, a result that comes about after
ideas are developed, winnowed down, and validated .6 The main driver for sand pits is to
push boundaries and promote transformative research but they incur high overheads to
reach a funding decision and so their applicability is probably limited. The actual peer
review component is quite conventional – the novelty is in how it is implemented . Other
ideas that have emerged, but have not been tested on a broad scale, include oral pitches,
various voting schemes, and ‘self -funding science’ (distribution of funding via credits by
researchers within a community) .7 Other types of allocation mechanisms have been
suggested, for example, by Bollen et al. 2014, 2017.
One facet of the application and review process that this project tried to explore is the
duration of the process. We found a wide variation in the time between a call for proposals
and the research award, with a clustering between six to 12 months. Competitions for large
awards such as centres can take longer, while awards involving industrial firms tend to be
reviewed faster. Programme managers were satisfied to mildly dissatisfied in the time to
award, with several taking steps in recent years to reduce it. Such steps include: informing
rejected applicants as early as possible in the process, e specially for multi -stage review;
instituting small efficiencies wherever possible in review; and using on-line tools to speed
the reviewer selection process. But in general, both agencies and applicants appear to
accept the need for a careful peer-review process even if it takes time. Some programmes
set goals for time between application and awa rd; in one Danish example, this goal was
100 days.
The following sections describe analysis with respect to the two key features of the
competitive funding process: the call for proposals, and the reviewing process.
3.2.1. Call for proposals and eligibility criteria
The dominant frequency of calls for proposals in the sample for this study was once a year,
although there was a wide range from every month to every three to five years (Figure 8).
Recently, there have been experiments (such as in the U.S. National Science Foundation)
in having no deadlines, or a rolling call in which applicants can submit a proposal at any
time. One surprising result of the NSF pilots is a dr op of nearly half in the number of
applications (see Hand , 2016). The United Kingdom and Australia have already moved
beyond experimentation and have established no -deadline rolling applications for some
programmes (see Box 2). For the overwhelming majorit y of calls for proposals with
deadlines, the questionnaire found the open time period for calls to cluster between one and
three months, although there are outliers of less than one month to as long as nine months.
The Group found some examples of program mes shortening call periods to deliberately
reduce the number of proposals and thereby improve success rates.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Figure 8. Call for proposal frequency in research funding schemes analysed

Box 2. Australian Research Council continuous submission of applications
The Australian Research Council (ARC) administers a number of competitive research
funding schemes supporting research ranging from basic to applied research. One of the
schemes that has been in place since 2001 is the Linkage Projects scheme. The ARC has
awarded over AUD 1.6 billion to date through the Linkage Projects scheme to stimulate
research-industry linkages.
The Linkage Projects scheme aims to create research -industry connections that can
endure beyond the duration of ARC funding. Like any other working collaboration, these
linkages build lasting associations and professional relationships, which expand the
scope of national research activity.
A significant change to the operation of Linkage Pro jects occurred in July 2016 with a
shift from an annual cycle to a continuous submission cycle for applications. The
continuous application process was implemented as an outcome of the Australian
Government’s National Innovation and Science Agenda, in orde r to allow more -rapid
assessment between proposal submission and outcome announcement. Proposals can be
submitted at any time. Following detailed peer review, proposals are considered by an
external selection advisory committee as they are submitted, rathe r than having to wait
for a scheduled annual selection meeting. This change allows for more nimble and
responsive funding in response to industry timeframes.
From 1 July 2016 to 5 February 2018, 139 new collaborative research projects were
awarded under th e ARC’s Linkage Projects scheme. These projects represented
AUD 55.7 million in ARC funding to support new colla borative research with over
270 partner organisations.
During the establishment of the continuous process, the ARC put in place mechanisms
to ensure that only excellent research was funded, and the efficient use of the selection
advisory committee’s time.
An evaluation of the implementation of the changes to the Linkage Projects scheme is
planned for 2019.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Every
month
Mutiple
Times Per
Year
Three Times
Per Year
Twice Per
Year
Once Per
Year
Once In 2
Years
Every 3-5
Years
Others

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 27

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

There are different types of calls (Jacob, 2010). Some examples are: a one -step open call
with broad eligibility for investigator -initiated research projects; a one -step call for
thematic areas (more-limited topics); a two-step open call in which pre -proposals or brief
proposals are followed by a second step of full proposals for successful applicants of the
first step; a two-step thematic call; restricted eligibility calls, where applicants must meet
specific criteria to apply (an international partner, a business performer or partner, a certain
career stage); and calls where applicants must demonstrate co -financing of a certain
percentage of funding coming from another source (either self or an external source). There
are interesting French and Dutch examples, among others, of segmenting proposals by
career stage into separate competit ions; the Netherlands Veni (0 -3 years after PhD), Vidi
(3-8 years), and Vici (8-15) competitions ensure that only applicants at similar career stages
are in competition for funding, eliminating one of the potential pitfalls of peer review: the
chance that early-career researchers without extensive track records will not be reviewed
as favourably as established researchers (see Box 3).
Box 3. Veni Vidi Vici in the Netherlands
In 2000, the NWO (Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research) joined forces with
the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and Dutch universities
to establish the Innovational Research Incentives Scheme. The programme includes three
types of grants: Veni, Vidi, and Vici.
The aim of the Scheme is to promote innovation in academic research and to provide
encouragement for individual postdoctoral researchers at various stages of their careers.
Providing creative opportunities for adventurous, talented, pioneering researchers to do
research of their own choice and to encourage them to make a permanent career of
academic research are therefore key aims of the Scheme. Researchers at foreign
institutions are eligible for the Scheme provided they carry out their research at a Dutch
institution recognised by NOW in the Netherlands.
The Scheme targets postdoctoral researchers in three distinct stages of their careers with
three separate schemes:
Veni
Veni applicants must have obtained their doctorate within the last three years. The focus
in this respect is on innovative and curiosity-driven research. The candidates are at the
start of their academic careers but have already demonstrated a striking talent for doing
scientific research. It is essential that researchers should have the ability to formulate and
conduct a line of scientific research independently.
Vidi
Researchers who want to submit a Vidi application can do this from three years and up
to a maximum of eight years after having been awarded their PhD. The Vidi target group
consists of excellent researchers with a striking and original talent as well as a
considerable fascination for doing ch allenging and pioneering research. The candidates
should have carried out several years of postdoctoral research after their PhD and have
demonstrated the ability to independently generate innovative ideas.
Vici
Vici applicants must have obtained their doctorate within the last fifteen years.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

The Vici scheme is aimed at the excellent senior researcher who has successfully
demonstrated the ability to develop his/her own innovative line of research and the ability
to act as a coach for young researchers.
Selection procedure
Applicants can apply in the four science domains of NWO: sciences, social sciences and
humanities, applied and engineering sciences, and health research. There is another track
for cross-domain applications. The available budget is divided over the three schemes
and the 5 domains.
Applications are reviewed by external peers, mostly from abroad. The applicant has the
opportunity to rebut peer comments. An independent assessment committee meets and
discusses the application, peer review commen ts, and rebuttal. The assessment
committee selects the best-ranked proposals for an interview.
Since the start of the Scheme, NWO has made awards to about 3 000 talented researchers.
The Innovational Research Incentives Scheme grant has given these researchers an
opportunity to develop their career in a way that would otherwise have been impossible
for many of them.
Calls for proposals are adapted to the strategic objectives of the funding instrument and
may be directed to selected categories of applicants (for instance consortia-only). Selection
based on the applicants’ age or career stage (time from PhD) often forms a subset of larger
calls rather than the object of specific calls (but this latter formula also exists).
Grant size varies greatly between funding schemes but, in the sample analysed, traditional
mechanisms funding projects led by a principal investigator (PI) were found to usually
provide grants of about EUR 3-500k size (total) while funding for institutional projects are
more in the range of EUR 1-3M+.
 In the study sample, the calls for proposals were overwhelmingly oriented to the funding
country, not surprisingly. For national funding schemes, applicants must either be domestic
nationals or residents or foreign nationals who commi t to performing the research in the
funding country. There are a small number of proposals that are open only to domestic
nationals. Of course, there are also funding schemes in the European Union that are
explicitly open to nationals of any member or associated nation.
3.2.2. Reviewing process
The Expert Group found predictable variation in the nationality of peer reviewers. Larger
nations such as the United States and Japan rely almost exclusively on domestic researchers
as reviewers, while smaller nations rely heavily on foreign reviewers. Small nations’
reliance on foreign reviewers, despite the extra cost, is often necessary to assemble a pool
of researchers qualified to offer a scientific opinion on a proposal topic with small
disciplinary research communiti es. Interviewees from Denmark, in particular, expressed
strongly that foreign reviewers are indispensable for a small nation such as Denmark to
review proposals for excellence because only by looking to foreign communities can
enough ‘peers’ be found. In a ddition, in small nations with overlapping relationships and
collaborations there is a challenge in finding qualified peer reviewers who do not have
conflicts of interest with the applicants. However, relying on non -national reviewers may
be hampered by language barriers when English is not commonly used within the scientific
community and by the administration of the funding body.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 29

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Although most funding schemes have review processes that are well described in
programme materials, usually available on public websites, the actual workings of review
processes are often opaque. Some funding schemes use scoring, but we could find no
instances of scoring rubrics based on quantitative data; rather, scoring tends to be numerical
scores associated with qualitative assessments such as “fair” or “excellent”. And although
the criteria used to evaluate applications tend to be described, they are almost entirely
qualitative, with few criteria that can be evaluated independently. Selection criteria also
vary according to the strategic objectives of the funding scheme: while scientific excellence
(often interpreted as both the scientific quality of the proposal itself and the quality of the
scientists as judged by their track record) remains a primary criteria, other elements may
also be taken into account (see Figure 9). These are often more challenging for scientific
peers to assess. In other words, peer reviews are seldom replicable: because of the large
role played by individual qualitative expert judgment, the chance that two reviewers would
offer identical evaluations beyond a summary assessment of “recommend for funding” or
“excellent” for the same application is essentially random. Only in competitions for large
laboratory awards or centres did this study find a strong role for indicators in review
processes. In fact, a few interviewees stated that in the peer review process, they used
indicators ‘as little as possible’ in favour of qualitative assessment.
Figure 9. Selection criteria for project grants for public research

Source: EC/OECD (2017), STIP Compass: International Science, Technology and Innovation
Policy (STIP) Database, edition 2017, https://stip.oecd.org (April 2018 version)
From the sample of questionnaires and interviews, it is difficult to draw definitive
conclusions, but most program mes appear to employ a multi -stage proposal evaluation
process, although there are many program mes that only have one stage (most often
panel/committee). These stages can include: initial screening, external review of proposal
documents, review by a committee or panel, and (more rarely) interviews of applicants by
an external review panel. The research literature indicates that one-stage review tends to be
used by smaller research program mes, while l arger program mes tend to use two -stage
processes (Kubler, 2013). Faced with large numbers of applicants, there however seems to
be a growing trend for pre -selection procedures (beyond just an administrative process to
ensure the conformity of the applicati ons to the call). This is sometimes (but not always)
linked to a two-step procedure whereby an initial shorter application (or sometimes a letter
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Social inclusion in research
Geographical location
Other
Commercial impact anticipated
Alignment with national research priorities
Societal impact anticipated
Track record of applicant
Scientific impact anticipated

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

or a CV) is requested and assessed internally before more-detailed proposals are invited for
submission to und ergo the full peer -reviewed evaluation process. In some countries,
programme managers play a proactive role in soliciting or discouraging proposals. This can
be an important part of application management but is rarely a fully open and accepted
process. While these mechanisms are justified as a way to streamline procedures and reduce
the workload of (unsuccessful) applicants, this pre -selection procedure is usually carried
out internally within the funding organisation with little transparency on the evalua tion
criteria.
In a recent United States National Science Foundation (NSF) example, the NSF’s 2016
merit-review report found consistency across years in NSF’s merit -review processes
(National Science Foundation, 2017). NSF has long relied on a mix of revi ewing
approaches: in 2016, of the 95% of NSF proposals that were reviewed externally, 67% of
proposals were reviewed by a panel (committee of experts) only, 27% were reviewed ad
hoc (document review by experts) plus a panel, and 5% ad hoc (document) review only.
(NSF does not use interviews in its pee r reviews.) In addition, 5% of all NSF proposals
were reviewed internally, that is by NSF staff and not by external peer reviewers.
This study found no common standard for how many reviewers must review a prop osal,
although the most common minimum number is three in a clustered range from 2 to 5.
Conversely, individual reviewers receive very different numbers of proposals to review,
from 3 to more than 20. Although there was a wide variation, agencies strived t o keep a
certain percentage of reviewers from year to year to help preserve continuity and coherence,
while at the same time recruiting new reviewers in order to refresh panel expertise. Many
programmes such as those run by United States NIH and some Germa n and United
Kingdom programmes have standing committees or study sections of a stable group of peer
reviewers who review multiple successive competitions in a research program me,
providing some continuity of reviews over time.
Several methods are used to recruit reviewers: open calls, reviewers of previous
competitions (with some specified turnover), nominations from agency staff or from the
external community, peer review colleges, recommendations from a panel chair who is
selected by the funding agency programme manager, suggestions from the applicants, and
searches of databases such as Scopus or Google Scholar or Elsevier tools, etc. There
appears to be very little research on good practices for recruiting reviewers, nor any
strategic insights into how funding agencies might recruit reviewers to help solve, for
example, agencies’ reported difficulty in finding certain types of reviewers such as
reviewers from industrial firms or reviewers (and panels) able to review interdisciplinary
projects. In the study sample, there were few experiments for reducing recruitment burden
or encouraging more researchers to serve as reviewers. One intriguing experiment from the
United States National Science Foundation required applicants to an NSF programme to
review up to seven other applications for the same programme, a twist on a common tactic
of having applicants commit to reviewing future applications as in the case of the Australian
Research Council. In that experiment, not only were reviewers recruited with less ef fort
than the standard NSF search for reviewers, but each proposal received more reviews than
the standard (Science, 2014).8
No obvious differences were found in recruiting document reviewers and panel reviewers.
Indeed, in many cases reviewers participate in both tasks and sometimes in a third interview
stage. Although review panels usually synthesize their reviews into numerical rankings, the
results of their reviews are most often qualitative recommendations (fund/not fund or
excellent/fair).

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 31

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Only a minority of the funding schemes that were analysed had an appeals system for
appealing the outcome of a peer -review process, and even when one existed, it was often
an administrative procedure rather than a new review of the proposal. We found this to be
a source of broad dissatisfaction among researchers, who argued that a trustworthy system
should allow applicants to respond to or rebut peer reviews, either verbally or in a written
rebuttal (International peer -review conference, 2017). Clearly, however, establishing an
appeals system beyond the finality of peer review as currently constructed would require
new administrative structures and possibly additional rounds of peer review or additional
panels, all adding to time to award and cost. The Group found a few schemes that allow for
a second review of the proposal either by the same reviewing panel or by a different group.
There appear to be few systemised efforts to gather feedback from applicants, successful
or unsuccessful, or reviewers. The limited feedback that agency program me managers
receive appears to be informal through conversations and communications outside the
review process, although some funding bodies, such as the Research Councils UK, gather
feedback periodically through user satisfaction surveys (see Box 4). Although there are
opportunities for successful applicants to provide feedback on the review process as part of
annual reports or final reports, the Group did not find any research programmes that took
advantage of this opportunity; instead, these reports focused on the research project itself
and its outputs and impacts rather than the process by which they were selected for funding.
Box 4. Peer Review at Work in the UK Research Councils
The peer review 9 process is the cornerstone of the work of the UK Research Councils
(RCUK) in allocating public funds. The Haldane principle proposes that decisions on
how to spend research funds are best taken independently of Government by those who
have the expertise and experience, for example through peer review. In the
United Kingdom, u pholding this principle is considered to be a vital part of ensuring
academic independence and excellence.
There are a number of variations in the peer review process, reflective of the variety of
funding mechanisms and types of research, but the process typically involves two stages.
Proposals are considered by external referees (usually by correspondence) and then by a
separate expert Panel or Board (usually at a meeting). This Panel will have a role in
assessing or moderating the proposals and agreeing a rank ordered list for funding. In
between these two stages the Principal Investigator is provided with the anonymous peer
review comments and given the opportunity to provide a written response to these, which
is presented to the Panel alongside the reviewer comments. To increase transparency ,10
feedback is provided to research organisations about the assessment of proposals that the
organisations have submitted.
RCUK draws peer reviewers from a wide pool nationally and internationally for
academic and research user reviews. Some of the Research Councils ha ve peer review
colleges11 of between 1 000-4 000 members, broadly reflecting their research
communities in relative size and in terms of their spread of knowledge and expertise.
Members are appointed for a fixed period, may be invited or nominated onto the college
(including self -nomination) and are assessed on their experience relative to the
requirements of the college. Peer Review college membership is also reviewed
periodically to address any imbalances and to ensure coverage for new and emerging
areas. Councils that do not use colleges, use their own knowledge together with reviewer
matching software to select relevant experts from their communities. In certain funding
calls, the investigator may also suggest referees who are experts in the research fiel d or

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

who they believe may be able to provide an expert view on the value and benefits to
research users of the research proposal.
There is a “Pathways to Impact”12 section within the application for investigators to think
about what can be done to help ens ure that their research makes a difference to wider
society and the United Kingdom’s economy. Through Pathways to Impact RCUK
encourages investigators to explore, from the outset and throughout the life of their
project and beyond, who could potentially benefit from their research and what they can
do to help make this happen.
RCUK provide the United Kingdom peer review community guidance on completing
reviews and field regular user satisfaction surveys .13 RCUK has also introduced a
programme for peer rev iewers and decision makers to raise awareness and reduce the
impact of unconscious bias as par t of a commitment to addressing equality and
diversity.14
Feedback from the academic community is that the work involved in preparing proposals
(e.g. background research, discussions and experiments) and the feedback from peer
review help investigators to both generate and improve their ideas.15

In its investigations of competitive funding schemes, the Expert Group searched for
innovative processes and found that although nations are experimenting with reform of
competitive funding systems, truly innovative schemes are few and far between. Some
examples follow. In the United States, the National Science Foundation has been
experimenting with no -deadline or always -open calls for proposals, and reductions in
required elements for proposals (to reduce burden for applicants); the United Kingdom and
Australia have adopted these approaches for some program mes. The Australian Research
Council has introduced a Career Interruption Policy that extends the period of eligibility
for early - and mid -career fellows with an interrupted academic career. One Danish
programme has also experimented with reducing required elements in proposals. The
Natural Science Foundation of China has established a pilot micro -grant programme to
support preliminary research on new ideas and to support exploratory research on emerging
fields that may not rate highly in standard peer-review approaches. Some programmes are
experimenting with interviews of applicants incorporating a “pitch” by the applicant.
Evaluation of a pilot for United Kingdom social sciences research, under the auspices of
the Economic and Social Research Council, found that the ‘pitch’ second stage was
successful in identifying transformative approaches without sacrificing quality. The
National Institutes of Health has instituted “bridge” awards in which applications that have
narrowly missed the cut -off for funding in the peer -review process are re -evaluated by
agency staff for one -year “bridge” awards to allow researchers to continue their research
and re -apply for a standard research award the following year; the number of NIH
programmes adopting ‘bridge’ awards has increased steadily in recent years (see Box 5).
The latter scheme is intriguing because it is a change from the usual binary funding/no-
funding result of peer review. The option of giving a smaller, shorter award to keep a
researcher funded until the next competition round helps to ameliorate the all -or-nothing
nature of funding competitions that can be disruptive for researchers as they plan the ir
research and their careers.
These experiments suggest that OECD countries have numerous options for how to adjust
their competitive funding systems. However, the evaluation of the efficiency and
effectiveness of these various options appears to be missing in many cases.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 33

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 5. U.S. National Institutes of Health “Bridge” Awards
One alternative to the binary “yes/no” or “go/no -go” decisions for competitive funding
mechanism is the so -called ‘bridge’ award, a smaller, more -limited award given to
applicants for a competitive funding scheme who fall just short of a successful peer -
review score.
In the United States, several component institutes of the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) make R56 awards, formally known as a High Priority, Short-Term Project Award
but universally known as bridge grants or bridge awards. These awards provide one,
sometimes two, years of funding to resear chers and are given to applicants for
competitive NIH awards (such as the standard, competitively -awarded R01 research
grant which average four years in duration) who fall just outside the cut-off limit of peer
review scores for the full NIH award.
Interestingly, investigators never apply directly for a bridge award but instead receive
them as a third outcome between receiving a standard NIH research grant and a rejection.
The bridge award is typically for a year, with a maximum of two years, and allows th e
investigator to continue research and to revise a R01 proposal for resubmitting the next
year in the standard competition. Most, though not all, bridge awards are for R01 renewal
applications, an NIH-funded investigator ending one R01 award project and applying for
another R01. Thus, the mechanism is intended to be a ‘bridge’ between one R01 award
and another future R01 award. If the investigator is successful in the future R01
competition, then the future R01 award is offset (reduced by one year and the cost of the
bridge award).
After a peer -review panel (in NIH, e xternal reviewers organised in “ study sections ”)
grades and ranks applicants for a R01 or other competition, NIH program me managers
determine a cut -off score known in NIH as a payline based on available funds. This
process results in R01 awards going to the most highly-rated proposals, but also a list of
proposals that rank highly but just below the payline score. NIH sends these proposals to
programme managers, who make ranked recommendations on which of these proposals
should receive bridge awards. Therefore, there is no additional peer review for bridge
awards; the peer review is for the original R01 competition.
The bridge award gives NIH program me managers a tool to manage applications fro m
year to year. For example, if a program me is unusually competitive one year, NIH can
shift applicants from the current year’s competition to next year’s competition and
allocate them bridge funding to sustain their research until then.
The bridge award is also a way of managing success rates. NIH program me managers
could give all of their program me’s funding as R01 awards. But reserving some funds
for bridge awards has the effect of reducing the success rate for the standard awards yet
providing some form of funding to a greater number of researchers. In addition, it allows
proposals to become more competitive, in theory resulting in better science; investigators
use the bridge award funding to do research and improve their proposals to be more
competitive in the next competitive round.
3.3. Success rates
The questionnaire and subsequent research found wide variation in success rates (including
some programmes with a reported success rate of 100% and others of below 10%), with
clustering of success rates between 10 and 20% (Figure 8). The Expert Group found no
obvious relationships between the size of a program me, the number of applications, or

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

award size and the success rate. It should be noted that there are some relationships between
the type of programme and success rate: centres of excellence, mission -oriented research
in priority fields, and innovation and industry -oriented programmes tend to have higher
success rates than individual general-purpose research awards, with the lowest success rates
for investigator-initiated, general-topic, open-call research awards.
Figure 10. Success rate in research funding schemes analysed

Programmes with initial screening or multi-stage application processes tend to have higher
success rates for the final selection stage, which is not a surprising finding considering that
the purpose and effect of pre -screening or initial screening is to reduce the number of
proposals that have to be reviewed in the final selection stage. App lying initial screening
or multiple stages that can reduce the number of applications that must be peer reviewed is
a worthwhile strategy for nations to consider.
Several screening strategies are used by nations, including: administrative screening
(agency staff triaging incomplete applications or checking administrative eligibility
criteria); pre -proposals (requiring applicants to submit a shorter, simplified propo sal or
letter of intent or a CV for initial screening that is either peer reviewed or reviewed
internally, and allowing only successful applicants in this round to submit full proposals);
preliminary internal review (agency staff review applications and se nd only a subset to
external review); and multi -stage review (usually a document review followed by a
committee review and sometimes followed by an interview stage, with the number of
reviewed applications shrinking at each stage). These strategies appear to work well in
different contexts and are worth consideration by national funding agencies. Many have
the added benefit of reducing burden by eliminating the need to write full proposals for
applicants who do not make it to the final round.
One strategy to avoid oversubscription and to reduce non -relevant applications that has
been used by the Severo Ochoa Centres of Excellence program me in Spain is to require
applicants to submit a bibliometric self-assessment (see Box 6).
0
5
10
15
20
25
1-10% 10-20% 20-30% 30-40% 40-50% 50%- 100%

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 35

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 6. Using bibliometric self-assessment to avoid oversubscription: The “Severo
Ochoa Centers of Excellence” programme in Spain
The “Severo Ochoa” Centers of Excellence program me was launched in 2011 with the
aim of funding and accrediting research centers in Spain. In 2014, a new variation for
smaller research units (the Maria de Maeztu Units of Excellence program me) was
launched. There is an annual call for applications. The cor e annual funding allocated
under this mechanism is EUR 1 million per year, but there are also additional streams of
funding through other public funding instruments, such as PhD fellowships, post -
doctoral contracts, etc.
To be funded, public research cente rs and units, in any domain of research, have to
demonstrate scientific leadership and impact at a global level, as well as active
collaboration in their social and business environment. They should be organisational
structures with highly strategic resear ch programmes in the frontiers of knowledge and
they should be among the best in the world in their respective scientific areas.
To be eligible, applicants for a center grant are required to present at least 10 researchers
(6 in the case of R&D Units) plus the scientific director as guarantors of the excellence
of the applicant center or unit. Those “guarantors”, or principal investigators, are required
to present bibliometric evidence of their performance, including the “normalised impact
factor” of their recent works.
These requirements serve s to reduce the number of applicants and the average success
rate has been 30% over three years of competitions.
The evaluation and selection process is carried out by an independent international
committee of prestigious scientists, organis ed into three main domains. In most cases,
the chairs of th ese Panels are Nobel Prize winners, and the focus of the evaluation and
the criteria for assessment is the substantive scientific contribution of the Center or Unit,
recent performance and expected results and impacts.

One issue with initial or multi-stage screening is that although the number of proposals that
have to be peer reviewed may be reduced, the number of disappointed applicants
(researchers who are not funded) is not reduced. Measures to increase success rates, in
general, do nothing to change the competitive environment for researchers, who are obliged
to submit increasing numbers of applications to different funding competitions. Addressing
the symptoms, researc hers caution, will not remove the causes which are linked to the
competitive environment (International Peer-Review Conference, 2017).
Other strategies to increase success rates focus on taking applicants out of the applicant
pool. Some nations are experi menting with longer research grants (greater than 5 years)
and prohibiting these recipients from applying to other program mes until the original
research grant is complete. This approach has the benefit of allowing these researchers
more time between applications.
There are other strategies to raise success rates that are more controversial. One is to reduce
the number of applicants by barring unsuccessful applicants (or applicants with scores
below a certain threshold) from applying to a future round of a funding program me
(referred to in some nations as “quarantine” ). Related is a “time out” system in which
applicants, successful or unsuccessful, cannot re -enter a competition for a certain amount
of time. Another is to limit the number of research awards from an agency that a single

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

investigator can hold simultaneously. Some program mes apply limits to the number of
applications that a single institution can submit to a competition, which can have the effect
of creating an intra -institution competition befo re the main competition. Another is to
impose limits on current awardees reapplying to a funding programme with a new project,
or limits on renewals of ongoing projects that have not been completed in the time period
of the initial award. Other strategies can include institutional limits on number of
applications for a specific competition, or require applicants to have a funded grant
portfolio of a certain size in order to be able to apply, or not allowing previously
unsuccessful proposals to be resubmitte d regardless of time, unless invited to do so. And
there are also financial strategies, such as increasing the co-funding required by institutions
to reduce the number of applications any institution will submit.
The success rate problem is not only on th e numerator side but also on the denominator
side. The research workforce in most OECD countr ies tends to grow faster than research
resources because of the traditional academic model whereby one researcher advises and
mentors several students, many of whom go on to pursue independent research careers (for
more on this topic, see Stephan, 2012). Thus, if left unchecked, the number of researchers
applying for funding tends to grow. This is compounded by the fact that the salaries of
many researchers, includi ng PIs, are dependent on competitive project funding. One
method of improving success rates is therefore to limit the population growth of
researchers. Not surprisingly, this idea is not very popular in the scientific community.
And of course, one method of increasing the success rate is to increase the funding available
for a competition. However, in a time of fiscal austerity across the OECD, this method has
obvious limits.
There are other practices undertaken for policy reasons that may also have the ef fect of
raising the success rate. Many funding programmes restrict the pool of eligible applicants
according to defined criteria: career stage (time from PhD); nationality; performer type
(small business, academic institution, or a subset of academic insti tutions); geography
(competitions limited to certain jurisdictions that are historically disadvantaged in
competing for research funding); and collaboration (limi ting applications only to
cross-sector or cross -national research collaborations). While the a doption of such
measures primarily to raise success rates may not be appropriate, aligning eligibility with
policy objectives makes sense.
As an aside, the majority of programmes surveyed do not have an explicit process for
renewal of awards or reapplication (a rejected project applying for funding in a new call),
although policies regarding renewal and reapplication can affect success rates.
From the data, it is impossible to determine an ideal success rate. Interviewees stated
repeatedly that success rates below 10% were a concern because below that threshold it is
claimed that peer review is ill -equipped to make meaningful funding decisions and
therefore the selection process becomes a ‘lottery,’ delegitimising the process in the eyes
of the scientific community. In other words, low success rates erode the trust in the peer -
review process that is key to the scientific community’s support for it. In addition, the
cumulative burden of peer review per award increases as the success rate decreases,
thereby re ducing the efficiency of the selection process. Interviewees suggested that
success rates between 25 and 33% were optimal. These assertions are based on personal
experiences and involve p rofessional judgment as to the “right” ratio of applications and
reviews to funded projects, but this study could not identify data to support these assertions.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 37

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

There remains much more research that could be done on success rates. One promising
research area is determining what percentage of “ good” or “worthy” proposals should be
funded in an “optimal” situation. Several funding agencies, including NIH and NSF, make
informal assessments on how success rates compare to the percentage of application s that
peer review panels deem “good” or worthy of funding, usually to argue for more funding
to fund more of the worthy proposals deeper in the application pool. In the interviews, the
Expert Group found that program me managers generally agree that most competitions
result in thr ee categories of applications: “ good” proposals tha t should be funded,
“average” proposals that could be funded if funds are available , and “bad” proposals that
should not be funded. For them and for the scientific community, one issue that is eroding
trust in the peer -review process is a growing sense tha t many “ good” proposals are not
being funded in heavily subscribed competitions with very low success rates. In the EU, it
is interesting to note that several countries such as France or Spain have mechanisms to
fund highly rated ERC applications that fail ed to get ERC funding (as success rates for
ERC grants are below 10%).
3.4. Monitoring, impact, and measures of success
This study found wide variation in funding agencies’ monitoring of the peer -review
process, and also a wide variation in evaluation of impac t/success measures of research
funded competitively. One problem encountered was that it was difficult to separate
programme monitoring from impact evaluation, or in other words, it is difficult to
distinguish between programme efficiency and programme effectiveness.
There are few agreed -on criteria for scientific success in general, and therefore little
concrete guidance on how to evaluate success or impact after competitive awards have been
made. The most common metrics used to evaluate the scientific ex cellence (impact) of
funded proposals are: bibliometric indicators (publications, citations, impact factor), prizes,
qualitative assessments of impacts either self-reported or externally reported, the ability to
attract additional funding, and qualitative assessments of interdisciplinarity, breakthrough
discoveries, or innovative outcomes. There are however, questions regarding the actual
value of journal impact factor and metrics such as the H-index for assessing the quality of
publications or the contribution of individual researchers.
Outcomes related to policy priorities were variously evaluated but only in a minority of the
programmes in this study. Approaches included: qualitative assessments of whether the
research helped to meet programme objectives ; qualitative or quantitative assessments of
interdisciplinarity; disciplinary balance; regional balance; and overall changes in national
research structure. Although innovation/technology transfer would appear to be the easiest
category of impact to evalu ate quantitatively, direct impact indicators of
economic/innovation impact were rarely used; instead, programmes used qualitative
assessments of success stories and self -reported economic impact s. Collecting and then
synthesising these various qualitative evaluations often required more expert panels, that is
to say additional peer review.
Nevertheless, there are some promising approaches for evaluating impact beyond
traditional bibliometric outputs. The Science Foundation of Ireland, for example, has
developed an impact framework based on impact categories that are derived from an
applicant’s original impact statement (see Box 7). There is an ex ante evaluation of impact
based on the impact statement and evaluation guidelines. Annual and mid-term reviews of
awarded grants are carried out against this impact statement.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Box 7. Science Foundation Ireland Research Impact Evaluations
As Ireland’s scientific infrastructure and capacity matures, there is a strong focus on
demonstrating the e conomic and societal benefits of publicly -funded scientific research to
society. Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) published a strategy document, Agenda 2020, in 2013,
which set out a vision in which Ireland, by 2020, would be the best country in the world for both
scientific research excellence and impact. In line with other international funding agencies, SFI
defined impact as “the demonstrable contribution that excellent research makes to society and
the economy.”
SFI had always asked applicants for competitive funding to articulate the value of their research
to Ireland but, following the publication of its strategy, expanded and refined this aspect of
research evaluation. To this end, SFI began using experts in the translation, commercialisation,
and development of scientific research to evaluate research imp act as an integral part of
post-award review processes. Towards supporting impact assessment, many of SFI’s awards, are
subject to a mid -term programme progress review. International experts in t he relevant
disciplines, including those with expertise in relevant areas of industry, commercialisation, and
translation, evaluate the progress being made against the original Impact Statement as submitted
in the funded proposal. There is specific guidanc e provided to direct the reviewers to “score”
with reference to indicators of impact, as defined by SFI, and not simply to “rate” award outputs,
some of which may have little relevance to impact. Furthermore, all Research Centre awards are
asked to provide targets for specific outputs in direct support of delivering Impact. These are
examined internally by SFI staff, and are used to report progress to the SFI Executive and Board,
and SFI’s parent department (Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation). Additionally,
as part of annual reporting guidelines, all current SFI awardees are provided with a list of
11 Impact “declarations” or statements. They are required to select the statements which best
reflect the impact(s) arising from their award; they must provide details justifying the statements
selected and metrics in support of their selected impact(s). The Impact statements help SFI to
quantify the types of impacts arising from awards made under various SFI Programmes. They
provide SFI with impact case studies for public dissemination and are particularly important for
scenarios where impacts arising from specific programmatic activities are required by the parent
department as justification for investments made.

The Group found few attempts by agencies to evaluate the efficiency or effectiveness of
their competitive selection processes although many possibilities exist. In part, this is
because agencies are understandably reluctant to share detailed data containing personally
sensitive or busine ss confidential information on award applications, peer -review scores
and reviews, and awards. But researchers who have persevered in collecting and analysing
detailed anonymized data have made intriguing findings: one study of NIH awards and
their peer-review scores found no correlation between the percentile ranking in peer review
of an application and its eventual citation impact (Fang et al., 2016). Another study of the
New Zealand Marsden program me found no systematic evidence that the program me’s
peer-review selection process predicted the subsequent success of the research project. At
the very least, such research provides some empirical foundation for the notion, already
discussed, that peer review is ill -equipped to make fine distinctions between re search
applications.
When evaluations of competitive funding mechanisms do take place, they are often
retrospective qualitative assessments by external panels. One example is an international
2011 evaluation of the Natural Science Foundation of China’s fu nding and management
performance by a team led by the National Center for Science and Technology Evaluation

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 39

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

(see Box 8). The European Research Council and U.S. funding agencies also conduct
periodic external retrospective evaluations of competitive funding mechanisms; we found
that there is no standard methodology for s uch evaluations nor a standardis ed set of data
used in such evaluations, only a range of inputs (bibliometric indicators, questionnaires,
interviews, citations data, award project reports) th at are most commonly used to inform
an external panel’s review.
Box 8. International Evaluation of National Natural Science Foundation of China’s
Funding and Management Performance
Since 2005, t he government of China (GOC) has increa singly focused attention on the
performance of scientific research supported by public funds and explicitly required an
evaluation of the National Natural Science Foundation of China’s (NSFC) performance. NSFC
plays an important role in basic research unde r China’s National Innovation System (NIS), and
its influence is well recognized among China’s scientific community.
An international evaluation of NSFC was implemented from June 2010 to A pril 2011. Its
objectives were to: (1) provide an independent assessment of the overall performance of NSFC’s
funding and management during the past 25 years, with a truly global perspective; (2) present
key findings, lessons learned and recommendations to improve the NSFC’s funding and
management performance as well as to achieve excellence in management; (3) and develop a set
of forward-looking guiding ideas, based on a truly global perspective, supporting the Ministry of
Finance (MOF) and NSFC to redefine NSFC’s strategic role within the NIS of China.
The Evaluati on cove red four dimensions: (1) NSFC’s strategic positioning, (2) funding
performance, (3) management performance, and (4) impact on China’s S&T system. The
National Center for Science and Technology Evaluation (NCSTE) was responsible for designing
and implementi ng the Evaluation, and preparing synthesis evidence for evaluation. An
International Evaluation Committee (IEC) – in practice a mixed Chinese/international panel –
was established to assess this evidence and draw conclusions and recommendations.
The evalu ation provided a number of recommendations around five dimensions: strategic
positioning of NSFC, funding performance, international connections, funding instruments, and
management and administration. The evaluation report was widely circulated within NSF C and
published online. The majority of the recommendations w ere adopted by the NSFC and the
Ministry of Finance. For example, as recommended, the budget for NSFC doubled between 2010
and 2015; NSFC has implemented performance evaluations of the General Pr ogramme, the
Young Scientist Fund in 2015, and the Fund for Less Developed Regions in 2016; the duration
of the General Programme project, the most important funding instrument of NSFC, increased
from three years to four years; and the General Programme grant size increased from
RMB 600 000 to 800 000.

Clearly, greater access by the science -policy research community to detailed anonymi sed
data on peer review could allow for comparative analyses of differing competitive
allocation systems (peer review vs. program me manager review, panel review vs.
panel + interview, peer review with bibliometric or other indicators vs. purely qualitative
peer review, etc.). There are also opportunities for counterfactual studies, for exam ple, to
assess impacts of funded proposals in a competition vs. unfunded proposals that were later
funded by other funding sources. Such comparative research could provide an empirical
basis for determining the advantages and disadvantages of different modes of competitive
research funding, or the most appropriate mode to use in particular contexts. There have
already been notable studies in which such data have been used to study the degree to which

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

factors such as gender, race/ethnicity, or age affect pee r reviewers’ judgments, and more
such studies would help to identify barriers to effective peer review (Ginther et al, 2011).
But detailed studies on the advantages and disadvantages of different competitive funding
mechanisms are lacking in the literature , and could be useful opportunities for future
research provided data and funding are available.
In particular, there is a continuing need to investigate the impact of race/ethnicity, gender,
age, and other factors of both the reviewers and the applicants on peer review outcomes.
There is a welcome movement toward ensuring gender balance and diversity both on
review panels and in funding awards. And training program mes for peer reviewers (such
as those operated by the Research Councils UK) to raise awarenes s of and potentially
reduce the impact of implicit bias in peer review are growing in number. While there is an
emerging body of literature suggesting that diversity in both reviewers and applicants is
important in ensuring fair outcomes, the impact of bia ses on peer-review decisions is not
well understood, and therefore policy measures to correct for biases are not well developed.
The need to screen for bias and to understand the role of bias in competitive funding
mechanisms will only grow more pronounced if in-person processes, such as interviews
and ‘pitches’, become more prevalent in selection mechanisms.
3.5. Perceived challenges and responses
Costs of competitive funding schemes
Although studies have shown that a competition in a funding system may bring significant
benefit to the quality of the research produced (Li and Agha, 2015), the true operating costs
of competitive funding schemes are not accounted for. This real cost not only includes the
funders’ administrative resources required to manage and d istribute grants and monitor
their use, but also those required for the whole evaluation process and, perhaps the most
critical element of all, the time and effort spent by researchers to respond to grant proposals
and, for the grantees, to meet post-award requirements.
This project highlighted the lack of data on operating costs of competitive funding systems.
Where reported, operating costs appear to be under 5% of the total program me cost. But
the questionnaire yielded no data at all for many programmes, and no details as to how each
programme calculates operating cost. Just as an example, the study found considerable
variation in how operating costs are attributed: some programmes include operating costs
within the program me budget , others have operating costs supported out of a central
agency-wide fund, and many others do not attempt to calculate operating costs separately.
Interviewees repeatedly said that operating costs were difficult if not impossible to
calculate with any precision.
The evaluation process itself is most often based on peer review. Peer review relies heavily
on the volunteered time and effort of external reviewers, most commonly employed at
academic institutions. Although a small sample of competitive program mes pay external
reviewers through honoraria, peer review relies predominantly on external reviewers
volunteering their time and being compensated only for travel and other expenses
associated with their service on panels. Even if they are not direct costs, the time and effort
of external reviewers are a cost to the entire research system, both in terms of their salaries
and in terms of the opportunity cost of the research and other activities that they could be
doing if they were not serving as external reviewers. Accounting of the uncompensated
costs of peer review remains approximate, but anecdotally , these costs are considerable,

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 41

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

especially as success rates decline and therefore more external reviews are required per
research funding award.
The effort devoted by researchers to comply with competitive funding requirements is even
more difficult to assess and includes the proposal preparation itself, usually some pre-award
administration efforts and, for the awardees, some sort of post -award administration and
report preparation. Time spent for these various tasks is variable between researchers and
funding schemes, but a 2012 publication (Schneider et al ., 2012) reporting on a study
carried out in the United States indicated that an average of 42% of the time spent by
principal investigators supported by active federal grants was related to meeting funding
requirements. Even considering that a significant time is devoted anyway to administrative
duties by researchers using other forms of funding, the 15% time allocated to proposa l
preparation reported in this study indicates that competitive funding does involve
significant effort and resource allocation by researchers.
Assessing the full cost of competitive funding mechanisms is complex, particularly as the
criteria taken into ac count for the cost associated with researcher’s proposal
preparation/submission and reporting may vary. In a 2006 report of the UK Research
Councils, the total cost of the system was evaluated to about 13% of the Research Councils’
budget spent in higher e ducation and research. Although based on estimates, this gives a
rough value of the cost of peer-reviewed funded research. This value was subdivided into
about 75% linked to researchers’ proposal preparation, 20% related to the evaluation
process and about 5% associated with internal Research Council activities. The relative
cost of competitive funding is affected by the success rate of a given funding mechanism,
as the costs associated with proposal preparation and evaluation increase relative to the
funding awarded as success rates fall (the 2006 United Kingdom estimate is to be analysed
in a context of about 30% success rate). The real cost per amount awarded can vary
significantly as a function of the complexity of the proposal requirements, the size of the
grant allocated and the complexity of the evaluation and management process.
Debate around the cost of competitive funding mechanisms and their real added value
continue in the absence of conclusive evidence. In a 2009 publication, Richard Gordon and
Bryan Poulin suggested that the cost of the Canadian NSERC science grant peer review
system exceeded the cost of giving a baseline grant to every qualified researcher. They
advocated a mixed portfolio of high, medium and low -risk funding through 40% baseline
funding, 50% peer-review competition and 10% industry collaboration. In a more recent
(2017) paper, Krist Vaesen and Joel Katzav calculated that an egalitarian distribution of
funding would not lead to an unacceptable dilution of resources and would allow research
teams to both maintain current Ph D and postdoc employment level and have at their
disposal budgets for travel and equipment. Therefore, although the added value of
competitive funding mechanisms in helping foster the best research not only thro ugh the
selection process itself, but also via “soft” benefits to the researchers (facilitating
collaborations, etc.) is still widely accepted, whether this process is always cost -effective
(particularly when success rates are very low) is debatable and should be further studied.
Sustaining peer review
At least in the academic research community, there is an ethos of service that encourages
researchers to participate in peer review as a form of service to the broader community .
Some research funders have begun to bolster that ethos through soft or hard requirements
for applicants and/or awardees to ‘give back’ by serving as future reviewers as a condition
of the award. However, there are other challenges in recruiting reviewers, especially from
industry, wh ere the culture of uncompensated service to the community through

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

participation in peer review is not as ingrained. Even within the academic research
community, there a re challenges in recruiting peer reviewers in countries where peer
review is not well established as a tradition and where paid external consultancies are the
norm rather than volunteer service. On top of these challenges, there appears to be growing
fatigue among researchers at being asked to serve on nu merous competitive -funding
peer-review panels in addition to other peer review efforts such as journal manuscript
review, evaluation teams, and prize/award selections.
Some of this fatigue could be counteracted by measures to make peer review less
burdensome and more rewarding for reviewers. Examples from the literature and from the
2017 Amsterdam international peer review conference include: greater standardization of
review criteria and questions; clearly defined guidelines and expectations for reviewers on
how to review; better training in peer review (including ideas about including peer-review
training as part of PhD or postdoc program mes, and paying reviewers for participating in
peer review training); paying reviewers for their service through honoraria or other
compensation, in addition to the customary reimbursement for travel expenses; and ex-post
feedback for reviewers. Incentive payments to reviewers is a mechanism that has been
adopted by some funders, although it may not always be effective: The United Kingdom
EPSRC 2013 Review of Peer Review report found that payments did not help secure
reviews and recommended that the allocated budget for reviewers (GBP 1 million) should
instead be reinvested into the science. Another idea that has emerged recently is to create
online platforms for reviewers to share their experiences with peer review In terms of
rewards, it was also suggested, in Amsterdam, to increase the recognition of the reviewers
within their own institution, by making this task more formally linked to their official duties
(alongside research and teaching) and therefore better acknowledged by employers.
Anecdotal evidence on peer-review costs would benefit from being backed up by data and
indicators on the true operating costs of competitive funding, the financial and time burdens
of competitive funding on reviewers and their institutions, the burden of competitive
funding on applicants and on funding agencies, and similar indicators on other forms of
peer reviews. A potential response is for OECD countries to undertake concerted efforts to
better document the true operating costs of competitive funding schemes in general and
research funding schemes more broadly, including efforts to document opportunity costs
and non-monetary costs.
Preserving transformative, risky, and multidisciplinary research
Another challenge that emerged from this project is the lack of data to investigate the
concern that peer review, especially as success rates decline, tends toward conservatism. If
unchecked, there are worries that competitive syst ems disadvantage risky, potentially
transformative, and transdisciplinary research proposals in favour of applied, incremental,
or disciplinary proposals. Evidence is lacking and despite and despite the need for some
empirical basis for identifying the ris kiness, the transformativeness, or degree of
interdisciplinarity of research projects or proposals, robust indicators do not exist
(Koizumi, 2011). Without data to evaluate conservative vs. transformative research, it is
nearly impossible to document, for example, whether incremental projects were funded
instead of transformative projects in any given competition.
In this qualitative area, one strategy is to explicitly call on reviewers to consider an
application’s riskiness, potential for transformative insights, transdisciplinarity or novelty,
on the premise that reviewers can identify these qualities in an application. Doing so may
require a de -emphasis on other review criteria, such as the likelihood of an applicant
producing a “successful” outcome (as defined by publishable findings or a research article)

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 43

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

or an applicant’s prior track record. Alternatively, it may require setting aside a certain
proportion of a program me’s funding for proposals that are judged as truly risky or
transformative. Or, on th e assumption that transformative ideas tend to elicit widely
differing reactions from reviewers compared to incremental ideas, programmes may adopt
scoring rubrics that give added weight to a proposal with a greater variation in reviewers’
scores than a pr oposal with a similar average score but with less variation in individual
scores. But at this time, there is little guidance for research funding agencies on how to
counteract the perceived tendency to conservatism in competitive funding schemes.
The European Research Council has commissioned periodic reviews of its peer -reviewed
competitive funding schemes to answer the question of whether ERC funding has supported
projects of high scientific value and whether it is funding high -risk, high-reward research
(or potentially transformative research). While it is encouraging that recent reviews have
found the answer to be yes on both counts, the lack of a counterfactual or similar evaluation
of other alternatives means that it remains unclear whether ot her funding mechanisms
would have achieved equally excellent or transformative research (ERC, 2016).
Matching competitive funding to strategic objectives
A challenge for a subset of competitive funding schemes with strategic objectives is how
to adapt eva luation criteria, the reviewers, and the composition of panels to assess both
scientific excellence and the other objectives of a particular scheme. Such objectives vary
from raising economic competitiveness or technology transfer to improving health. This is
further complicated by the need to accommodate and review properly the proposals from
the many different disciplines that may respond to a strategic call. There little guidance on
how to ensure that a panel can competently assess all the criteria for a research funding call
designed around a strategic objective.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

4. Analysis
4.1. Improving efficiency of competitive funding schemes
There is widespread recognition that operation of competitive funding systems consumes
significant resources, on the part of the managing agency, research proponents, and external
reviewers. Further, as research communities have expanded and success rates have declined
in many countries (see next subsection), these costs have increased without a corresponding
increase in funded research, leading to concerns about the overall proportionality of costs
to research expenditure.
There appears to be widespread agreement that confidence in the integrity and reliability
of the proposal evaluation process is crucial to acceptance and support of the system by the
researcher community. And in general that confidence is closely tied to a strong belief that
peer review is the most – perhaps only – valid and reliable way to evaluate the merits of
research proposals. Presumably for this reason, most sy stems around the world have
maintained peer review as the core of their process.
Historically many competitive systems had funding that was adequate to support most of
the meritorious proposals that were received. Under such conditions, the task of the peer
review process is to determine which of the proposals are worthy of funding and which are
not. In systems that receive many more funding-worthy proposals than can be funded, peer
review must take on a fundamentally more difficult task: it must identify within the set of
funding-worthy proposals which are the best. Indeed, most competitive systems ultimately
use peer reviews in some way as a basis to rank propo sals from most promising to least,
and fund proposals from the top of the ranking down, either in strict order or perhaps with
some discretion but still based on the merit ranking.
There are of course, different ways of s oliciting, tabulating and utilis ing peer review
evaluations. Some systems use numerical scores that are combined in various ways; others
use solely qualitative evaluations, and some use a mix of scores and qualitative evaluations.
Most programmes solicit reviews from a relatively large grou p of expert reviewers, and
then combine these reviews in some way to yield an overall ranking. Such combination s
can be purely formulaic, or ranking can be undertaken by agency staff. Most systems,
however, use some kind of panel or committee that considers the information gathered from
prior peer review and then uses its own judgment and discussion to produce a ranking.
There is a general understanding that individual peer reviews are inherently idiosyncratic,
subject to both random variation and potentia lly systematic biases across reviewers. A
variety of techniques are used to try to mitigate the effects of such variation, including
requiring a minimum number of reviews (often three), using median rather than mean
scores, and excluding particularly high or low scores. There is a widespread belief by
participants in the systems that discussion of reviews by panel members mitigates the effect
of idiosyncratic reviews, although there is no systematic evidence supporting this belief.
The recognition that in m any systems only a small proportion of the very best proposals
can be funded has led to various mechanisms to reduce the resources invested in
distinguishing poor proposals from mediocre ones, neither of which have any chance of
being funded. Such mechanisms typically involve an initial screening, requiring less time
and resources than typical peer review, to identify a subset of proposals that will be
advanced to full review. For a given number of proposals received, such screening clearly

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 45

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

reduced costs, because full peer review is undertaken only for a portion of all proposals.
The risk, of course, is that some number of meritorious proposals will be rejected at the
first stage, since it is by definition a more cursory review.
In some systems this economi sing on agency and peer review resources is extended to
economizing on proposal effort, by requiring a less detailed pre-proposal or letter of intent
at the pre-screening stage, with full proposals prepared only by those applicants who are
selected to advance to the second stage. It is possible, of course, that conducting the initial
screening based on a less detailed proposal increases the chances that meritorious proposals
will fail to advance. Further, reducing the initial proposal burden in this way can be
expected to increase the number of initial proposals received. Even though these proposals
do not receive full review, their review does require some effort, so this effect offsets to
some degree the benefits of the two -stage process. Thus the choices i nvolved in
implementing and designing a two-stage process are complex; to our knowledge there has
been no systematic effort to quantify or even characterize the tradeoffs involved.
Another experiment some systems have tried as a way to deal with large proposal volumes
is to allow submission at any time, rather than having fixed deadlines. This smooths out the
receipt and processing of applications over the year. It is generally popular with
researchers, as it increases their flexibility. Ho w such timetables are synchronised with
review processes will depend on the nature of such processes.
All programmes struggle to some degree with securing high-quality referee reports. Some
systems have invested significant effort in constructing, testing, and refining spe cific
guidelines for assessors, and believe that such guidelines improve the quality of evaluation
reports, particularly with respect to minimizing the problem of some reviewers being
consistently too “soft” or too “hard”. But it will always be a challenge and these systems
depend fundamentally on volunteer referees undertaking reviews as part of their general
social obligation to the science system. (A few systems do offer small honoraria for referee
reports, but no one pays amounts that really cover the v alue of the needed time, and there
is no consensus that paying produces better reports.)
The sense of social obligation that underlies refereeing is naturally weaker when reports
are sought from international experts. This is a particular problem for small countries in
which qualified domestic experts are few in number and often encumbered by conflicts of
interest. An obvious solution, if practical difficulties could be overcome, would be for
countries to form associations in which refereeing obligations an d reports are pooled.
Experts could be made to understand that their refereeing for another country was explicitly
in exchange for experts in that country reviewing proposals from their own. It is not clear,
however, what context or me chanism could be used to organise this kind of co -operative
solution but the outsourcing peer -review service provided by the European Science
Foundation16 provides an interesting example.
4.2. Implications of success rates
As already noted, a number of systems around the world have experienced significant
declines in the fraction of proposals funded (“success rates” ). Despite wide discussion of
this phenomenon, we are not aware of any systematic tabulation of the trend in success
rates around the world. Several experts interviewed during our study have expressed alarm
about possibly dire consequences for the science system of a prolonged period of low
success rates . This raises wider science policy issues, but this report focuss on the
implications for the operation of the selection mechanisms themselves.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

As mentioned, lower success rates translate almost automatically into higher operational
costs per research grant awarded, because those costs are largely a function of the number
of proposals processed rather than the number of grant s made. In addition, many
participants in the programmes we reviewed expressed concern that success rates in the
range of 10% and below risk undermining the overall confidence of participants in the
system, because at this level so many worthy proposals have to be rejected that participants
come to view the funding decisions as essentially random.
An emerging issue is the interaction between low success rates and feedback to applicants.
Many participants in the competitive process (reviewers, programme managers, and
applicants) view feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of a proposal as important, even
if it was unsuccessful. But when success rates are very low, it is inevitable that numerous
unsuccessful applicants will receive feedback that make it very hard to see why they were
not funded, or which will highlight the fragility of the evaluations as, for example, when a
proposal is criticis ed for an element that in a previous (also unsuccessful year) was
complimented.
It is important to keep in mind that the success rate is a complex function of the overall
amount of funding available, the size of grants, and the decisions of researchers regarding
applications. On some level, potential applicants are balancing the burden to them of the
application process against the possibility of funding success. All else being equal, a low
success rate is itself a disincentive to application (though this disincentive may be offset as
the low success rate itself amplifies the prestige conferred by success). Given that success
rates are generally pretty well understood by applicants, the persistence of low success rates
signals a willingness or a need by applicants that is not likely to change on the basis of
incremental changes to how funding systems are managed. If f unding were increased
modestly, the expected increase in success rates might be partially or wholly offset by an
increase in the number of applications induced by the higher expectations around success.
Over a long period of time it is possible that the larger forces governing the science system
will adjust so that the balance between funding and perceived need will return to historical
levels, but for the foreseeable future low success rates are not likely to go away.
A second important aspect of the situation is that the perception of stakeholders that funding
decisions have a large component of randomness is, in fact, reality. Evaluation of proposal
quality is an inherently difficult subjective task. While the true slope of the underlying
quality curve as one moves from the best proposal to the 10th or 20th percentile will vary
somewhat across contexts, in most of these systems there is a group of good proposals that
are fundamentally indistinguishable. The difference between the proposal that is rated top
and the proposal that is rated at the 10th percentile or 20th percentile is as likely to be due
to imprecision in the ranking system as it is to be due to true superiority of the underlying
proposal. This is a difficult truth to face because we all want t o believe in the inherent
reliability of the selection system, but perhaps it is healthy to face up to this truth (Gush et
al., 2017) .
If low success rates are likely to persist in some systems, and if participants come to accept
that selections made among a small fraction of proposals are inherently somewhat arbitrary,
it may be time to rethink the significant resources that are devoted to carefully ranking
among the set of potentially fundable proposals. While care would have to be given to
issues of transparency and external confidence, it is possible that less intensive allocation
mechanisms could produce results that would be objectively as valid as the current
processes but at lower cost.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 47

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Another consequence of low success rates is the likelihood that some truly promising
research will fail to achieve funding. While this problem can never really be solved, some
systems have tried to mitigate its worst consequences with changes in funding strategies.
Panels may be given increased flexibility to modify p roposed budgets so as to
accommodate funding for more proposals from a fixed budget. A portion of available funds
may be set aside for 'bridge funding' that is insufficient to really advance a research project
but can be used to keep a given research line open until greater funding can be identified.
One interesting approach that is aimed at both the problem of low success rates and
perceived inability to generate truly transformative ideas is a separate application track
explicitly limited to relatively small amounts of short-term funding, used to initiate a larger
number of “smart ideas” with the expectation that many will fail. This is for example t he
idea behind the New Zealand “smart ideas” grant programme.17
4.3. Encouraging transformative, risky, and multidisciplinary research
This project was launched with an intention to develop a “typology” of competitive funding
schemes, with the explicit goal of trying to identify best or at least good practices for
different types of scheme. It quickly became clear, ho wever, that the concept of such a
typology is problematic, because of the heterogeneity and complexity of relevant funding
programmes around the world. To fit the observed programmes into a detailed typology
would require either specification of so many types as to be unhelpful, or else grouping
within given “ types” of schemes that differ in important ways. So a more generic and
progressive organisation was proposed (Figure 5, chapter 3.1)
Some general observations about different types of schemes are nonetheless possible. In
particular, many systems around the world now seek to accomplish with their research
funding particular policy goals in addition to research success per se. Indeed, the trend
seems to be towards more programmes stating such multipl e goals, and these goals being
given more serious attention within programmes that have nominally stated such multiple
goals for some time.
These broader goals fall into two broad categories. One category is the fostering of certain
attributes or conditions within the research system itself, including:
 advancing the careers of early-stage researchers
 more generally building long-term research capacity
 fostering international collaboration
 fostering interdisciplinary research
 fostering “breakthrough” or “transformative” research.
Development of mechanisms for interdisciplinary and breakthrough/transformative
research seem to be particular challenges. In particular, the challenge seems to be how to
create and then maintain processes that recognis e interdisc iplinarity or transformative
research in the face of strong disciplinary and conservative tendencies in the existing
system. Funders have experimented with special panels constructed for their expertise in
interdisciplinary research, and also with review b y multiple panels from different
disciplines, who are required to coordinate their evaluations.
With respect to encouraging transformative research, the challenge is the difficulty of
identifying ex ante which proposed research will ultimately have transfo rmative impacts.
In addition to specifically identifying such potential as a criterion that reviewers should

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

look for, systems have experimented with various methods designed to protect such
proposals from the possibly adverse effects of “highly transformative” being seen by some
reviewers as risky or unlikely to succeed. This can include combining multiple referee
scores in ways that are perceived to assist risky proposals (e.g. discarding each proposal's
lowest scores). Some syste ms allow each panel membe r one “gold” vote, which allows
them to protect a proposal they think is highly promising regardless of negative views of
other panel members. A few agencies are experimenting with a “go/no -go” system that
allows full funding for a risky project only after an initial trial period (typically one year).
The challenge of fostering transformative work is believed by some to be connected with
the so -called “Matthew effect ”, namely that the strongest predictor of success in the
proposal process is previous grant success. It is believed by some that this self-reinforcing
tendency causes researchers to play it safe in terms of research ideas, and makes it difficult
for new innovative ideas to break into the system. Some funders operating from this
perspective have considered undertaking project reviews without use of CVs or other
identifying information, or at least separating evaluation of the promise of the proposed
research from any evaluation of the capability of the proposers. (Such approaches are also
sometimes advocated as a response to other perceived biases in peer review, such as
gender.) There is no real evidence, however, that outsiders or less-experienced researchers
are particularly likely to generate the most transformative ideas; the Matthew effect is likely
due, at least in part to the reality that some researchers are innately creative and therefore
repeatedly come up with brilliant new ideas (Bol et al., 2018). To whatever extent this is
true, efforts to reduce the likelihood of funding those who were previously most successful
may also potentially reduce the flow of transformative research.
4.4. Matching competitive funding to strategic objectives
The other category of objectives relate to the broader impacts of research, including:
 fostering commercial innovation
 fostering international competitiveness
 building the evidence base for public policy formulation
 improving the environment
 improving the well-being of citizens, particularly the disadvantaged
 supporting other specific policy objectives of countries.
From first principles, it is not obvious that competitive funding mechanisms are the ideal
way to pursue these objectives, in general or with respect to any specific objective. For
example, early-stage researchers are, by definition, inexperienced at research and difficult
to assess in terms of likely success so a competitive grant process is inherently ill-suited to
their support. More generally, the peer -review based evaluation that is at the heart of
virtually all competitive research grant select ion mechanisms may not be well -suited to
evaluating likely success with respect to complex objectives.
Despite these difficulties, most programmes that have taken on these additional objectives
use processes adapted from the traditional evaluation model. Some use relatively narrowly
crafted CFPs (call for proposals), for which proposals must directly address specific policy
goals in order to qualify. Many programmes retain a more bottom -up approach, allowing
proposers wide latitude to formulate proposal ideas, but then evaluate the potential benefit
or impact of the proposals with respect to policy goals in parallel with their evaluation for

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 49

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

scientific merit. In some cases, a formulaic combination of scientific merit and broader
benefits is used, e.g. with a 50% weight placed on both scientific merit and other benefits.
Several systems have implemented specific procedures for bringing evaluation of likely
social and economic impacts into the decision process. Project proponents are asked to
describe not just the research outcomes they are pursuing, but specifically how these
outcomes, if achieved, would contribute to specific social or economic objectives, and the
implementation pathways that would be used to maximize the likelihood that the impacts
are realized. Proposals with such additional information are then evaluated using referees
specifically chosen for their expertise on impact mechanisms (both scientists with
significant implementation experience, and non-scientists from the commercial and public
policy sectors). These referees can be used remotely through writ ten reports, or convened
as an “impact panel”. Referees can be given specific guidelines for impact evaluation,
defining the nature of the impacts that are valued, and instructed to evaluate the robustness
of the implementation plans or mechanisms laid out in the proposals.
It appears that the political and policy environment will continue to increase the importance
of these broader goals for research investment in OECD countries. The United Nati ons’
Sustainable Development Goals as well as various social challenges such as global
environmental problems, security concerns, energy issues and economic prosperity are a
good examples of where scientific research is expected to contribute to finding so lutions.
For this reason, it would be very valuable to understand better how public research support,
including competitive grant systems, can best contribute to these objectives. As there are a
multiplicity of approaches being tried or used across the OECD member countries, ongoing
study of the performance of these different approaches could shed light on such questions
as:
 How suitable are competitive grant systems for fostering specific policy
objectives?
 What kind of people are most capable of judging t he likely benefit of research
proposals with respect to particular policy objectives?
 Can these likely benefits be effectively evaluated within the same structures used
to evaluate scientific merit, or are different structures needed?
 Does “ tuning” research grant systems to maximize their success in achieving
broader policy objectives generate tradeoffs in terms of the scientific success of
funded projects, and if so how can such tradeoffs be managed?
 How can research funding agencies best achieve buy -in fr om the researcher
community to the broadening of the evaluation process to include these objectives?
 How can the private and public sectors benefit from lessons learned in each sector
to maximize research impacts?
4.5. Improving monitoring and evaluation
Most funders engage in monitoring and evaluation to some extent. Frequently such
monitoring is focused on specific aspect of the operations of different schemes . For
example, there have been numerous studies of the gender balance of both applicants and
funded proposals. Many programmes find that female scientists are under -represented in
the applicant population, but most find that the success rates do not depend on gender after
controlling for other characteristics such as publication record. However, self-censorship

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

of female or minority scientists (relative reluctance to submit proposals), which might
operate at the system level, has not been investigated adequately.
There are two levels at which to consider the issue of more comprehensive and systematic
monitoring and evaluation of funding programmes. At one level, we can ask: to what extent
is the funding mechanism, over time, achieving the policy objectives at which it is aimed?
This is an important question, and one that science agencies around the world are
increasingly being asked. It is also a very difficult question, in part because of the increasing
range of objectives that funding programmes are taking on. While more and more
programmes are tabulating bibliometric indicators of research success of their grantees, the
extent of impact on objectives such as commercial innovation, societal benefit, quality of
policy advice or well -being of disadvantaged populations will depend on a long and
complex causal change, with many compounding factors. How to und ertake such
evaluation meaningfully is a challenge that funders are just beginning to think about.
There are major challenges to this level of evaluation, including:
 ambiguity surrounding what social and economic impacts are the objectives of
funding
 long and uncertain time lags between research investment and impact
 complex chains of causality in which research investment interacts with other
social and economic variables (impact pathways)
 difficulty in identifying the counter -factual world against which t o compare
observed outcomes to determine the impact of the research investment.
These problems can never be entirely solved but some level of inference is still possible.
Some programmes are explicitly identifying the impacts that they hope to achieve and
therefore will monitor. Intermediate outcomes such as investment by the private sector, and
proxies for impacts such as citation of research reports in policy documents can be used to
indicate possible impact along the pathway to ultimate impact. Qualitati ve assessment
shortly after research completion can provide expert views as to whether significant
benefits are li kely to be realis ed eventually. Improved tracking of unfunded as well as
funded researchers, and clever exploitation of policy changes to iden tify natural
experiments can help to establish counterfactual comparisons.
Much of this analysis can be developed and implemented by outside researchers, if funding
agencies maintain and make available basic information on their funding decisions,
including who applied and who was funded and the subject of the research. If these
foundational data are collected and maintained, then creative researchers can use publicly
available data, webscraping, qualitative assessments and other tools to connect indicators
of impact to the underlying funded and unfunded activities in an emergent “Science of
Science” field (Fortunato et al., 2018).
Another level at which to think about monitoring and evaluation is inherently somewhat
simpler. This kind of evaluation is focus ed on the operational level, trying to understand
how changes in the mechanics of the selection process affect the selection outcomes. It is
easier because it does not necessarily require measuring ultimate impacts. If, for example,
one could determine tha t using two reviewers per proposal produces grant decisions that
are not significantly different than those that are produced when three reviewers are used,
then resources can be saved. We will still not know whether the projects we are funding
are achievi ng our long -term objectives, but if we are funding the same projects while
consuming fewer resources we are operating more efficiently.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 51

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Evaluation along this second dimension inherently involves comparing different ways of
doing things. For any one funding system, making comparisons of this kind is inherently
difficult. It is both politically and operationally challenging to set up comparable but
distinct processes and then compare the results. Occasionally, changes in practice over time
may offer poss ible comparisons, but the occu rrence of such changes is likely to be too
infrequent to be truly useful. An additional challenge is that drawing conclusions about the
consequences of different approaches requires sample sizes large enough to undertake
reasonable statistical inference. Many systems do not make enough funding decisions each
year for comparisons across different possible approaches to yield statistically meaningful
answers, even if possible comparisons across different approaches are presented.
Pooling data across multiple different funding systems offers a potential solution to the
problems of both lack of comparative approaches and small sample sizes. In principle,
combining data on the funding decisions of the dozens of distinct funding systems in the
OECD member countries would allow some useful comparisons to be made, and some
statistically valid conclusions to be drawn. There would be considerable challenges at both
the conceptual and operational level in lining up different systems for comparis on, and
standardizing data on system operations so that they would be consistent. A fully consistent
globally comparable database is not likely to be feasible. But a significant effort to begin
pulling together such data, and working through the steps nece ssary to make them
comparable, would itself increase mutual understanding of how these systems work in
different contexts. Even partial data compilation would allow significantly greater
understanding than now exists about the consequences of mechanism choices.
It is notable that as this report was coming to completion, the Wellcome Trust in the
United Kingdom announced a new initiati ve for “research on research” . Improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of research funding allocation mechanisms is a spec ific area
of focus for this initiative and efforts are being made to bring funding agencies together to
discuss what data they have and can share with academic researchers. It will be interesting
to see the outcomes of this exciting initiative, which hopef ully will inspire other research
funders to develop similar schemes.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

5. Conclusions and recommendations
The project found a great deal of interest among nations in utilising competitive funding to
build research capacity, to select research projects with the greatest potential to achieve
scientific excellence and other societal objectives, and to involve the research community
in the process of selecting funded research projects. It is hoped that the findings presented
in this report will aid nations and OECD bodies in continuing to better understand and
refine competitive funding schemes to maximis e scientific excellence and other impacts.
From the report’s findings, the E xpert Group offers some recommendations for further
study and action to extend this project’s findings.
1. Interested countries are invited to initiate further analytical and comparative
studies on the true costs and benefits of competitive funding schemes . Although there
are some studies on specific aspects of competitive funding mechanisms, many of which
are discussed in this report, there is little research or analysis documenting the total costs
for the research system of competitive funding mechanisms . This includes not only the
monetary costs of operating competitive funding mechanisms (for which there are data) but
also the volunteered time of reviewers, the costs of researchers and institutions in applying
for and managing competitive awards , and opp ortunity costs for the entire research
community. At the same time, further study on the benefits of competitive funding
mechanisms and explicit comparisons between different funding mechanisms could also
contribute to the findings presented in the report. There are claims in the literature for the
benefits of competitive funding, as described in the report, but there remain opportunities
to better document some of them, especially the knowledge gains to researchers of
preparing competitive applications and participating in peer review and differential
benefits/costs for different schemes.
2. Research funders are encouraged to develop experiments in competitive funding,
especially in easing the administrative burden often linked to peer review and for
increasing efficiency. Low success rates put a strain on competitive funding by increasing
the workload of reviewers per successful proposal and increasing researchers’
administrative burdens; nations are encouraged to experiment with multi -stage reviews,
pre-proposals, reducing paperwork requirements for applications and awards, and
alternative competitive funding schemes. In addition to further experiments with some of
the mechanisms discussed in the report, there is a need for experimentation with as -yet
untried funding mechanisms, taking advantage of the emergent field of “Science of
Science” to improve data collection and evaluation and new measurement modes for
experiments.18 There is an opportunity to encourage experimentation with new techniques
and technologies such as the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies
with the aim of improving efficiency in existing funding schemes. Results should be
evaluated carefully and shared with other OECD members, to facilitate collective learning.
3. Governments and research funders are encouraged to experiment with approaches
to competitive funding that preserve competition while still encouraging potentially
transformative, breakthrough, and/or multidisciplinary approaches to guard against
potential conservatism of research . Here, experimentation is less robust than with the
other challenges, so OECD members as well as ph ilantropic institutions and
non-governmental organisation are enco uraged to share good practices on creating and
maintaining processes that recognise interdisciplinarity or transformative research in the
face of strong disciplinary and conservative tendencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 53

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

4. Governments are encouraged to further study how public res earch support,
including competitive grant systems, can best contribute to broader objectives than
scientific excellence. As there are a multiplicity of funding and evaluation approaches
being tried or used across the OECD member countries for numerous societal objectives,
ongoing study of the performance of these different approaches could shed useful light on
how OECD members can better identify competitive proposals for potential impact and
better evaluate the impacts funded proposals create. As with the other recommendations,
OECD members are further encouraged to share their evaluations through the GSF and
CSTP.
In addition, governments are encouraged to take steps to improve the collection,
analysis, reporting, and accessibility of data about competitive funding to allow more
robust comparisons in the future. The absence of an agreed conceptual framework and
lack of reliable, standardised, data inhibits robust analysis and cross -national learning.
Improving our information and data on success rates, evaluation metrics, and the other key
issues discussed in this report is a necessary step in improving funding systems. There is a
potential ongoing role for OECD in facilitating co-operation in this regard.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Endnotes
1. http://www.sheridan.com/on-topic/artificial-intelligence-peer-review.
2. http://www.bristol.ac.uk/news/2017/march/peer-review-process.html.
3. Modes of public funding of R&D: interim results from the second round of data collection
based on GBAORD.
4. https://www.jsps.go.jp/english/e-toplevel/data/08_followup/WPIseika.pdf.
5. http://www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/funding/.
6. https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/funding/applicationprocess/routes/network/ideas/whatisasandpit/.
7. NWO International peer review conference.
8. http://science.sciencemag.org/content/345/6194/248.full.
9. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/funding/peerreview/.
10. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/transparency/.
11. EPSRC https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/research/, AHRC http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/peerreview/,
NERC http://www.nerc.ac.uk/funding/application/peerreview/, ESRC
http://www.esrc.ac.uk/funding/guidance-for-peer-reviewers/peer-review-college/.
12. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/innovation/impacts/.
13. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/publications/reports/rcuk-and-uk-sbs-satisfaction-surveys/.
14. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/media/news/151123/.
15. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/documents/rcukprreport-pdf/.
16. http://www.esf.org/scientific-support/peer-review/?L=%27%22%28%29.
17 http://www.mbie.govt.nz/info-services/science-innovation/investment-funding/current-
funding/2018-endeavour-round.
18. S. Fortunato et al., Science 359, eaao0185 (2018). DOI: 10.1126/science.aao0185.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 55

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

References
Auranen, O. and M. Nieminen (2010), “University research funding and publication
performance--An international comparison”. Research Policy, 2010, vol. 39 issue 6,
pp. 822-834,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/46489045_University_Research_Funding_
and_Publication_Performance-An_International_Comparison.
Barnett, A. G. (2016), “Funding by Lottery: Political Problems and Research
Opportunities”, mBio Aug 2016, 7 (4), https://mbio.asm.org/content/7/4/e01369-
16.full-text.pdf.
Bol, T. et al. (2018), “The Matthew effect in science funding”, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences , April 2018,
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2018/04/18/1719557115.
Bollen, J. et al. (2017), “An efficient system to fund science: from proposal review to peer-
to-peer distributions ”, Scientometrics, Januar y 2017, Volume 110, Issue 1,
pp. 521-528, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11192-016-2110-3.
Bollen, J. et al. (2014), “Collective allocation of science funding as an alternative to peer
review”, EMBO reports (2014),
http://embor.embopress.org/content/early/2014/01/07/embr.201338068.
Bush, V. (1945), “Science the Endless Frontier”,
https://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/nsf50/vbush1945.htm.
Chubin, D. E. and E.J. Hackett (1990), “Peerless Science: Peer Review and U. S. Science
Policy”, State University of New York Press, 1990.
Dialogic and Empirica (2014), “The Effectiveness of National Research Funding Systems”,
https://www.dialogic.nl/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/2013.109-1422.pdf.
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council UK (EPSRC) (2013), Review of Peer
Review report, https://epsrc.ukri.org/newsevents/pubs/the-review-of-peer-review-
2013-final-report/.
European Commission (2015), European Research Area Facts and Figures 2014.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_progress_report2014/era_facts&figures_201
4.pdf.
European Commission (2012), Impact Assessment Accompanying the document
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, t he Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee a nd the Committee of Regions. A
Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence. Brussels.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era-communication/era-impact-
assessment_en.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Fang, F. C. and A. Casadevall (2016), “Research Funding: the Case for a Modified
Lottery”, mBio Apr 2016, 7 (2), https://mbio.asm.org/content/mbio/7/2/e00422-
16.full.pdf.
Fang, F. C. et al. (2016), “NIH peer review percentile scores are poorly predictive of grant
productivity”, eLife. 2016; 5: e13 323,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4769156/.
Fortunato, S. et al. (2018), “Science of Science ”, Science 02 Mar 2018:Vol. 359,
Issue 6379, http://science.sciencemag.org/content/359/6379/eaao0185.full.
Franzoni, C. et al. (2011), “Changing Incentives to Publish ”, Science 2011
Aug 5;333(6043), pp. 702-3,
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/333/6043/702.long.
Georghiou, L. (2013), “Effectiveness of National Research Systems”, Discussion paper for
the 2013 ERAC mutual learning seminar on research and innovation policies.
Brussels,
https://era.gv.at/object/document/366/attach/background_paper_session_1.pdf.
Ginther, D. K. et al. (2011), “Race, Ethnicity, and NIH Research Awards ”, Science
19 Aug 2011: Vol. 333, Issue 6045, pp. 1015-1019,
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/333/6045/1015.
Gordon, R. and B. J. Poulin (2009), “Cost of the NSERC Science Grant Peer Review
System Exceeds the Cost of Giving Every Qualified Researcher a Baseline Grant ”,
Accountability in Research , 16:1, pp. 13-40,
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/08989620802689821.
Gross, K. and C. T. Bergstrom (2018), “Contest models highlight inherent inefficiencies of
scientific funding compe titions”, Physics and Society , 14 June 2018,
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.03732.pdf.
Gush, J. et al. (2017), “The effect of public funding on research output: the New Zealand
Marsden Fund ”, New Zealand Economic Papers , May 2017, pp. 1-22,
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00779954.2017.1325921.
Hand, E. (2016), “No pressure: NSF test finds eliminating deadlines halves number of grant
proposals”, Science Apr. 15, 2016, http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/04/no-
pressure-nsf-test-finds-eliminating-deadlines-halves-number-grant-proposals.
Horrobin, D. F. (1990), “The philosophical basis of peer review and the suppression of
innovation”, Jama, 263(10), pp. 1438-1441,
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/380984.
Jacob, M. (2010), “Research funding instruments and modalities: Implication for
developing countries ”. Sweden. OECD Publishing, Paris.
https://www.oecd.org/sti/Draft_Report_public_funding_instrument_final.pdf.
Jonkers, K. and T. Zacharewicz (2016), “Research Performance Based Funding Systems:
a Compara tive Assessment ”, Publications Office of the European Union,
Luxembourg, https://rio.jrc.ec.europa.eu/en/file/9514/download?token=-8JG6aKx.
Jonkers, K. and T. Zacharewicz (2015), “Performance based funding: a comparative
assessment of their use and nature in EU Member States ”, a working paper , JRC
Working Papers JRC97684, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg,
https://ideas.repec.org/p/ipt/iptwpa/jrc97684.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 57

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Koizumi, K. (2011), “Science Policy: A Federal Budgeting View”, in Fealing, Lane,
Marburger, and Shipp, eds., The Science of Science Policy: A Handbook, Stanford
University Press, Stanford, 2011.
Kubler, J. (2013), “Strengthening the mechanisms of competitive research funding and peer
review in Africa ”. Cape To wn: the European Union’s ACP S&T Programme,
https://www.acu.ac.uk/publication/download?publication=534.
Lepori, B. et al. (2007), “Indicators for comparative analysis of public proj ect funding:
concepts, implementation and evaluation”, Research Evaluation, Volume 16, Issue 4,
1 December 2007, pp. 243–255,
https://academic.oup.com/rev/article/16/4/243/1599037.
Li, D. (2017), “Expertise versus Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH ”, American
Economic Journal : Applied Economics Vol. 9, No. 2 (2017), pp. 60-92,
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20150421.
Li, D. and L. Agha (2015), “Big Names or Big Ideas: Do Peer Review Panels Select the
Best Science Proposals ?”, Science Vol. 348, No. 6233 (2015) , pp. 434-438,
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/348/6233/434.
NWO (2017) , International peer -review conference 2017,
https://www.nwo.nl/en/policies/nwo+conferences+2017/international+conference.
OECD (2015), Frascati Manual 2015, Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on
Research and Experimental Development , OECD publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/24132764.
OECD (2014), Promoting Research Excellence: New Approaches to Funding , OECD
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264207462-en.
OECD (2011), Issue Brief: Public Sector Research Funding , OECD publishing, Paris,
http://www.oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform/48136600.pdf.
Research Councils UK (2006) , Report of the Research Councils UK efficiency and
effectiveness of peer review project, www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/peer/efficiencypr.htm.
Sandstrom, U. and P. Van den Besselaar (2018), “Funding, evaluation, and the performance
of national research systems ”, Journal of Informetrics , 2018, vol. 12, issue 1,
pp. 365-384,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1751157717302882?via%3Dihu
b.
Serrano-Velarde, K. (2018), “The Way We Ask for Money… The Emergence and
Institutionalization of Grant Writing Practices in Academia ”, Minerva, March 2018,
Volume 56, Issue 1, pp . 85–107,
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11024-018-9346-4.
Schmidt, E. K., et al. (2006), Funding Systems and Their Effects on Higher Education
Systems Country Study – Denmark. OECD Publishing, Paris ,
https://www.oecd.org/denmark/38307998.pdf.
Schneider S. et al. (2012), 2012 Faculty Workload Survey , Research Report, Federal
Demonstration Partnership,
https://sites.nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/pgasite/documents/webpage/pga_0876
67.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Smith, R. (2006), “Peer review: a flawed process at the heart of sc ience and
journals”, Journal of the royal society of medicine , 99(4), pp. 178-182,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1420798/.
Stephan, P. et al . (2017), “Reviewers are blinde d by bibliometrics”, Nature 544,
pp. 411-412, 27 April 2017 , https://www.nature.com/news/reviewers-are-blinkered-
by-bibliometrics-1.21877.
Stephan, P. (2012), “How Economics Shapes Science ”, The Production of Research:
People and Patterns of Collaboration , Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard
University Press.
Torka, M. (2018), “Projectification of Doctoral Training? How Research Fields Respond
to a New Funding Regime ”, Minerva 56 (1), pp. 59-83 (2018),
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11024-018-9342-8.
Vaesen, K. and J. Katzav (2017), “How much would each researcher receive if competitive
government research funding were distributed equally among researchers? ”, PLoS
ONE 12(9): e0183967, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0183967.
Van den Besselaar , P. (2010) , “Research funding as selection ”, in International Social
Science Council, World Social Science Report 2009/2010 , UNESCO, Paris,
http://www.vandenbesselaar.net/_pdf/2010%20wssr%20peter.pdf.
Wenneras, C., and A. Wold (2001), “Nepotism and sexism in peer-review, Women, science
and technology: A reader in feminist science studies ”, in M. Wyer, M. Barbercheck,
D. Giesman, H. Orun Ozturk and M. Wayne (Eds.), Women, science and technology:
A reader in feminist science studies, New York, Routledge, pp. 46–52.
Young, M. (2015) , “Competitive funding, citation regimes, and the diminishment of
breakthrough research ”, Higher Education , Volume 69, Issue 3, pp . 421-434,
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10734-014-9783-4.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 59

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 1. Expert Group Members

Country Name Organisation
Argentina María Guillermina D’Onofrio National Directorate of Programmes and Projects
Minister of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation
Australia Kylie Emery Australian Research Council
Belgium Olivier Boehme Research Foundation Flanders (FWO)
China SHI Xiaoyong National Center for Science and Technology Evaluation of China
Czech Republic
Jana Bystřická Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports
Petr Kavalir University of West Bohemia
Denmark Franziska Wolf Division of Research Policy, Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation
Joakim Quistorff-Refn Division of Research Policy, Danish Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation
Estonia Andres Koppel Estonian Research Council
European
Union Neville Reeve Horizon 2020 policy Unit, DG Research
Finland Tuomas Katajarinne Academy of Finland
France
Pascal Maigné Ministry for Research and Higher Education
Anne Guichard Ministry for Research and Higher Education
Hungary Endre Spaller National Research, Development And Innovation Office
Japan (co-lead)
Tateo Arimoto (co-chair)
National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies (GRIPS)
Yasushi Sato Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)
Keiko Matsuo Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Korea
Jihye Hyeon
Center for International Affairs
NRF (National Research Foundation)
Sun Kun Oh
Konkuk University
Netherlands Mirjam Rigterink NWO
New Zealand
(co-lead)
Adam Jaffe (co-chair) Motu Economic and Public Policy institute
Richard Walley People, Science and Enterprise Policy
Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment
Norway Liv Langfeldt NIFU Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and Education
Espen Solberg NIFU Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and Education
Poland Jan Kozłowski Department of Innovation and Development
Ministry of Science and Higher Education
Portugal
Tiago Santos Pereira Centre for Social Studies , University of Coimbra and FCT
Daniel Ferreira Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT)
South Africa Romilla Maharaj National Research Foundation
Spain Luis Sanz Menendez CSIC Institute of Public Goods and Policies, Ministry of Economy, Industry and
Competitiveness
Sweden Mats Johnsson Ministry of Education and Research
Switzerland Jean-Luc Barras Swiss National Science Foundation
United
Kingdom Maisie England Research Councils UK
US (co-lead) Kei Koizumi Office of Science and Technology Policy, then AAAS
OECD
Frédéric Sgard GSF Secretariat
Taro Matsubara GSF Secretariat
Carthage Smith GSF Secretariat

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 61

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 2. Survey questionnaire
Request for Information
The focus of the inquiry is publicly (direct) funding programmes for the support of
scientific research that operate through some kind of request -for-proposal mechanism,
under which proposals are evaluated relative to stated criteria, and the proposals that best
meet the criteria receive funding. The goal o f the activity is to characteris e how these
programmes are structured and operated in d ifferent countries, to synthesis e existing
evidence on the relative performance of different structures in the context of particular
policy objectives, and to gather and synthesise available qualitative and quantitative
evidence on impacts for different competitive systems.
There is a large diversity of research funding m echanisms, which broadly fall under the
following categories:
1. institutional block funding to research performing entities (includes block grants for
teaching and research as this is often not split out);
2. competitive funding for centres of excellence (Institutional competitive funding)
3. competitive funding for individuals or groups (competitive project-based funding)
4. fellowships/scholarships
5. other (such as funding for collaborations/consortia.
The purpose of this questionnaire is to collect basic infor mation on the existence and
structure of relevant funding schemes that fall under categories 2 and 3 in the participating
countries, as well as on the existence of any evaluation studies that may have been carried
out with respect to these programmes. Th is information will be synthesis ed to provide a
preliminary baseline of information that we will use to structure more in-depth information
collection.
There are certainly multiple funding schemes under your purview that fit this description.
Please provide information on what you consider as representative/informative
mechanisms (one copy of the questionnaire for eac h of these, except for question 1 on
generic research funding information).
If there are other schemes that are no longer running, but which ope rated sufficiently
recently that relevant information can be provided, please complete one copy of the
questionnaire for each of these as well.
The questionnaire is designed to gather as much information as possible, recognizing that
countries and systems differ widely. Please respond as feasible. Feel free to skip questions
that are not appropriate for your system.
1. Generic research funding Information
This is to provide some general background information on the national research funding
context.
What is a (approximate) percentage of funding coming from competitive/granting system
vs institutional/block funding in your country (if some project funding is not distributed

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

through competitive mechanisms, please distinguish) ; what is the evolution over the last
10 years.
What are the main sources of research funding (for both institutional and competitive
funding, i.e. research councils or agencies, ministries, EU funds, foundations, etc.) and their
respective share for your country; what is the evolution over the last 10 years.
2. Basic Mechanism Information
Please provide information on a typical/recent research funding scheme from your
country/organisation
Name of scheme:
 Approximate annual total of research funding granted (in local currency):
 Approximate annual number of proposals received:
 Approximate annual number of grants funded / % of success
 Approximate annual cost for operating and administering the programme:
 Period of time that this scheme has operated in approximately its current form:
3. Purpose of the Programme
Please check all that apply to the scheme:
 funds individual researchers or laboratories/teams
 Can fund non-national researchers/labs
 funds “blue sky” or investigator-driven research
 funds research devoted to particular mission(s) such as:
o economic development
o environment
o health
o energy
o agriculture/forestry/fisheries
o other:
 has particular mechanism for funding young researchers
 funds research projects proposed by universities and independent research institutes
 funds research projects proposed by firms
 other key features not covered above:
4. Nature of funding awards made
Duration of grant funding commitments made:
Is there an explicit process for renewal or reapplication that is different from new
applications:
Range of funding awards (per grant) made:

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 63

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Is co -funding (i.e. funding from different sources requirement) a consideration in the
programme; and if so is there a mandatory co-funding formula?
5. Request for Proposal (RFP) process
Frequency with which proposals are solicited:
Time duration between publication of RFP and deadline for submission:
If the programme targets or has different review approaches for different types of
submitters (such as young/new investigators; individuals versus teams; multidisciplinary
teams; or multi-institutional teams), please describe:
Stated criteria against which proposals are evaluated:
If there are multiple criteria with explicit numerical weights given to different criteria,
describe the weighting scheme:
If funding is open to non -national researchers/labs, are there specific conditions? What is
the language of the request for proposal?
6. Proposal evaluation Process
If there is a website that describes the evaluation process, please provide the URL:
Please indicate which of the following evaluation mechanisms are used:
 Initial screening so that not all proposals receive full evaluation?
o if used, what fraction of proposals are thereby eliminated
 External referees or reviewers?
o if used, approximately how many referee requests are made for each proposal
(including rejected requests/referees which are not available/willing)
o If used, how are reviewers recruited (from a general pool of previous
reviewers/reviewers suggested by the research community or stakeholders, from a
specific pool of experts which has agreed in advance to review proposals for the
specific call?)
o approximately how many reports are received for each proposal
o is there a minimum number of reviews required
o are referee reports shared with the proposal submitters?
o are proposal submitters given an opportunity to respond to referee reports?
 Review panels or committees?
o if used, what is the nature of their decisions (e.g. specific funding decisions;
numerical ranking of proposals; qualitative recommendations)?
7. Studies or evaluations of the grant process
Have any formal or informal studies or evaluations been undertaken to evaluate how well
the grant review process works?
If so, please provide a copy of any reports from such studies.
If such reports are not available, please summarize the main findings of such studies.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

8. Studies or evaluation of the impact of the funding scheme
Have any formal or informal studies or evaluations been undertaken to evaluate the impact
of the funding scheme/initiative?
 What is the impact of the funding scheme on researc h excellence (publication
rate/impact factor, international collaborations?
 What is the impact of the funding scheme on scientists careers (average age of
recipients and evolution, percentage of permanent vs fixed -term contract and
evolution, etc.)?
 What is the impact of the funding scheme on innovation /technology transfer
(patent, spin-off, staff mobility with industry, etc.)?
 Other types of impact
9. Other relevant information
If there is any other information you would like to provide at this stage, please do so here

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 65

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Funding schemes analysed

Country Funding scheme
Argentina Scientific and Technological Research Projects (Proyectos de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica -PICT-) of the Fund
for Scientific and Technological Research (FONCYT)
Argentina Equipment Modernization Projects (Proyectos de Modernización de Equipamiento -PME-) of the Fund for Scientific and
Technological Research (FONCYT)
Australia Australian Research Council (ARC) Centres of Excellence
Australia Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Programme
Belgium (Flanders) Odysseus
Canada Canada Foundation for Innovation, Innovation Fund
China General Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
Czech Republic Inter-Excellence
Denmark UNIK – Universiteternes InvesteringsKapital
Denmark Centers of Excellence
Denmark Innovation Fund Denmark: Grand Solutions
Denmark DFF–Research Project 2
Estonia Personal Research Funding for Exploratory and Start-Up Research Grants
Estonia The researcher mobility programme Mobilitas (funding Postdocs and Top Researchers), co-funded from the European
Social Fund
Estonia Post-doctoral research programme
Estonia Centres of Excellence in Research
Finland Academy of Finland; Centre of Excellence programme
Finland Academy of Finland; Academy projects (pure bottom up funding)
Finland Academy of Finland; Strategic Research programmes
France Excellence Initiative.
France Agence Nationale de la Recherche, Annual generic call
France LabEx
France EQUIPEX
Japan Creation of Innovation Centers for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research Areas Program
Japan World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI )
Japan Scientific Research on Innovative Areas, Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) grants
Japan CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)
Japan Category Scientific Research (C), Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) grants
Korea Basic Science Research Lab
Korea Mid-Career Researchers Support Program
Korea Young Researchers Support Program
Korea Biomedical Technology Development Project
Korea Global Frontier Program
Korea Nano·Material Technology Development Program
Netherlands Open Technology Programme STW
Netherlands Vernieuwingsimpuls (Innovational Research Incentives Scheme, Veni, Vidi, Vici))
Netherlands Off Road- ZonMw
Netherlands Free Competition Humanities
New Zealand MBIE Contestable Fund
New Zealand Health Research Council funding
New Zealand Marsden fund
Norway Centres for Research-based Innovation (SFI)
Poland TEAM
Poland WELCOME
Poland OPUS

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
66 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Portugal Scientific Research and Technological Development (SR&TD) Project Grants
Portugal Investigador, FCT
Portugal Evaluation and Funding of R&D Unit
Portugal Support to Science & Technology Research (SAICT)
Spain Severo Ochoa Centres of Excellence Programme (SO) and Maria de Maeztu Units of Excellence Programme (MM)
Spain Proyectos de I+D. Programa Estatal de Fomento de Investigación Científica y Técnica de Excelencia
Spain Proyectos de I+D+I. Programa Estatal de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación Orientada a los Retos de la Sociedad
Spain Acción Estratégica En Salud
Spain Retos-Colaboración
Spain Ramón y Cajal
Spain Miguel Servet Programme
Sweden Strategic research areas, institutional funding
Sweden Strategic research areas, grants for funding agencies
Sweden Swedish research council competitive programmes
Sweden Vinnova, innovation funding
Sweden Formas, environment and agricultural funding
Sweden Forte, social science and working life
Sweden Energy agency, R&D on renewable energy
Sweden Space Board, funding of space research and industrial production of space equipment
Sweden Strategic Research Foundation
Sweden Mistra - environmental research foundation
Sweden KKS- The knowledge fundation
Sweden STINT - International collaboration in higher education and research
Sweden Riksbankens Jubileumsfond - The Swedish Foundation for Humanities and Social science
Switzerland SNSF Project Funding
Switzerland SNSF National Centres of Competence in Research (NCCRs)
United States National Science Foundation (NSF) Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP)
United States USDA, The Agriculture and Food Research Initiative competitive program
United States The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Research Project Grant Program (R01)

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 67

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Appendix 3: Survey interviews
The objective of this survey is to gather information in order to identify ma jor issues and
existing successful practices related to the processes of competitive research funding.
Interviews have to be flexible to appreciate the variations between different countries and
organisations.
Questions are designed for the two categories of stakeholders: administrators/managers of
funding bodies, and panel chairs/experts involved in proposal evaluation.
Questions will have to be adapted/précised for each interviewee.
1. Brief presentation of the funding body (if not already provided by the questionnaire):
 objectives/structure/funding provided
 types of funding schemes
2. Brief presentation of the general funding mechanism with added information on specific mechanisms
(if available and not already provided by the questionnaire)
 objectives/funding provided
 general infos on the call for proposals
 general infos on reviewing process
 general infos on impact (scientific output, socio -economic impa ct, structuring
impact…)
3. Generic issues
a. Context/importance of the mechanism in the research system
 How unique/important is the funding mechanism in the national context?
 How old is the mechanism?
 What has been the evolution of the funding provided through the scheme over the
years? (total amount of funding available)
b. Matching priorities to scientific excellence
 How is the funding scheme integrated into the broader national research priorities?
 If the scheme has objectives beside scientific excellence, what is the approximate
weight of the various objectives vs scientific excellence?
c. Target audience / Success rates
 What is the expected target audience for the call(s) – is it known (approx. number,
proportion of the target scientific community)?
 Is the success rate as expected/appropriate for the call(s)?
 Was anything done to affect the success rate (i.e. broaden/restrict the call(s) for a
bigger/smaller audience, adapt the objectives)?

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
68 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

Peer review process
 How are reviewers recruited? Do you encounter diffic ulties to recruit appropriate
experts? What solutions have you implemented?
 What are the most important criteria used to assess the proposal? Are there
explicit/written criteria and/or marks set in the “call” to assess the proposals? Do
you use specific indicators/metrics (bibliometrics etc.) in the reviewing process? Is
it satisfactory? What solutions have you implemented to improve the process (to
select the “best” proposals according to priority criteria)?
 How many steps are included in the reviewing pr ocess? Is the system appropriate
to select the best proposals or too conservative? Was there any changes
implemented to improve the selection?
d. Impact monitoring and measures of success (tacit and explicit)
 Is the impact of research funded through this sch eme evaluated? Based on what
criteria?” (strategic objectives of the scheme, more general objectives in the
scientific system…)
 “How do you evaluate the success of an award?”
e. Acceptability to the scientific community / Cost to the research community/Efficiency
 What is the feedback of the funding mechanisms from the user side? Is there a
mechanism to receive user feedback on the decision? On the process?
 How complex/time consuming is the funding mechanism for the users? Have
simplifications been implemented?
 How long is the process from calls to decision and to receiving fund? Is it
satisfactory? How can need for quality in the process and the need for rapid
response be improved?
f. Open questions
 What does not work/what did not match expectations?
 What are the perceived problems in the system?
 What is impeding the effectiveness of the funding mechanism?
 What are the barriers in achieving targeted objectives
 What has been tried, what worked?
4. Issues related to specific types of funding programmes
a. Targeted support for young (or senior) researchers
 What is the objective of the funding scheme
 How is the review process adapted to the targeted audience (specific criteria,
metrics…)?
 What are the challenges of such a scheme? How were they addressed?
 How successful is the funding scheme? How is it evaluated?

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS │ 69

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

b. Breakthrough science/innovative funding schemes
 What is the objective of the funding scheme
 How is the review process adapted to the objective (specific criteria, specific
reviewers, metrics…)?
 What are the challenges of such a scheme? How were they addressed?
 How successful is the funding scheme? How is it evaluated?
c. Societal challenges and inter-disciplinarity
 What is the objective of the funding scheme
 How is the review process adapted to the objective ( specific criteria, specific
reviewers, metrics…)?
 What are the challenges of such a scheme? How were they addressed?
 How successful is the funding scheme? How is it evaluated?
List of experts interviewed
Funders:
 Deborah Jackson (United States); NSF Engineering Research Centers scheme
 Bob Finkelstein and David Owens (United States); NIH Bridge funding program
(R56 award)
 Ravi Basavappa (United States); NIH Pioneer Award Program
 Yves Lecointe (France); ANR LabEx scheme
 Kylie Emery and Stephen Buckman (Australia) ; ARC national competitive grants,
discovery grants, linkage grants, career grants
 Prue Williams (New Zealand); Mini stry of Business, Innovation & E mployment
Smart Ideas and Research programmes grants
 Juliet Gerrard (New Zealand); Marsden Fund scheme
 Kathryn McPherson (New Zealand); Health Research Council
 Mirjam Rigterink (Netherlands); NWO Veni Vidi Vici scheme
 Björn Halleröd (Sweden); Research Infrastructure Council scheme
 Gunnar Öquist (Sweden); Swedish Research Council scheme
 Göran Marklund (Sweden); Vinnova innovation scheme
 Ellen-Kristina Kock Rasmussen (Denmark); Danish National Research Foundation
Centers of excellence and Niels Bohr Professorships schemes
 Søren Haselmann (Denmark); Innovation Fund Denmark Grand Solution scheme
 Mads de Wolff (Denmark); Danish Council for Independent Research DFF
International Postdoctoral Grant, Starting Grand and Project 1&2 schemes

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
70 │ EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF COMPETITIVE RESEARCH FUNDING SYSTEMS

OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS

 Yuko Shimabayashi (Japan); JST agency Strategic Innovation Promotion (SIP)
programme
 Masashi Hara (Japan); JST Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST) programme
 Kazuko Shimizu, Sachi Yabuno and Mika Ikeda (Japan); JSPS World Premier
International Research Center Initiative (WPI)
 Marta Lazarowicz (Poland); Foundation for Polish Science programmes
 Marcin Liana (Poland); National Science Centre programmes
 Carlos Cassanello & Jorge Blackhall (Argentina); Fund for Scientific and
Technological Research (FONCYT)
 Jean-Pierre Bourguignon ( European Union ); European Research Council
programmes
 Tiina Petänen (F inland); Strategic Research Funding programme from the
Academy of Finland
 Pamela Moss (Canada); Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
(NSERC) Strategic Partnerships Grants
 Torsten Fischer, (Germany), DFG Individual grant programme
Panel members/chairs:
 Maria Otegui (Argentina), FONCYT
 Héctor Targovnik (Argentina), FONCYT
