
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
ADDRESSING
SOCIETAL
CHALLENGES USING
TRANSDISCIPLINARY
RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
June 2020 No. 88

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING
TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH

STI POLICY PAPER

This paper was approved and declassified by the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy
(CSTP) on 5 June 2020 for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E. under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2020)4/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.

©OECD (2020)

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs,
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright
owner is giv en. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to
rights@oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 3
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Abstract
This report looks at how transdisciplinary research , which combines knowledge from
different scientific disciplines with that of public and private sector stakeholders and
citizens, can be used to address complex societal challenges. This includes developing
effective responses in acute crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as longer-term
solutions for sustainability development. In a series of 28 case studies, each of which is
briefly summarised in the report, it identifies the key obstacles to effectively implementing
transdisciplinary research. Many of these are embedded in the way that research systems
are structured and managed and they are amenable to policy intervention. Examples of how
various actors, including funding agencies and u niversities are adapting to bette r
accommodate the requirements of transdisciplinary research are included in the report and
related policy actions are ascribed for these actors.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Foreword
Transdisciplinary research (TDR), which involves the integration of knowledge from
different science disciplines and (non- academic) stakeholder communities, is required to
help address complex societal challenges. However, and despite increasing interest at the
policy level, there are significant barriers to conducting rigorous TDR. This report is the
output of a project that was commissioned by the OECD Global Science Forum (GSF) and
focused on a systematic analysis of methods and practices for TDR at the project level
across different communities and countries. It aims to promote mutual learning betwe en
countries by:
• reviewing the theoretical foundations and methods of TDR and differentiating it
from other related modes of research and broader policy concepts
• developing a standardi sed analytical framework to explore the key variables and
determinants of successful trans-disciplinary research
• using the Framework to analyse case studies of specific initiatives
• analysing relevant information on national policy initiat ives to identify good
practices
• on the basis of these findings, make a final report and po licy recommendations to
promote TDR to address complex societal challenges.
An important characteristic of this work is that it takes a holistic approach to analysing the
barriers to TDR that takes account of the diversity of drivers, restraints, interests and
expectations for different actors.
As this report is being finalised, the Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been
spreading across the World and the full extent of its impacts on human health and the socio-
economic wellbeing are starting to become apparent. Science has been placed at the
forefront of the fight against the virus. Scientific data, information and expertise from
different domains and different countries is having to be integrated to inform policy makers.
Whilst there is hope that effective therapeutics and a vaccine will be quickly developed and
tested, it is likely that this will not happen in time to prevent massive socio -economic
disruption. In the meantime, difficult choices are having to be made that balance public
health and economic imperatives, with implications for all sectors of business and society
at different scales from local to global. Trust between science, policy-makers and citizens
is critical in making these choices and TDR will be an essential tool for building and
maintaining this trust and ensuring the longer -term suitability and effectiveness of
mitigation measures. TDR provide s a powerful mechanism for combining different
branches of knowledge and practice to develop the social and technological solutions that
will be required during the extended response and recovery phases of the global response
to COVID-19.
A number of the case studies that are included in this report focus on the use of TDR to
address complex public health issues or crises. These ran ge from holistic animal and
human health management strategies in rural communities in Africa to the use of advanced
digital technologies for social and health care in North America. COVID -19 has
highlighted the vulnerability of large, densely populated c ities and a several case studies
focus on health and well -being in complex urban environments. Several studies focus on
increasing resilience to longer -term threats, associated with environmental change and
there are cases that looks at how TDR can help in dealing with natural disasters. There are
lessons to be learned from all of these cases in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 5
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

The report is in two main parts t hat can be read separately: 1. The overall study review,
analysis and recommendations and 2. The collection of 28 single page vignettes for
individual case studies (section 11). Each case study is different and the collection as whole
illustrates the diversity of issues that TDR can be used to address and provides some
important insights into the practical challenges of bringing together different disciplines
and stakeholders to address specific challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Acknowledgements
An international Expert Group (annex 1), was established through nominations from GSF
delegates, to oversee and implement the project, building on existing work and engaging
with relevant stakeholders. The Expert Group was chaired by Jakob Zinsstag (Switzerland)
and Tateo Arimoto (Japan). This final policy report is the product of that Group’s work. It
was drafted by Jose Sir i, with input from all Ex pert Group members and the OECD -GSF
Secretariat, Carthage Smith and Yoshiaki Tamura.
In addition to the International Expert Group members, a number of other experts made
important contributions. This included the principle investigators or project leaders for the
28 case studies who kindly shared their experience in interviews and provided comments
on the draft case vignettes. It includes also more than 100 people who participated in
dedicated project workshops that were held in Paris and Tokyo (see annexes 3 and 4) and
were generously supported by the host countries.
The Network for Transdisciplinary Research (td -net), which is supported by the Swiss
Academies of Arts and Sciences, provided some of the material that is cited in t his report
and was the main organiser of the International Transdisciplinary Conf erence in
Gothenburg (September 2019). OECD joined with td -net and the Internationa l Science
Council to organise two sessions at this Conference that enabled discussions with the
international community and provided examples of good practice that are included in the
report.
The Belmont Forum of research funders, led by US -NSF, organised a workshop on
Evaluating Transdisciplinary Approaches in Washington DC (June 2019) that informed the
discussions around impact assessment of transdisciplinary research (section 10).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 7
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table of contents
Executive Summary 9
Recommendations 11
Addressing Societal Challenges Using Transdisciplinary Research 15
1. Background 15
2. Transdisciplinarity and related research methods 16
3. Methodology and Case Studies 19
4. Rationale for transdisciplinary research 22
5. Key parameters of transdisciplinary research projects 24
6. Research system challenges for the effective implementation of transdisciplinarity 28
7. Challenges for transdisciplinary research extending beyond research systems 37
8. Monitoring and impact assessment of transdisciplinary projects 39
9. Case study vignettes 40
10. Concluding comments 69
Notes 71
References 72
ANNEXES 74
Annex 1. GSF Expert Group Membership 74
Annex 2. Case study questionnaire 75
Annex 3. Workshop on transdisciplinarity and sustainability research, 24 May 2019, Paris 77
Annex 4. Workshop on Transdisciplinary Research, 5 December 2019, Tokyo 78
Glossary 79

Tables
Table 1. Case studies 20

Figures
Figure 1. Graphical representation of transdisciplinary research 15
Figure 2. Conceptual model of a typical interactive and iterative transdisciplinary research project 18
Figure 3. Transdisciplinary research and related modes of research 19
Figure 4. TDR project lifecycle, illustrating phasing and depth of participatory engagement 26
Figure 5. Conceptual model of a TDR funding programme 34

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Boxes
Box 1. Messages from case studies: added value of transdisciplinary research 24
Box 2. Messages from case studies: TDR project design and implementation 27
Box 3. What are Universities and public research institutions doing to promote TDR? 31
Box 4. What are Research Funders doing to support TDR? 35

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 9
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Executive Summary
There are a number of societal challenges, often involving complex human -environment
systems, that are not fully understood and for which sol utions are urgently required.
Science has already provided critical insights into the nature, causes and likely trajectory
of many of these societal challenges and it is now being called upon to help provide
sustainable solutions. The impacts of global warming, biodiversity loss, natural disasters,
economic migration and health pandemics are manifest at multiple scales and require both
technological and social innovations. In order to achieve this, di fferent scientific
disciplines, including natural and social sciences and humanities (SSH) need to work
together and to fully engage other public and private sector actors, including policy-makers.
Solutions to complex societal challenges, such as those e mbedded in the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), cannot to be generated based solely on disciplinary research
but require a paradigm shift in research practice.
Transdisciplinary research (TDR) first emerged as a concept at the OECD International
conference on Interdisciplinary Research and Education in 1970. It is a mode of research
that integrates both academic researchers from unrelated disciplines – including natural
sciences and SSH - and non-academic participants to achieve a common goal , involving
the creation of new knowledge and theory. In drawing on the breadth of science and
non-scientific knowledge domains such as local and traditional knowledge, and cultural
norms and values, it aims to supplement and transform scientific insights for the good of
society. It criss- crosses the traditionally separated realms of science and practice and
advances both simultaneously.
TDR can address complex problems beyond the reach of traditional science. It offers a
practical way to address issues that are hi ghly contested and where stakes are high. It can
expand on existing scientific evidence and give rise to more innovative, holistic solutions.
It can generate both new scientific insights and practical societal benefits. As such, it is a
necessary complement, but not a replacement, to traditional research practices. However,
given the scale and urgency of the human-environmental system challenges that society is
currently facing, there is a strong argument that TDR needs to be scaled up very
considerably and become a mainstream modus operandi for research.
No two TDR research projects are alike but they fit within a broad fra mework that can be
defined by 6 key parameters: the diversity of disciplines engaged; the depth of integration
across disciplines; the degree of interaction with non- academic stakeholders; the
composition of non-academic stakeholders; the timing of participatory engagement and the
types of knowledge that are emphasi sed. The combination of these parameters is
determined by the problem to be addressed and may evolve over time.
Science systems, their institutions, structures and processes, have been largely designed
around distinct research disciplines and this presents a number of significant barriers to the
promotion of TDR. Academic and professional training is normally organised in disciplines
and not easily adapted to accommodate students who wish to engage in TDR. Peer-review,
evaluation and promotion processes are likewise normally organized in disciplines and the
key performance measur es are based on scientific publications and citations, rather than
societal benefits that are the main aim of TDR research. Funding allocation mechanisms,
are mainly targeted at research excellence, which again is largely assessed in terms of
scientific publication outputs. Excellence and rigor are equally important for TDR but there
is a need to re-define how we evaluate and measure these qualities.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Across the world, Universities and public res earch institutions are beginning to recognise
the importance of trans-disciplinary research, not only in terms of generating new scientific
knowledge/research excellence but also as a mechanism to link their research mission with
their so-called 3rd mission to promote innovation and societal benefit. A small number of
Universities have gone as far as articulating their missions and reorganising their faculty
and departmental structures around societal cha llenges. Others have invested in inter -
disciplinary and/or multi- stakeholder platforms and recruited new expertise in TDR and
some have adjusted their teaching and training activities to promote TDR. In some
countries, public research institutions have been established in domains such as
sustainability science or disaster research that are inherently trans- disciplinary. And new
institutional networks are being established at a number of scales, from local to global,
engaging different types of public and private institutions, including for example research
universities and universities/institutes of applied science.
Research funders are also innovating in response to the challenges that arise in supporting
TDR. Some countries are re-focusing their STI strategies around the SDGs and/or societal
challenges. Dedicated challenge-driven research funding schemes have been implemented
in many countries and some of these mandate TDR approaches. Peer review and
programme development and management processes have been adapted to take account of
the specificities of TDR and different donors are working together, and in some cases
pooling resources across borders, to support TDR that addresses shared societal challenges.
Looking beyond research systems there are two inter -related ch allenges for conducting
TDR: 1. How to select and effectively engage non -academic stakeholders, and 2. The
ethical considerations that often arise from this engagement. These are not issues that
researchers from many disciplines are normally confronted with. Again, for these issues to
be addressed effectively in the longer term, both research funders and institutions need to
implement structures and or mechanisms to support researchers in dealing with them.
A major basis for the analysis in the current report was 28 de novo case studies of individual
TDR projects. These cover a broad range of fields, ge ographic areas, scales, disciplines
and stakeholders. Each project is unique but the overall collection of case vignettes, which
are included in the second part of this report, illustrates the variety and importance of
scientific and societal issues that r equire a TDR approach. Each vignette includes a
summary of the experiences from an individual project in terms of lessons learnt and policy
implications. In addition, a more normative analysis of all these cases, based on detailed
case interviews has been carried out. The recommendations that result from this analysis
are listed in the following section.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 11
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Recommendations
A number of issues emerging from this work —including the case study analysis —merit
consideration by policy makers and other actors with a shared interest in how science can
effectively support solutions for complex societal challenges. TDR is required to address
such challenges but significant obstacles limit implementation of TDR at the necessary
scale. Many of these obstacles are embedd ed in the traditional disciplinary structures,
norms and practices of our science systems but are amenable to judicious policy
intervention. Governments, research agencies, research institutions and international
bodies all have a role to play in designing and implementing effective policy initiatives. As
highlighted in this report, there are many good practices to build on. Mutual learning,
collaboration, and exchange are required at the policy level as well as at the practitioner
level.
Governments
Governments need to recognise and promote transdisciplinary research, as an essential
complement to other more traditional research approaches, in addressing complex societal
challenges. Governments have a critical role to play in establishing the overall framework
that enables and supports effective TDR. This includes:
1. Providing dedicated and sustainable resources for TDR, in particular in relation to
STI for societal challenges and the Sustainable Development Goals;
2. Facilitating and supporting the engagement of public sector actors – including
policy makers – in TDR activities and making the relevant public sector data
available for use in these activities;
3. Incentivising other actors, including from the private sector, to support and
participate in TDR to address societal challenges;
4. Promoting cooperation across ministries and responsible public authorities,
including pooling of resources where appropriate, e.g. for research, innovation and
overseas development, for TDR that addresses complex societal challenges.
Research Funders
Research funding agencies have a critical role to play by directly supporting and
incentivising TDR research. This affects both prioritisation of research areas and changes
to funding processes, including funding criteria, peer review and evaluation. Specific
actions that can be taken by funders include:
1. provision of dedicated, long-term funding for TDR to address societal challenges,
e.g. challenge-based funding, at local, national and international scales
2. support to establish centres of expertise and national and international networks in
inter- and trans-disciplinary research domains
3. experimentation with different mechanisms to support the development of rigorous
TDR projects, including sand-pit processes and training workshops for researchers
4. implementation of proactive management and monitoring of TDR programmes,
recognising that flexibility is required to accommodate the evolving goals that are
inherent in TDR projects. The management overhead, at both project and
programme level, is likely be higher than for more traditional research

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

5. changes to peer review and evaluation processes, including the use of
multi-disciplinary and multi -stakeholder review processes and selection of
peer-reviewers with prior experience in doing TDR
6. emphasising the evaluation of societal as well as scientific outputs and impacts in
both ex ante and ex poste assessment of projects
7. extension of funding, and/or collaboration with other donors, to support capacity
building and the participation of non-academic stakeholders in TDR projects
8. individual support, e.g. Fellowships, for outstanding individuals, who can develop
and lead TDR projects.
Universities and Public Research Institutions (PRIs)
Universities and PRIs are the principle organisations through which TDR is carried out and
their long-term strategic commitment and support is essential if TDR is to be expanded to
the scale that is necessary to address complex societal challenges. This has implications
for education and training, as well as research. It also cuts across the so-called 3rd mission
activities (societal engagement and innovation) of universities and PRIs. Specific actions
that can be taken by universities and PRIs include:
1. introduction of challenge -based approaches in research strategies and
organisational structures
2. development of sustainable institutional structures and mechanisms (e.g.,
cross-department committees and meetings, shared infrastructure, flexible
schedules, pump-priming funds ) to foster cooperation across discipli nes and to
support TDR
3. establishment of structures and mechanisms to build long- term trusted relations
with external stakeholder communities, including creation of formal, high -profile
interfaces with civil society and private and public sector entities
4. allocation of core resources, including personnel, to build long -term expertise in
TDR methodologies and practice
5. introduction of TDR learning modules into science education and postgraduate
training courses;
6. support for early career researchers to engage in TDR projects, e.g. jointly
supervised PhDs, and development of more flexible career paths
7. changes to evaluation and promotion criteria for individuals who engage in TDR,
so that they are judged not only on scientific publications and citations but also on
their contribution to collective research outputs that are of value to stakeholders
outside of science
8. establishment of local, national and international networks of institutions that
cooperate and exchange best practices in relation to TDR. These might be focused
on local challenges, selected domains, such as sustainability research or global
health, or more generic aspects of TDR.
The academic community and science associations
The academic community has a major influence on science policy development and the
definition of research strategies and priorities. It is responsible for conducting peer review
and evaluation processes and often has a strong voice in how these are designed and
conducted. Universities and PRIs tend to have considerable autonomy and are rightly

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 13
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

responsive to their academic employees. Thus, whilst policy -makers and other actors can
provide mandates and incentives for TDR, their impact will be limited without the support
of the academic community and its representative associations. Key actions that can be
taken by the academic community include:
1. development and recognition of new inter -and trans-disciplinary research fields,
such as sustainability research an d planetary health, including the promotion of
relevant scientific journals
2. support for, and participation in, new research management approaches, including
innovative peer review and evaluation processes, that would promote TDR
3. support, including mentorship, for early career researchers who wish to engage in
TDR
4. development of strategies and assessments, e.g. by National Academies or
international science bodies, of the needs and potential for TDR to address societal
challenges
5. development of international frameworks or programmes for TDR that addresses
complex societal challenges
6. contributing to the development of new STI indicators and measures that value the
combination of multiple research outputs.
Intergovernmental Organisations
One of the major policy drivers for more TDR is the UN Sustainable Development Goals.
Inherent in these goals is the recognition that no single country can fully address them on
its own and there is a need for more effective international cooperation and exchange.
Whilst the UN and other international bodies, including the OECD do not have the
resources or the authority to implement TDR at the scale required to address societal
challenges, these international bodies can play an important role in building consensus and
catalysing action. Specific roles that international bodies can play include:
1. building awareness of TDR into existing policy frameworks (e.g. the SDGs or
Responsible Research Innovation);
2. fostering capacity-building, e.g. by convening meetings of development donors and
research funders;
3. promulgating guidelines/best practices/case studies of TDR;
4. promoting international alliances/networks and forums that bring together
scientists and other stakeholders.
In addition to these 5 groups of actors, who have the major responsibility for promoting
and enabling TDR within scientific research systems, there are a number of other
stakeholders that need to embrace TDR if we are to effectively address that complex
challenges that society is currently confronted with. Principle among these are many actors
from the private sector and civic society/NGOs. Both of these are very heterogeneous
groupings with conflicting interests but it is reasonable to assume that the majority of their
members have a stake in finding solutions to the societal challenges with which we are all
confronted.
The private sector has enormous intellectual, technological and financial resources as well
as valuable data and information, all of which can be leveraged in TDR. As illustrated by
many of the cases i n the current report, engagement in TDR can provide a variety of
significant benefits for private firms that range from a better understanding of potential

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

markets and longer -term drivers through to improved technological development and
innovation. Whilst intellectual property protection and confidentiality concerns can be an
obstacle to engagement with academia and other stakeholders, where these can be
overcome the mutual benefit that arises from engagement in TDR projects can be
considerable.
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) represent different societal interests and as such
they can make a very valuable contribution to many TDR activities. In addition to
knowledge and expertise they can sometimes act as a proxy, and/or provide a mechanism,
for engagement of important citizen groupings including neglected communities. On many
complex societal issues, NGOs are at the forefront of public debates and are both producers
and users of knowledge. As with the private sector (and indeed the science sector) there
are lines that need to be respected between research and advocacy but provided that these
are openly recognised and respected, the mutual benefit of engaging NGOs in TDR can be
very considerable.
Many private sector actors and NGOs have experience of working together in TDR projects
and there is an urgent need to build on these experiences and provide incentives and, where
necessary, support for multi -stakeholder engagement in addressing shared societal
challenges using TDR.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 15
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Addressing Societal Challenges Using Transdisciplinary Research
1. Background
Transdisciplinarity (TD) is defined by the integration of academic researchers from
different disciplines with non- academic participants in co-creating new knowledge and
theory to achieve a common goal (Swiss Academies of arts and sciences, n.d.[1]).As such,
TDR is increasingly cited as a means for addressing complex societal challenges, such as
those encompassed by t he United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) .1 In
part, this growing awareness rests on a recognition of the importance of coupled human -
environment systems (HES) at multiple scales and their implications for society. Causal
pathways in such systems transcend disciplines or sectors and are highly context dependent.
Addressing their manifold consequences requires thinking and acting beyond the
traditional bounds of individual scientific disciplines, and indeed beyond the scientific
enterprise itsel f, to other relevant stakeholder domains. It calls for better integration
between natural sciences and social sciences and humanities (SSH), a more direct
relationship between science and society, and the inclusion of non -scientific stakeholders
in research processes at all stages (see Figure 1 and Glossary).
Figure 1. Graphical representation of transdisciplinary research

Source: Architectures of adaptive integration in large collaborative projects (Wright Morton, Eigenbrode and
Martin, 2015[2])

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Under conventional research approaches, societal problems are identified, and solutions are
planned, developed and evaluated, by experts —scientists, in the context of research
processes—and then applied to target populations. Transdisciplinary approaches, in
contrast, use participatory engagement to involve target populations, relevant authorities,
and other actors, aiming to understand their perceptions, expectations and priorities, and to
make effective use of their experiential and contextual knowledge. As expressed by Hirsch
Hadorn et al. (2008[3]), “through scientists entering into dialogue and mutual learning with
societal stakeholders, science becomes part of societal processes, contributing explicit and
negotiable values and norms in society and science, and attributing meaning to knowledge
for societal problem-solving.”
In practice, there are significant obstacles to getting different disciplines to come together
to conduct interdisciplinary research (Van Noorden, 2015[4]), and implementation of TDR
is even more challenging. If the latter is to evolve from a marginal theoretical concept into
a mainstream approach, important questions must be resolved, including about methods
and practice, institutions and environments, research support, publication and impact,
education and training, data integration and the coordination of global research to address
societal challenges.
Further questions involve how to evaluate TDR before, during and after the fact. In
particular, the science and policy communities need criteria to assess whether TD R
proposals are likely to yield desired results, indicators to weigh the progress and
sustainability of existing research efforts and ensure continued application of the principles
of TD, and standards —practical, scientific, and ethical —for appraising the value of
completed research.
This document begins with a brief history of TDR and how it relates to other terms that are
commonly used in Science, Technology and Innovation ( STI) policy. It follows with an
introduction to a set of case studies, which help to illustrate a discussion on criteria for —
and the added value of—adopting TDR approaches. The key parameters that define TDR
projects are then described, followed by an analysis of how these are reflected at the
practical project level. The main structural challenges to promoting TDR are analysed, and
examples of what different actors, including funders and Universities/research institutions,
are doing to address them are presented. Dedicated sections are devoted to monitoring and
evaluation and the broader issues relating to science and society, which have particular
importance for science policy. Then, in part 2 of the report, each of the 28 de novo case
studies that provide the basis of the cross-cutting analysis is briefly summarized. Both the
more normative cross-cutting analysis and the individual case studies feed into a set of
policy recommendations/options that are laid out at the start of this report (see previous
section) and summarised at the end in short concluding comments. These recommendations
are addressed to different groups of actors, all of whom need to work together to promote
TDR to address socio-economic and scientific challenges.
2. Transdisciplinarity and related research methods
2.1. Historical development
While a full treatment of the history of TD and related concepts is beyond the scope of this
report, a few key points are summarised here (Zinsstag et al., 2015 [5]). Modern science
emerged in the scientific revolution of the 16 th and 17 th centuries. While drawing on
concepts from antiquity, it diverged from traditional philosophy in its reliance on controlled
experimental research to elucidate empirical laws, complementing, if not superseding, the
long-established focus on deductive reasoning from first principles (Hadorn et al., 2008[3]).
While, from its inception, natural science had strong linkages with technological innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 17
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

for economic and societal gain, its focus on empiricis m through experimentation tended
toward an increasing dissociation from practical, lived experience.2
The 19th and early 20th centuries featured the separation of the traditional humanities from
philosophy, and later the development and formalisation of the social sciences. These fields
applied scientific reasoning to elucidate universal laws governing human experience, yet
also recognized the limitations of generalized interpretation: “the natural sciences explain
general aspects of empirical events by uni versal laws, while history investigates the
individuality of empirical phenomena, giving them values to aid the understanding of their
meaning and importance.”
3 SSH emerged in part from a recognition of science’s potential
contribution to understanding and addressing social challenges. Indeed, practical problems
in society, such as poverty, were explicitly recognised as a stimulus for scientific research,
paralleling the application of natural science to practical problems in technology. Yet, the
focus of S SH on meaning, interpretation, norms, values, and context contrasted with the
natural science emphasis on explanation in neutral, universal, idealised terms.
With the burgeoning corpus of scientific knowledge , there was fragmentation and
specialisation of scientific disciplines in virtually all domains. One consequence of this was
the recognition that complex, emerging phenomena could not be understood or addressed
from within knowledge and practice siloes. In response, systems theory was developed
along pa rallel lines by practitioners in a broad range of fields, including biology,
cybernetics, game theory, information theory, and sociology. Beginning in the 1940s,
systems theory examined “the abstract organisation of phenomena, independent of their
substance, type, or spatial or temporal scale of existence … [It gave] rise to the idea of an
abstract structural unity of scientific knowledge against the background of… progressive
fragmentation… (Jantsch, 1972
[6]).” This idea constituted a powerful argument for
integrative research that could bridge silos and address complexity. The term
“transdisciplinarity” was first introduced 50 years ago, at the OECD International
conference on Interdisciplinary Research and Education, in the context of a call for values-
driven innovation for society, coordinated within the triad of government -industry-
university (Jantsch, 1972[6]).
While science remains dominated by traditional disciplinary structures, the conce pt of
transdisciplinary systems thinking has been highly influential, leading to a proliferation of
related methodological approaches over the past half -century. Beyond TDR itself, these
include: operations research; systems approaches; action research; pl ace-based research;
team science; integration and implementation science; ethical, legal and social implications
research; citizen science, convergence research, and post-normal or mode 2 science. The
innovation community—the modern instantiation of the long-standing partnership between
science and technology—embraces related frameworks, including responsible research and
innovation; open innovation and social innovation. Each of these varied methods has
different aims and focus (see Figure 2) , but they sha re broadly similar fundamental
assumptions, including about the validity of different knowledge sources, the importance
of complexity, and the need to engage with the knowledge and values of relevant
stakeholders.
Such approaches have become particularly i mportant in the context of sustainable
development. The Brundtland Report from the United Nations World Commission on
Environment and Development (1987
[7]), the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development in Rio de Janeiro (1992), and the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals (2015) offer progressively stronger assertions of the need for systemic,
integrated approaches and inclusive participation to address conjoined development issues.
In 2012, the ‘Future Earth’ initiative of the International Science Council was launched at
the UN Conference on Sustainable Development. This aims to bring together scientists

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

from different domains of global change research to work with other stakeholders to
address global sustainability challenges.
The theoretical and conceptual thinking that underpins TDR is in itself an active area of
scientific development and there are many different models that try and capture the essence
of what it is and how it really represent a pa radigm shift in research practice that can be
applied to address complex or ‘wicked’ problems. One of the key defining features is that
it criss-crosses the traditionally separated realms of science and practice as illustrated in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. Conceptual model of a typical interactive and iterative transdisciplinary research project

Source: authors’ design based on Gredig (2011[8]), Jahn et al (2012[9]), Lang et al (2012[10]), Pohl et al (2017[11]).
2.2. Relation between TDR and other related concepts
TDR features both interdisciplinarity and co -creation ( i.e., co- design of research and
co-production of knowledge) with actors outside of academia. As introduced in the
previous section, several related modes of research overlap with TDR but do not necessarily
incorporate both interdisciplinarity and co-creation (see Figure 3). Thus, team science and
convergence research are characterised by the integration of different disciplines, whereas
action research/operational research and d evelopment research very often involve
co-creation. Citizen science can be defined more or less broadly but does not necessarily
involve either interdisciplinarity or co-creation. Different communities identify with these
semi-discrete modes of research, which have developed their own distinct frameworks and
terminology.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 19
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 3. Transdisciplinary research and related modes of research

Source: authors’ original design.
There are also a number of other umbrella concepts that are used in the science and
innovation policy community and imply a need for more TDR. Hence, TDR is compatible
with Open Science with its emphasis on societal engagement and with Responsible
Research and Innovation (or Open Innovation) and its emphasis on multi -stakeholder
engagement. Likewise, Mission -driven Research and Innovation will often require TDR
approaches. This is implicit also in discussions around Post -normal science, with its
emphasis on uncertainty and complexity. Relative to these broader concepts, TDR can be
considered as a potential delivery mechanism, i.e. it is a mode of research that can help to
deliver particular aims and address societal challenges and, as such, it is a complemen t to
other research and innovation approaches or activities.
The overlap between different terminology and concepts, can be a significant obstacle to
effective communication and collaboration across different communities. Indeed, TDR
itself is sometimes mistakenly identified as being exclusive to social sciences and so
disregarded as a potential approach by those coming from other domains. Despite the
confusion inherent in having overlapping concepts and modes of research, trying to clearly
demarcate between different ‘schools of thought’ has diminishing returns and what is more
important is to recognise the complementarities and focus on the potential for mutual
learning across different communities. Adopting the best approach for the research
challenge in hand is more important than the label that is attached to that approach.
3. Methodology and Case Studies
This report combines information from various sources, including the knowledge of
individual experts (annex 1), published literature, two dedicated wor kshops in Paris
(May 2019) and Tokyo (December 2019), and sessions on funding and research institutions
at the International Transdisciplinarity Conference, Gothenburg (September 2019). Policy
initiatives to support TDR from the OECD-STIP compass database (EC/OECD, 2020[12])
have been analysed, and examples of good practices have been identified by the

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

international Expert Group (EG) established to oversee the work. All these inputs
complement 28 de novo project case studies that were conducted specifically for this
project.
The case studies cover a broad range of fields, geographic areas, scales (local to
international), disciplines and stakeholders, proposed and selected by EG members in line
with a robust definition of TDR,4 Principal investigator(s) for each case study were sent an
online questionnaire (see annex 2) and then interviewed by an EG member. Interviews
focused on challenges and lessons learned/good practices. The written record of these
interviews was the basis of the analysis in this report.
The case studies and their main features are described in Table 1 below and a 1 -page
summary of each is provided in section 11. Each project is unique, but the overall
collection of case vignettes illustrates the variety and importance of scientific and societal
issues requiring a TDR approach, as discussed in the following section.

Table 1. Case studies

Project Name (acronym) Subject Area Involved Discipline Lead
Country
(scale)
Stakeholder Years of
Operation
Acclimaterra Climate change Climate sciences, agriculture,
hydrology, biodiversity,
history, sociology
France
(Local)
Municipalities, public
institutions, NGOs and
citizens

2013 - 2019
Agrophotovoltaics –
Resource-Efficient Land
Use
(APV-RESOLA)
Solar energy-food
nexus
Technology, environment and
biodiversity, energy economy,
agriculture, society and
politics

Germany
(Local)
Farmer, renewable energy
and grid companies, local
government, politicians,
NGO and citizens

2015 - 2019
ASU Decision Centre for
a Desert City
(DCDC)
Water resource Decision science, policy
science, geography,
hydrology, life science,
economics, anthropology,
computer science, urban
planning and public
administration
USA
(Local)
Local government and
environmental organization
2004 -
CAMINOLARGO Traditional music Music, art and law Colombia
(national)
Musician, dancer and
teacher
2017 - 2019
Climate Change and Sea
Level Rise in the
Anthropocene
Climate change Law, international law and
Geology/Earth sciences
Norway
(International)
International association,
media, filmmakers, artists,
cultural organisations, etc.

2014 – 2019
The Centre for Research-
based Innovation in
Sustainable fish capture
and Processing
technology (CRISP)
Sustainable fish
industry
Fish finding, catch
identification, fishing gear
control and quality
improvement
Norway
(National)
Manufacturers of fishing
equipment, fishermen’s
association, etc.
2011 - 2019
CuveWaters Water resource
management
Social science, civil
engineering Urban water
management,
Germany
(International)
Water reclamation
company, ministries,
regional and local
authorities and leaders,
citizens and NGO
2006 - 2015
Food4Sustainability Food Economics, policy science,
business, philosophy,
psychology, agronomy, SSH
Belgium
(local)
Supermarket, local
producer and the Belgian
government

2014 - 2018
Frugal Innovations and
Responsible
Entrepreneurship

Water and health Technology, medical
anthropology and ethics
Netherlands
(International)
Electronics company, water
company and NGO
2015 – 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 21
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Project Name (acronym) Subject Area Involved Discipline Lead
Country
(scale)
Stakeholder Years of
Operation
Governing risk society
(GOVRISK)
Flood, landslide
and climate
change
Environmental science,
geoscience and ecology,
political science and law

Norway
(International)
Private company and the
Norwegian government
2014 – 2018
Strengthening
international
Collaboration for
Capitalising on Cost-
effective and Life-saving
Commodities

(i4C)
Public health Art, political science,
interdisciplinary humanities
and medicine
Norway
(International)
International organization,
the Namibian government,
etc.

2014 – 2019
Innovating Spatial
Development Planning by
Differentiating Land
Ownership and
Governance
(INDIGO)
Land use Spatial planning, territorial
development, geography,
legal studies, environmental
sociology and political
economy
Belgium
(International)
Consulting offices in spatial
planning; government
agencies in planning,
environment, rural
development; landowners;
professional federations of
planners and notaries;
nature conservation
organisations; farmers;
housing providers
2015 – 2018
International Research
Institute of Disaster
Science
(IRIDeS)
Natural disaster Engineering, physics,
medicine and history
Japan
(national)
Local government, IT
company and citizens
2012 -
Japan-ASEAN Science,
Technology and
Innovation Platform

(CHIRP/JASTIP)/
Collaboration Hubs for
international research
programme
Energy,
bioresources and
disaster

Energy and material
sciences, forestry,
biotechnology, natural
disaster-related sciences,
anthropology, humanities and
social science
Japan
(International)
Inter-governmental
organisation, national and
local government, private
sector and civil society
2015 – 2020 (max.
extension 2025)
Jigjiga University One
Health Initiative
(JOHI)
Public health Human health, veterinary
medicine, nutrition, water and
sanitation and rangeland
management
Switzerland
(International)
Pastoralist and agro-
pastoralist community,
health and animal health
care provider, and regional
and federal authority
2015 – 2025
Lively Agricultural
Landscapes
Agriculture Agriculture science, social
science, environmental
science. ecosystem services
Germany
(Local)
Farmers, winegrower and
local authorities
2014 – 2021
MobilAir Transport,
atmospheric
pollution and
health
Environmental economics,
sociology, geography,
behavioural psychology,
biology and health sciences
France
(Local)
Ministry of Research, local
authorities and citizens
2018 – 2021
Mobility Innovation
Center by COI (Mobility)
Mobility Engineering, human health,
sociopsychology and law
Japan
(Local)
Car manufacturing
company, local government
and citizens
2013 – 2021
MONTANAQUA Water
management
Geography, environmental
sciences and social science
Switzerland
(Local)
Representatives of
hydropower, viticulture,
agriculture, tourism,
environment, communes
and canton
2010 – 2013
Participatory Value
Evaluation of energy
policies
CO2 emission Energy system, behavioral
econometrics and ethics
Netherlands
(National)
Energy consulting company 2018 – 2021
Precise Advanced
Technologies and Health
Systems for Underserved
Populations
(PATHS-UP)
Health Biomedical, electrical
mechanical and industrial
engineering, computer
science, chemistry, material,
medicine, community
USA
(Local)
Patient, health care
provider, caregiver,
community health
advocate, industry,
insurance provider, private
2017 -

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Project Name (acronym) Subject Area Involved Discipline Lead
Country
(scale)
Stakeholder Years of
Operation
engagement and behavioural
psychology
foundation and government
agency
PigSustain Pig industry Animal science,
environmental science, public
health, risk assessment,
human geography, IT and
agricultural economics
UK
(National)
Pig producers, retailers,
NGOs, vets and UK
government
2017 – 2021
Sociotechnical Systems
to Enable Smart and
Connected Energy-Aware
Residential Communities
(SSC-IRG)
Energy Civil/mechanical engineering
and political science
USA
(Local)
Local government and
housing developers
2015 -
Smart community
policing
Policing system Virtual Reality(VR), robotics,
Big Data, material sciences,
AI, police study, forensic
science and law

Korea
(National)
The Korean government 2018 – 2025
Smart Grids Energy Innovation science, science
and technology study,
humanity and social science

Netherlands
(International)
Private company and
citizens
2016 – 2020
Strategic University
Network to Revolutionise
Indian Solar Energy
(SUNRISE)
Solar energy Photo physics and chemistry UK
(International)
Private foundation, Indian
government and citizens
2017 – 2021
Transdisciplinary
Research Intervention
Anchored in Luxembourg
(TRIAL)
Environment Social Science, anthropology
and philosophy
Belgium
(local)
Politicians, economic
actors and citizens
2017 – 2021
Urban ecology meets
architecture and urban
planning
(U-EM-A-UP)
Urban planning Ecology, urban planning,
landscape architecture, arts,
science communication,
environmental psychology,
cultural study and
environmental humanity
Switzerland
(Local)
Local government and
citizens
2016 – 2021
4. Rationale for transdisciplinary research
Mono-disciplinary research has successfully addressed many scientific and societal issues,
yet often fails in contexts with high complexity and uncertainty, where causal pathways
transcend disciplinary boundaries. Multi- and interdisciplinary approaches can be helpful
in such contexts but face analogous limitations when and where non-academic stakeholders
hold knowledge uniquely critical to resolving the issue in question. In brief, TDR is
required when other approaches are intrinsically unable to generate the needed insights
and/or when the involvement of non- academic stakeholders is essential to successful
implementation.
All TDR is solution-oriented, yet specific aims cover a range of goals and situations, e.g.,
some projects focus on local solutions and sets of actors within relatively prescribed
themes, whereas others describe whole- of-society solutions for complex global problems
(see Table 1 and the case vignettes in section 11). In general, TDR is valuable in several
contexts:
• Where understanding and management of integrated systems requires cooperation
among a range of disparate stakeholders.
• In situations involving systemic and rapid technological, environmental and/or
social change, i.e. societal transitions.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 23
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• In evaluating the societal impacts and/or best implementation strategy for a new
technology or policy intervention or a su ite of such interventions, particularly as
they relate to a specific place or region.
• Where problems fundamentally involve the intersection of academic/technological
and non-academic/societal domains.
• For scientific/technological issues in which ethical norms or value judgements have
to be included in the problem solving and/or where solutions have real or perceived
impacts on some stakeholders.
TDR can add significant value over mono -disciplinary or multi- disciplinary research in
such situations, allowing for consideration of issues that the latter approaches would simply
be unable to address. Yet, TDR is also applied to issues that are subject to more traditional
research approaches. Given the generally greater complexity and resource requirements of
TDR compared with traditional approaches, clarifying its added value is important. The
case studies that were undertaken for this report, offer insights into why researchers adopt
TDR approaches and their perceptions of added value at the practitioner level (see Box 1).
TDR is a mode of research and, as such, it aims to generate new scientific knowledge that
is applicable to addressing societal challenges. It can have diverse social impacts, both
during and beyond the lifetime of a project. Key examples, beyond the direct effects of
interventions, include new relationships among citizens, stakeholders and academics; new
capacities among partners and end-users; a space for societal dialogue wherein potentially
hidden values and opinions are made visible; the empow erment and inspiration of
stakeholders through their involvement in tackling societal problems; and the illumination
of issues related to equity. By their nature, some societal impacts attributable to TDR are
difficult to measure—because they speak to intangible changes in underlying attitudes or
capacities, involve cascading impacts beyond the remit of a project, or encompass longer-
term processes that exceed its timeframe.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 1. Messages from case studies: added value of transdisciplinary research
Case studies highlighted a range of ways in which TDR can provide added value, from
the perspective of a (scientific) principle investigator. In general, these fell into five
categories.
I. TDR can address complex problems beyond the reach of traditional science,
particularly those that require the application of contextual knowledge
unavailable to researchers. Such is often the case in human- environmental
systems, where the actions and incentives of practitioners and end- users can
produce unexpected or unpredictable behaviour.
II. TDR can offer a practical way to address contested, high- stakes societal
problems where knowledge is uncertain, the concrete nature of the problem
itself may be disputed, and the potential impacts on stakeholders are significant.
III. TDR can add new dimensions and perspectives to traditional research
approaches, and give rise to more innovative, holistic solutions. TDR
approaches allow for the integration of practical/experiential knowledge, norms
and ethical precepts in academic research and of abstract ideas with case-
specific knowledge. In staging and resolving conflicts between different priorities
and ways of understanding, it can foster the emergence of new questions, and
the resulting process of resolution thr ough debate can result in the enrichment
and evolution of ideas.
IV. TDR can provide social benefits beyond pure scientific insights. It can provide
venues for dialogue and conflict resolution around contested issues, address
the expectations and fears of stakeholder groups or society at large. In providing
a scientific perspective on ongoing social processes, it can act as a barometer
for change, measuring progress or lack thereof and packaging information in
ways that are meaningful for society.
V. TDR often generates significant lasting benefits. It can clarify in what
circumstances or via what processes an intervention is likely to be accepted or
taken up. It can foster societal acceptability and uptake by making an
intervention familiar and developing the societal knowledge needed to make the
most of it. Through TDR, society can develop relationships, tools, administrative
structures and mechanisms that outlast individual projects and generate
continuing benefits. TDR can be a powerful tool for capacity -building among
individuals and institutions.
In many cases, longer -term societal impacts depend on networks and structures that are
difficult to maintain beyond the end of a project, when funding and institutional support
are no longer available. In such situations, social benefits may evaporate rapi dly. Those
involved in supporting and implementing TDR projects need to consider how beneficial
structures and mechanisms that arise from these projects can be made sustainable.
5. Key parameters of transdisciplinary research projects
The definition and theo retical basis for TD remains contested, with different knowledge
communities adopting different principles. Whilst this might be considered a purely
academic consideration with limited practical relevance, it is problematic in that it divides
the research and policy communities and is consequently a barrier to communication,
mutual learning, and the consolidation of guidelines and best practices. As such, it also
helps to explain why, even in projects that clearly recognise the need for transdisciplinary

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 25
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

approaches, methods for participatory engagement, co-design and co-production are often
ad hoc and sub-optimal.
For this report, TD is defined by the integration of academic researchers from unrelated
disciplines and non-academic participants in creating new knowledge and theory to achieve
a common goal. However, even under this definition, transdisciplinary efforts can vary
widely. This variation can largely be characterised along 6 key dimensions that are
introduced below.
5.1. Breadth/diversity of interdisciplinarity
All transdisciplinary efforts involve interdisciplinarity, but the number of disciplines
involved and the epistemic distance among them will vary with the problem being
addressed. In general —though not universally—the more separated the disciplines , the
more difficult it will be to effectively integrate them. Differences among the
institutional/professional frameworks and working modalities of the specific actors
involved may also contribute to the complexity, and therefore the challenge, of effecti ve
TD.
5.2. Depth of disciplinary integration
Interdisciplinarity, by definition, involves the creation of new knowledge and theory and
the blending of working modalities and heuristics. However, the degree of integration can
be relatively more superficial or p rofound and may vary with the epistemic distance
between the disciplines involved, the timeframe of investigation, and/or the complexity of
the problem to be solved. In general, greater complexity demands deeper integration, given
the likelihood of cross-disciplinary interactions, feedbacks and impacts.
5.3. Degree/quality of interaction with non-academic participants
TDR requires meaningful participation beyond the academy, yet the extent of interaction
and the degree to which outside stakeholders influence the research process will differ from
project to project. Among determining factors are the technical complexity involved, the
resources available, and the timeframe. The capacity of relevant local non -academic
stakeholders can also dictate the form of participatory engagement. True TD requires that
participation by non -academics is more than mere tokenism —thus, stakeholder
consultation without a mechanism for incorporating suggestions fails to be truly TD. Yet,
when non- academics make all decisions and hold all power, research becomes mere
consultancy (Arnstein, 1969
[13]). TD should operate at the level of partnership, wherein
planning and decision- making responsibilities are shared and not subject to uni lateral
change.
5.4. Composition of non-academic partnerships
The nature of TDR projects depends strongly on which non-academic partners are included.
For example, projects carried out in partnership with private sector actors are likely to have
a different flavour and orientation than those that involve community-based or civil society
organizations. In general, external stakeholders fall into one of four categories: private
sector (i.e., business and industry), public sector (i.e., government and civil service), civic
sector (i.e., civil society and non- governmental organizations), and citizens/communities
themselves. Traditional and modern media may also play an important role. Many
non-academic stakeholders have no formal science education but they are experts in the
respective fields and can provide insights that go beyond academic knowledge.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

5.5. Timing of participatory engagement
The degree of engagement of researchers with non-academic participants is rarely constant.
Most TDR projects feature phases wit h active participation and others with greater focus
on pure research, in some cases, alternating periodically ( see Figure 3) Timing must be
considered not only in light of research phases and funding cycles, but of the cadences of
non-academic life. For example, political, fiscal, or business cycles can greatly influence
both the structure and the efficacy of transdisciplinary efforts, depending on which external
stakeholders are involved.
Figure 4. TDR project lifecycle, illustrating phasing and depth of participatory engagement

Note: The oscillating line shows the dynamic and iterative nature of the TDR process.
Source: Adapted from Stauffacher (2008[14]).
5.6. Types of knowledge
TDR often blends knowledge at different scales (e.g. context-specific vs. generalised), with
different functions (e.g., phenomenological vs. strategic), and from different sources (e.g.
experiential vs. scientific/theoretical) (Enengel et al., 2012 [15]). The extent to which
different types of knowledge are emphasised influences the character of TDR projects.
The case studies that were carried out for this work give relevant insights into how these
6 key parameters impact on the design and implementation of projects, with implications
not only for individual project participants but also for institutions and sponsors. Some of
the key messages from the case studies, in this regard, are summarised in Box 2.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 27
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 2. Messages from case studies: TDR project design and implementation
Respondents to case interviews identified several fundamental characteristics of TDR
that should inform problem framing and project design.
TDR generally takes longer and requires more resources than traditional research,
both because a diversity of partners must become familiar with one another, but also
given the need to develop ways of working, decision criteria and shared goals that draw
on the norms, operating procedures and knowledge of all sets of stakeholders.
The planning and engagement phases are likely to pose the greatest difficulties
in establishing mutual understanding and coordination. They are also the period when
goals and expectations are most likely to evolve; projects should be aware of this and
devote sufficient time to overcoming barriers and to exploration. TDR often requires
significant elasticity —goals, processes, relationships and hierarchies can shift during
project implementation, opportunistically or based on evolving insights. Such
considerations need to be discussed and clarified with funders a priori.
In selecting project partners, consideration should be given not only to disciplinary or
sectoral r equirements, but to prior experience with TD and to empathy, open-
mindedness, sensitivity, and social skills. TDR generally requires a strong
understanding of the nature of a given place (i.e., of culture, history, institutions, power
and relationships in the geographic area of interest), and the research team —including
non-academic partners—should be selected accordingly. As such, inclusion of experts
or knowledge brokers with deep connections to local communities and actors, or who
play a natural role in facilitating relationships among stakeholders, is important. In many
projects, pre- existing relationships that have generated mutual trust and shared
practical experience are beneficial. At the same time, it is clear that the selection of both
academic partners and stakeholders must reflect the specific nature of the challenge to
be addressed.
Effective TDR requires structural mechanisms to manage complexity . Project
management requires significant, dedicated ( i.e. rather than ad hoc) resources. It is
often the case that some mix of nested, multi -level and cross -disciplinary governance
structures must coexist with unifying thematic or locality -specific structures. Effective
project management may need to be supported by formal agreements on issues such
as dispute resolution, changes to project goals or advisory arrangements and budgetary
management. There can be value in having external, independent, impartial advisory
structures.
Effective communication within complex TDR projects serves various roles, including
increasing efficiency, building trust among partners and ensuring the rigour of results.
Different stakeholders can have different standards, expectations, and incentives for
communication—for example, some stakeholders may be reluctant to report ne gative
results. In all contexts, TDR requires regular and consistent communication across the
research team and partners. Where possible, physical proximity (e.g., housing research
partners under one roof) can be beneficial . In some cases, it has proven es sential to
have a designated and skilled facilitator to manage relationships and communication.
Leadership across academic disciplines and other stakeholders in the project team can
be delicate, especially where mandates and/or lines of authority are unclear.
Co-leadership, with academic and non- academic leaders, is often desirable. In any
case, projects should explicitly establish equivalent standing (or justifiable hierarchies)
among members of the project team and procedures to resolve conflicts. Indeed, TDR
requires explicit and continual negotiation: about values, goals, ways of working,
definitions, criteria for success, division of labour and other issues —this must be built
into project processes. Competition among partners and between different type s of

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

partners with potentially conflicting incentives (e.g., civic and private sector) can impact
progress and success needs to be carefully and proactively dealt with.
Managing expectations is another major challenge. The breadth of work involved in
many projects can lead to loss of enthusiasm among partners who don’t see particular
elements as related to their personal or professional objectives. For researchers,
expectations about publication of academic results can be particularly thorny, given
differences among disciplines —indeed, this poses a major barrier to involvement of
young scientists in TDR. Conversely, societal partners naturally have expectations
around the communication of results —these can be particularly challenging when the
local language differs from that in which academic results would normally be
communicated. Private sector partners are likely to have expectations about ownership
of intellectual property and profit -sharing. Because TDR generally involves pressing
societal problems, expectations and pressures can be greater than in traditional
research, with failures resulting in a loss of confidence on the part of project partners.
In general, proactive, a priori negotiation and an equitable balancing of transdisciplinary
elements with more focused research can help manage expectations across the wider
set of project stakeholders.
Capacity development , both within and beyond the research team, is valuable for
instilling a sense of ownership, as well as for sustaining project results. Within research
teams, it is important to consider the career needs of young researchers; while TDR
skills and competencies are marketable, early-stage researchers need both stability of
employment and relevant academic outputs. Formal and informal training activities for
non-academic partners are an integral part of many TDR projects.

6. Research system challenges for the effective implementation of
transdisciplinarity
There is considerable experience in TDR across several research fields (see Figure 3) and
a number of useful guidance documents and toolkits have been developed .5 Some
institutions have specialised TDR support services (see Box 3) and sponsors are developing
criteria and processes that account for the specific requirements of TDR (see Box 4).
Nevertheless, even with optimum project design, conducting TDR means overcoming
numerous barriers embedded in most research systems. These are discussed in more detail
below.
6.1. Scientific disciplines and institutions)
“terminology differences between sectors/fields are a barrier”6
“there are often tensions between disciplines”
“Integration between more related disciplines can be more difficult than between more
widely separated disciplines, both because of approaches and expectations and because of
institutional barriers”
Scientific disciplines support the creation and consolidation of information with in
relatively well-defined branches of knowledge. They share the common framework of the
scientific method, but develop characteristic tools, language, ways of working, and criteria
for evaluation. These disciplinary heuristics serve to facilitate communication, standardise
the presentation of information, and establish a shared basis for valuing research and
rewarding success. In parallel, disciplines create organisational and professional structures
to support training, career advancement, research implementation, collaboration, and

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 29
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

knowledge dissemination, exchange and synthesis. New disciplines or disciplinary
subspecialties may emerge in response to paradigmatic shifts, scientific spill -overs,
increases in available data or the development of new types of data.
While disciplinary structures and heuristics are of considerable value, they can be a
formidable barrier to effective TDR. In general, disciplines that are more distant in terms
of their focus (e.g., natural sciences versus humanities) will face greater challenges working
together—although this is not universally true and depends on the specific heuristics and
structures of the disciplines involved. In some cases, disciplines may actively discourage
cross-disciplinary work to maintain disciplinary integrity, or due to a perception that other
disciplines produce invalid or less valid information. Conversely, interdisciplinary research
(and to an even greater degree TDR) relies on an acceptance by all part ies that different
perspectives each yield valuable knowledge and that their combination is likely to provide
improved utility.
The traditional organisation of academia and associated structures in universities and
research institutions tends to constrain work that crosses disciplinary boundaries. While
individual researchers may straddle or connect disciplinary ‘silos’ to initiate and implement
multi- or interdisciplinary research within existing systems, substantive transdisciplinary
initiatives can be difficult to establish for structural reasons. Differences in expectations,
capacities or rules across institutions can complicate management and inter -institutional
collaboration, especially where individual institutions impose barriers that constitute
bottlenecks for entire projects.
There is considerable potential for different types of institutions, e.g. research universities,
technical universities and public research institutes to combine expertise in TDR projects.
Notably, academic institutions foc using on applied sciences or research are more readily
able to take on and effectively manage TDR, yet these rarely operate on an equal footing
with traditional research institutions in terms of finances. Moreover, they maybe viewed as
less academically reputable, which tends to constrain the sharing of complementary
expertise and networks.
6.2. Data management
“A major issue is integration of data of many types from many different sources.”
“….significant differences in spatial and temporal resolution, timing of acquisition, level
of analysis (individual/group/institution) and type (quantitative/qualitative) of data”
“Protecting data effectively requires close communication, especially when it originates
from different stakeholder domains”
The organisation of scientific information generally reflects the disciplines or domains
from which it derives, with research communities managing the information generated and
used in their own fields. Infrastructures, standards and processes are thus optimised for
internal use, posing challenges when new research communities attempt to access and use
data from other fields. There are significant technical and cultural obstacles to the practical
realisation of data integration, which is a prerequisite for TDR . Moreover, as TDR often
addresses issues that have a significant social or health component, some of the necessary
data may be subject to personal privacy or security regulations and ethical considerations.
Where the private sector is involved, commercial interests and intellectual property rights
(IPR) may also have to be considered. Whilst different communities are used to dealing
with these issues in their own domains, TDR, by definition, brings together multiple
research and stakeholder communities, who are most ofte n not familiar with the data
handling conventions of their counterparts. In addition, the integration of data from diverse

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

sources can give rise to new regulatory or ethical issues, e.g., de-anonymisation of personal
data.
6.3. Academic and professional training
“Universities and research institutions can take a lead in developing and requiring TDR
training.”
“Need a positive learning environment allowing exchange between researchers at different
levels.”
“Process of TDR is too long and complex to meaningfully include students.”
Higher educational systems prepare students to deliver contributions in prescribed
disciplinary fields, building expertise and acquainting them with the terminology,
methodologies, and modes of professional interaction and knowledge trans mission
characteristic to those fields. These systems may, by their nature, be a barrier to TD —for
example, doctoral theses may be restricted to within disciplinary boundaries.
Universities and other academic institutions can play important roles with respect to TDR,
training young researchers to meet the specific challenges of transdisciplinary projects,
including effective communication across disciplines, engagement with non- academic
stakeholders, and complex project management 7. Similarly, they can fami liarise
researchers with the tools, terminology and methods of TDR. At the same time, training for
TDR must be balanced with the ongoing need for substantive disciplinary knowledge.
Beyond providing stable platforms for the development of TDR skills and professionalism,
educational systems have a major role to play in elevating the perceived value of TDR
among students, established researchers, research funders, and non -academic actors. This
role is contested; indeed, some academic advisors may discourage students from pursuing
TDR where it is viewed as of questionable value or as career-limiting.
6.4. Career advancement for researchers
“Limited number of positions for interdisciplinary researchers (e.g., in disaster prevention)
leads managers/advisors to push young researchers toward conventional fields, which
universities prioritize to demonstrate results.”
“..strong dissonance between desire of researchers to carry out interdisciplinary research
and reality of research sector requirements; e.g., can’t register an interdisciplinary thesis
in two schools.”
“TDR competencies are in high demand, but no corresponding mechanisms to provide
career value for those who possess them.”
As with funding, the career advancement system for scientists is closely tied to disciplinary
priorities and publication. Because TDR takes longer than traditional research and often
leads to fewer publications —or to publication outside traditionally esteemed discipl inary
journals—it can be career -limiting. Moreover, while TDR experience and competencies
are highly valued within individual projects, they are not highly rewarded within academic
systems of career advancement. Thus, despite high interest, it is difficult f or young
researchers to pursue TDR. It may be easier for more established researchers with robust
publication records, extensive collaboration networks, and secure car eers. New
mechanisms to recognise and credit high- quality TDR outputs, including non- academic
outputs, and to value transdisciplinary competencies need to be built into existing systems
for hiring, promotion, and tenure. This may require new metrics for measuring impact
across science and society (see ahead, 7.5).

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 31
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

6.5. Jurisdictional boundaries and international cooperation
“Regulation for water issues would require an interplay of national and international
legislation.”
“Language and cultural barriers can be major obstacles in multi-country collaborations.”
“Need an international liaison office to assist international collaboration, including legal
frameworks, contracts, language.”
The types of pressing societal issues that demand transdisciplinary solutions are often
international or global in nature, and likely to cross -geographic and jurisdicti onal
boundaries, just as they cross-disciplinary and organisational boundaries. In these contexts,
TDR may have to accommodate different legal and regulatory regimes—for example,
around appropriate use of data, ethical research, or material transfers—and d ifferences in
language, culture, norms and ownership. Each of these poses significant, yet different,
challenges for communication, harmoni sation of the research effort, organis ation and
dissemination of results, and coordinated action, while also introduc ing significant
complexity, time and costs. Transboundary challenges can arise at the project or the
funding programme level and require dedicated management.

Box 3. What are Universities and public research institutions doing to promote TDR?
Universities and research institutes have taken various approaches to promote TDR.
These range from the physical co-location of researchers from different disciplines to
encourage exchange and collaboration and the co- teaching of relevant courses, to the
development of standard practices and policies for transdisciplinary projects and the
establishment of dedicated inter- and TDR centres or networks. The following examples
illustrate some of these innovative efforts:
The Université catholiq ue de Louvain (Belgium) hosts LPTransition, a
cross-disciplinary, cross -sectoral scientific research platform which aims to explore
pathways for ecological and societal transitions from a transdisciplinary perspective.
LPTransition aims to collectively support the development of TDR trajectories in
research teams at UCLouvain
The Institute for the Future at the University of Leuven (Belgium) is a research
incubator that supports, catalyzes and accelerates TDR at KU Leuven. It supports
transdisciplinary educ ation and capacity building, bringing students representing
different disciplines together with experts and societal stakeholders around problems
that require TDR approaches. Interesting ideas emerging from these teams are
incubated to assess their feasibility and sustainability.
The Leuphana University of Luneburg (Germany) has created an interfaculty
Methodology Centre as a focus for TDR development and support, while at the same
time appointing new transdisciplinary professors in different departments in order to
institutionalise TDR approaches.
The Technical University of Berlin has developed a transdisciplinary strategy that is
championed at the highest leadership level and promoted by the University’s Executive
Board, with a major emphasis on cooperat ion with the citizens of Berlin. A dedicated
team at the University organises consultation workshops and trialogues to identify topics
and project ideas and coordinate funding applications.
The University of Tokyo’s Institute of Gerontology (IOG) is a cros s-sectoral
structures that brings together researchers and students from different faculties and

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

graduate schools with employees seconded from private companies and local
government. In order to promote research on the problems of an aging society, IOG has
concluded agreements with local governments and formed an academia- industrial
network - “Gerontology” – that conducts research to support individual autonomy.
The Université-Grenoble-Alpes has been created by a merger of different preexisting
universities in the region and it has based its development project on promoting a
number of major cross -disciplinary projects, in order to connect the different research
communities. Most of these projects address complex societal challenges and several
integrate stakeholders from outside the academy (e.g. Mobilair case).
The CRI-Centre de Recherche Interdisciplinaire at the University of Paris Descartes
(with participation of Grenoble Alpes Université and INSERM- National health institute)
has been created to promot e education and learning for the implementation of the UN
Sustainable Development Goals. The aim of the Centre is to create and develop at scale
the capabilities to articulate individual and collective action for the planet by using a
“learning by doing” approach. It organises inter -and trans-disciplinary workshops and
living lab activities and sponsors projects.
The University of Technology in Sydney has a mission to integrate fundamental
research with leadership in implementing sustainable solutions at the local and regional
scale. The achieve this, it has established a number of sustainability research centres
in areas such as climate change, energy technology conservation, water management
and sustainable futures. These bring together different disciplines and work with
government, industry and community partners to identify solutions and implement
change.
Arizona State University, which is ranked as one of the top universities for research
and innovation in the USA has an overall mission “….to advance research and discovery
of public value; and assuming fundamental responsibility for the economic, social,
cultural and overall health of the communities it serves”. It is organized into 17 colleges,
with more than 170 cross-disciplinary centres and institutes, many of which active
engage with non-academic stakeholders to develop implementable solutions to complex
real-life problems (see for example, the ASU-DCDC case).
The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology for Environment and Sustainability
under the aegis of ETH, is being created out of the merger of two previously independent
environmental research institutes. This major restructuring is linked with the strategic
goal of ETH to strengthen inter - and trans -disciplinary research that will generate
innovative solutions for a sustainable society.
Delft University of Technology educates its students to contribute to solving societal
challenges by providing them “with a solid grounding in interdisciplinary skills,
sustainability and entrepreneurial thinking”. It incentivizes TDR, among other things, by
connecting its disciplinary faculties through cross -cutting institutes that facilitate
interdisciplinary research around societal challenges and collaborate with non-
academic stakeholders, including the industry and policy-makers.

In addition to these examples, several of the project case studies for this report
highlighted the critical importance of investment, management or structural
developments at their host Universities in enabling TDR. These examples incl ude
structural investment at the University of Leeds, UK (Pig Sustain) and the establishment
of a cross-disciplinary structure at Tohoku University in Japan (see IRIDeS). The Japan-
ASEAN STI Platform (JASTIP) is an interesting example of a distributed international
TDR centre.
Some of the project cases demonstrated the importance of Public Research Institutions
as a focus for TDR. Hence in Germany, the Institute for Technology and Systems
Analysis has a focus on transitions to sustainability (CuveWaters) an d in Norway the

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 33
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Institute of Marine research is an interdisciplinary institute, whose mission includes
supporting innovation and sustainability (see CRISP).

6.6. Funding and evaluation of research proposals
“TDR applications often fail due to not fitting traditional field descriptions.”
“Funding is available for research component, but insuffici ent for real involvement of
non-academic stakeholders. At least 50% extra time and funding needed.”
“Lack of funding in framing phase was difficult.”
In most contexts, science funding mechanisms are aligned with disciplinary structures, and
thus dedicated funding is relatively scarce for TDR. Research assessment and competitive
grant awarding processes invariably depend on peer review that focuses on scientific
excellence, organized along disciplinary lines. The diversity of disciplines within
individual transdisciplinary projects might seem an advantage in terms of accessing distinct
funding opportunities, yet few of these countenance transdisciplinary approaches. Ev en
where research funding agencies or national strategic funding priorities recognise the need
for inter - and transdisciplinary research, this can be difficult to map onto existing
operational mechanisms and review criteria (Pohl et al., 2011[16]). For example, assessing
the merits of TDR proposals may fall to mono -disciplinary panels that lack experience in
TDR and do not understand its requirements. Efforts to mobilise TDR through traditional
review routes may lead to dispariti es in funding for different project components —
including where funding is earmarked for disciplinary research activities, thus neglecting
the broad engagement which is essential to TD.
The diversity of actors involved in TDR opens some new avenues for funding beyond
traditional academic or state science funding mechanisms. For example, TDR can draw on
corporate sources or on funding allocated for social or economic development in a variety
of sectors. Innovative funding structures can promote the involvement of relevant
stakeholders, including businesses and local communities. Yet the existence of new and
multiple funding sources with different rules and processes can also complicate
management of TDR.
Funding tends to reflect societal and scientific norms and established power relations. TDR
often challenges such norms, fundamentally requiring power to be shared among non-
traditional stakeholders. Moreover, it tends to focus on controversial societal issues
involving conflict among a variety of actors, and t herefore entails greater risks than
traditional research. These factors may decrease the incentive for relatively conservative
funding systems to foster TDR.
The emergence of TDR projects requires competitive funding geared to its needs and
realities. In addition to dedicated peer review and active programme management
significant time and resources are necessary for the initial co -design phase of project (see
Figure 4). Funding for this is rarely available under traditional research funding schemes.
In general, TDR is more resource- intensive, time-consuming, risky and prone to shifting
goals than traditional research. While it can yield proportionally greater benefits, it requires
more stable, reliable funding sources and a priori recognition of these challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 5. Conceptual model of a TDR funding programme

Note: A conceptualised programme design and management model for TDR involves 10 key stages (the width
of the symbols represents the relative importance of the stages over time
Source: Research funding programmes aiming for societal transformations: Ten key stages. Science and Public
Policy (Schneider et al., 2019[17]).
Research funders are in many cases responding to these needs by building dedicated
programmes around TDR. Typically, such programmes require transdisciplinary
approaches and ensure transdisciplinary competence in assessment panels. In the best
cases, they also have long-term time horizons, enabling research communities to plan future
activities. In some cases, they are challenge-driven, dedicated to a particular policy priority,
and they may cover activities from research to market, including innovation-related action
(see box 4).
6.7. Research publications, incentives and rewards
“In most contexts, TDR publication is more difficult than traditional publication and
traditional journals are rarely interested in TDR publications.”
 “Publication of TDR can be fostered by creation of TDR -specific jou rnals or by
influencing top journals to value TDR. Both pathways have value, but new journals are
generally less influential and less likely to be positively evaluated by disciplinary bodies.”
“Current standards for success in science offer no incentive for TDR.”
The traditional system for scientific publication is founded on academic peer -review
processes rooted in disciplinary structures. Whilst citation patterns of transdisciplinary

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 35
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

research papers have not been systematically studied, there is some evidence that
interdisciplinary work receives less attention on average than traditional research at the
level of both journals and individual articles (Barthel and Seidl, 2017[18]). This may reflect
the challenges of producing interdisciplinary research that meets traditional standards of
excellence or the structural incentives that encourage sci entists to pursue and cite
mono-disciplinary work in their own fields. It is clear also that some transdisci plinary
papers, in areas such as public health or ecosystem services, do manage to transcend these
challenges and are highly valued and acknowledged by scientific peers.
As publications are generally considered to be the most valuable output of scientific
research—and by extrapolation the primary measure of both individual and institutional
performance—they play a critical role in determining career paths (see earlier discussion)
and allocation of research funding. Hence, barriers to publishing TDR research are a strong
disincentive to the very conduct of such research. Whilst disciplinary advances can be made
(and published) in the context of TDR projects, the publication system will need to evolve
to provide fair and rigorous review for integrated TDR outputs in many different fields.

Box 4. What are Research Funders doing to support TDR?
Research funders in many countries are striving to promote TDR through the
development of dedicated grant programmes. These programmes tend to differ in a
number of ways from regular competitive research funding programmes. Hence, they
may have different criteria, proposal definition, preparation and review processes and
award management and monitoring procedures. Some illustrative examples are given
below.
The NSF Convergence Research Programme focuses on novel research at the
interface between different disciplines (and other stakeholders). It has established a
reviewers’ college of leading scientists who are given special training to help ensure that
they can fairly assess inter - and trans -disciplinary proposals. Projects are actively
managed and reviewed after two years at which point they may be discontinued.
The Brussels Institute for Research and Innovation (Innoviris) has launched a
research program called “Co-Create” that funds research and innovation projects based
on Participatory Action Research Principles (PAR) in the fields of Urban Sustainable
Food Systems and Urban Resilience. The projects are carried out in experimental
spaces directly in the users' living environment, where usage is the main driver of
innovation. The Co- Create action aims at reinforcing the relevance of the innovations
for urban resilience within the Brussels -Capital Region (Hulhoven, n.d. [19]). This
research program is the first of its kind in Belgium which makes it very innovative and
experimental both in terms of the type of projects funded and the funding allocation
process. For instance, the selection and evaluation of the projects is done by a mixed
panel of experts (researchers, social workers or other field workers) in the relevant
domain, and also by a jury composed of citizens.
Germany’s Research for Sustainable Development (Forschung für Nachhaltige
Entwicklung FONA) initiative aims to develop decision-making tools for future-oriented
action and deliver innovative solutions for a sustainable society. Under its third
framework programme (FONA3), the Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) supports sustainability resear ch in Germany. A multi -stakeholder agenda-
setting was carried out to define research priorities. There are three flagship initiatives:
Green Economy; the City of the Future; and the Energy Transition in Germany. These
are designed to be application-oriented, and include stakeholders, such as businesses
and local communities. (see also the APV-RESOLA case vignette).

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Japan has a number of programmes that support TDR. The Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST) manages the Centre of Innovation (CO I) programme to
promote collaboration between the private sector and academia and projects must have
co-leaders from each sector. COI projects use a back -casting co- design approach
focussed on societal problems. They receive funding not only from JST but also from
private companies and many involve multiple stakeholders (see Mobility case study).
The RISTEX programme (see the report on open research agenda setting (OECD,
2017[20])) uses a proactive and iterative management process to develop and support
trans-disciplinary research projects to address complex problems at the local community
scale. The Government of Japan’s Cross-ministerial Strategic Innovation
Promotion Program (SIP) aims to realize innovation beyond the framework of
government ministries and traditional disciplines and again includes support for TDR as
well as broader innovation actions.
The UK Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF) is a GBP 1.5 billion fund
announced by the UK Government in late 2015 to promote challenge-led research with
a focus on developing countries . The initial funding was for 5 years, during which time
a number of interdisciplinary research nodes have been established in UK Universities.
This required a considerable amount of negotiation between the funders and
Universities but is driving systemic change.
France have reorganized its National Research Strategy for 2014-2020 along a set
of societal challenges. This implies breaking the walls between fundamental and applied
research, researchers and stakeholders, which requires interdisciplinary and
transdisciplinary approaches. This strategy, led by the Ministry of Higher Education,
Research and Innovation (MESRI), is being implemented by a seri es of programs at
national, European or international level. Each involves ad- hoc committees, with
appropriate expertise and experience, to select project that are funded by the National
Research Agency (ANR).
Following the engagement of citizens in develo ping a national research agenda, NWO
in the Netherlands has implemented a dedicated funding programme for collaboration
between knowledge institutes and social partners to study urgent issues, including those
identified the national agenda. The Research Along Routes by Consortia
(NWA-ORC) programme has a three phase submission process: initiatives,
pre-proposals and full proposals.
Norway’s Collaborative and Knowledge -building Project provides support to
national research organisations that apply in coopera tion with relevant actors from the
private and/or public sector. The objective is to promote cooperation and develop R&D
expertise and capacity in areas of importance to society and business and industry.
The European Commission’s ‘Science with and for Soc iety’ SWAFS programme is
targeted at European societal challenges and aims to build capacity and develop
innovative ways of connecting science to society. It supports all societal actors
(researchers, citizens, policymakers, business, non-governmental organisations etc.) to
work together during the entire research and innovation cycle. Many of the projects
within this Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) programme are transdisciplinary
and the programme design includes an open on-line consultation process.
The Belmont Forum , brings together national funding agencies and organises co-
design workshops to develop its collaborative research actions, which are all
interdisciplinary and many of which are transdisciplinary. This forum has close links with
the Future Earth initiative, which provides a global framework for sustainability research
under the aegis of the International Science Council.
The Leading Integrated Research for Agenda 2030 in Africa (LIRA) programme is
managed by the International Science Council with funding from the Swedish
Development Agency. This programme supports TDR projects in African countries. It

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 37
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

has implemented a multi -step proposal development and review process, including
training workshops for applicants who pass the 1st stage of review.

7. Challenges for transdisciplinary research extending beyond research systems
“TDR can foster ground- breaking cooperation between historically antagonistic groups,
with science functioning as a neutral interface.”
“Scientists must display high professional competence to be taken seriously in tackling
societal issues.”
Beyond securing insights and information essential to addressing complex societal
challenges, the inclusion of stakeholders from outside of academia in research processes
has other important potential benefits. These include promoting ownership and uptake of
research results and solutions; nurturing understanding of science and its processes and
growing trust in science. Yet, the inclusion of non -academic stakeholders also ra ises a
number of issues relating to research integrity, credit and acknowledgement, equity and
ethics—in the first instance at the level of individual projects, but also with broader
implications for science policy.
7.1. Engaging non-academic stakeholders in transdisciplinary research
Effective inclusion of non -academic stakeholders in TDR requires an understanding of
their potential contribution and expectations and the processes needed to sustain and derive
greatest value from their participation.
Non-academic stakeholders vary widely in their incentives, ways of working, language and
capabilities—both within and across sectors. They tend to act, react and evaluate
knowledge in different ways to academics, and they often have access to information
unavailable to researchers. Indeed, non-academic stakeholders can provide critical insights
and challenge the assumptions of academics —in some cases, such insights lead to re-
evaluation of goals or changing of project activities. Often, non-academic stakeholders
have more power to act, and are better positioned to overcome barriers (e.g., language,
institutional, bureaucratic, legal) than researchers. As such, securing their ‘buy -in’ is
critical to implementing interventions. Non-academic stakeholders are often also in a better
position to evaluate societal impacts and feasibility of interventions than researchers.
Non-academic stakeholders play various roles in TDR projects. In some cases, they are the
primary drivers of demand for the research. While engagement in TDR projects is usually
iterative, non-academic stakeholders often play significant roles both at the beginning of
the process, where broad preliminary consultation is undertaken to establish goals and
clarify relationships, and toward the end, when project s tend to shift from fundamental
research or technology development to implementation and diffusion. In some cases, non-
academic partners have significant capacity for scientific research, and may thus be
involved on a more continuous basis. Elsewhere, tec hnology transfer and training for
societal partners may be explicit goals. Engagement is typically multifaceted, and the
timing is often driven by non-science factors. While co-leadership is the ideal, in practice
TDR projects are often led by academic researchers and relationships vary widely.
Various processes are critical to establishing and maintaining effective participation of non-
academic stakeholders. Understanding the incentives of the specific groups involved is
critical; for instance, whereas businesses may react negatively to perceived threats to their
activities or profit, scientists may have concerns about the publishability of results.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Moreover, neither all scientists nor all businesses (nor other stakeholder groups) are alike—
for example, sm all businesses may be more dynamic and innovative, but are also much
more vulnerable, than large businesses. It should not be assumed that understanding across
stakeholder domains will emerge spontaneously —in fact, elucidating potential conflicts
can require significant, dedicated effort. Engagement often involves explicit negotiation,
for example of the allocation of funding among partners, the distribution of benefits arising
from research, the nature of quid pro quo relationships, or even of direct payme nt of
non-academic stakeholders for their participation. The natural complexity of TDR may
discourage participation, but candid negotiation, along with standardization of protocols
and agreements, can help.
Where there are significant differences in perce ived power or authority among different
stakeholders, specific processes may be required to allow for more open, equal exchange;
for example, at Nagoya University COI certain individuals from business and local
government are designated “s ocial implementat ion leaders”, a designation which
empowers them to offer opinions to academics in positions of high authority (see Mobility
case vignette).
7.2. Ethical considerations
Most TDR incorporates a strong equity dimension by virtue of its orientation towards
societal problem-solving and its incorporation of non -academic stakeholders. Similarly,
while TDR is bound by the same ethical considerations as traditional research, it will often
require greater attention to these issues as a consequence of its societal framing and direct
impacts. Ethical issues can arise both in the design and management of TDR projects and
in the practice of TDR. Some of the issues that require careful attention in TDR are
described below.
Diversity and inclusivity of partners are important ethical considerations: project
stakeholders should be chosen not only based on technical, disciplinary or sectoral
proficiency, but to represent those groups who will be impacted by the research and any
implemented solutions. This often implies a high diversity of backgrounds and worldviews
in project teams; as such, it is important that TDR projects incorporate the expertise needed
to understand all stakeholders’ needs and positions , and to resolve conflicts ; this may
include, for example, expertise in psychology, law, culture, policy or specific languages.
Gender balance and diversity of individuals across different project partners are
normally important considerations. Complex societal issues invariably concern both men
and women and normally cut across different societal groupings. Hence, it is important that
these different perspectives are included in TDR that attempts to address these issues.
Asymmetries of power can exist between different academic and non- academic partners
and knowledge production itself can accentuate these asymmetries. Over the life of a
project, there is a need to continually identify and mitigate power differentials. Ethical
conduct demands honesty and transparency in dealings with end users, as well as
meaningful engagement of all stakeholders, i.e. engagement should carry with it a
reasonable expectation of affecting project goals, processes and actions
Cultural equity and/or language issues can be important considerations. This is
frequently the case in international projects but these issues can also be important in local
scale projects. Because effective communication is critical in TDR, ensuring sufficient
language proficiency on the project team is often important
Data access and who controls access can be a particularly sensitive issue. This relates not
only to personal data and other forms of sensitive data, which cannot be made openly

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 39
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

available, but it also relates to the broader issues of responsibilities and rights to access and
use data, both during the course of a project and after it completion .
Equitable distribution of risks and benefits : Well-designed TDR projects proactively
identify potential winners and losers, especially with respect to vulnerable groups and take
measures to balance risks and benefits. Stakeholders have different incentives, some of
which may conflict with each other and these need to be recognised and addressed in an
equitable manner.
The potential for un intended consequences of the implementation of an intervention.
These consequences can extend to groups that are not directly involved in a project and
hence have ‘no voice’. Outreach and consultation activities that extend beyond project
partners are one way to explore unintended consequences
Not every ethical concern is relevant to every TDR project, and some issues only arise or
become apparent during the course of project activities. Accordingly, while a priori ethical
approval should be an integral pa rt of TDR, ethical review is an ongoing process, salient
over the life of a project.
8. Monitoring and impact assessment of transdisciplinary projects
Inter- and transdisciplinary research projects are highly heterogeneous, challenging the
development of generali sed frameworks for monitoring and assessment of both project
functioning and project impacts (Klein, 2008 [21]). Moreover, the measurement and
evaluation of the societal impacts of TDR are chall enging because of non- linear
dependencies, multiple interacting drivers, and relatively long, uncertain time scales for
realising “impact” (Roux et al., 2010[22]). New frameworks are needed to assess a priori
the likelihood that projects will be successful, to ensure their continued effectiveness once
initiated, and to measure their impact upon completion.
Complex TDR projects (and programmes) require dedicated management tools and
processes, which can aid in effective monitoring. For certain projects, depending on their
scale, policy -cycle management methodologies (e.g., log frames) derived from
development or business may be useful. Likewise, regular contact with sponsoring agencies
and or external advisory or steering committees can be useful.
Monitoring and assessment should be distributed, with different criteria assessed at
timescales appropriate to the various components and aims of TDR (e.g., scientific rigour,
citizen feedback, logistical efficiency). Given the experimental nature of TDR, monitoring
must often be more flexible than for traditional research, recogni sing shifting goals and
priorities. TDR can also be more risky, i.e. the outputs are less predictable than more
traditional research approaches, and it can be expensive. The costs and potential benefits
need to be evaluated not only at the outset of a project but at regular intervals during its
implementation. This can require active project management from the project sponsor(s).
In general, ex post evaluation processes should consider the extent to which TDR projects
benefit all stakeholders. In contrast to typical academic projects, valid deliverables from
TDR projects will include both qualitative and quantitative outcomes and both academic
and non-academic outputs. To properly assess the latter, assessments can be solicited from
non-academic actors and beneficiaries of the research, with due attention to potential
conflicts of interest. Depth and quality of participation and visibil ity (e.g., in media or
political statements) may themselves be valid assessment variables for TDR, as may the
extent of new investment or funding for a societal issue.
Assessment processes for TDR need to take into account the reality that impacts on both
science and policy may not be realised immediately and can be difficult to estimate. For

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

example, the emergence of new frameworks for thinking or new ways of working can be
intermediate outcomes of significant value that are not always acknowledged in
evaluations.
Pathways-to-impact and theory-of-change approaches can be useful in visualising impacts
and articulating goals. As discussed earlier in section 3, there are a number of overlapping
concepts and different communities that have been using TDR -related approaches in
different contexts. The development research community and clinical research community
have developed their own impact assessment approaches and there are considerable
opportunities for mutual learning across different sectors.
9. Case study vignettes
This section includes short summaries of each of the case studies that were interviewed for
this report (tables 1a and 1b). Whilst previous sections have drawn heavily on this case
work and have included selected extracts from the interviews to illustrate specific issues,
the individual case reports can help the reader understand how these issues manifest at the
operational project level. Each case vignette includes a small number of lessons learned
and potential policy implications. These serve to contextualise and reinforce the more
normative cross-study analysis that has been presented in the earlier sections of this report.
Both the cross -study analysis and the individual case studies have been considered in
developing the overall conclusions and recommendations that are presented in full at the
start of this report and are summarised at the end.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 41
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

1. Acclimaterra, a study of climate change and its impacts in the New Aquitaine Region
[http://www.acclimaterra.fr/]
‒ Main Institutions: Sorbonne University, Paris, France
‒ Disciplines involved: Physics; biochemistry; oceanography; meteorology and climatology;
economy; law; political study; social study.
‒ Societal partners: Regional and local authorities; NGOs; citizens.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 100K/year (9 years). Main funding from the New Aquitaine
local government.
Summary: Acclimaterra gathers scientific evidence on how climate change may affect key regional
assets in a variety of domains (agriculture, fisheries, urban areas, littoral areas, mountains, etc.). It
examines the direct and indirect consequences of these impacts (e.g., on economics, biodiversity,
energy mix). Its aim is to propose specific adaptation actions to the regional government, while also
identifying mitigation opportunities. In so doing it carries out dialogues with key actors in the region
and develops outreach activities.
The origins of this project go back to 2014 when, in response to a request from the regional authority,
a group of scientists from different disciplines came together to do a regional integrated science
assessment similar to that conducted globally by the Inter -Governmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). This led to extensive dialogue with local stakeholders and 2
nd integrated assessment report
was commissioned and published in 2018. The framing and development process for this 2nd report
involved active engagement with local social and economic actors. It was drafted by a core group
of ~20 scientists with contributions from ~300 more experts from academia and non- governmental
organisations. Publication was followed by an intense outreach effort.
The project implemented two parallel processes to incorporate diverse academic and stakeholder
perspectives. The first was a dialogue within the academic domain, with progressive integration of
science-oriented NGOs. The second was an outreach and dialogue process with civil society that
included five meetings in different cities that helped frame the 2
nd report and an ongoing process of
engagement with citizens, schools and other stakeholders in different towns and cities to discuss the
report’s findings. This engagement process has included the development of a ‘climate train’
travelling exhibition.
Acclimaterra is associated with almost all decisions being taken by the regional authority about
climate change which is one indication of its impact. More broadly it has promoted an informed
dialogue amongst different regional actors and contributed to e ducation at different levels.
Unfortunately, the main publications addressed to decision- makers are in French, which has not
allowed for communication to the international scientific community.
Lessons learned:
• The project worked because there was a stron g scientific motivation – to identify missing
links and areas in scientific knowledge – as well as a clear policy demand from the local
government.
• Many young researchers can be easily motivated to take part in outreach events and
exhibitions.
• Locally targeted TDR can produce important learning experiences and knowledge of much
wider relevance but language can be a barrier to dissemination.
• High-level scientific publications have been hindered by the local dimension of the study
and by the fact that all initial materials were in French language.
Policy implications: Integrated scientific assessments can be enhanced by using a TD approach
particularly where the aim is to translate the outcomes into local solutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

2. Agrophotovoltaics – Resource-Efficient L and Use (APV- RESOLA)
[https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/en/research-projects/apv-resola.html]
‒ Main Research Institutions : Karlsruhe Institute of Technology; Fraunhofer Institute for
Solar Energy Systems (ISE); University of Hohenheim.
‒ Disciplines involved : Agriculture; environment; biodiversity; techno -economics; and
social sciences.
‒ Practice partners and stakeholder: Farmers (Hofgemeinschaft Heggelbach); renewable
energy develop er (BayWa r.e., EWS Vertriebs GmbH); regional federation
(Regionalverband Bodensee-Oberschwaben); local community (Herdwangen-Schönach).
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 223K (2015-2019). Main funding from Ministry for Research
and Education
Summary: A main objecti ve of this research project was the co -design of a societally acceptable
and feasible technological innovation in the context of increasing land use competition.
Agrophotovoltaics (APV) is a technology that combines power production with photovoltaics and
agricultural food production by using high -fixed PV modules. APV is a technological response t o
the food versus energy debate that addresses different societal challenges, including the energy
transition, climate change, and land-use efficiency. Power supply by open space photovoltaics (PV)
requires large areas and thus increases the demand for limited agricultural land. Double harvesting
with APV can potentially reduce the competition for land between agriculture and the energy
industry.
This inter- and transdisciplinary project aimed to integrate non-academic stakeholders and actors in
the process of co -developing the technology and identifying conditions for the design and
implementation of APV, which meet the criterion of acceptability as well as the ne eds of
policymakers, service providers and technology developers. With different formats and methods of
social sciences, such as guided in-depth interviews, surveys and citizen and stakeholder workshops
members from different stakeholder groups as well as citizens were integrated into the research
concept to combine academic and non-academic perspectives. Participants in the citizen workshops
were selected to ensure diversity in terms of age, gender, education, profession, political interests,
etc. The requ irements and recommendations from the citizen’s perspective were analysed and
discussed in a stakeholder workshop that included representatives from key stakeholder groups, such
as decision -makers from administration, politics and economics, farmers associ ation and local
tourists association, as well as representatives from nature conservation. Main findings from these
workshops were communicated to the technology developers and providers, who in turn were asked
to respond to arguments and recommendations from the stakeholders.
The main challenge in the research project was to overcome the concerns of technology developers
that social science could harm their project by identifying negative consequences, and thereby
promoting resistance to the technology a nd the pilot plant. These fears were built on past negative
experience of local public resistance to biogas plants and wind parks in the region.
Lessons learned:
• Citizens and stakeholder should be involved early during the development of technologies
that may affect their local environment and quality of life.
• The relationship between research -based consultation and decision -making needs to be
clear and transparent if trust is to be built and maintained among different stakeholders.
• It is important to create structures and build expertise that support TDR, as ITAS has done.
Policy implications: Governments, funders and universities should commit to supporting
transdisciplinary approaches in technology development and assessment. This requires capacity
building and new framework conditions for allocating funding.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 43
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

3. ASU Decision Center for a Desert City (DCDC) [https://sustainability.asu.edu/dcdc/]
‒ Main Institutions: Arizona State University.
‒ Disciplines involved: decision science; policy studies; geography; hydrology; life science;
economics; anthropology; computer science; urban planning; public administration.
‒ Societal partners: Local governments; environmental organisations; farmers; museums
and schools.
‒ Funding and timing: ~17M EUR (2004-) in total direct investment via the National
Science Foundation (NSF), supplemented by ~ 18M EUR in additional leveraged a wards
from NSF, NASA, NOAA and other sources.
Summary: The mission of the DCDC is to develop a transdisciplinary network of scientists,
students, and stakeholders cooperatively producing transformational solutions to inform evidence -
supported strategies fo r transitions towards sustainable water management in the Colorado river
basin.
DCDC was established in 2004 with an investment from NSF through their Decision Making Under
Uncertainty (DMUU) program. The Centre brings together a transdisciplinary team of social,
behavioural, economic, and sustainability scientists working in close collaboration with
stakeholders. A diverse group of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scholars are educated
and trained with a focus on key competencies in sustainabili ty through real -world sustainability
research and education experiences. The project builds on and strengthens networks of scientists and
decision-makers that improve the relevance of scientific knowledge for policy and foster learning
across diverse persp ectives. A variety of formal and informal approaches are employed to ensure
that non-academic perspectives are integrated into project design, implementation and evaluation.
This includes science-policy workshops, collaborative (TDR) research and water/cl imate briefings.
An External Advisory Committee includes representation from key decision-making institutions.
Early career researchers can face unique risks when participating in transdisciplinary projects,
related to the length of time to publication and perceptions that use-inspired research is less rigorous
or scientifically impactful than basic research. To address this challenge, the centre provides
specialised training and post -doctoral research mentorship programs. All postdocs are required to
submit an Individual Development Plan, as well as participating in regular mentorship meetings and
evaluations. The Centre has worked also with university administration, as part of a larger
university-wide effort, to reform promotion and tenure review proc edures to provide adequate
recognition for transdisciplinary research, and research that is focused on positive societal impact in
addition to contributing to knowledge advancement. Indeed, conducting “Use Inspired Research” is
one of the Eight Design Aspirations
 that guide the university.
Lessons learned:
• Specific strategies are needed to overcome lack of awareness of problems, including
insufficient framing and unbalanced ownership of projects. Pilot studies can help identify
and resolve these problems.
• It can be challenging to identify adequate funds to support broad stakeholder engagement
through conventional science grants. Joint fundraising with stakeholders is one solutio n.
• Formal organisational structures to support collaboration (i.e., boundary -spanning
organisations), as well as informal structures (i.e., social norms), are essential.
• Significant investment has been required in data infrastructure to address the challe nge of
integrating data across social/behavioural sciences with physical sciences and engineering.
Policy implications : Government and public sector organisations are important stakeholders in
many TDR projects. Governments can provide incentives and time to support the public sector in
participating in transdisciplinary collaborations and in making in -kind contributions of data and
knowledge.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

4. ‘CAMINOLARGO’ (Longroad), Colombia [https://caminolargo.co]
‒ Main Institutions: Universidad El Bosque; Archives of Traditional Music, Indiana
University; Fundación Instituto Folclórico Colombiano de Delia Zapata Olivella;
El Palenque de Delia; Estudios Audiovisión.
‒ Disciplines involved: traditional music; ethnomusicology ; architecture/territory
studies; creative/cultural industries; sound engineering; musical production; sound
documentaries; graphic and industrial design; law.
‒ Societal partners: Independent music producers and musicians.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 9.7K (2018-2019).
Summary: The ‘Caminolargo’ project aims to pass on Maroon musical traditions to future
generations—in particular, the music of Juan Lara as interpreted by Los Gaiteros de San Jacinto.
This involved the recovery and understanding of cultural heritage in the form of music for pipers
and its translation from a period when it was distributed directly from player to listener without any
intermediaries to the modern era where cultural industries and information and communication
technologies enable both the appropriation and the wide dissemination of music.
The project traces the history of the mixed -blood, ‘heritageable’ music of the ' palenques', where
Maroon Afro -Americans lived together with Native -Amerindians on the Co lombian Caribbean
Coast for 200 years. It tells the story of Delia Zapata, folk -dance choreographer, who accompanied
ethnomusicologist George List (Indiana University -ATM) during fieldwork (1964- 1968). In San
Jacinto (Montes de Maria), List recorded the testimony and pipe music of Los Gaiteros de San
Jacinto (1G). List’s archives rested at IU -ATM for 60 years until digital copies repatriated to
Colombia in 2012 by ethno -musicologist J. Sebastian Rojas were re -appropriated by Los Gaiteros
de San Jacinto (4G) in 2018.
The project concretizes a historical, technological innovation process in the form of a hybrid
product–a CD/art book special edition –for collectors and archives, and digitally, through Internet
platforms—complex products of the intersection of value chains and creativ e ecosystems in the
music and publishing industries). Audiovisión studios (Bogotá) engineered a digital edition of List’s
archives in documentary format. ‘ Caminolargo’ received a Global Music Awards Gold Medal
(2019).
Lessons learned:
The transdisciplinary approach helped to capture Maroon culture through a complex creation ‘triad’
involving cultural industries, traditional creation, and arts-based research.
Policy Implications: TDR can play a role in the recovery, preservation and appropriate promotion
of Cultural heritage, with arts and humanities having an important contribution to make.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 45
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

5. Climate Change and Sea Level Rise in the Anthropocene: Challenges fo r International
Law in the 21st Century [https://www.fni.no/projects/climate-change-and-sea-level-rise-in-
the-anthropocene-challenges-for-international-law-in-the-21st-century]
‒ Main Institutions: Fridtjof Nansen Institute
‒ Disciplines involved: International Law, Geological sciences
‒ Societal partners: The International Law Association (ILA), media, filmmakers, artists,
cultural organizations, private organizations and inter-governmental bodies
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 782K (2014-2019). Main funding from the Research Council
of Norway.
Summary: The overall objective of this project was to provide a comprehensive study of potential
international law responses to scientific projections of sea -level rise. Changes resulting from sea -
level rise will cause territorial changes, and may consequently question the agreed maritime
boundaries and even the survival of some island states, with implications for migrat ion. This will
require a profound re -examination of some currently- accepted perspectives of international law.
This work started as an interdisciplinary research activity, but it evolved into a truly transdisciplinary
project.
There were pre- existing re lationships between several project members in the international
Anthropocene Working Group (AWG, under the aegis of the International Union of Geological
Sciences) and several members of the ILA Committee on International Law and Sea Level Rise.
The Principal Investigator – was involved in both AWG and ILA and this facilitated mutual
communication between those two bodies. Additional aspects of transdisciplinary cooperation were
developed, during a series of informal meetings and formal events that were organised by academic
and non-academic partners, during the course of the project
The project had tangible societal impacts in different spheres. For instance, when the United Nations
International Law Commission (ILC) included of the topic on Sea -level rise in its long -term
programme of work, the focus was on those areas originally defined in the AWG-ILA work. Impacts
of the project were also recognised when the Fridtjof Nansen Institute won the UK Prospect Award
as the Best European Think Tank in the field of Energy, Environment and Science in three successive
years from 2017 to 2019.
Project results were disseminated through media, including newspapers and presentation of project
findings through documentaries, such as the “Anthropocene”. This film has been shown at over 30
festivals worldwide. There has also been extensive dissemination of the project results through
cultural and art institutions and events.
Lessons learned:
• Pre-existing relations with non -academic stakeholders, that may even depend on a single
individual, can be critical to developing a TDR project.
• A TDR approach can increase the dissemination and impact of project results by providing
broader access to media (e.g., newspapers and television/cinema) or cultural and art
institutions (e.g., museums) which have a stake in the project outcomes.
• Established international associations/networks can provide an important anchor for
transdisciplinary research that addresses global issues.
Policy implications: Research funders can promote transdisciplinary research by building on
existing interdisciplinary activities, addressing problems that can benefit from including other
stakeholders.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

6. The Centre for Research -based Innovation in Sustainable fish capture and Processing
technology (CRISP) [ https://www.uib.no/en/research/75371/centre-research-based-
innovation-sustainable-fishing-and-pre-processing-technology]
‒ Main Institutions: Institute of Marine Research (IMR)
‒ Disciplines involved : led by marine acoustics, fishing technology, IMR is an
interdisciplinary institute
‒ Societal partners : Manufacturers of fishing equipment, Norwegian Fishermen’s Sales
Association for Pelagic Fish and the Norwegian Fishermen’s Sales Organization
‒ Funding and timing : EUR 24K (2011-2019). Main funding source from the Research
Council of Norway and private companies.
Summary: CRISP was funded as a Centre for Research-based Innovation (CRI). The main intention
of CRIs is to create or strengthen Norwegian research groups that cooperate closely with prominent
innovation communities. The scheme is intended to improve Norway’s industrial competitiveness
and to support Norway’s participation in strong international research networks. Fisheries
technology is in a field where both the Norwegian industry and research institutions have strong
traditions for innovation and cooperation, and it was anticipated that the partners would strongly
benefit from joining a CRI.
The main objective of this project was to develop “smart technologies” which may lead to
responsible fisheries and at the same time, improve the profitability of the fishing fleet and
supporting industries. Some of the challenges in this project are to develop instruments to identify
species and sizes of fish in the sea, to design trawls that minimise the environmental impact on
bottom habitats, and to analyse the economic benefits to the fishing industry resulting from new
technologies developed in this project.
There had been a long history of cooperation between most of the industry a nd research partners in
CRISP. The research and industry partners selected the research themes in cooperation. The ideas
for innovations were mainly launched by the industry partners, while the research teams added to
the theoretical basis and field -tested the products under development. From a research capacity
perspective it was notable that many students involved with thi s project are now employed in the
fisheries sector, either in industry or academia. Although men traditionally dominate this sector,
half of these students are female.
One major challenge in this programme was that there is a fundamental difference in the research
partners’ need for the publishing of their work to build a scientific career and the industry partners’
need for confidentiality to protect their business ideas.
Lessons learned:
• The industry tends to protect data and information. On the othe r hand, researchers need to
publish the results of their projects. This fundamental gap in their incentives may create
conflict during or after TDR projects.
• Students who work on TDR projects can gain experience of working with the private sector
(and other stakeholders) which can help them develop transferable skills. This can provide
an entry to different career paths beyond academic research.
Policy implications: The research funders and institutions need to adjust their evaluation systems
to value not only academic publications but also research-based innovation activities.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 47
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

7. CuveWaters [http://www.cuvewaters.net]
‒ Main Institutions: ISOE—Institute for Social-Ecological Research.
‒ Disciplines involved: Social sciences, civil engineering, urban water management,
‒ Societal partners: Water reclamation company; ministries (urban and rural development,
water, agriculture, and forestry); regional and town council; traditional authorities; citizens
and NGO; Desert Research Foundation of Namibia; German Corporation for International
Cooperation (GIZ); German Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources
(BGR).
‒ Funding and timing: No budgetary information (2006 – 2015). Main funding from
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
Summary: Almost half the Namibian population lives in the Cuvelai -Estosha basin, an area
characterised by climatic extremes, with droughts and floods alternating seasonally. This project
aimed to support and improve Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) in the northern
Namibian Cuvelai-Etosha Basin region. This required cooperation with local people as well as with
private sector implementation partners, town and regional council, governmental institutions and
traditional authorities.
The preliminary phase of the project was critical to analysing needs and getting to know the main
stakeholders, other relevant institutions and formal and informal decision -making processes. The
first phase, in Germany, featured a project structure linking ISOE—responsible for coordinating the
project, soci al science research and the TDR approach —with various partners in the Technical
University of Darmstadt and German companies, who led the construction and technological
implementation options. Needs were initially determined through a survey of non -academic
stakeholders, communicated to technicians/engineers and tested in the community. This
participatory-adaptive demand- response procedure required significant effort but was of great
importance.
The crucial feature of this project is that the local population accompanies and influences the design
and realisation of technologies. Technical implementation is discussed with local residents and
adapted accordingly. Moreover, engineering innovations are always coupled with capacity
development. As such, local residents are trained in construction, maintenance and operation of the
facilities. This project developed concepts for good governance and to support institutional
processes, while investigating the underlying socio-ecological framework.
Lessons learned:
• Exploration of demand and requirements from potential users was a crucial first step for
improving integrated water management strategies with new technologies.
• Building trust among local stakeholders was essential and this required a lot of effort with
many meetings with the local partners and different institutions (town/regional councils,
ministries and traditional authorities).
• Technical innovations need to be combined with social innovations for being sustainable.
Policy implications: Training for local partners is often important to ensure that the long term
benefits transdisciplinary projects are realised and sustained. This requires support for capacity
building embedded within TDR and for long-term follow up.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

8. Food4Sustainability [http://www.food4sustainability.be]
‒ Main Institutions : Université catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain), Université libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven)
‒ Disciplines involved: economics; policy science; business; philosophy; agronomy; Social
Science and Humanities.
‒ Societal partners : stakeholders related to food supply chain, urban gardening,
cooperative/social economy, catering, labelling, local currency and social financing.
‒ Funding and timing : EUR 750K (2014–2018). Main funding from Belgian Federal
Science Policy Office
Summary: The provision of agricultural inputs and the production, packaging, processing,
transport, and distribution of food contribute 19- 29% of global anthropogenic greenhouse gas
emissions, exerting significant pressure on natural resources—especially water, nitrogen, phosphate,
and arable land. Reforming food systems is thus essential for a transition towards a low -carbon,
resource-efficient society. This project examined potential transformation pathways, both in
mainstream food systems that rely on large pr ocessors and retailers and in alternative food systems
that have typically emerged in a bottom -up way, often through local and citizen -based initiatives.
Challenges were identified in the project proposal, but precise themes resulted from co-design in the
first and third years of the project.
The overall project direction was managed through in -person and virtual meetings with all project
researchers and PIs of the various universities. To integrate across disciplines, the team
implemented workshops and j oint publications. This project relied on extensive semi -structured
interviews and workshops with societal actors to identify potentially effective policy innovations,
accounting for the values and beliefs of stakeholders in the various food systems. Non -academic
participants were selected through systematic mapping of actors in the alternative food networks
(urban gardens, collective food buying groups, etc.) and through workshops. Non- academic
participants were all involved in co -design of research quest ions, with workshops being held at
regular intervals.
Adopting a transdisciplinary approach allowed the team to develop a high- level, integrated
understanding of problem domains, which required both knowledge from different disciplines and
non-academic inputs and expertise.
Lessons learned:
• The main challenge was to adjust scientific protocols to varying access rights to data. For
alternative food networks, a combination of in -depth case study research and large -scale
comparative assessment through surveys—the preferred scientific approach—was possible.
However, it was not feasible when dealing with the private sector, given the complexity of
producing confidentiality agreements.
• To be successful, a transdisciplinary research project requires a true co-construction process
that encompasses three dimensions: co -construction of the research question, the selection
of methodologies and definition of the societal objectives in the problem field.
Policy implications: Governments can develop dedicated funding a nd evaluation mechanisms and
establish centres of expertise in TDR. Universities/research institutions can take a lead in building
capacity for TDR, including support for training and networks.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 49
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

9. Frugal Innovations and Responsible Entrepreneurship: Case Studies in the Water and
Health Sectors in East Africa [https://www.cfia.nl/home]
‒ Main Institutions: Delft University of Technology; Erasmus University Rotterdam;
University of Nairobi.
‒ Disciplines involved: Economics; engineering; ethics; medical anthropology; development
research; philosophy; entrepreneurship.
‒ Societal partners : Electronics company (Philips); water treatment solution company
(Hatenboer); drinking water company (OASEN); NGO.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 507K (2015- 2019); Main funding from Dutch Research
Council (NWO).
Summary: This project explored new inclusive business models for Dutch companies to improve
their performance in commercialising frugal innovations in developing countries. Technical design
phases of the innovation development cycle were integrated with ethical and development
considerations. Results should help entrepreneurs understand how, when and why to integrate ethical
and developmental considerations in technological development processes.
The project originated in an existing Dutch academic network in response to a call from the Dutch
funding agency NWO, with partners selected based on familiarity and earlier collaboration
experience. Academic partners in East Africa were selected to meet the needs of the research project,
although the inclusion of partners from the region of interest was also a requirement of the funding
programme. In general, academic partners provided theory, while private sector partners provided
empirical data. Private sector partners also contributed about one-quarter of total funding.
The transdisciplinary engagement occurred most prominently at annual meetings, but frequent
additional contacts were made. Whereas the transdisciplinary approach was initially desig ned to
meet the requirements of the funding call, it became clear over the course of the project that it added
substantial value. For example, understanding the roles and actions of various partners with respect
to frugal innovation led to important insigh ts about equity -related consequences of certain
interventions. Collaboration with non -academic partners allowed for incorporation of real -world
cases, data and practical experience. For industry, added value consisted in part in learning how to
experiment with an idea in collaboration with academics. The inclusion of ethics at an early stage
was seen as having significant value. Challenges included the tendency for private sector partners
to be protective of proprietary data. Important project outputs included scientific findings in journal
articles, annual reports, the project website, and a video.
Lessons learned:
• Lack of institutional arrangements and support pose significant challenges for TDR
• Both academic and non-academic partners must benefit from TDR, for it to be successful.
Template agreements that harmonize expectations and responsibilities between different
actors can help
• Awareness of direct competition among private sector partners can be important
Policy implications: Despite a trend towards more TDR including support from funders,
institutional mechanisms to support it are often not in place and this can be more of a challenge the
more partners that are engaged.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

10. Governing risk society (GOVRISK) [https://blogg.hioa.no/govrisk/]
‒ Main Institutions: Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional Research, Oslo
Metropolitan University; Norwegian Institute for Water Research; Department of Business
Administration, Technology and Social Sciences, Luleå U niversity of Technology;
University of Gothenburg; InterSus.
‒ Disciplines involved: Political science; policy; law; environmental science; geoscience;
ecology.
‒ Societal partners: Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 950K (2014–2018). Main funding from Research Council of
Norway
Summary: This project aimed to provide new knowledge on how to increase local adaptive capacity
to the negative impacts of climate change, including flooding and landslides. The focus was on the
role of planning and learning networks.
Expected impacts were: A) to increase insights into how legal, financial and institutional instruments
hinder or stimulate local climate change adaptation; B) to gain new knowledge on how planning can
be used as a mechanism to increase cross-sectoral and multi-level coordination of climate adaptation
efforts b y public and private actors; C) to increase understanding of how learning networks can
function as arenas for interpretation, contributing to a comprehensive pr oactive approach to local
climate change adaptation; D) to contribute to development of new models for cross -sector and
multi-level coordination.
Teams were based in Norway, Sweden and Germany. Project meetings (most frequently among the
Norwegian team, but occasionally including all teams) constituted the primary mechanism for
integration across disciplines and between academic and non -academic project participants. A
project leader/coordinator followed -up with all project participants every month. Prin cipal
investigators reported on progress to the Norwegian Research Council every year.
The main challenge for the team was finding sufficient time to fully present different perspectives
and learn from each other through discussion. Joint authorship of art icles was also challenging and
required identification of unfamiliar cross -disciplinary journals in which the work could be
published. Nevertheless, the work has been published in national and international journals and the
findings have served as input t o the Norwegian Environment Agency in developing new policy
instruments.
Lessons learned:
• Management of TDR projects can be complex and regular whole -team project meetings
were important for cross- and transdisciplinary learning.
Policy implications: Governments and research funders can stimulate TDR projects by designing
targeted calls for this type of research.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 51
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

11. Strengthening international Collaboration for Capitalising on Cost -effective and Life -
saving Commodities (i4C) [ https://www.fhi.no/en/qk/international/global-health/bilateral-
collaboration/i4c/]
‒ Main Institutions: Norwegian Institute of Public Health; University of Oslo; York
University, UK.
‒ Disciplines involved: Art; political science; interdisciplinary humanities; medicine.
‒ Societal partners: Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS(UNAIDS); Gavi, the
Vaccine Alliance (GAVI); Mali Ministry of Health and Social Affairs; Republic of
Namibia.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 2.4M (2014-2019). Main funding from Research Council of
Norway.
Summary: This project aimed to evaluate potential policy interventions to support global health
institutions in scaling up access to, and innova tion for, cost-effective and life-saving commodities.
For example, one sub -project explored the role of art in advocacy for evidence -based decision -
making. In this case, a trans-disciplinary approach was used both to design and evaluate the impact
of an art exhibition.
The art exhibition project brought together a range of academics, including professors and students
from policy studies, global health, studio art, art history, interdisciplinary humanities, law, and
digital humanities. And it engaged with individual artists and senior administrative staff at UNAIDS.
Over three years, three workshops were held with all participants to discuss plans for the art
exhibition. Monthly meetings were convened for the core research team, which included the two
principle investigators and lead artist. At the outset, the differences between expectations for outputs,
including publishing norms in different disciplines, were discussed at length. It was agreed that the
work be published in both health science and humaniti es journals that would be recognized by
individual researcher’s peers groups.
The project created an evidence- based art exhibit that was designed to influence decision -making
processes. Though this impact was difficult to measure, other outcomes were take n as measures of
success. For example, commentaries on the art exhibition were given by high -level policymakers
and influencers, and it was positively reviewed in both The Lancet and Canadian Art, two journals
with different disciplinary focus. In this se nse the project could be considered a success and it is
interesting to reflect that when the main project funding proposal was originally evaluated the art
exhibition plan was criticised due to its transdisciplinary nature and ‘non - academic’ outputs. The
funding for this part of the overall project was reduced and additional funding had to be secured
from other sources.
Lessons learned:
• TDR requires sufficient time for participants to get to know and truly understand one
another and appreciate each other’s disciplinary knowledge and background.
• Because universities are structured to recognise outputs that adhere to disciplinary norms,
there is a challenge in translating transdisciplinary outcomes into accountability
mechanisms, so as to give proper credi t to students and faculty and thereby support their
career advancement.
Policy implications: Universities and research institutions need to provide academics with the
flexibility to take on, or participate in, transdisciplinary projects. Funding agencies n eed to adapt
their traditional peer - review processes to accommodate transdisciplinary research and attach due
value to outputs other than academic publications.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

12. Innovating Spatial Development Planning by Differentiating Land Ownership and
Governance (INDIGO) [http://theindigoproject.be]
‒ Main Institutions : KU Leuven; Universiteit Antwerpen; Harokopio University;
OMGEVING cvba (BE) (private consultancy).
‒ Disciplines involved: Spatial development analysis and plann ing; territorial development;
geography; legal studies; environmental sociology; political economy.
‒ Societal partners: Consulting offices in spatial planning; government agencies in planning,
environment, rural development; organisations of landowners; professional federations of
planners and notaries; nature conservation organisations; farmers; housing providers.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 2.2M (2015 – 2018). Main funding from Flemish Agency for
Innovation by Science and Technology (IWT), now Flemish Agency for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship (VLAIO).
Summary: INDIGO was a research project on territorial development, land ownership and
governance of land use rights in Flanders (Belgium). It aimed to understand how land use rights are
governed, land access is orga nised and landed commons are co -created and to contribute to the
development of innovative forms of shared land use and valuation. The project particularly focused
on the embeddedness of land ac cess and commons in wider socio -economic and socio -political
dynamics and the process of building landed commons.
This complex study involved multiple disciplines and stakeholders across different sites in Flanders
and linked with parallel studies in other European countries. A layered management structure
included a coordination team (3 persons), a core management t eam from 4 research partners
(6 persons), a case study partner group (9 persons) and a stakeholder advisory group (~30 people).
Although letters of intent were written by all academic and stakeho lder partners during proposal
development, ensuring long -term commitment and engagement was challenging, as was the full
inclusion of diverse (academic and stakeholder) perspectives. In addition to formal governance
structures and workshops, continuing informal discussions were necessary. Various novel methods
were also used, including provision of research funding for stakeholders and co -publication of a
non-academic book. These efforts resulted in strong engagement of all stakeholders in developing
the analytical framework and good involvement of researchers from different disciplines in
conducting the case studies.
Stakeholder engagement takes time and resources beyond those normally required for research
projects. In this case, a greater-than-50% time increase was needed to accommodate the emergence
of shared inter- and transdisciplinary frameworks, language, methodologies, etc.
Lessons learned:
• Sufficient time and resources for effective exchange among different disciplines and
between researchers and stakeholders on all aspects of the research are important. This
must start during proposal writing and continue throughout the project.
Policy implications: Government can support TDR by providing resources for long-term research.
Funding agencies need to provide a strong framework of requirements on the nature of the research
while allowing maximum flexibility fo r meeting these requirements. Universities and research
institutions can create frameworks, e.g. for allocating funds and performance evaluation, that are
more open to unconventional ideas and non-traditional approaches.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 53
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

13. International Research Institute of Disaster Science (IRIDeS)
[http://irides.tohoku.ac.jp/eng/index.html]
‒ Main Institution: Tohoku University
‒ Disciplines involved : Tsunami engineering; earth science ; civil engineering; history; art
history; disaster medicine; clinical psychology; economics; public policy.
‒ Societal partners: Sendai city; Kesennuma city.
‒ Funding and timing : ~ 84M EUR (2012-2020). Main funding from various sources,
including university grants from government, competitive grant -in-aid for research,
contracts, donations etc.
Summary: IRIDeS was established to create a new approach to disaster mitigation research,
synthesizing lessons from the 2011 Great East Japan (Tohoku) Earthquake and Tsunami with the
findings from different research fields related to disaster research and societal resilience. Its aim is
to exploit learning for management of future disasters and support social systems to respond
promptly, sensibly and effectively to nat ural disasters. The founding Director was a historian and
his successor and current director is from Tsunami engineering, whilst the President of the host
University, Tohoku, was a medical doctor. This nicely illustrates the breadth of disciplines that
IRIDeS brings together. The Institute also has extensive links with other stakeholders, was actively
involved in organising the UN Wor ld Conference on Disaster Risk R eduction in 2105 and co-
organises the World BOSAI Forum biennially that brings together resea rchers, policy makers and
other actors with an interest in disaster risk reduction and mitigation.
Action-oriented research is conducted under several themes, ranging from the physics of global scale
natural disasters to disaster medicine and building disaster resilient societies. The institute also hosts
the Global Centre for Disaster Statistics, with UNDP, JICA and a private company, Fujitsu, - being
responsible for the construction of the database. Cooperation across various sectors is promoted
through meetings, information-sharing, regular stakeholder fora, and periodic study sessions with
the Regional Development Bureau of the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
Trusted relationships with a variety of public and private sector stakeholders have been built through
cooperation in the development of disaster management plans. Broader societal engagement
includes the participation of local volunteers in the rescue of historical documents.
Up until 2014, the Institute was distributed w ith affiliated researchers being spread across the
University campus. Then a shared physical base was established with research facilities and support
for public relations and outreach. Researchers are evaluated not only on via the traditional
quantitative university system but also on their contribution to society. In order to encourage
participation of early career researchers, exchange workshops are held and a new evaluation and
reward system was introduced in 2018.
A variety of outputs are produced by t he institute including: publication of scientific findings in
journal articles, development of a new interdisciplinary academic journal – Progress in Disaster
Research (Elsevier), workshops and conferences, the project website, an archive of the earthquake
disasters, and disaster management plans for local governments and companies.
Lessons learned:
• Co-locating researchers from different disciplines in the same place /area improves
exchange of ideas and collaboration and can provide a focus for TDR projects.
• Arts and humanities can provide important perspectives and methods for understanding and
communicating complex societal issues in TDR projects.
Policy implications : Physical interdisciplinary centres or institutes embedded within traditional
universities can provide a focus for promoting and accelerating TDR.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

14. Japan-ASEAN Science, Technology and Innovation Platform ( CHIRP/JASTIP)/
Collaboration H ubs for International Research Programme
[http://jastip.org/en/about/mission/]
‒ Main Institutions: Kyoto University.
‒ Disciplines involved : Energy and material sciences ; forestry; biotechnology; natural
disaster-related sciences; anthropology; humanities and social science.
‒ Societal partners: Inter-governmental organization; national and local government; private
sector; civil society (e.g., grassroots associations and local communities).
‒ Funding and timing : EUR 4M (2015-2020). Main funding from Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST).
Summary: JASTIP aims to help address social and environmental challenges in the ASEAN region
by fostering STI collaboration between Japan and ASEAN countries. It is a collaborative platform
that focuses on priorities agreed upon by ASEAN Member States. As mono-disciplinary approaches
often fail to disentangle complicated and intertwined real -world problems, an inter - and trans-
disciplinary approach is the norm for JASTIP’s projects.
JASTIP is hosted by Kyoto University which has a long history of research collaboration across
South east Asia, including substant ial funding through national Centres of Excellence programmes
that were the precursors to JASTIP. As well as acting as a focus for connecting different disciplines
and actors across the universities in Japan and ASEAN, the platform has 2 main pillars:
• Three joint laboratories in the fields of Energy and the Environment, Bio -resources and
Biodiversity and Disaster Prevention, located in Thailand Indonesia and Malaysia. These
laboratories, act as regional hubs and have to secure their own core funding.
• JASTIP-Net, which acts as an incubator and provides seed -funding for new collaborative
projects, covering ASEAN countries that do not host regional hubs.
The research carried out under these themes is solution focused and takes into account the local
context in which the solution is to be applied. Private companies are often important partners in
implementing research activities but addressing local needs and requirements is the dominant driver.
TDR approaches need to take into account of the diversity in polit ical systems, economy, culture,
geography and social setting. For example, in the case of a rural electrification project, the selection
of an appropriate technological solution depends on the unique characteristics of each project site.
The outputs and impact of JASTIP projects extend beyond scientific publications and often can only
be evaluated over the long-term. Proxy measures, including the extent of collaborations or demand
for JASTIP services from countries and private companies, are used to provid e some indication of
performance. However, at the level of individual researchers, the emphasis on traditional research
outputs can be a significant disincentive to engage in JASTIP projects. Commitment to TDR does
not always lead to a successful career path in academia and even where senior academics engage in
JASTIP projects they do not always encourage their students to do so.
Lessons learned:
• In trans-national projects, in particular, it is necessary to visit study sites and interact with
local stakeholders to understand context and frame problems before proposing solutions.
• TDR projects may be too time-consuming to productively include early-career researchers,
given their obligatory focus on producing academic outputs and securing stable academic
posts.
• Successful TDR projects are supported by University Research Administrators and have
dedicated coordinators who help to bridge among different disciplines and to ensure long-
term commitment from non-academic participants.
Policy implications: Impact assessment of transdisciplinary projects needs to go beyond traditional
academic research outputs and timescales.
Transnational funding mechanisms for TDR would greatly facilitate the development and
implementation of sustainable solutions for complex societal challenges

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 55
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

15. Jigjiga University One Health Initiative (JOHI)
‒ Main Institutions: Jigjiga University; Somali Regional State, Ethiopia; Armauer Hansen
Research Institute, Ethiopia; Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute.
‒ Disciplines involved: Human health; veterinary medicine; nutrition, water and sanitation;
rangeland management.
‒ Societal partners: Pastoralist and agro -pastoralist communities in the Somali Region of
Ethiopia; health and animal health care providers; regional and federal authorities ,
community leaders.
‒ Funding and timing : EUR 4.7M (2015-2025) from the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation, supplemented by a 60% matched contribution from other partners.
Summary: The health and wellbeing of mobile pastoralists and agro -pastoralists, and the animals
that constitute an important part of their livelihood, can be improved through locally -adapted
interventions in health care, nutrition, animal health, rangeland management, market access and food
system transformation. To this end, re search capacity a range of related fields has been built up at
Jigjiga University by working in close collaboration with the Swiss Tropical and Public Health
Institute. This truly inter - and transdisciplinary research programme engages with local
communities, local, regional and federal authorities and scientists to co -produce transformational
knowledge for locally-adapted interventions and policy recommendations. For example, pastoralists
share their own soil classification system which is matched with satellite images.
The active participation of local communities, authorities and experts is crucial for development of
locally-adapted interventions. Participatory transdisciplinary stakeholder meetings were critical at
the outset of the project to contextualise and co -define the problems to be addressed. Similar
meetings took place at least annually to jointly review and, where necessary, amend the research
agenda, discuss results, plan interventions and review implementation progress. Projects have
thereby fostered a high level of local ownership, both at the University of Jigjiga and among the
communities and local authorities involved in the study. Capacity building both within the
University and for non -academic partners will be critical in ensuring the longer-term usefulness,
application and impact of the project. The projects was used to train a cohort of local young
scientists and a new curriculum was developed at the University of Jigjiga to leverage the
educational potential of the project.
The project has clearly demonstrated that novel forms of joint human/animal health surveillance -
response have significant potential but such systems will need to be maintained and improved over
the long-term.
Lessons learned:
• The adoption of a participatory, transdisciplinary from the outset is critical for creating
strong ownership among different stakeholders.
• Capacity building will need to be an integral part of many TDR projects if the longer -term
impacts are to be realised.
• High turnover among authoritie s and academic leadership can affect continuity. It is
important to select partners who can ensure longer -term commitment from the institutions
and stakeholder groups that they represent
Policy implications : In partnerships with less economically developed countries in particular,
capacity building needs to be considered as an integral part of TDR projects. This requires long-term
commitment and dedicated resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

16. Living Agricultural Landscapes - farmers shaping diversity [http://lebendige-
agrarlandschaften.de/]
‒ Main Institutions: Leibniz Centre for Agricultural Landscape Research (ZALF);
German farmers’ association (DBV), Farming and Winery Association
Rheinland-Nassau, Foundation for Westphalian Cultural Landscape, Foundation
for Rhenish Cultivated Landscape
‒ Disciplines involved : Agriculture, social science, environmental science,
ecosystem services.
‒ Societal partners: Farmers; winegrowers; German farmers’ associations
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 3M (2014-2021), Main funding from Federal Agency
for Nature Conservation (BfN) with funding from the Federal Ministry for the
Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU);
Landwirtschaftliche Rentenbank
Summary: The primary objective of this coo peration project is to evaluate agricultural
methods that protect and promote biodiversity and ecosystem services and to assess
farmers’ attitudes towards nature protection measures incorporated into regular farming
activity. In this context, it also aims to develop advanced training programs for farmers.
Starting in three model regions, production- integrated nature conservation measures are
being adapted and implemented by farmers and winegrowers working closely with
consultants. Successful measures will be transferred to other regions of Germany.
ZALF had previously focused on interdisciplinary research and agricultural databases.
However, they recognised the need to transform scientific knowledge into practical
solutions, necessitating a transdisciplina ry approach. The farmers' association, as the
project coordinator with direct links to farmers and winegrowers, ensures practical
relevance and thus increases the level of awareness of the measures and communicates the
project results to political decision-makers.
The challenge of preserving and promoting biodiversity in the agricultural landscape
requires a joint commitment from key actors in agriculture and nature conservation and
strong political and societal support. At the outset, regional actors were wary of the
scientists, as they thought that they would be carrying out a critical assessment. In practice,
the scientists focused on observing and understanding processes in order to learn therefrom
and improve practices. Once this was understood by regional actors, trust was established
and the mutual learning that is inherent in TDR created a win-win situation.
A significant challenge for the researchers was to generate scientific outputs comparable to
those produced in traditional non-TDR projects. Scientists are judged in large part on the
number of publications, so a low publication output can be detrimental to research careers.
TDR takes time and academic publications are but one of a number of main outputs. In
general, academic evaluation processes act as a disincentive for TDR projects.
Lessons learned:
• TDR takes time.
• TDR requires a wide range of communication skills, adapted to different actors, in
order to create a good basis for cooperation.
• It is important to build trust by sharing data and ensuring that results are transparent.
Policy implications: Research assessment and evaluation processes need to be adapted
for TDR. Funding mechanisms need to make allowance for the extra time required to
conduct TDR research.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 57
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

17. MobilAir [https://mobilair.univ-grenoble-alpes.fr/]
‒ Main Institutions : French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS); French
National Institute of Health and Medical Research (INSERM).
‒ Disciplines involved : environmental economics; sociology; geography; planning;
behavioural psychology; biology; health.
‒ Societal partners : Grenoble Metropolitan Authority, City of Grenoble; French
Environment and Energy Management Agency (ADEME); and the Federation of Air
Quality Monitoring Associations France (ATMO).
‒ Funding and timing : EUR 4M (2018–2021). Main funding from Université Grenoble
Alpes and CNRS.
Summary: Urban atmospheric pollution is a major challenge for public health in both developed
and developing countries. It causes approximately 48 000 premature deaths annually in France and
about one hundred in the metropolitan area of Grenoble. Via a transdisciplinary approach, MobilAir
aims to identify precise measures to significantly reduce atmospheric pollution a nd associated
damages in this city. Drawing on the considerable disciplinary diversity of the scientific community
of the Grenoble-Alpes University, MobilAir adopts an integrated approach for Grenoble, a relevant
pilot site for France as a whole. The coll aboration across disciplines is facilitated by substantial
institutional support in the form of Idex (Excellence Institute initiative) cross -disciplinary projects
funding that has leveraged other resources. MobilAir aims to develop methods and instruments that
can be replicated elsewhere in France and in other countries.
Demand from non-academic partners has been a key driving force since project inception. Project
governance relies on three independent entities: a Steering Committee, an International S cientific
Advisory Board and a Decision -makers Committee —non-academic partners are strongly
represented in the latter. A Stakeholders Committee is tasked with dissemination of results and
feedback to and from civil society. Issues related to interactions with public decision -makers are
addressed by the Decision -Makers Committee which meets annually, and is composed of the
president of the Grenoble metropolitan area, the three Vice -Presidents in respectively in charge of
the environment, mobility and resear ch, representatives of the city of Grenoble and the French
Environment and Energy Management Agency. In accordance with MobilAir’s innovative
approach, these interactions are central to project implementation.
The activities include the elaboration, implementation and assessment of a programme intervention
aimed at promoting behavioural change and the use of more active and collective transport modes.
This includes plans for a randomised controlled trial involving several hundred people. The
intervention is highly inter-disciplinary and multiple quantitative and qualitative outcome measures
will be collected.
Lessons learned:
• MobilAir took almost three years to set up from first meetings to the securing of main
funding. During this time, researchers lea rned to interact and to understand one another’s
research questions through the lenses of their own disciplines. This experience illustrates
the length of time required to set up such a transdisciplinary project.
• Core investment and support from the host institution has been critical in ensuring cross -
disciplinary engagement and has led to contributions from other funders, although
managing multiple funding sources has its own challenges.
• The constant implication of the policy-makers, from the start of the project, has allowed for
a full integration of the public policy dimension in the different research.
• In terms of scientific practices, the challenge of data management may be easily
underestimated when diverse data from multiple different sources need to be integrated.
• The strong dedication of all researchers to societal and environmental values has allowed
for the coherence and success of the project.
Policy implications: Funders, research institutes and Universities need to work together to develop
the structural conditions and long-term support for transdisciplinary research.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

18. Mobility Innovation project by Centre of Innovation (COI , Mobility )
[http://www.coi.nagoya-u.ac.jp/en]
‒ Main Institutions: Nagoya University; Toyota Motor Corporation.
‒ Disciplines involved : Mechanical engineering; information science; urban planning;
human health; sociopsychology; law.
‒ Societal partners: Toyota Motor Corporation; Japan Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport; Aichi Prefectural Government; Toyota City; Kasugai City; Nagoya City; Kota
Town.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 57M (2015-2019, extended to 2021); Main funding from Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST).
Summary: This project aimed to develop mobility technology to allow senior citizens in the ageing
Japanese society to stay active and participate in their communities. The research plan emerged
from discussions among Nagoya University, the Aichi Prefectural Government and Toyota Motor
Corporation, and was then approved by the COI visionary team consisting of leaders in industry and
academia. The visionary team visits the research centre annually to conduct project reviews.
Under the COI program, project leaders must have industrial experience. In this cas e, the leader
was a manager at Toyota Motor Corporation with a concurrent position at Nagoya University.
Within the project, several types of meetings were implemented for different management layers
and to ensure the continuous engagement of various actors.
Toyota Motor Corporation is headquartered in Toyota City in Aichi prefecture. Local cities are
heavily involved in the development of autonomous driving systems. The Aichi prefectural
government maintains a one -stop service to authorise field testing of autonomous driving systems,
with the participation of the prefectural police agency and a local office of the Ministry of Land,
Infrastructure and Transport. The research team assigned a social implementation leader to liaise
with these organisations.
A transdisciplinary approach was essential for this research project on development of practical
mobility services for the elderly. Early in the project, “elderly wellbeing” was defined through a
series of interviews with local elderly people. These interv iews led the project to redefine its goal,
shifting from full -scale to “slocal” (i.e., slow and local) automated driving. The new formulation
focused on social implementation to fulfil local residents’ actual needs. To date, the project has
developed hardware and software for “slocal” autonomous driving and a walking assistance robot.
Traditional research approaches would have struggled to grasp the true problems associated with
social implementation.
Lessons learned:
• Developing and sharing a project vision with all participants is important and this vision
needs to be re-examined continuously.
• The length of the project needs to be longer than the standard five years to allow for full
problem definition, which is an ongoing and iterative process.
• Having academia researchers and non-academia researchers work in the same place (under
one roof) was important for promoting collaboration.
Policy implications: Relevant authorities and research funders may need to be directly involved in
project management to support it from a regulatory and monetary standpoint.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 59
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

19. MontanAqua: Approaching water management in times of scarcity and climate change
[http://www.nfp61.ch/en/projects/project-montanaqua]
‒ Main Institutions: Universities of Bern; Lausanne and Fribourg, Switzerland.
‒ Disciplines involved: Geography; environmental science; hydrology; social science.
‒ Societal partners : Cantonal and Communal authorities of Vala is and Crans -Montana,
Switzerland; hydropower; viticulture; agriculture; environmental NGOs.
‒ Funding and timing : ~900K EUR (2010- 2013). Main funding from Swiss National
Science Foundation.
Summary: Availability and consumption of water are changing due to climate change and socio -
economic development, potentially leading to water distribution conflicts. The aim of this project
was to develop sustainable water management strategies in cooperation with local stakeholders in
the Crans-Montana-Sierre region in the Swiss Alps. To this end, the team applied a TDR approach
to co-produce systemic models, desirable targets for intervention and transformative strategies. A
plurality of critical factors discussed in water-related climate research are present in this region, e.g.
water gradients, scarcity, conflicts over utilization, and accommodating these required a truly
transdisciplinary approach
At the outset of the project, four different visions for regional development were co-developed with
local stakeholders and it became clear from th eir subsequent quantification and modelling that
socioeconomic factors would have a more impact on future water systems than climate change. This
reality was critical in developing sustainability scenarios that were realistic and useful for informing
real life decision-making on water management that takes into account multiple interests.
Transdisciplinary collaboration enabled this project to: i) grasp the complexity of the regional water
situation and create a holistic understanding of sustainability probl ems and possible solutions;
ii) recognise the contested nature of water sustainability among various interests and to facilitate
dialogue on more sustainable water futures; iii) elaborate and di scuss relevant, meaningful water
management options for regional stakeholders. The longer term outcomes included the development
of a local informal multi-actor ‘knowledge network’ that is able to engage constructively in decisions
on water management
Lessons learned:
• Transdisciplinary processes can only succeed through de novo negotiation over cooperation
and competition, in which social skills and open-mindedness are essential.
• Having a dedicated and skilled coordinator/facilitator who acted as an intermediary between
different project participants and institutions was critical for the success of this work.
• The main ingredients for success are cooperation, clarity in roles and concepts, strong
motivation, commitment and trust.
Policy implications: Whilst new scientific insights are an important output from TDR, key impacts
are often in terms of societal changes, e.g. better decision -making and governance. These become
apparent on a longer time scale and are more difficult to assess and evaluate than traditional science
outputs like publications. New performance measures are needed for TDR.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

20. Participatory Value Evaluation of energy policies [ https://www.nwo-
mvi.nl/project/participatory-value-evaluation-new-assessment-model-promoting-social-
acceptance-sustainable]
‒ Main Institutions: Delft University of Technology
‒ Disciplines involved : Economics; philosophy; ethics; behavioural econometrics; energy
systems engineering
‒ Societal partners: Consulting companies (Quintel; Harmelink; Greenvis)
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 478K (2018-2021). Main funding from NWO, VolkerWessels,
ABN AMRO, Enpuls, Greenvis, Waternet and Municipality of Amsterdam.
Summary: Various stakeholders in the Netherlands have recently set ambitious targets for the
decarbonisation of energy systems. For instance, the alderman of Amsterdam promised that the
energy system will be decarbonized by 2050; priv ate bank ABN AMRO aims to improve its entire
real estate portfolio by 2030, resulting in a CO 2 emissions reduction of 2 megatons per year.
However, currently available assessment models are inadequate for evaluating concrete sustainable
energy policies to realise these ambitions. At the same time, stakeholders contend that conventional
participation methods are likely inadequate to establish social acceptance for sustainable energy
projects. Participatory Value Evaluation (PVE) is a promising assessment model which also
comprises a concrete approach to amplify participation and thereby potentially increase social
acceptance of sustainable energy projects.
All the disciplines involved in this project are, in principle, needed for the design of PVE. This is
indeed challenging and requires compromises. For instance, in engagement across disciplines,
materials and procedures must be useful to and comprehensible for all practitioners. This was an
important consideration in organising a design workshop that w as held with all practitioners to
discuss a draft version of a new PVE.
Ultimately, this project expects to improve evaluations of the societal value of sustainable energy
policies and to facilitate the mass participation of citizens in the design of energy policies.
Lessons learned:
• Divergent disciplinary expectations regarding publication and the differing expectations of
academic institutes posed challenges in deciding how to proceed with the academic findings
of this collaborative work. Most institutions are structur ed to produce and evaluate
mono-disciplinary work. Researchers must provide extra justification for carrying out work
that does not always generate academic outcomes.
• A substantial proportion of the principal investigator’s effort goes toward coordination.
Supervision of postdocs in TDR projects is different, as they are expected to have skills an
average academic postdoc does not require, such as com munication skills to engage
non-academic partners.
Policy implications: Universities and funding agencies could better support the process of initiating
and implementing TDR, including recognition of the value of facilitation and communication skills.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 61
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

21. Precise Advanced Technologies and Health Systems for Underserved Populations
(PATHS-UP) [https://pathsup.org/]
‒ Main Institutions : Texas A&M University (TAMU), University of California Los
Angeles, Rice University, Houston, Florida International University, Miami.
‒ Disciplines involved : Biomedical; electrica l; mechanical and industrial engineering;
computer science; chemistry; materials science; medicine; health and kinesiology;
community engagement; behavioural psychology.
‒ Societal partners: Patient; health care provider; caregiver; community health advocate;
industry; insurance provider; private foundation; government agency.
‒ Funding and timing : ~17.60 M EUR over 5 years (2017-) with a possible extension of
5 years leading to over EUR 31M. Main funding from Engineering Research Centers,
National Science Foundation.
Summary: Over the last two decades, chronic diseases have emerged as the leading cause of
morbidity and mortality in the US and globally. CVDs are now the leading cause of death worldwide,
with cancer, pulmonary diseases, and diabetes cl ose behind. Chronic diseases are particularly
devastating in underserved communities in the USA, where they occur at a rate higher than the
national average. This inter - and trans-disciplinary research centre aims to change the population
health paradigm b y developing point -of-care devices and systems, particularly for cardiovascular
disease (CVD) and diabetes among underserved populations.
The researchers that contribute to the centre’s activities are distributed across 4 research Universities
and come from diverse disciplines. Collaboration across the sites is assured at the leadership level
by having all sites represented on an Executive Committee, with leadership for specific projects
being distributed. Overall the Centre includes 25 senior researchers, about 90 students, hundreds of
people with diabetes or cardiovascular disease from the communities, and multiple health care
providers, industrial partners, state agencies and regulatory authorities. The Centre makes a
concerted effort to involve junior faculty, including the provision of seed funding afforded through
industry partnership.
Health care providers, caregivers, and people from the underserved communities with diabetes or
cardiovascular disease are engaged in developing monitoring devices through a participatory design
process. They guide scientists and engineers in designing appropriate devices by specifying desired
characteristics and offering practical observations regarding the functioning of such devices. In
addition, people with diabetes or cardiovascular disease will be involved in performance studies of
devices under development.
Lessons learned:
• The most important challenge is effective communication and building mutual respect
among diverse cultures and disciplines.
• Translational research toward medical device development at the point-of-care should take
into account user needs and the environment in which the devices are to be used in order to
provide successful translation and integration that will allow for behaviour modificatio n
and overall improved health outcomes.
• In the health and medical device field, the designer must be mindful of the regulatory
processes. In this case, the US Food and Drug Administration sits on the project’s
Industry/Practitioner Board to provide early feedback on the devices designed.
Policy implications: Universities/research institutions need to support faculty that want to write
such larger programmatic grants by offering sabbaticals and release from other duties in order for
them to have the time to make the connections, establish the grand challenge, and prepare a strong
competitive proposal. TDR often involves large research teams, with contributions from a variety
of disciplines and non-academic stakeholders, individual credit and reward mechanism s need to be
adapted to reflect this.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

22. PigSustain [https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=BB%2FN020790%2F1]
‒ Main Institutions: University of Leeds; University of Lincoln; London School of Hygiene
& Tropical Medicine; University of Reading, Animal and Plant Health Agency
‒ Disciplines involved : Systems modelling; Animal health and welfare; veterinary
epidemiology; public health; environmental epidemiology; veterinary diagnostics;
sociology; human geography; computer science; remote monitoring; economics.
‒ Societal partners: British Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (DEFRA);
Food Standards Agency (FSA), Red Tractor, Agriculture and Horticulture Development
Board (AHDB); pork producers/ processors (Cranswick, Yorkwold, Elsham, Karro Food
Group).
‒ Funding and timing : ~2.4M EUR (2017 –2021). Main funding from UK Research and
Innovation (UKRI) and the Scottish Government.
Summary: The primary objective of this project was to improve understanding of the resilience of
the UK pig industry in an international context. Currently there is not a robust system to quantify
and forecast how the national pig industry will be impacted by future changes in intensification,
climate, international trade and other external factors. Against this background, the aim is to develop
a systems model alongside an AI-driven remote monitoring surveillance system that can be used to
support complex decisions about disease prevention and control, international trade, climate change
and consumer preferences.
There are five Work Packages (WPs) for specific research themes, and a sixth WP was designed for
project coordination and integration. Each WP was designed to promote collaborative working.
Formal WP Leader telecon ferences were scheduled monthly with all disciplines present and
providing input. The moderation of this management meeting rotated among WP leaders, with each
presenting findings to the wider group. In addition, dedicated training sessions were put in pl ace to
enable transdisciplinary skills development across the whole research team.
Before this project, the academic partners were not known to the non -academic stakeholders, and
the initial engagement and trust -building exercise required concerted effor t. During project
implementation, the research team invited all partners to contribute their ideas in annual facilitated
Stakeholder Workshops and regular newsletters.
One goal expected to be achieved in early 2021 is the creation of an on -line interface that
stakeholders and other interested parties can use, allowing them to plug in different variables and
visualise expected outcomes for different parts of the system.
Lessons learned:
• Decisions take longer than when working within a single discipline, a factor that briefly
slowed project initiation. Building good relationships has been essential. Monthly meetings
with clear accessible minutes and actions circulated afterwards keep all partners up-to-date.
• Applying to a dedicated transdisciplinary funding programme was a very positive process
and has ultimately enabled a complex challenge to be tackled with the full range of
disciplines required.
Policy implications: The research environment and infrastructure can be adapted to support and
encourage TDR. In this case, the University of Leeds was well -placed to host the project having
invested EUR 43M in infrastructure that provides seamless access to the expertise, talent and
facilities available at the institution.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 63
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

23. Sociotechnical Systems to Enable Smart and Connected Energy -Aware Residential
Communities (SCC-IRG Track 1)
‒ Main Institutions: Purdue University.
‒ Disciplines involved : Civil/Mechanical engineering, Communication, School of
Management, political science, Computer and Information Technology, Technology
Leadership & Innovation.
‒ Societal partners: The Indiana Housing and Community Development Agency (IHCDA)
and housing developers
‒ Funding and timing : ~3.16M EUR (2015- ). Main funding from the National Science
Foundation.
Summary: This project aims to develop a new paradigm for smart and connected residential
communities that engage inhabitants in understanding and reducing their home energy use while
increasing their environmental awareness, responsiveness to collective goals, and improving their
quality of life. The research has provided new insights into how individuals, groups, and residential
communities make decisions related to their home energy consumption. Based on this knowledge,
the project developed feedback mechanisms integrated into user-interactive smart devices to enable
optimal energy management. The Indiana Housing and Community Development Agency
(IHCDA), several industry stakeholders and community residents have been engaged throughout the
lifetime of the project . Smart and connected (S&C) technology has been implemented in multiple
residential communities that cover a range of demographics, locations, and construction and are used
as research test-beds.
Engagement activities with the IHCDA and community developer s began in 2015 through the
“Moving Forward” program, which uses Rental Housing Tax Credits (RHTC) from the federal
government to fund the development of energy-efficient, affordable housing and transportation. The
communities set ambitious goals for ener gy use, ranging from 30% reduction to net -zero energy.
Metrics for success includes the percentage of residents who are satisfied with their technology and
the extent of reduction in energy use.
The interdisciplinary Purdue team works closely with housi ng developers - the frequency of
interaction varies from every day to every two weeks depending on the project phase. A project
leadership team with participants from housing developers, IHCDA and Purdue meet once per
month.
The key challenge has been the need to train students who can work across disciplines. Their strong
partnership with IHCDA and housing developers has been the cornerstone for their success. Initially,
the team invested a lot of time in the project without any dedicated funding before they were
eventually awarded an NSF grant.
Lessons learned:
• Integration of the work with the implementation of new housing policies (e.g., RHTC)
allowed the team to test and evaluate their technologies in residential houses.
• Agreeing ambitious and measurable goals was important for commitment from all
stakeholders.
Policy implications: Research funders can provide ‘exploratory’ support for researchers to build
partnerships with stakeholders before they apply for larger project grants.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

24. Smart Community Policing
‒ Main Institutions: Dongguk University
‒ Disciplines involved: Mechanical engineering; virtual reality (VR); artificial intelligence
(AI); big data; police studies; forensic science; law studies; robotics.
‒ Societal partners: The law enforcement sector (e.g., Korea National Police Agency)
‒ Funding and timing : ~7.2M EUR (2018- 2025). Main funding from Korean National
Research Foundation.
Summary: A Convergence Research Centre (CRC) has been established under the auspices of the
Korean National Resear ch Foundation, with an expected duration of 7 years. The Centre aims to
modernise forensic science, diminish crime rates and strengthen societal security. Multidimensional
analysis of criminal data to extract underlying determinants of crimes can lead to the illumination
of patterns of criminal behaviour and context. This can inform the development of criminal forecast
algorithms and thus to reductions in gender-related crimes, domestic violence and child abuse. This
project will also identify characteris tics of high -risk groups and crime hotspots. It will collect
anthropometric data on criminals and thus aims to increase the clearance rate for unsolved crime
files.
The project is being conducted by three teams. The first applies VR and AI to criminology. VR
reconstruction of crime scenes may contribute to investigations of violent crimes, and bolster
education on techniques for crime scene reconstruction and physical simulation, prediction and 3D
visualisation of crime situations. The second group is deve loping technology to facilitate law
enforcement, e.g. a robot to assist police investigators’ surveillance robots and databases for forensic
ontological and anthropological data in Korea. The third group will develop a big data platform for
smart policing , using data collected both on - and offline, including information from police
investigations and provided by citizens. Professors and students from different university
departments are part of these three interdisciplinary teams.
The main non-academic stakeholders are from the law-enforcement sector but the plan is to run civic
education programs and develop prevention and response scenarios for child abduction and violent
crimes. The aim is to also construct a service system to support local government o ffices,
investigative offices, non-government organisations and citizens. The trans-disciplinary, co-design
and co-production, aspects of such a system will be important but have not yet been fully worked
out.
Lessons learned:
• The initial focus of the Smart Community Policing Centre has been on the potential of
converging technologies to improve policing but as public service considerations become
more prevalent then trans-disciplinary research approaches are likely to be required.
Policy implications: There is a need for TDR research in relation to the design and deployment of
powerful digital technologies in the service of the public.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 65
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

25. Smart Grids [https://www.nwo-mvi.nl/project/developing-and-implementing-smart-grids-
india]
‒ Main Institutions: Eindhoven University of Technology.
‒ Disciplines involved : Science and technology studies; human geography; ethics; SSH;
electrical engineering, industrial design.
‒ Societal partners : Private companies (especially start -ups/small- and medium -sized
enterprises); local citizens.
‒ Funding and timing : EUR 350K (2016- 2020) plus in- kind and cash support from
companies. Main funding from Dutch Research Council’s Platform for Responsible
Innovation (NWO-MVI).
Summary: The bottleneck for the success of smart grids for electricity distribution is the difficulty
of embedding the technology in a way that is both socially accepted and ethically acceptable.
Empirically grounded insights and an ethical focus on the most vulnerable stakeholders are needed
to address this challenge. Informed by such considerations, this project is guided by the following
overarching research question: How can smart grids be successfully developed and implemented in
rural India?
The project closely monitors and informs the development and implementation of smart grids in
Indian villages. Through an interactive process, it defines, develops and tests prototypes that enable
a “smart” exchange of electricity in Indian villages. These “local insights” are related to a broader
perspective which offers insights about the wider societal embedding of smart grids and possibilities
of upscaling.
One key to a successful project design was to consistently aim for the best quality in terms of
solutions. For example, the team pitched products from its commercial project partner to various
experts in India, soliciting feedback and suggestions for improvement. Visits to proposed target sites
were important and it was important also to engage closely with partners, developing personal
contacts and trusted relationships. At the level of potential users, it was important for this project to
recognise that women play a central role in energy access issues in Indian villag es and so their
perspectives were critical. The company partner in India had women as their main experts for energy
access to villages.
The transdisciplinary approach offered a holistic view of smart grids and real -life impacts through
the design, delivery and testing of prototypes. For example, the use of kerosene lamps subsidised
in India and solar lamps will not sell as long as kerosene lamps are cheaper to use and available.
Similarly, the arrival of the main electricity grid during the course of the p roject had implications
for product-design. Through this project, the company partner learned about the scale and potential
impact of these contextual issues, which affect the development of a viable business model for its
technology.
Lessons learned:
• Transdisciplinary projects must engage people (academic and non -academic) who are
capable and willing of engage beyond disciplinary siloes. In parallel, researchers should be
more reflective about the project objectives and their own roles.
• Private companie s, particularly SMEs, have short -term commercial imperatives and
objectives that can make it difficult for them to dedicate resources and expertise to TD
research projects.
• Gender is an important consideration when considering which actors to engage, and h ow,
in TDR projects
Policy implications: Funding may be required to support the full engagement of non- academic
partners in TDR projects and such funding can be difficult to secure.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
66 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

26. Strategic University Network to Revolutionise Indian Solar Energy (SUNRISE)
[http://www.sunrisenetwork.org/]
‒ Main Institutions: Swansea University
‒ Disciplines involved: Materials Engineering
‒ Societal partners : Tata Group; Tata Institute of Social Sciences; Government of
Maharashtra.
‒ Funding and timing: ~7.5M EUR (2017- 2021). Main funding from Global Challenges
Research Fund (GCRF).
Summary: This project’s primary objective is to ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all. Sunrise is a jo int UK -India project to develop low -cost, building -
integrated solar technologies and deploy them in rural India. Led by Swansea University, the
network unites 12 leading universities and several industrial collaborators from the UK and India in
an equitable research collaboration. This international network will work to develop and implement
a minimum of five solar-powered building demonstrators in rural India.
The project was funded via an EPSRC (UK) grant under the “Growing Research Capability Call”
as part of the UK Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF). It had precedents in previous projects
and many of the academic partners had already worked with each other, although new, academic
and non-academic partners were also engaged. Swansea University pr ovided pump-priming funds
to support initia l pilot work and other resources were also leveraged to complement the GCRF
resources and, for example, support PhD students or early career researcher workshops.
This project is innovative in involving a very broad range of academic and non -academic groups
from photo-physicists and chemists through to the user communities in Indian villages. Whilst the
programme is Engineering-led, the core team involved experts from Social Sciences with knowledge
and experience of working with Indian communities and subsequently expanded to include
Humanities specialists exploring the relationship between energy systems and gendered household
practices. A strategy for community development was built at the outset and all project partners were
involved in co-designing the work plan.
An Executive Management Team (EMT) reports to an Advisory Board (AB). The breadth of
expertise on the AB, which is chaired by a senior industrialist a nd champion of sustainable
development generates independent advice and ensures impartiality with no vested interests. Ethical
considerations are deeply ingrained in the project and the research partnership.
The research team found that shifting from labo ratory work to direct engagement with users
completely changed their framework for understanding and has been invaluable in terms of how
they will shape and create future projects. Medium -term impacts are expected to be seen in India,
but longer-term potential exists for similar efforts across the Global South.
Lessons learned:
• The biggest challenge in TDR is making initial connections with new disciplines that have
no prior experience of inter - or trans -disciplinary working. The most important
characteristic of a successful transdisciplinary collaboration is having a network of
previously-established trusted contacts that can be expanded upon as necessary.
Policy implications: Successful TDR teams and networks need to be valued and nurtured as a basis
for future TDR and capacity building. Sandpit schemes can provide opportunities for establishing
new connections across a range of disciplines and for exchange of ideas to seed new TDR.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 67
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

27. Transdisciplinary Research Intervention Anchored in Luxembourg (TRIAL)
[http://www.trial-lux.be/fr/projet]
‒ Main Institutions: Université de Liège and Université catholique de Louvain
‒ Disciplines involved: Social science; philosophy; facilitation.
‒ Societal partners : Private s ector; public sector; community/public representatives;
citizens.
‒ Funding and timing: EUR 500K (2017-2021). Main funding from the Fund for Strategic
Fundamental Research (Associated Fund of the F.R.S. -FNRS) - Walloon Institute fo r
Sustainable Development (FRFS-WISD).
Summary: This project aims to develop a new method to bring together academic researchers,
citizens and the other stakeholders to co -create environmental knowledge on issues facing the
province of Luxembourg in Belgium. Through experimentation and evaluation of the
implementation of an eco-citizen institute, the project expects to produce transformative knowledge
to inform local solutions. To be successful and sustainable, the knowledge production process must
incorporate non-academic perspectives and inputs that relate to the desired transformation.
While identifying research themes, the team held a citizen forum to gauge stakeholder opinions and
identify their priorities. This was open to anyone with a link to the territory of Luxembourg with the
research team ensuring that diversity was respected. The citizen’s f orum was asked to select from
3 potential issues following a discussion of potential benefits and risks for each of these. They
eventually settled on a framin g issue: sustainable and integrated managem ent of the forest of
Saint-Michel Freyr.
During the second phase, the team is collaborating with the private partner contracted by the
Walloon Region to manage the forest of Saint -Michel Freyr. The collaboration aims to co-create a
master plan for the sustainable management and exploitation of the forest with citizens and territorial
actors. The purposes and interests of the partners and the researchers are different and data is
required that will respond to diff erent needs that do not always reflect the primary interests of the
data collectors/controllers. This requires considerable negotiation.
Lessons learned:
• Without a transdisciplinary approach, it would be impossible to construct a framework
based on the interacting dynamics of the territory and relevant actors.
• It is critical to understand the cultural habits and power ratios of residents, stakeholders,
and authorities from a specific region in order to build trusted relationships, but this takes
time.
• The time taken and resources required for problem definition and co- design processes is
easy to underestimate and funding is necessary for some stakeholders.
Policy implications: Dedicated support is required for the problem definition and co- design phase
of TDR projects. Research funders should make structural funding available to support partnerships
between academic researchers and non-academic stakeholders from industry, public sector, and civil
society.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
68 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

28. Urban ecology meets architecture and urban planning
‒ Main Institutions: University of Applied Sciences Eastern Switzerland; HSR Rapperswil;
ETH Zurich.
‒ Disciplines involved: Econolocal genetics; conservation genetics; community ecology;
urban ecology; biogeography; urban planning; landscape architecture; art; science
communication; environmental psychology; cultural study; environmental humanity.
‒ Societal partners: Urban plan ning, green space management, and biodiversity
conservation units of public city administrations; museum; private horticulture industry;
citizens.
‒ Funding and timing: ~850K EUR (2016- 2021). Main funding from private philanthropy
(Mercator Foundation), Univ ersity of Applied Sciences Eastern Switzerland, HSR
Rapperswil and ETH Zurich.
Summary: Cities are considered hotspots of biodiversity and urban ecosystem services are essential
for sustainable and healthy cities. This project assesses strategies to promot e biodiversity and
ecosystem services in cities by integrating ecological research with research and practice in urban
planning and design, and by engaging with the public through an arts-science project. The main goal
was to develop evidence- based tools f or urban planning that are adopted by practitioners. Thus,
collaboration among practitioners, applied researchers and scientists from urban planning and
ecology was essential. A secondary TDR goal was to embrace a paradigm shift in how we think
about and values nature in cities—this underlay the arts-science collaboration and the citizen science
approach
The primary base for the project is an urbanism and landscape architecture research institute within
a university of applied sciences. Transdisciplinarity is the default research mod e, with professors
rooted in 12 different disciplines (architecture, landscape architecture, urban planning, history of
landscape architecture, landscape planning, geography, horticulture, environmental engineering,
digital building, ecology, environmental sciences) working closely together. ETH Zurich, which is
world-leading research University, is a partner in the project with a specific interest in urban ecology
and how basic ecology can contribute to support conservation of urban biodiversity. The Swiss
network of environmental humanities is the 3 rd academic partner, with an interest in public
understanding and engagement in grand challenges, such as biodiversity loss. One of the major
challenges was developing a common conce ptual understanding and terminology between urban
ecology and urban planning at the outset. Once this had been achieved, each of these 3 partners led
a specific research theme. The principle investigator is jointly affiliated to both the main institutions
and has worked for several years with the third partner and so he provides the bridge between them.
Lessons learned:
• Different institutional settings present different advantages and disadvantages for TDR:
o Within Universities of applied Science, co -production is straightforward, as regular
interactions between research and practice are common; some professors still maintain
active practices and some practitioners are lecturers (e.g. in design studios). However,
time and resources for (non-applied) research is very limited
o Within research universities, collaborating across disciplines and engaging with
external stakeholders can be more challenging and the evaluation criteria focus on
scientific publications. However, research is part of an academic’s role an d there is
ready access to infrastructure and resources to conduct research.
Policy implications: There can be considerable considerable added -value in combining expertise
from different types of institutions that do TDR research, in this case Universities of Applied Science
and traditional Research Universities.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 69
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

10. Concluding comments
As described in the first part of this report and reiterated in individual case studies,
Governments, research agencies, research institutions and international bodies all h ave a
role to play in designing and implementing effective poli cy initiatives to promote TDR.
Detailed recommendations and suggested actions, in this regard, are listed at the start of
this report and will not be fully repeated here. However, a short summa ry of the roles for
different actors is given below.
Governments need to recognise and promote transdisciplinary research, as an essential
complement to other more traditional research approaches, in addressing complex societal
challenges. Governments have a critical role to play in establishing the overall framework
that enables and supports effective TDR.
Research funding agencies have a critical role to play by directly supporting and
incentivising TDR research. This affects both prioritisation of research areas and changes
to funding processes, including funding criteria, peer review and evaluation.
Universities and P ublic Research Institutions (PRIs) are the principle organisations
through which TDR is carried out and their long-term strategic commitment and support is
essential if TDR is to be expanded to the scale that is necessary to address complex societal
challenges. This has implications for education and training, as well as research. It also
cuts across the so -called 3
rd mission activities (societal engagement and innovation) of
Universities and PRIs.
The academic community has a major influence on science policy development and the
definition of research strategies and priorities. It is responsible for conducting peer review
and evaluation processes and often has a strong voice in how these are designed and
conducted. Unive rsities and PRIs tend to have considerable autonomy and are rightly
responsive to their academic employees. Thus, whilst policy -makers and other actors can
provide mandates and incentives for TDR, their impact will be limited without the support
of the academic community and its representative associations.
Intergovernmental organisations can enable TDR. One of the major policy drivers for
more TDR is the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Inherent in these goals is the
recognition that no single country can fully address them on its own and there is a need for
more effective international cooperation and exchange. Whilst the UN and other
international bodies, including the OECD do not have the resources or the authority to
implement TDR at the scale requir ed to address societal challenges, these international
bodies can play an important role in building consensus and catalysing action.
In addition to these five groups of actors, who have the major responsibility for promoting
and enabling TDR within scien tific research systems, there are a number of other
stakeholders that need to embrace TDR if we are to effectively address that complex
challenges that society is currently confronted with. Principle among these are:
• The private sector has enormous intelle ctual, technological and financial
resources as well as valuable data and information, all of which can be leveraged
in TDR.
• Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) represent different societal interests
and as such they can make a very valuable contribution to many TDR activities.
Addressing complex societal challenges is a shared responsibility that requires new
knowledge, new technologies and changes in society. Science has a central role to play in
informing the transformations that are required to ensure sustainable and prosperous
futures. In order to achieve this, a paradigm shift is required and transdisciplinary research

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
70 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

needs to be actively promoted and supported, as a natural complement to tr aditional
research approaches. This requires changes no t only within science systems but also
support and engagement from other sectors of society. Policy- makers have a critical role
to play in developing the framework that lowers the existing barriers to TDR and
incentivises engagement by all actors.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 71
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Notes
1 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, 2015.
2 German philosopher E.Husserl introduced the term "Lifeworld (German:Lebenswelt)" to describe this.
3 Ibid., paraphrasing Wilhelm Windelband’s inaugural address as rector of Strassburg University, 1894.
4 Each case study describes a project that integrates natural and SSH academic components and actors
from more than one non- academic stakeholder domain. For example, a project might include hydrology,
psychology, community representatives and local government.
5 See for example www.transdisciplinarity.ch.
6 Introductory phrases, in italics, reflect insights from case study reports that were prepared by expert
group members who conducted interviews. They are extrac ts from these case notes and are not verbatim
quotations.
7 A freely available Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) on transdisciplinary research is available through
the Swiss, Academies of Sciences at https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/partnering-for-change-link-
research-to-societal-needs.

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
72 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

References

Apostel, L. et al. (eds.) (1972), Towards Interdisciplinarity and Transdisciplinarity in
Education and Innovation, OECD Publications Center.
[6]
Arnstein, S. (1969), “A Ladder Of Citizen Participation”, Journal of the American Institute of
Planners, Vol. 35/4, pp. 216-224, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225.
[13]
EC/OECD (2020), STIP Compass: International Database on Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy (STIP), https://stip.oecd.org (accessed on 14 May 2020).
[12]
Enengel, B. et al. (2012), “Co-production of knowledge in transdisciplinary doctoral theses on
landscape development—An analysis of actor roles and knowledge types in different
research phases”, Landscape and Urban Planning, Vol. 105/1-2, pp. 106-117,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.12.004.
[15]
Gredig, D. (2011), “From research to practice: Research-based Intervention Development in
social work: developing practice through cooperative knowledge production”, European
Journal of Social Work, Vol. 14/1, pp. 53-70,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691457.2010.516624.
[8]
Hadorn, G. et al. (eds.) (2008), Handbook of Transdisciplinary Research, Springer
Netherlands, Dordrecht, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6699-3.
[3]
Hernandez Montoya, A. (ed.) (2017), “Interdisciplinary Collaboration between Natur al and
Social Sciences – Status and Trends Exemplified in Groundwater Research”, PLOS ONE ,
Vol. 12/1, p. e0170754, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170754.
[18]
Hulhoven, X. (n.d.), Develop a sustainable future for Brussels through a co -creation project,
https://innoviris.brussels/co-creation (accessed on 27 May 2020).
[19]
Jahn, T., M. Bergmann and F. Keil (2012), “Transdisciplinarity: Between mainstreaming and
marginalization”, Ecological Economics, Vol. 79, pp. 1-10,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.04.017.
[9]
Klein, J. (2008), “Evaluation of Interdisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Research”, American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 35/2, pp. S116-S123,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.05.010.
[21]
Lang, D. et al. (2012), “Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science: practice,
principles, and challenges”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 7/S1, pp. 25-43,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11625-011-0149-x.
[10]
Moser, S. (2016), “Can science on transformation transform science? Lessons from co -design”,
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, Vol. 20, pp. 106-115,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2016.10.007.
[24]
Noah, W. and M. Jean (1980), Webster’s New Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English
Language, Unabridged, W. Collins.
[25]

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 73
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

OECD (2017), “Open research agenda setting”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers, No. 50, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/74edb6a8-en.
[20]
Pohl, C., P. Krütli and M. Stauffacher (2017), “Ten Reflective Steps for Rendering Research
Societally Relevant”, GAIA - Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society, Vol. 26/1,
pp. 43-51, http://dx.doi.org/10.14512/gaia.26.1.10.
[11]
Pohl, C. et al. (2011), Questions to evaluate inter- and transdisciplinary research proposals,
td-net for Transdisciplinary Research.
[16]
Roux, D. et al. (2010), “Framework for participative reflection on the accomplishment of
transdisciplinary research programs”, Environmental Science & Policy, Vol. 13/8, pp. 733-
741, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2010.08.002.
[22]
Schneider, F. et al. (2019), “Research funding programmes aiming for societal
transformations: Ten key stages”, Science and Public Policy, Vol. 46/3, pp. 463-478,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy074.
[17]
Stauffacher, M. et al. (2008), “Analytic and Dynamic Approach to Collaboration: A
Transdisciplinary Case Study on Sustainable Landscape Development in a Swiss Prealpine
Region”, Systemic Practice and Action Research, Vol. 21/6, pp. 409-422,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11213-008-9107-7.
[14]
Swiss Academies of arts and sciences (n.d.), td-net Network for Transdisciplinary Research,
http://www.transdisciplinarity.ch/en/td-net/Transdisziplinarit-t/Definitionen.html
(accessed on 27 May 2020).
[1]
The World Commission on Environment and Development (1987), Report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development - Our Common Future.
[7]
Tress, B., G. Tress and G. Fry (2006), “Defining concepts and the process of knowledge
production in integrative research”, in Tress, B. et al. (eds.), From Landscape Research to
Landscape Planning: Aspects of Integration, Education and Application , Springer,
Dordrecht.
[23]
Van Noorden, R. (2015), “Interdisciplinary research by the numbers”, Nature, Vol. 525/7569,
pp. 306-307, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/525306a.
[4]
Wright Morton, L., S. Eigenbrode and T. Martin (2015), “Architectures of adaptive integration
in large collaborative projects”, Ecology and Society, Vol. 20/4,
http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/es-07788-200405.
[2]
Zinsstag, J. et al. (2015), One Health: The Theory and Practice of Integrated Health
Approaches, CABI.
[5]

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
74 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

ANNEXES
Annex 1. GSF Expert Group Membership
Country Name Affiliation
Belgium Audrey Segerie Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique - FNRS
Colombia Tania Catalina Delgado Ministry for Research and Culture (Colciencias)
France Patrick Criqui CNRS and Université Grenoble Alpes
Germany Cornelia Reimoser
Forschungskoordination Innovationsforschung, Vorstandsstab
Forschung
Zentrale der Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft
Japan Tateo Arimoto (co-chair)
Professor at National Graduate Institute For Policy Studies
(GRIPS) and Principal Fellow, Center for Research and
Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency
(JST/CRDS)
Japan Kazuhito Oyamada Fellow, Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST/CRDS)
Japan Kazuhisa Yoshida Fellow, Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST/CRDS)
Korea Kiwoo Chun Senior Researcher, National Research Foundation of Korea
Korea Soonkeon Nam Dean, Office of Planning & Coordination, Kyung Hee University
Netherlands Behnam Taebi Delft University of Technology
Norway Lillian Baltzrud Senior Adviser, Department of University and University College
Policy, Research Council of Norway
Switzerland Jakob Zinsstag (co-chair) Deputy head, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health,
Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute
United Kingdom Anne-Mette Olesen International Policy Manager, International Shared Capability,
UK Research and Innovation (UKRI)
United Kingdom Jo O’Leary Head of Unit, UKRI- Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBSRC)
United Kingdom Riaz Bhunnoo
Director of the Global Food Security Programme, UKRI-
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(BBSRC)
United States Dragana Brzakovic National Science Foundation
Consultant José Siri Wellcome Trust, Our Planet Our Health

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 75
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Annex 2. Case study questionnaire
I. General project information [to be completed prior to interview]
1) Title
2) Years of operation
3) Total budget
4) Annual budget
5) Funding source(s)
6) Principal investigator
7) Principal investigator’s discipline
8) Principal investigator’s affiliation
9) Location(s) of research team
10) Study sites (i.e., cities/countries)
11) Scale of analysis (i.e., local/national/regional/global)
12) Primary objectives (i.e., what societal challenge is being addressed?)
13) Brief description

II. Project design and structure
1. Research themes:
a. How were research/working themes identified or selected?
b. What partners drove this process? Was there consultation with other actors?
c. Did research themes evolve during participatory engagement? Please describe.

2. Briefly describe the project leadership and management. How were decisions made with respect to:
a. Overall project direction and research questions.
b. Day-to-day project functioning.
3. Academic participants:
a. How were the principal/main investigators selected?
b. What disciplines were actively engaged in designing and implementing the project? What was the
split between natural sciences and SSH?
c. What other disciplines, if any, contributed significantly to the project? Were any approached that
did not eventually contribute and, if so, why?
d. How did the depth of engagement of different disciplines vary over time?
e. What processes, formal and informal, were in place to integrate across disciplines?
4. Non-academic participants (private sector, civic sector, community/public representatives, other)
a. How were non-academic partners selected?
b. Which non-academic participants, from which domains, were actively involved in designing and/or
implementing the project?
c. What other participants, from which domains, contributed significantly to the project? Were any
approached that did not eventually contribute and, if so, why?
d. How did the depth of engagement of non-academic partners vary over time? Were there moments
when they were highly involved, and to what extent were they engaged/involved during intervening
stretches?
e. What processes, formal and informal, were in place to integrate academic and non -academic
perspectives and participants?
5. Existing relations and networks
a. Were there historical antecedents or pre-existing relationships that laid a foundation for the research
team?
b. How was the transdisciplinary network built and what was new for this project?
c. To what extent were the various partners already familiar with each other?
6. Why did the project adopt a transdisciplinary approach? What were the motivating factors?

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
76 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

7. Did non-academic processes (e.g., political, business or fiscal cycles) drive any aspects of the
project design or timing?
8. Are any aspects of the project design novel or unique? Please briefly describe.
9. Was any particular attention given to ethical and/or equity issues, and, if so, how did this influence
project design?
III. Project outputs, monitoring and impact
1) How was project performance monitored over different timeframes? Briefly describe any formal or
informal monitoring mechanisms.
2) What were the main project outputs?
3) What were the expected project impacts? How are these being assessed?
4) Did the transdisciplinary approach adopted by the project offer any advantages or disadvantages
compared with traditional approaches? Please describe.
5) Were any project outputs or impacts directly attributable to the adoption of a transdisciplinary
approach?
6) Has consideration been given to the equitable distribution of benefits and/or potential unintended
consequences arising from this project? Briefly describe any mechanisms to improve/ensure equity
IV. Implementation challenges
1) What were the main challenges in implementing transdisciplinarity in this project with respect to
each of the following issues? What steps were taken to address them?
a. Selection of appropriate methods
b. Selection of appropriate partners
c. Ensuring inclusion of diverse perspectives
d. Institutional arrangements and support (research environment)
e. Leadership, governance and/or management
f. Funding (including the project proposal review process)
g. Participation of academic staff from different disciplines (including publication expectations)
h. Participation of students and early career researchers (including employment expectations, career
paths and incentives)
i. Communication between academia and non-academic partners
j. Cultural/language barriers
k. Data management and integration
l. International harmonization/trust building, if appropriate
m. Other obstacles (e.g., regulations or standards around data sharing)
2) What, in your view, is the most important challenge/obstacle to implementing transdisciplinary
research? Please explain in detail
3) In yo ur experience what are the most important characteristics of successful transdisciplinary
research projects?
V. Supportive actions
1) What can actors in each of these domains do to help to resolve/mitigate the above challenges and
promote transdisciplinary research?
a. Governments
b. Research funders
c. Universities/research institutions
d. International organizations (e.g., UN system)

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 77
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Annex 3. Workshop on transdisciplinarity and sustainability research,
24 May 2019, Paris
At: Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation
25 rue de la Montagne Sainte Geneviève, 75005 Paris

Aims of the workshop
Following an overview of key conceptual and methodological issues, several different cases studies will be presented
and for each of these the same four over-arching questions are to be addressed:

1. What are is the added value of using a transdisciplinary approach (aims and impact)?
2. What are the main obstacles and challenges to implementing transdisciplinary research?
3. What has been done (good practices) to address these obstacles/challenges?
4. What can policy makers (governments, research institutions, funders) do to promote transdisciplinary
research?

Workshop Agenda

09h00 Opening session
 Jacob Zinsstag, welcome from the GSF Expert Group co-chair
Bernard Larrouturou, Head of general directorate for Research and Innovation at French ministry of
research
Carthage Smith, Senior Policy Analyst – Lead Co-ordinator, OECD Global Science Forum
09h15 Roland Scholz , Professor Emeritus of Environmental Systems Science at Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule (ETH Zürich)
Transdisciplinarity: evolution and limitations of the concept
10h15 Rémy Slama, Environmental Epidemiologist at Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale
(Inserm)
Path of successive research projects/journey to inclusive transdisciplinary [30min +30min discussion]
11h15 break
11h30 Anne-Sophie Stevance , Science Officer at International Science Council (ISC) and, Sandrine Paillard,
Global Hub Director at Future Earth
Future Earth: challenges and lessons learned [30min+30min discussion]
12h30 Lunch
13.45 Case study analysis framework – Jakob Zinsstag
14h Case study 1: One Health project [20min+40min discussion]
Ethiopia-Switzerland cooperative project for the improvement of health and wellbeing of communities
Kadra Osman Ali, Jigjiga University, Ethiopia
15h Case study 2: MontanAqua [20min+40min discussion]
Water management project in times of scarcity and climate change in Switzerland
 Flurina Schneider, Centre for Development and Environment, University of Berne
16h break
16h30 Case study 3: APV-RESOLA [20min+40min discussion]
Food-energy nexus project for rural development in Germany
 Christine Rösch, Head of Sustainability and Environment, Institute for T echnology Assessment and
Systems Analysis, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
17h30 Conclusions
Patrick Monfray, deputy head of service of research and innovation strategy
Jakob Zinsstag, GSF Expert Group co-chair
Tateo Arimoto, GSF Expert Group co-chair
17h45 End of workshop

Participants: ~50 people from academia, French Ministry for Research and funding agencies and OECD.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
78 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Annex 4. Workshop on Transdisciplinary Research, 5 December 2019, Tokyo
Organizers:
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan (MEXT)
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST -CRDS )
OECD Global Science Forum (GSF)
Aim of the workshop:
To discuss the following issues in the context of specificTDR projects;
a. added value of using a TDR approach
b. how to promote collaboration among different disciplines
c. how to involve various stakeholders
d. evaluation of impact
Workshop Agenda:
10:00 Opening remarks
Tateo Arimoto, co-chair of OECD/GSF Transdisciplinary Research (TDR) project
MEXT and Cabinet Office, Japan
Carthage Smith, OECD/GSF
10:20 Key note (30min + 30min discussion)
Hiroko Akiyama, Institute of Gerontology, University of Tokyo, Japan
11:20 Case study 1 (30min + 20min discussion)
Mobility Innovation Center, COI (The Center of Innovation) Program, Nagoya University, Japan
Takayuki Morikawa, Research Leader, Mobility Innovation Center; Professor, Institutes of Innovation for
Future Society, Nagoya University
12:10 Lunch (70min)
13:20 Case study 2 (30min + 20min discussion)
International Research Institute of Disaster Science (IRIDeS), Tohoku University, Japa n
Fumihiko Imamura, Director, IRIDeS, Tohoku University, Japan
14:10 Case study 3 (30min + 20min discussion)
Korean Case
Soonkeon Nam, Director, The Centre for Strategic Planning, Korea
15:00 Break
15:20 Case study 4 (30min + 40min + 20min discussion)
Japan-ASEAN Science, Technology and Innovation Platform (JASTIP), Kyoto University, Japan, and its
Collaborative Institution in Malaysia
Ryuichi Fukuhara, Programme Coordinator, JASTIP, Kyoto University, Japan
Hideaki Ohgaki, Professor, Kyoto University, Japan
Che Hang Seng, Senior Lecture, Um Power Energy Dedicated Advanced Centre (UMPEDAC), University of Malaya,
Malaysia
16:50 General Discussion (30min)
17:20 Conclusion and closing remarks
Jakob Zinsstag, co-chair of OECD/GSF TDR project
Tateo Arimoto, co-chair of OECD/GSF TDR project

Participants: Approx. 50 people from MEXT, Cabinet Office, JST, OECD/GSF TDR EG members, etc.

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH | 79
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Glossary
Differences in definitions and terminology among different communities, including
policymakers, can inhibit discourses on transdisciplinarity. Working definitions for some
key terms, as adopted for this report, are given here (Tress, Tress and Fry, 2006[23]; Moser,
2016[24]; Noah and Jean, 1980[25]).

Disciplinary
research
Research that takes place within the bounds of a single, currently recognised academic
discipline.

Interdisciplinary
research
Research that involves several unrelated academic disciplines in a way that forces them to
cross subject boundaries to create new knowledge and theory in achieving a common goal.
Integration of natural sciences with social sciences and humanities (SSH) is particularly
relevant to addressing complex societal challenges, including those related to human-
environmental systems (HES), but poses substantial challenges.

Multidisciplinary
research (also
pluridisciplinary
research)
Research that involves several different academic disciplines working in parallel on one
theme or problem, often with a common goal, yet following their individual disciplinary
precepts and ways of working. Participants exchange knowledge, but do not aim to cross
subject boundaries to create new, integrated knowledge and theory. This lack of
integration may make it difficult to satisfactorily resolve complex societal problems.

Participatory
research
Research that brings together academic and non-academic partners to exchange
knowledge without necessarily integrating that knowledge. Participatory research is
sometimes used as an umbrella term that encompasses numerous methods that involve
non-academic participants to different degrees in research processes.
Transdisciplinary
research
Research that integrates both academic researchers from unrelated disciplines –
including natural and social sciences- and non-academic participants to achieve a
common goal involving the creation of new knowledge. TDR is necessarily
interdisciplinary. In drawing on non-scientific knowledge domains such as local and
traditional knowledge, and cultural norms and values, it aims to supplement and
transform scientific insights for the good of society.

Co-design First phase of a research process, in which researchers and non-academic partners jointly
develop a research project and define research questions that meet their collective
interests and needs.

Co-production A collaborative model that includes stakeholders in the knowledge production phase of
the research process, e.g., engagement of patients in health research.

Science Systematised knowledge derived from observation, study, and experimentation carried on
in order to determine the nature or principles of what is being studied; a branch of
knowledge or study, especially one concerned with establishing and systematising facts,
principles, and methods, as by experiments and hypotheses. Sometimes “Science” is used
to denote natural sciences, as opposed to Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH); however,
in its broadest interpretation it encompasses all disciplines of academic knowledge and
both quantitative and qualitative methods.

Discipline Branch of knowledge or learning. Practitioners of a given discipline generally share
characteristic background knowledge, objects of analysis, terminology, analytic
methodologies, and mechanisms for training, collaboration and knowledge exchange.

Natural science Systematised knowledge of nature and the physical world, including zoology, botany,
chemistry, physics, geology, etc., or any of these branches of knowledge.

Social science Systematised knowledge based on qualitative information or quantitative data about
groups of people and how they live together as families, tribes, communities, races etc., or

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
80 | ADDRESSING SOCIETAL CHALLENGES USING TRANSDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

any of several branches of knowledge, as history, economics, civics, etc., dealing with the
structure of society and the activity of its members.

Humanities Academic disciplines that study aspects of human society and culture. They include
literature, philosophy and history.

Stakeholder A person, group or organisation with an interest in a particular project

Stakeholder
domain
A category that encompasses a set of stakeholders with a characteristic role in society.
Stakeholders within a particular domain often have similar priorities, incentives and ways
of addressing problems. Four stakeholder domains were defined for this report: public
sector (e.g., government and public authorities); private sector (e.g., business and
industry); civic sector (e.g., NGOs, charities); and/or direct representatives of
communities (e.g., lay persons)

Epistemology The study or a theory of the nature and grounds of knowledge especially with reference to
its limits and validity

Scientific
Paradigm
A set of concepts, analytical tools and research methods that characterize the way a
discipline identifies and solves scientific problems (the paradigm of a chemist is different
to that of a physicist, and that of an economist different to that of a sociologist). In a
broader sense, a paradigm shift occurs when, a systemic change in these concepts-tools-
methods occurs in one or several disciplines.
