
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY
FRAMEWORK FOR
OECD COUNTRIES
OLD DEBATES, NEW PERSPECTIVES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
May 2022 No. 127

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Policy Papers

This paper was approved and declassified by the Committee for Industry, Innovation and
Entrepreneurship (CIIE) on 4 April 2022 and prepared for publication by the OECD
Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E under the reference code:
DSTI/CIIE(2022)9/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to
the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers
and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

© OECD 2022
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to
be found at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  3
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
An industrial policy framework for OECD countries: old
debates, new perspectives
Chiara Criscuolo, Nicolas Gonne, Kohei Kitazawa, Guy Lalanne (OECD)

The debate on industrial policy has made a comeback in both academic and policy circles.
Yet, no consensus exists o n an industrial policy paradigm and the absence of a common
reference framework unduly obfuscates the debate – even which interventions are to be
considered “industrial policy” is not clear -cut. Against this background, t his paper
proposes a coherent framework for analysing the formulation of industrial policy, relying
on a purposefully broad definition of the latter. Leveraging the proposed framework and a
companion paper (Criscuolo et al., 2022 [1]) which synthetises the available empirical
evidence, this paper stresses the complementarities between policy instruments , thereby
justifying the use of industrial strategies , acknowledges the role of t argeted industrial
strategies, which can direct technological change and growth , and of demand -side
instruments, which can cont ribute to transformative industrial change , but calls for a
stronger emphasis on evaluation and the regular re -assessment of targeted industrial
strategies.
JEL codes: L52, L53, 025, 038, Q58
Keywords: industrial policy, industrial strategies

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Executive summary
The debate on industrial policy has made a comeback in both academic and policy circles.
The case for governments to perform a strategic and coordinating role in the business sector
is gaining traction across OECD countries in the wake of major shoc ks, such as the 2008
Global Financial Crisis, the current COVID -19 pandemic, and long -term trends, e.g.
globalisation and productivity slowdowns, the digital transformation and climate change.
Yet, no consensus exists on an industrial policy paradigm. The efficiency of horizontal (or
untargeted) policies, but also their sufficiency to address global societal challenges, are
increasingly questioned. In addition, targeted policies continue to raise concerns related to
anticompetitive effects, capture by vested interests and the opportunity cost of public funds.
Moreover, the absence of a common reference framework unduly obfuscates the debate –
even which interventions are to be considered “industrial policy” is not clear-cut.
This paper proposes a cohere nt framework for analysing the formulation of industrial
policy, presented schematically in Figure 1 below. Industrial policy is d efined as
“interventions intended to improve structurally the performance of the domestic business
sector”. It comprises a vast set of instruments, ranging from the design of intellectual
property protection to public procurement, R&D incentives or public support to the
provision of skills. By this purposefully broad definition, industrial policy encompasses
much-studied realms such as science, technology and innovation (STI) and
entrepreneurship policies. The breadth of the definition of industri al policy goes hand in
hand with the recognition that aggregate performance is multidimensional and should not
necessarily be conflated with aggregate productivity.
The proposed conceptual framework (Figure 1) hinges on the definition and description of
the two main dimensions of the formulation of industrial policies, linked by the rationale
underpinning policy intervention:
 The design of industrial strategies, defined as a consistent and articulated group of
policy instruments aimed at achieving a given policy objective, which can go
beyond productivity growth and innovation to include, e.g., sustainability,
resilience and strategic autonomy. Beyond traditional sectoral or place -based
orientations, “new” industrial strategies increasingly focus on specific technologies
or “missions”.
 The choice of industrial policy instruments. A new taxonomy allows identifying the
channels through which instruments operate and potential complementarities. To
that effect, in addition to keeping with the traditional distinction between horizontal
and targeted policies, the taxonomy follows the neo -Schumpeterian growth
literature in distinguishing between demand -pull instrumen ts and two types of
supply-push instruments: those that improve firm performance (“within”
instruments) and those that affect industry dynamics (“between” or framework
instruments).
Leveraging the proposed framework and a companion paper (Criscuolo et al., 2022 [1])
which synthetises the available empirical evidence on industrial policy, this paper provides
four policy messages.
 Complementarities between policy instruments justify the use of industrial
strategies. The available evidence supports the effectiveness of several categories
of policy instruments such as firm -level investment incentives, instruments

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  5
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
favouring the access to inputs (e.g. skills, knowledge, infrastructure) and
appropriate framework conditions (e.g. sound competition, well-functioning capital
markets). For the instruments to be effective and to maximise their effectiveness,
however, good policy design is crucial. In addition, t he framework developed in
this paper sheds light on the complementar ity between investment incentives,
instruments supporting access to inputs and framework conditions , thereby
rationalising the use of policy packages, or strategies, to reach industrial policy
objectives.
 Targeted industrial strategies can direct technolo gical change and growth .
Governments having a strong role to play in tackling societal challenges , in
particular climate change , this may explain and justify the renewal of targeted
industrial strategies, such as mission-oriented and technology -focused strategies.
Targeted instruments can usefully complement horizontal policies within a strategy
to achieve a given objective. However, it is important to be aware of well-identified
pitfalls of targeted interventions, whose governance model should be built so that
young competitors are not excluded , specifying objectives rather than means,
scheduling assessments and evaluations and building in exit options.
 Demand side instruments can contribute to transformative industrial change.
These instruments, which affect the demand for products through either their price,
availability or public demand, have become more and more common, in particular
in transformative mission -oriented strategies . The underlying rationale is the
creation of demand in order to support scaling-up and improving efficiency
through, e.g., learning by doing. In the context of targeted industrial strategies,
demand side policies are particularly interesting as they may be less distortive than
targeted supply-side policies. For instance, they are more likely to affect indirectly
all the relevant firms, irrespective of their size, age or connections with the
administration. The evidence support s the effectiveness of these instruments,
although the optimal policy mix between demand and supply sid e instruments
remains an open question.
 Governments need to put a strong emphasis on evaluation and the regular re-
assessment of targeted policies . While the evidence on the effectiveness of
targeted interventions is limited and mixed so far, digital tech nologies have the
potential to improve the effectiveness of these interventions, in particular by
making evaluation cheaper and more timely.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Figure 1. The formulation of industrial policy

Source: OECD.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  7
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Table of contents
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................... 3
1. Towards a framework for industrial policy .................................................................................... 8
2. Conceptual framework ................................................................................................................... 14
2.1. Industrial policy definition .......................................................................................................... 14
2.2. Horizontal and targeted policies ................................................................................................. 14
2.3. Policy instruments and industrial strategies ................................................................................ 15
2.4. Industrial strategy objectives ...................................................................................................... 16
3. Policy instruments ........................................................................................................................... 19
3.1. Distinguishing instruments ......................................................................................................... 19
3.2. Within instruments ...................................................................................................................... 21
3.3. Between instruments ................................................................................................................... 22
3.4. Demand instruments ................................................................................................................... 23
4. Industrial strategies ......................................................................................................................... 25
4.1. Types of strategies ...................................................................................................................... 26
4.2. Strategy overlap .......................................................................................................................... 31
5. Policy recommendations ................................................................................................................. 32
5.1. Complementarities between policy instruments justify the use of industrial strategies ............. 32
5.2. Targeted industrial strategies can direct technological change and growth, but should be
handled with care ............................................................................................................................... 33
5.3. Demand side instruments can contribute to transformative industrial change............................ 35
5.4. Governments need to put a strong emphasis on evaluation and regular re-assessments of
targeted policies ................................................................................................................................. 35
References .............................................................................................................................................. 3
Annexe A. Industrial strategies in practice ....................................................................................... 13

FIGURES
Figure 1. The formulation of industrial policy 6
Figure 2. Policy instruments and industrial strategies 15
Figure 3. The formulation of industrial policy 16
Figure 4. Taxonomy of policy instruments 19
Figure 5. Types of industrial strategies 25

TABLES
Table 1. Industrial strategies and their rationale 26

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
1. Towards a framework for industrial policy
The case for governments to more actively direct the structure of the business sector is
gaining traction across OECD countries in the wake of major shocks and long-term trends,
such as the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, the current COVID -19 pandemic, tensions in
international trade, the productivity slowdown, the digital transformation and climate
change. The question on the role of industrial policy in advanced economies has returned
to the forefront of discussions in both academic and policy circles.
Yet, no consensus exists on an industrial policy paradigm. The absence of a common
reference framework unduly obfuscates the debat e – even which interventions are to be
considered “industrial policy” is not clear -cut. So -called horizontal policies, i.e.
interventions available to all firms and which include business framework conditions, are
increasingly questioned on both efficiency and sufficiency grounds – see e.g. the recent
Franco-German Manifesto (2019[2]). At the same time, particularly lively debates surround
targeted industrial policies, i.e., interventions restricted to a subset of eligible fi rms – see
Box 1. On the one hand, supporters stress success stories, such as the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) deemed to have led to the emergence of technological
breakthrough like the internet, and insist on the potential of such initiatives to tackle grand
challenges – see, e.g., Mazzucato (2013[3]). On the other, sceptics caution against
exaggerating the role of gov ernments ex -post and point to numerous instances where
targeted policies fail to achieve their objectives while leading to anticompetitive effects and
capture by vested interests, at great opportunity cost for public funds – see, e.g., Lincicome
(2021[4]).
As these old debates are raging, an increasing number of scholarly contributions aim at
reformulating industrial policy frameworks in the light of recent major shocks and growing
global challenges. Primary examples include the OECD’s Design principles for mission-
oriented innovation policies (Larrue, 2021[5]); Bruegel’s Blueprint on a green industrial
policy for Europe , which focuses on serving the EU Green Deal (Tagliapietra and
Veugelers, 2020 [6]); and frameworks for reconsidering the role of industrial policy
interventions in the success of the “Asian Miracles” (Cherif and Hasanov, 2019[7]). These
frameworks, however, either focus on selected types of interventions and objectives, or on
emerging economies. A notable exception is Warwick (2013[8]), who adopts a broad
definition of industrial policy and proposes a new typology based on policy orientation and
domain. However, both the economic and the policy environment have changed
dramatically since that work.
The COVID-19 crisis and climate change are reinforcing the perceived urgency of global
societal challenges and stress the role of industrial policy, notably through the large -scale
recovery plans that are now being implemented around the world (Hepburn et al., 2020[9]).
Industrial policy is gaining traction as countries seek to ensure a green, digital and inclusive
recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic, with a goal of building back better. Following
these urgent needs, in recent years governments have announced new industrial strategies
such as the European Green Deal (2019), the Next Generation EU fund (2020), the Korean
New Deal (2020), the American Rescue Plan Act (2021) and the EU New Industrial
Strategy (2020, updated in 2021). The COVID-19 crisis also prompted the emergence (or
the revival) of new industrial policy objectives, such as economic resilience and strategic
autonomy.
Against this backdrop, the present paper offers new perspectives on a present -time
industrial policy paradigm for OECD countrie s.1 It proposes a coherent framework for

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  9
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
analysing the formulation of industrial policy, defined here as interventions intended to
improve structurally the performance of the domestic business sector. By this purposefully
broad definition, industrial polic ies comprise a vast set of instruments, ranging from the
design of intellectual property and public procurement, to government support and fiscal
incentives for research and development (R&D) or the public support to the provision of
skills, and encompass other much -studied realms such as science, technology and
innovation (STI), and entrepreneurship policies.
The proposed conceptual framework hinges on the definition and description of the two
main dimensions of the formulation of industrial policies, bound by the rationale
underpinning policy intervention:2
 The design of strategies , defined as a consistent and articulated set of policy
instruments aimed at achieving a given policy objective, which can go beyond
productivity growth and innovation to in clude, e.g., sustainability, resilience or
strategic autonomy. Beyond standard sectoral orientation, industrial policy notably
includes technology -focused, place -based strategies and, increasingly, mission -
oriented strategies. A categorisation of these four main types of strategies and their
underlying rationales complements the conceptual framework, including a
comprehensive overview of the market failures and other elements justifying
intervention.
 The choice of industrial policy instruments. A new taxonomy allows identifying the
channels through which instruments operate and potential complementarities. To
that effect, in addition to keeping with the traditional distinction between horizontal
and targeted policies, the taxonomy follows the ne o-Schumpeterian growth
literature in distinguishing between demand -pull instruments and two types of
supply-push instruments: those that improve firm performance (“within”
instruments) and those that affect industry dynamics and productivity enhancing
resource reallocation (“between” or framework instruments).
While the paper purposefully adopts a broad scope towards industrial policy, it emphasises
two key elements. First, productivity and economic growth are considered the main metrics
against which industrial policy objectives are assessed, giving technology and innovation
policies a key role in the proposed framework. With that respect, the proposed framework
builds on the large body of previous OECD work on science, technology and innovation
(STI) polic y interventions . Second, addressing societal challenges has become a key
justification for industrial policy, placing mission -oriented strategies at the centre of
policymaking. Even though the related evidence remains scarce, t his type of intervention
is increasingly analysed in OECD work, e.g. the role of industrial policies for achieving
decarbonisation (Anderson et al., 2021[10]; OECD, 2021[11]), for fostering the contribution
of the private sector to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
(OECD, 2021 [12]) or for stimulating the development of green hydrogen (Cammeraat,
Dechezleprêtre and Lalanne, 2022[13]). The paper also acknowledges the multidimensional
nature of performance.
Leveraging the proposed framework and based on the available evidence on the
effectiveness of industrial policy instruments reviewed in (Criscuolo et al., 2022[1]), this
paper provides four main policy messages:
 Complementarities between policy instruments justify the use of industrial
strategies. The available evidence supports the effectiveness of several categories
of policy instruments such as firm -level investment incentives, instruments
favouring the access to inputs (e.g. skills, knowledge, infrastructure) and
appropriate framework conditions (e.g. sound competition, well-functioning capital

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
markets). For the instruments to be effective and to ma ximise their effectiveness,
however, good policy design is crucial. In addition, t he framework developed in
this paper sheds light on the complementarity between investment incentives,
instruments supporting access to inputs and framework conditions, there by
rationalising the use of policy packages, or strategies, to reach industrial policy
objectives.
 Targeted industrial strategies can direct technological change and growth .
Governments having a strong role to play in tackling societal challenges , in
particular climate change , this may explain and justify the renewal of targeted
industrial strategies, such as mission-oriented and technology -focused strategies.
Targeted instruments can usefully complement horizontal policies within a strategy
to achieve a given objective. However, it is important to be aware of well-identified
pitfalls of targeted interventions, whose governance model should be built so that
young competitors are not excluded , specifying objectives rather than means,
scheduling assessments and evaluations and building in exit options.
 Demand side instruments can contribute to transformative industrial change.
These instruments, which affect the demand for products through either their price,
availability or public demand, become more and mor e common, in particular in
transformative mission-oriented strategies. The underlying rationale is the creation
of demand in order to support scaling -up and improving efficiency through, e.g.,
learning by doing. In the context of targeted industrial strate gies, demand side
policies are particularly interesting as they may be less distortive than targeted
supply-side policies. For instance, they are more likely to affect indirectly all the
relevant firms, irrespective of their size, age or connections with the administration.
The evidence supports the effectiveness of these instruments, although the optimal
policy mix between demand and supply side instruments remains an open question.
 Governments need to put a strong emphasis on evaluation and regular re -
assessment of targeted policies . While the evidence on the effectiveness of
targeted interventions is limited and mixed so far, digital technologies have the
potential to improve the effectiveness of these interventions, in particular by
making evaluation cheaper and more timely.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed conceptual framework.
Section 3 lays out the new taxonomy of industrial policy instruments. Section 4 describes
industrial strategies and their rationale in detail. Secti on 5 summarises the main policy
messages from the analysis. Finally, Annex A describes two examples of industrial
strategies – green and artificial intelligence (AI) strategies – in selected countries and
regions to illustrate how real-world strategies fit into the conceptual framework developed
in this paper.
Box 1. Long-standing debates on targeted industrial policy
Traditional targeted industrial policy: for or against?
The debate around targeted industrial policies has been rather polarised.
 Supporters of targeted industrial policies have stressed success stories – see, e.g.,
Mazzucato (2013[3]). The American post -WWII technology policy, including
the experiences of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA),
the Apollo program and more generally the research programs funded by the

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  11
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Department of Defense are usually deemed successful as they led to inventions,
such as the internet, the GPS, drones, and several other breakthroughs following
a model that has been extensively discussed – see, e.g., Alic, Banscomb and
Brooks (1992[14]). Recently, supporters of targeted government interventions
have also pointed to particular areas such as climate change mitigation, the green
transformation and societal challenges, where “mission -oriented” industrial
policies can direct innovation and help overcome uncertainty, lack of markets
and the need for demonstration projects – see Section 4. .
 Sceptics have warned about ex-post glorification of the role of government and
pointed to numerous drawbacks of targeted industrial policies – see for instance
Lincicome (2021[4]). These ca n be summarised along three main issues. First,
governments might not be the most knowledgeable when choosing the “best”
project to support. Second, support might be subject to capture and firms might
focus on lobbying and rent-seeking rather than on productive activities , which
is particularly problematic when the opportunity cost of public funds is high .
Third, critics have pointed to potential crowding out effects of public investment
that might discourage private investment rather than complement and encourage
it.
While economists acknowledge that the existence of market failures justify targeted
policies in theory, they are generally sceptical about the efficiency of i nterventions to
improve the production system of advanced economies in practice, given unsuccessful
past experiences (Romer, 1993[15]; Lerner, 2009[16]; Tagliapietra and Veugelers, 2020[6])
– some even doubt that the benefits of interventions overcome their costs (Pack and
Saggi, 2006[17]). When it comes to the successes of industrial policy in Asian countries
in the 1960s and the 1970s, when the so-called Asian Tigers successfully caught up with
the global productivity frontier, t he debate focused on (i) the absence of compelling
evidence that these policies caused or harmed growth in these countries, because of the
difficulty to design a counterfactual scenario and (ii) the validity of this experience for
developed economies, whose goal is to push the technological frontier whereas these
countries were trying to catch up.
Finally, ongoing discussions point to potential difficult ies to align targeted industrial
policies and competition policy – see, e.g., OECD (2020[18]). In particular, state aid
might end up favouring some firms over others, supporting inefficient or failing firms
and lead to the survival of zombie firms, thereby slowing down productivity-enhancing
reallocation and reducing the level playing field.
Recent developments: economic, technological and societal needs
Nevertheless, many economists are reconsidering the role of targeted policies (Rodrik,
2008[19]; Mazzucato, 2018[20]; Bloom, Van Reenen and Williams, 2019 [21]), despite the
current lack of a framework for governments to identify the right interventions and
investments. There are three main reasons for this reconsideration.
 First, there is an increasing focus on market imperfections. Targeted policies are
usually thought as unduly discriminating between firms based on their activity.
However, in a second -best world (i.e. , a world where some markets are
imperfect), they may be justified and introducing a policy distortion may
actually be welfare enhancing. This argument appears in the public and
economic debate under several forms:

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
o According to some economists, the global financial crisis revealed an
inefficient sectoral allocation (Philippon and Reshef, 2012 [22]; Gopinath
et al., 2017[23]), justifying interventions to favour reallocations (Warwick,
2013[8]). This argument is in fact similar to the one that underpinned
industrial policy of the Asian tigers in the 1960s and 1970s, where the main
objective was to overcome the lock-in on a low-growth and low-productivity
path by the expansion of heavy industries.
o In some cases, governments have resorted to industrial policies to
compensate sectors or firms for the potential loss of competitiveness
resulting from foreign policies, including tax, trade and FDI pol icies, that
are perceived as unfair (European Political Strategy Centre, 2019 [24];
Enderlein et al., 2019[25]; Franco-German Manifesto, 2019[2]; ITIF, 2020[26];
Werner, 2018[27]).
 Second, the technological opportunities and societal challenges facing most
advanced and developing economies are evolving rapidly. Several aspects of
this multi-faceted structural change suggest that there may be a need for more
targeted industrial policies:
o The world is increasingly facing global societal challenges that necessitate
both a public impetus/guidance and a large -scale private investment to be
addressed (climate change, demographics, growing inequality ,
cybersecurity, etc.). Such challenges existed in the past (tertiarisation of the
economy, energy security, etc.) and already prompted debates about the
respective roles of the public and the private sectors (in medical research for
instance) but several observers consider that the breadth of these global
questions has increased over the past decades – see Section 4. on mission-
oriented strategies.
o Some new technological developments (e.g. big data and artificial
intelligence) are considered as a new general purpose technology (GPT) and
are expected to become pervasive in the economy. As for societal
challenges, breakthroughs in these GPTs, which potentially have positive
spillovers on a wide range of sectors, become more likely with a public
impetus. From a public policy perspective, they may also need new rules,
new governance frameworks and cross-sectoral cooperation (see Annex A
on AI strategies).
o The development of the digital economy and the growth of network
externalities in some sectors gave rise to winner -takes-most dynamics,
especially in sectors characterised by the rise of platform business models.
Some even argue that the phe nomenon exceeds the digital economy and is
linked to the rise of top firms’ tacit knowledge or to a slowdown in
technology diffusion (Andrews, Criscuolo and Gal, 2019[28]). Governments
have expressed a willingness to invest early in new technologies to secure a
global leading position, for instance by building national or regional
champions (Franco-German Manifesto, 2019[2]) and to promote technology
diffusion to improve the productivity of laggard sec tors and firms. More
generally, securing positions in high mark -up/high value -added stages of
global value chains is also mentioned as an objective of targeted industrial
policies (European Political Strategy Centre, 2019[24]).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  13
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
o Recent advances in data collection, storage and analytics (notably machine
learning) may decrease the cost for governments to design and implement
targeted policies, for instance by improving the identification of innovative
firms and of the latest technological advances.
 Third, the secular decline in output and productivity growth and the
accompanying increase in productivity dispersion and wage inequality
(Berlingieri, Blanchenay and Criscuolo, 2017[29]; OECD, 2021[30]) put a special
emphasis on the role of industrial policies for social outcomes. Industrial
policies are often praised for reducing geographical or income inequalities or
counteracting wage polarisation (Rodrik and Sabel, 2019[31]).
The COVID-19 crisis has reinforced these three arguments, and uncovered potential new market
imperfections. In particular, short-run and long-lasting disruptions in global value chains have
prompted the emergence of economic resi lience and strategic autonomy as new objectives of
industrial policy (see section 2. ).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
2. Conceptual framework
2.1. Industrial policy definition
To provide a coherent framework for conceptualising industrial policy interventions, this
paper starts by defining industrial policies and delimiting their scope.
No single, clear-cut definition has emerged from previous attempts at considering industrial
policy within a coherent framework – see Warwick (2013[8]) for an inventory of the
definitions used in the literature. Therefore, the scope of instruments that industrial policy
is deemed to encompass varies across authors, policymakers and countries, which unduly
obfuscates the debate.
In this paper, industrial policy encompasses all types of instruments that intend to
structurally improve the performance of the domestic business sector. By this definition, it
includes business support measures, such as STI and entrepreneurship policies. Industrial
policy does not necessarily focus on manufacturing, but concerns the whole private sector.
Such a purposefully broad definition encompasses a vast set of policies (i ncluding those
implemented without being explicitly labelled “industrial policy”) , thereby providing
policy makers with a comprehensive framework to discuss policy interventions aimed at
improving the performance of the business sector. It is worth noting that, by this definition,
governments have always implemented industrial policies to some extent. Importantly, the
objective of industrial policy (i.e., the performance of the business sector) is
multidimensional – see below.
Industrial policy, given its focus on structural performance, needs to go hand in hand with
competition policy, tax policy and trade and investment policy, and general business
framework policies.
 Macroeconomic policies, i.e. fiscal, monetary and macro -prudential policies, do not fall
within the present scope of industrial policies because they address the business cycle, not
the structural performance of the business sector. However, it is important to bear in mind
that they indirectly contribute to the resilience and productivity of the business sector. More
generally, many other policy areas can have an indirect impact on the performance of the
business sector but are excluded from the scope of this paper to keep it tractable, e.g., social,
education, housing and health policies.
2.2. Horizontal and targeted policies
There is a standard distinction between horizontal and targeted (or “vertical”) industrial
policies. Horizontal policies are available to all firms, irrespective of their activity ,
technology or location, e.g. R&D tax credit s of fiscal incentives to support the green
transformation of businesses. On the contrary, targeted policies are restricted to a subset of
eligible firms based on their activity, their technology or location, e.g., public procurement
for specific products; or place-based policies.3
This is an ‘ex -ante’ definition of horizontality. Even if eligibility to horizontal policies is
not restricted to specific sectors or technologies, they might disproportionally benefit a
small number of sectors or firms. For insta nce, R&D tax credits mostly concern R&D -
intensive sectors or, depending on their design, larger firms and tax -paying incumbents.
Second, according to the definition adopted in this paper, size-contingent policies are also
considered horizontal measures (Box 3).

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  15
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
2.3. Policy instruments and industrial strategies
This paper distinguishes policy instruments from industrial strategies.
A policy instrument is defined as a tool used by policymakers to affect performance
outcomes in the business sector in order to achieve a pre -defined objective. Examples of
policy instruments include R&D grants, training programs, public procurement or sectoral
industry boards. In this paper, instruments are categorised along two dimensions:
 The target of the intervention , referring to the standard distinction between
horizontal and targeted policy;
 The channel through which it operates , distinguishing “between”, “within”,
“demand” and “governance” instruments (defined in Section 3. below).
Industrial strategies are defined as a consistent and articulated group of policy instruments
designed in order to reach specific policy objectives. For example, an artificial intelligence
(AI) leadership strategy can combine R&D grants, training programmes, innovative public
procurement and sectoral industry boards ( Figure 2). The diversity of policy instruments
found in industrial strategies is the main reason for resorting to a broad definition of
industrial policy.4 Strategies are categorised in Section 4. below.
Figure 2. Policy instruments and industrial strategies

Note: This is a fictitious example. See the OECD AI observatory for a list of national strategies and policies
(https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards).
Source: Authors.
Within this framework, the formulation of industrial policy rests on the combination of
instrument choice and strategy design (Figure 3). A strategy is designed in order to achieve
a predefined objective and instruments with specific targets and channels are chosen and
bundled. Keeping with the previous example of AI leadershi p, a technology -focused
strategy can be designed resting on a bundle of instruments including horizontal “within”
instruments like R&D grants and training programmes, targeted demand instruments such
as public procurement for innovative AI-related products and governance instruments like
tech industry boards.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Figure 3. The formulation of industrial policy
Source: OECD.
2.4. Industrial strategy objectives
Traditional objectives of industrial strategies comprise innovation, productivity and
economic growth. Industrial policies have also long been used to pursue social objectives,
such as smoothing transition costs or fostering economic activity and employment in
disadvantaged areas. In recent years, renewed government interventions pursued goals well
beyond traditional ones, e.g., the green transition (Anderson et al., 2021 [10]); the SDGs
(OECD, 2021[12]); and issues related to resilience or strategic autonomy exposed by the
COVID-19 crisis.
Industrial policy interventions to promote innovation find one of their main rationales in
the non-appropriability of the full return on private investment in knowledge creation by
firms. Interventions are therefore welfare-improving, since the existence of knowledge
spillovers implies that social returns to investment are higher than private returns.
Promoting technology adoption is increasingly considered as an important policy objective,
given the mounting evidence pointing to a breakdown in technology diffusion and its role
in the productivity slowdown of the last decades – see Berlingieri et al. (2020[32]). Indeed,
productivity growth can be obtained either by pushing the domesti c productivity frontier
or by improving the productivity of non-frontier firms. The former solution corresponds to
an innovation objective, whereas the latter rather corresponds to the diffusion of
innovations, including organisational and managerial ones.
Competitiveness is sometimes considered as a traditional objective of industrial policy.
Differently from productivity, competitiveness is a measure of relative costs across
countries. While innovation, productivity or technology adoption have a positive impact on
competitiveness, affecting competitiveness through other channels (including by
subsidising the production of a sector) bears the risk of hurting other countries in a zero (or
even negative) sum game at the global level. Macroeconomic policy is typically seen as a
common alternative to foster competitiveness.
Industrial policies may also target the inclusiveness of economic development through
targeting firms in disadvantaged areas, employing minority and disadvantaged workers

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  17
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
and/or entrepreneurs in specific p opulation groups (Iammarino, Rodríguez -Pose and
Storper, 2020[33]; OECD, 2019[34]). In some instances, targeted industrial policies may be a
way to provide economic opportunities to these groups. This objective is not necessarily
unrelated to efficiency, with lower access to “good jobs” having social costs and negative
externalities (Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2 019[35]; Rodrik and Sabel, 2019 [31]; Bartik,
2020[36])5 , notably by increasing political polarisation (Autor et al., 2020[37]). Relatedly,
improving productivity through diffusion can also contribute to inclusiveness by reducing
wage inequalities, as low -productivity firms typically pay lower wages (Berlingieri,
Calligaris and Criscuolo, 2018[38]).
Green industrial policies consist in re-directing technological innovation and deployment
away from dirty production processes and towards low -carbon technologies to achieve
decarbonisation goals – see, e.g., Anderson et al. (2021[10]). As this type of objective
necessitates overcoming a complex set of market failures, it also requires a strategy that
includes complementary policies (e.g., skills), enabling framework conditions and
stakeholder co-ordination at the local, national and international levels (Tagliapietra and
Veugelers, 2020[6]; Anderson et al., 2021[10]; Matsumoto et al., 2019[39]).
More generally, industrial policies can also aim at the attainment of the SDGs. Industrial
policies can promote sustain ability in the private sector beyond environmental transition
by, e.g., ensuring better health, well-being and education, reducing inequalities, eliminating
poverty or promoting gender equality. Beyond regulations and taxes, industrial policy can
also incentivise firms to become more sustainable but also accompany the growth of the
sectors and companies that provide solutions to overcome these challenges – see OECD
(2021[12]). This objective does not necessarily conflict with others such as innovation,
productivity and growth or economic resilience (OECD, 2021[12]).
The ongoing COVID-19 crisis is placing resilience on par with other objectives at the
forefront of the policy debate, making it a key objective of policy interventions – see e.g.
OECD (2020[40]). There is little consensus on policy instruments meant to promote
resilience or even on a definition of the concept of resilience.6 This calls for more work on
integrating the concept of resilience in industrial policy work. The working definition of
resilience tentatively adopted in this paper is the capacity to limit welfare loss when facing
a shock, either by limiting its impact or by rapidly recovering from it. Resilience is critical
for the stability and inclusiveness of economic growth and improvements in living
standards. In particular, resilience enables the economy to withstand, adapt and rebou nd
quickly from shocks as diverse as natural disasters, financial crises, health emergencies,
cyberattacks, terrorism, warfare or price swings in international commodity markets
(OECD, 2020[40]; OECD, 2020[41]).7
Resilience can be assessed at the macroeconomic, sectoral and firm level. Therefore, firm-
level resilience can be an objective of firms’ organisation and management practices.
Public policies can have a role to play if firm -level resilience has externalities or if
macroeconomic or sectoral resilience requires coordination or reallocation across firms, for
instance to safeguard the network of inter -firm and worker-firm relationships, to promote
cybersecurity or to maintain stockpiles of essential goods – see also DesJardine, Bansal and
Yang (2019[42]); Jüttner and Maklan (2011[43]); Aiginger (2009[44]); Caldera Sánchez,
Rasmussen and Röhn (2015[45]); Hynes, Lees and Müller (2020[46]).
Even though resilience and productivity may go hand in hand (OECD, 2020[47]), tensions
can arise between the two objectives, as resilience may emerge from features that efficiency
wants to reduce. Resilience comes from the ability to a djust products, processes, supply
chains and employment regimes flexi bly in response to a shock and, thus, may rely on
diversification, inventories and redundancy. Efficiency implies specialisation, sourcing and
scaling up to spread fixed costs over larger quantities.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Finally, strategic autonomy is increasingly seen as an important industrial policy objective
(Ding and Dafoe, 2021 [48]; European Political Strategy Centre, 2019 [24]; Franco-German
Manifesto, 2019[2]). In the COVID-19 context, some countries faced shortages of essential
products in the early stages of the pandemic, e.g., of facemasks (OECD, 2020[49]), and the
recovery challenges the organisation of global value chain s in key sectors (e.g.
semiconductors). Beyond essential goods and services, strategic autonomy also covers
technology and sometimes constitutes an explicit rationale for supporting the domestic
development of key technologies, as well as for pre-empting acquisitions of domestic firms
by heavily subsidised foreign firms.
The strategic autonomy concept is increasingly used to identify sectors or value chains
deemed to require special support, because of both productivity and resilience (European
Commission, 2021[50]), even though it is rarely well defined. Ding and Dafoe (2021[48])
define a strategic asset as being important (economic or military significance), prone to
externalities and national in scope (the external ities occur at a national level; on the
contrary, for instance, externalities of fundamental research in medicine diffuse easily to
other countries). They define three types of ‘externalities’ in the strategic sens e ( not
necessarily in an economic sense): (i) cumulative nature, when an asset features economies
of scale or any type of significant advantage for incumbents, such that it cannot be produced
easily in the short run without previous experience, (ii) infrastructure, when several other
activities rely on this asset (e.g. broadband network, banking sector) and (iii) dependence,
which corresponds to goods or services whose supply is concentrated and at risk of
disruption. However, this definition has not been operationalised yet.
Importantly, the objectives described above are not mutually exclusive and synergies exist
across the different policy instruments. For instance, green industrial policies often require
innovation support in order to make a business cas e for low -carbon technologies, which
may result in improved competitiveness.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  19
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
3. Policy instruments
3.1. Distinguishing instruments
This section introduces a new taxonomy of industrial policy instruments (Figure 4), which
allows (i) uncovering the rationale and the channels through which different instrume nts
operate and (ii) underlining possible complementarities between different types of
instruments. The new taxonomy is designed to serve as a conceptual backbone of industrial
policy analysis. It is also used as a tool to organise the evidence on industrial policy
instruments, as summar ised in Criscuolo et al. (2022[1]). Existing taxonomies typically
classify policy instruments according to either the corresponding input factors, the
technology-readiness level (TRL), the target group or the instrument s’ objective and
associated goals (Warwick, 2013 [8]; O’Sullivan et al., 2013 [51]; Stein mueller, 2010 [52];
EC/OECD, 2019[53]; Edler et al., 2016[54]; UNCTAD, 2018[55]; WTO, 2020[56]).
Figure 4. Taxonomy of policy instruments

Note: Examples based on main channel through which policy instruments work.
Source: Authors.
This new taxonomy builds upon two essential distinctions to achieve the desired type of
analysis.
First, it borrows from the mainstream split between supply-side instruments and demand-
oriented instruments (Edler et al., 2016 [54]). Supply -side instruments affect domestic
production decisions, regardless of where consumption takes place, while demand -side
instruments affect domestic consumption decisions, regardless of where production takes
place.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Second, among supply -side instruments, the taxonomy further distinguishes those that
affect efficiency within firms from those that affect the allocation of production factors
between firms, in the same spirit as in the productivity literature (Olley and Pakes, 1996[57];
Syverson, 2011[58]; Bartelsman and Doms, 2000[59]). This allows capturing any interaction
between different instruments.
Distinguishing “between” instruments from “within” instruments is a key novelty in
thinking about industrial policy. In doing so, the new taxonomy explicitly accounts for
Schumpeterian dynamics and the fact that productivity growth partly comes from creative
destruction, in particular the reallocation of production factors from less to more productive
firms with a superior technology or better innovation capacity (Aghion and Howitt,
1992[60]). Empirical work has confirmed that such reallocation between firms is a major
growth channel (Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda, 2013[61]; Bravo-Biosca, 2016[62]).
The “between/within” distinction also helps thinking about resilience. Indeed, sectoral
resilience can be achieved through two channels: increasing firm -level resilience and
improving the ability to swiftly mobilis e and (re)allocate resources across firms. The
former can be fostered through “within” instruments; the latter mostly through “between”
instruments promoting business dynamics.
In addition to demand- and supply-side instruments, governance is regarded as a necessary
enabler of successful policy interventions – see Box 2. Therefore, as depicted in Figure 4,
“governance” instruments complement the three main categories of industrial policy
interventions. Their role is to coordinate stakeholders in the business sector, the public
sector and research institutions, e.g. industrial actors, governments or universities, at the
subnational, national and international level s. Moreover, the ongoing COVID -19 crisis
highlighted the importance of international co-operation and reinforced the importance of
sound multi-level governance at the national level.
Many policy instruments can be either horizontal or targeted. Yet, while “within”
instruments typically feature in both types of policies, “between” instruments are mor e
likely horizontal. Demand-side instruments are more likely targeted, in particular as part of
transformative industrial strategies that aim to promote sustainable production and
consumption simultaneously (Altenburg and Rodrik, 2017[63]; OECD, 2021[12]).
Box 2. The governance of industrial policies
Like in other policy areas, good governance and transparency settings promote the
success and inclusiveness of industrial policies. Such governance settings rest on three
pillars:
 Design: whole -of-government approach involving all levels of government,
academia, the private sector and civil society;
 Implementation: by professional agencies;
 Evaluation: built in ex-ante.
Recent OECD work reviewed the governance mechanisms of 13 national and
supranational STI initiatives and identified several critical dimensions leading to
successful initiatives (Paic and Viros, 2019 [64]). These include a commitment at the
highest level of government to signal priorities to all stakeholders; the implication of all
stakeholders to promote knowledge and innovation absorption; a “mission orientation”
to increase societal impact; the coherence of specific intermediary objectives to promote

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  21
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
complementarities and prevent unintended eff ects; a systematic evaluation and
monitoring to make adjustment or termination possible; the flexibility in setting
priorities to be able to respond to rapid technological change; and the streamlining of
existing programs to optimise the use of resources.
In addition, public-private coordination fora are key for targeted policies, as they help
alleviate the coordination failure that justify sectoral and mission-oriented interventions
(Larrue, 2021[5]). Such fora are meant to both promote the efficient transfer of publicly-
produced knowledge and help government gather information on the technical issues at
play.
In October 2019, the OECD organised a workshop on “Reorienting STI and industrial
policies to tackle societal challenges”. Policy makers involved in mission-oriented STI
policies shared their experience of the challenges and opportunities associated with such
initiatives, from research to innovation and industrial and commercial deployment. The
talks perfectly illustrated the recent inflections of industrial policies: whether at the level
of the European Union (Horizon Europe), in Germany (New HT Strategy 2025), in the
Netherlands (Top Sectors) or in the United Kingdom (UK Industrial Strategy), industrial
policies increasingly follow a "mission -oriented" approach, which often transcend the
boundaries of industrial sectors – see Section 4. . The discussion suggested that the
governance settings of these policies seek to maintain a healthy competitive business
environment in which new entrants have as much latitude to participate as established
players.
Finally, Larrue (2021[5]) recently explored the design, funding and implementation of
mission-oriented innovation policies to address societal challenges. This work mapped
the practices of such systemic initiatives with regards to i) how they engage a wide range
of stakeholders in the missi on definition; ii) how they coordinate public and private
actors beyond disciplinary, sectoral and policy silos around the common mission; iii)
how they integrate and implement different policy and regulatory instruments in
consistent schemes or programmes to achieve the mission.
3.2. Within instruments
 “Within” instruments can be split into two subcategories (left box in Figure 4).
In the first sub -category, “within” instruments affect incentives for business investment
through sharing either the costs or the risks with the public sector. In particular, knowledge
externalities result in insufficient incentives for firms to invest in risky projects : firms
under-invest because they only get a share of the t otal return on their investment (Bloom,
Van Reenen and Williams, 2019 [21]; OECD, 2015[65]). This market failure can justify the
use of instruments such as R&D tax credits, grants or subsidies, of which the aim is to share
the costs of investments between public and private stakeholders (Hall, Mairesse and
Mohnen, 2010[66]). Beyond knowledge externalities, asymmetric information makes risk
assessment difficult for third party investors, including financial institutions, which may
hinder the financing of risky investments. This justifies the use of instruments that transfer
part of the risk from the business sector to the public sector (loans, guarantees, public
venture capital).
In the second subcategory, “within” instruments affect f irm performance through the
provision of efficiency -improving inputs. To carry out innovative and risky investment,
firms need to access specific inputs, in particular skills and knowledge. The externalities
and market failures that plague the markets for skills and knowledge justify the intervention

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
of the public sector. Regarding skills, interventions include public support to investment in
specific skills required by the business sector, vocational and on -the-job training.
Regarding research, interventio ns are increasingly coupled with schemes facilitating the
absorption of research outcomes by the business sector or incentivise mobility between
universities and public research institutes on the one hand and businesses on the other hand
or collaboration b etween these different actors in the innovation ecosystem . Moreover,
continuous access to inputs such as energy and infrastructure (including broadband, 5G, ...)
is crucial and a factor of resilience.
‘Within’ instruments from these two subcategories do not only affect innovation at the
frontier but also promote technology diffusion by improving the absorptive capacities of
firms, for instance by supporting related investments, improving firms’ management
practices or by addressing skill shortages and skill s mismatch (Calvino and Criscuolo,
2022[67]; Calvino et al., 2022[68]).
3.3. Between instruments
Among “between” instruments (middle box in Figure 4), one can distinguish
 Framework instruments, which affect the reallocation of production factors (capital
and labour) towards the most productive uses, allow efficient entry of new ventures
or provide a framework to balance the benef its of innovation diffusion with the
incentives to innovate through intellectual property and standardisation policies;
 Complementary policy areas, which aim to ensure a fair competition between firms
(in particular incumbents and challengers or domestic and foreign firms).
Product market regulations (PMR) play a key role with respect to factors’ allocation, as
they condition firms’ entry, exit, scale up and scale down . Pro-competitive PMR enable
innovative firms to bring new products to the market and expand. While tax expenditures
constitute a privileged channel for investments incentives, tax systems also have major
effects on the user cost of capital and therefore o n the allocation of capital across firms,
both internationally and domestically.
Note that, by allowing entrants and small firms to compete and eventually challenge large
incumbents, framework instruments can have an indirect positive effect on both
challengers’ and incumbents’ incentives to innovate or adopt frontier technologies and
organisational practices, thereby fostering within-firm performance.8
Box 3. Entrepreneurship and SME policies
Start-ups and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are an important target of
industrial policy interventions in OECD countries (OECD, 2019[69]). Although size- and
age-dependent by definition, entrepreneurship and SME policies are horizontal in
essence, as they aim at improving the entire business environment for any entrepreneur
to innovate, grow and create value added. Moreover, SMEs are the predominant form
of business and employment across OECD countries, so that SME policies affect the
overwhelming majority of firms.
Two main reasons underlie the importance of entrepreneurship and SME policies for
policymakers:
 Start-ups and young firms contribute disproportionately to private sector job
creation in OECD countries (Criscuolo, Gal and Menon, 2016 [70]). Moreover,
fast-growing young firms are more likely to recruit workers from disadvantaged

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  23
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
or marginalised groups, thereby contributing to sharing productivity gains with
larger segments of the population (Coad et al., 2014[71]).
 The entry and growth of new firms to replace old, unproductive ones is the
engine of efficiency -enhancing reallocation and a major driver of aggregate
productivity growth (Decker et al., 2017[72]). Moreover, start-ups are often seen
as vehicles of radical innovation and, thus, of reallocation and productivity
growth (Acemoglu et al., 2018[73]). SMEs can also contribute to innovation and
productivity growth thanks to their relatively simple organisational structure,
which enables them to be agile and responsive to the market.
The rationale for supporting start-ups and SMEs stems from the disproportionally high
fixed operating costs they bear due to administrative processes, as well as credit market
imperfections and other information asymmetries. Generally, entrepreneurship and
SME policies can be welfare improving to the extent that both government failures and
labour, capital and technology market failures are more likely to affect start -ups and
SMEs than large incumbents (Calvino, Criscuolo and Menon, 2016[74]).
These elements suggest that “between” instruments are especially relevant for fostering
start-ups and SMEs (see Figure 4). Among “within” instruments, those that promote
risk sharing also help address start-ups’ and SMEs’ structural disadvantages.
Across OECD countries, SMEs represent on average more than 90 % of the business
population and are therefore a very heterogeneous group: policies should take this into
account (OECD, 2020[75]; OECD, 2020[76]). For example, age is an important dimension
of this heterogeneity. Indeed, young, rather than small, firms account for the bulk of job
creation (Criscuolo, Gal and Menon, 2016 [70]; Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda,
2013[61]). Moreover, size-contingent policies need to avoid creating disincentives to scale
up and grow, as they may distort the allocation of inputs and be detrimental to aggregate
productivity (Garicano, Lelarge and Van Reenen, 2016 [77]; Aghion, Bergeaud and Van
Reenen, 2021[78]; Ando, 2021[79]).
Finally, age and size criteria should take into account the economic boundaries of a firm
rather than relying on a strictly legal definition, in order to avoid creating loopholes due
to ownership linkages.
3.4. Demand instruments
The third category contains demand-oriented instruments (at the right of Figure 4), which
apply to domestic consumption (including intermediate consumption), regardless of where
production takes place. They influence the demand for products and services, either through
diminishing their price or availability or through increased public demand. The distinction
between supply- and demand-side instruments is sometimes referred to as the “supply -
push” vs “demand -pull” dichotomy in the innovation literature, although their exact
definitions may vary across publications.
Carbon pricing is a typical example of Pigouvian taxes, and as such a demand -side
instrument. However, in practice, carbon pricing concerns only d omestic emissions and
treats differently domestic and foreign production, thereby potentially affecting
competitiveness. Recent discussions on Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanisms (CBAM)
aim to address the adverse competitiveness effects (as well as the ass ociated carbon
leakages) and would bring carbon pricing closer to a pure demand-side instrument.
Most demand -oriented instruments are not primarily targeting firm’s productivity and
innovation and rather focus on consumer safety (e.g. product standards 9) or follow
behavioural objectives.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Public procurement instruments are popular in incentivi sing innovation, for instance by
reducing market size risk or helping “demonstrate” a new product with public clients before
uptake by the private sector.
Finally, some demand-side instruments have an explicit industrial policy rationale, even
though their effect on domestic producers is less direct. At first glance, demand -oriented
instruments should have symmetric effects for domestic and foreign producers. For
instance, a tightening of regulatory standards in a given country should force both types of
producers to adapt to the new standards, and have the same effect on the incentives to
innovate. However, this type of instrument may favour domestic producers
disproportionally, either because of the purposeful design of regulatory standards (e.g. local
content requirements) or because they can become familiar with the new regulation and
implement it at a lower cost. More generally, the local nature of innovation and th e
fundamental uncertainty on the demand might give some rationale for demand -oriented
instruments.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  25
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
4. Industrial strategies
Countries are increasingly adopting industrial strategies focused on subsets of the economy
they deem to deserve support. Several way s of defining the relevant subset of firms co -
exist. This paper distinguishes four types of selection criteria: sectoral, mission -oriented,
technology-focused and place-based strategies. This section describes these different types
of targeted industrial strategies (see Figure 5) and their economic rationale (summarised in
Table 1).10 It starts from the standard sectoral orientation and then elaborates on mission -
oriented and technology-focused strategies. It also briefly describes place-based strategies,
which have been extensively reviewed elsewhere.11 Moreover, Annex A describes two
examples of industrial strategies (green and AI strategies) in a subset of countries or regions
(European Union, People’s Republic of China (hereafter “China”) , United States, United
Kingdom, Japan and Germany).
Figure 5. Types of industrial strategies

Note: Stylised representation; real-world strategies often borrow characteristics from several categories.
Source: Authors.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Table 1. Industrial strategies and their rationale
 Sectoral Mission-oriented Technology-focused Place-based
Learning-by-doing  
External economies of
scale 
Informational
externalities  
Competition creation 
Upstream sectors in
value chains  
Coordination failures   
Societal benefits 
Acceptability of public
investment 
Regulatory uncertainty
or Imperfect
commitment
 
Marshallian externalities 
Notes:  means relevant;  means especially relevant.
Source: Authors.
4.1. Types of strategies
4.1.1. Sectoral strategies
Sectoral strategies are the oldest and simplest type of targeted industrial strategy. Firms are
eligible based on their activity . Sectoral strategies either target a sector or a group of
interlinked sectors, for instance an industrial eco -system – see European Comm ission
(2021[80]).
Sectoral strategies primarily aim at increasing innovation and productivity growth. The
recent focuses on strategic autonomy and resilience could also trigger a new wave of
sectoral strategies. Secto ral strategies can also aim at inclusiveness, by targeting sectors
that concentrate low- or middle-wage workers or that are expected to decline rapidly with
significant social consequences.
While the rationale underlying this type of intervention was first discussed decades ago,
new arguments are emerging in the recent literature. Most are based on the existence of
different types of spillovers described below (in addition to standard knowledge spillovers)
to justify sharing the costs or the risks of investments.
Learning-by-doing
Under the learning-by-doing argument (also referred to as the infant industry argument in
the trade literature), sectoral productivity increases with experience, of which cumulated
production volume is a proxy, based on the idea that firms discover and improve processes
over time.
The literature has questioned the validity of this hypothesis, arguing that the government’s
valuation of expected payoffs should not be better than the private sector’s, as both take
future productivity gains into account (Baldwin, 1969[81]). However, the combination of
learning-by-doing with spillovers (external learning -by-doing) or imperfections in the
capital markets resulting in a wedge between the public and private val uation of
investments theoretically restores the validity of the argument (Pack and Saggi, 2006 [17];
Melitz, 2005[82]).

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  27
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
However, the empirical evidence is mixed. On th e one side, supporters of this rationale
argue that the experience of industrial policies in the Asian countries gives credit to the
infant industries narrative. On the other side, counterfactual studies supporting this
assertion are scarce and give contrasting results (Criscuolo et al., 2022[1]).
Finally, the learning-by-doing rationale justifies temporary public support only. The timing
and design of the phasing out of support is key in ensuring efficiency. Once the domestic
industry has climbed the learning curve, it is supposed to be able to compete on the global
scale. However, some argue that this type of support creates moral hazard, as the incentive
to become competitive is weak if firms continue receiving support otherwise.
External economies of scale
External economies of scale imply that firm productivity increases with sector size (as
opposed to firm size), usually at the national level and sometimes beyond, creating a wedge
between the public and private returns to investment. Hence, subsidi sing the sector to
increase its size can improve the efficiency of the economy (Chipman, 1970[83]).
This rationale can be seen as a static version of the learning -by-doing ar gument. With
learning-by-doing, productivity increases with the cumulated output of an industry, while
with external economies of scale it increases with current output. As in the previous
discussion, in theory, internal returns to scale do not distort the firm’s decisions and do not
call for a public subsidy12.
The empirical evidence is insufficient to identify the sectors that are subject to external
economies of scale. Bartelme et al. (2019[84]) find evidence of external economies of scale
in all 2-digit sectors, but they are limited, and the gains from an optimal industrial policy
(i.e., internalising the external economies of scale) are small. This paper has however the
merit to set out a method for the estimation of the external economies of scale at the industry
level. Pons -Benaiges (2017[85]) finds similar results and shows that the post -WWII
Japanese industrial policy is positively correlated with the external returns to scale.
Informational externalities
Through experimentation, early investors reveal sector-specific information that allows
subsequent investors to better assess the risk -return profile of the investments (Pack and
Saggi, 2006[17]). In this respect, followers benefit from the risk having been taken by first
entrants, which should therefore be supported.
This argument is close to the learning -by-doing one, as it is also about early inves tors
improving the risk -return profile. Whereas with learning -by-doing the first entrants
increase the expected pay -off of an investment, with informational externalities they are
reducing the risk or the uncertainty of this investment.
Competition creation
In industries with barriers to entry (e.g. large fixed costs , network effects, regulatory
obstacles or incumbency advantages), private incentives to enter may be insufficient. In
such a case, monopoly situations are likely to arise, with a detrimental ef fect on
competition. The support to entering firms can be welfare improving by creating
competition and increasing of consumer surplus.
This argument has usually been put forward for situations in which the monopolist is a
foreign firm and the domestic government wants to create a national champion. While the
creation of Airbus is the most famous example of a successful policy in this context, the
argument is also often made regarding the digital platforms.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
However, welfare analysis should take into accoun t the negative externalities abroad. In
particular, the creation of a national champion duplicates fixed costs at the global level and
may lower the overall efficiency of the industry (Neven, Seabright and Grossman, 1995[86]).
Upstream sectors
In value chains, the productivity of upstream sectors has an impact on the performance of
downstream sectors, which may call for government support (Liu, 2019 [87]). Upstream
services can be particularly important for the productivity of downstream manufacturing
industries.13
However, it is unclear why upstream sectors would underinvest in productivity
improvements, or how gains are shared through the value chains , both with downstream
sectors and between domestic and foreign clients.
With home bias in trade and externalities within value chains , it may still be rational to
target some interventions on these upstream sectors. Liu (2019[87]) shows that South Korea
supported upstream sectors in the 1970s (e.g. heavy and chemical manufacturing) and
China is doing the same today.
Moreover, t he COVID -19 crisis exposed the potential of shocks to directly impair the
functioning of some sectors absent relevant and timely policy responses (e.g., the airline
industry or the non-essential retail sector), which can in turn indirectly affect the rest of the
economy (e.g., indirect impact of airline industry on tourism) – see, e.g., OECD (2020[88]).
If a sector-wide disruption were to jeopardise the viability of parts of the economy, it would
cause tremendous negative externalities to society as a whole in the long run.14 Therefore,
the benefits of publicly supporting sectoral resilience could outweigh its costs and thus
become an objective of sectoral policies.
However, the optimal level of public support for resilience enhancement is unknown, as it
involves different aspects and timelines.15 In particular, the optimal cost sharing between
the public and private sectors remains an open question. Even if resilience can give rise to
social externalities, firms also directly benefit from their own resilience and thus have
intrinsic incentives to invest in this direction. Firms, however, can face moral hazard and
have little incentives to invest in resilience against some types of shocks, for instance
disastrous shocks that will anyway require public support.
Coordination failures
Some projects may require several (compatible) simultaneous investments. For instance,
complex products may need a vast network of suppliers (need of horizontal coordination),
or products may go through a number of outsourced production steps through value-chains
(need of a vertical coordination).
If coordination fails, governments should step in through exchanges of information and
cooperation between the stakeholders. They can resort to industry boards, but also
standardisation initiatives or improvements of the intellectual property system.
These remedies may emerge spontaneously from professional organi sations (Romer,
1993[15]), or the public sector can play an active role, as a third par ty or a stakeholder, to
make this public -private coordination happen (e.g.‘21 -platforms’ in Norway, various
sectoral strategic committees in Japan).
4.1.2. Mission-oriented strategies
Larrue (2021[5]) defines a mission-oriented innovation policy as a “co -ordinated package
of research and innovation policy and regulatory measures tailored specifically to address

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  29
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
well-defined objectives related to a societal challenge, in a defined timeframe. These
measures possibly span different stages of the innovation cycle from research to
demonstration and market deployment, mix supply-push and demand-pull instruments, and
cut across various policy fields, sectors and disciplines.” Even though this definition is
designed for innovation policies, it is straightforward to extend it to industrial policies more
generally.
As it is clear from the definition, the missions pursued by this type of policy are not only
about tackling ‘grand challenges’, such as for instance addressing climate change, but are
also translated into concrete and measurable objectives and targets t o be met in a defined
timeframe. They range from green strategies (see Annex A for a description of green
strategies in selected countries and regions) , in which emission targets or resource
efficiency objectives apply to a vast range of industries through several policy instruments
(see below), to more targeted interventions, such as the ones in ‘ARPA’-type16 challenges
(Azoulay et al., 2019[89]), the fight against some public health issues or ‘moonshots’17. The
European Commission (2018[90]) distinguishes between well -defined narrow missions
(accelerators) and broad missions addressin g complex multi -faceted challenges
(transformers) - see also Wittmann et al. (2020[91]).
Mission-oriented strategies are becoming increasingly popular to address societal
challenges, including the green transition and more generally the SDGs (OECD, 2021[12]).18
By improving sustainability, mission -oriented strategies can also be understood as
contributing to the long-run resilience of industry. Moreover, as innovation and technology
diffusion are usually key levers to overcome these challenges (Popp, Newell and Jaffe,
2010[92]; Anderson et al., 2021[10]), they can become objectives in themselves.
Mission-oriented policies differ from other types of strategies in that they are
‘transformation-oriented’ (Weber and Rohracher, 2012[93]), i.e. they address the direction
of innovation rather than its level and need coordination across policy domains and across
stakeholders (consumers, government, research institutions, etc.). They therefore include,
alongside investment incentives, several policy instruments in the demand -side and
governance categories (see the green strategies described in Annex A).
One important question regarding these st rategies is whether they are superior to a
combination of pure demand -side instruments to address the spillovers linked to the
challenge and horizontal policy instruments to foster innovation.
Four rationales can justify the use of mission-oriented policies:
 Social benefits. In addition to the traditional knowledge spillovers, mission -
oriented innovation yields social benefits that are inherently linked to the issue that
they are aimed at tackling, be it national security or sustainable growth (Rodrik,
2014[94]). Along this line, mission -oriented policies do not aim at fixing market
failures linked to innovation (Mazzucato, 2018 [20]; Foray, Mowery and Nelson,
2012[95]; Ergas, 1987[96]). Indeed, the literature on mission -oriented policies often
claims that these strategies do not only support economic growth, but also its
direction. In other terms, there are paths in economic growth that are preferable to
others because they provide a higher level of well -being in the long term
(Wanzenböck et al., 2019[97]). In a Schumpeterian framework where firms innovate
to create new markets, mission -oriented industrial policies can incentivi se or
catalyse firms to search in selected directions (Cantner and Vannuccini, 2018[98]).
Some of the COVID-19 crisis recovery plan were designed following more or less
explicitly a mission -oriented policy approach (e.g. , the Korean New Deal or
NextGeneration EU) so as to more proactively foster sustainable development in
the long-run.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
 Coordination failures (see above) ma y be particularly severe when a mission
requires simultaneous investments occurring in different industries (Altenburg and
Rodrik, 2017 [63]), which is likely to be the case when dealing with societal
challenges, for instance the promotion of a thriving circular economy (OECD,
2020[99]).
 Acceptability of public investment . Bloom, Van Reenen and Williams (2019[21])
provide a political economy argument in favour of such mission-oriented policies.
They argue that, by articulating a political vision around expenditures, mission -
oriented narratives can make it more acceptable to invest additional resources in
new technologies. By putting forwar d bold inspirational goals, mission -oriented
policies are conducive to higher and wider stakeholder engagement, including
citizens. In the same vein, they can facilitate the pooling of resources of different
ministries, enabling more ambitious and complex projects, and the reduction of
unnecessary overlaps between their respective actions in the same areas.
 Regulatory uncertainty / imperfect commitment. Firms’ investment decisions rely
on their discounted benefits over a long time span. If regulatory uncert ainty casts
doubt on the ability to recover the costs of the investment, it may hamper innovation
(Popp, Newell and Jaffe, 2010[92]). For instance, in low-carbon transition strategies,
governments need to set a clear carbon price trajectory for the private sector to
invest in low-carbon productive capital – see Anderson et al. (2021[10]). However,
their commitment to the carbon price trajectory can be percei ved as imperfect, as
governments can still renege on their promises, or be overturned by elections. In
such case, targeted industrial policy may be needed, on top of the traditional
demand-side policy (Harstad, 2020[100]).
4.1.3. Technology-focused strategies
Technology-focused strategies mainly aim at fostering innovation, diffusion and,
ultimately, productivity. Technologies that have applications in several sectors and can be
considered as General Purpose Technologies (GPTs), following the work of Bresnahan and
Trajtenberg (1995[101]), attract special attention from many countries.
Like mission-oriented policies, t echnology-focused policies are by nature multi -sectoral,
but may also include targeted interventions on the sector producing the good or the service
embodying the GPT (see Annex A for a description of AI strategies in selected countries
and regions). Two types of arguments are usually put forward when designing technology-
focused policies:
 External learning-by-doing or informational externalities (discussed above) may be
particularly severe on new technologies with wide-ranging applications, including
follow-on innovations (Dolfsma and Seo, 2013 [102]), which are not covered by
intellectual property rights. For instance, the ‘Nascent S -curve’ (see for instance
Azoulay et al. (2019[89]), frequently cited as an element of the ARPA model,
incorporates this idea of a large first -mover disadvantage in emerging fields or
technologies where the inflection point is likely to be close, but a lot of uncertainty
remains.
 Upstream sectors. The argument developed above applies to sectors producing the
goods or services incorporating the GPT.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  31
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
4.1.4. Place-based strategies
Place-based strategies mainly aim at affecting the regional distribution of economic
activity, thereby addressing inclusiveness, fairness and/or equality objectives. They
sometimes aim at increasing productivity and economic growth by supporting the
specialisation of regions in some sectors and technologies in which they have a comparative
advantage (innovation cluster policies, e.g., Smart Specialisation Strategy in the European
Union).
The rationale for place -based policies largely stems from the Marshallian externalities
(economies of scale in the production of specific intermediate goods, in the specialisation
of the local labour market, and the existence of local knowledge spillovers).
Place-based policies are the object of a large literature and are not at the core of this report.
For this reason, the evidence on the efficiency of place-based policies is not detailed here,
and interested readers may refer to Neumark and Simpson (2015[103]) and OECD
(2015[65])19.
Cluster policies bring together research institutions, large firms, start -ups and SMEs to
create innovation clusters that leverage localised knowledge spillovers and at the same time
achieve the necessary critical size to be connected to the global knowledge pipe line
(Feldman and Kogler, 2010[104]). They usually include policy instruments of the “within”
category (e.g. tax incentives, R&D grants and risk-sharing instruments, knowledge transfer
from public rese arch) and governance arrangements to co -ordinate public and private
stakeholders. Examples of such an approach, based on the local comparative advantage in
some innovative sectors, can be found in Canada (Innovation Superclusters Initiative 20 -
2018), the U nited States (Manufacturing USA 21 – 2012) and many European countries
(e.g., go -Cluster, Spitzencluster and Zukunftcluster initiatives in Germany; Pôles de
compétitivité in France).
While past innovation cluster policies were found to be little effective (Uyarra and
Ramlogan, 2016[105]), the new wave of cluster policies may be different (Ben Hassine and
Mathieu, 2020[106]; Bartik, 2020[36]; Mar and Massard, 2021[107]). Yet, many programs are
too recent to be evaluated and results may strongly depend on the design, governance,
technology and local economic conditions (Grashof, 2021[108]).
4.2. Strategy overlap
The different types of strategies may in some instances overlap. Mission-oriented strategies
are likely to include technology -focused or sectoral policies. For instance, green
technologies appear to have some GPT components (Barbieri, Marzucchi and Rizzo,
2020[109]; Nomaler and Verspagen, 2019 [110]). Technology -focused strategies may also
include sectoral or mission -oriented policies. For instance, some actions of AI strategies
are motivated by the will to preserve human rights and democratic values (OECD,
2019[111]).
In fact, technology -focused strategies can be viewed as solution -led pathways whereas
mission-oriented strategies are rather problem-led pathways (Wanzenböck et al., 2019[97]).
They underline that many strategies are in fact hybrid, in the sense that they integrate both
technology-focused and mission-oriented elements. While keeping this limit in mind, this
categorisation of policy orientations remains useful to explicit the underlying rationale of
strategies.
Place based-policies can also be sectoral, mission-oriented or technology-focused policies,
as soon as Marshallian externalities are expected to take place at the sectoral or at the
technology level.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
5. Policy recommendations
The previous sections of this paper have discussed th e definition and scope of industrial
policy and laid out a framework to analyse industrial policy interventions based on the
distinction between objectives, strategies and instruments. Armed with that framework and
leveraging the extensive literature revie w in Criscuolo et al. (2022[1]), this final section
identifies four main policy messages.
5.1. Complementarities between policy instruments justify the use of industrial
strategies
The combination of the results from the literature review on the effectiveness of industrial
policy instruments (Criscuolo et al., 2022[1]) with the taxonomy developed in this paper
underlines the importance of designing industrial policy strategies that include sev eral
instrument types, such as investment incentives, access to inputs and framework
conditions. This mirrors the co-existence of multiple market failures linked to knowledge
spillovers, financial markets, labour markets, myopia, uncertainty, etc. (OECD, 2021[11]).
The existing evidence stresses the effectiveness of each category of policy instruments and
the importance of policy design:
 Investment incentives have been extensively studied and evaluated. For instance,
there is now rich evidence that well -designed R&D tax credits and subsidies are
effective in stimulating R&D and innovation. Although the impact is less clear cut
regarding non -R&D investment incentives, targeted incentives and financial
instruments (such as public loans, public guarantees and government venture
capital), the body of evidence is growing and will allow uncovering the strength
and weaknesses of these interventions.
 “Access to inputs” instruments, such as skill and transfer policies, are shown to be
crucial enablers of innovation and productivity growth (Criscuolo et al., 2022[1]).
 Framework policies, notably competition and trade policies, are complementary to
industrial policy and are key in enabling the most productive firms to grow. These
instruments directly affect the allocation of resources and their reallocation between
firms, which is one of the main drivers of productivi ty growth and structural
change.
The framework developed in this paper sheds light on the complementarity between those
three categories of instruments.
 Complementarity between investment incentives and access to inputs. “Access
to inputs” instruments, such as skill and transfer policies, enhance the effectiveness
of investment incentives and contribute to increasing the absorptive capacities of
the least productive firms, thereby fostering technological diffusion.22
 Complementarity between instruments affecting firm performance (“within”)
and instruments affecting industry dynamics (“between”) . Framework
instruments enable firms’ exit, allow the most productive firms to grow and
contribute to translating firm-level successes into macroeconomic impact. In
particular, there is a large body of evidence showing that competition policy is an
efficient instrument to reallocate resources toward the more productive firms and,

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  33
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
indirectly, incentivise firms to inno vate. More generally, business dynamics is a
key lever of structural change.
5.2. Targeted industrial strategies can direct technological change and growth, but
should be handled with care
While the market failures justifying sectoral or place -based strategies have been
extensively discussed during the previous decades, this paper provides a comprehensive
review of the justifications for mission -oriented and technology -focused strategies. The
former primarily rests on the specific spill-overs stemming from the social benefits of the
mission, but can also be justified by particularly severe coordination failures and the
legitimacy provided by the challenge or the general-interest dimension of the mission. The
latter, particularly when it comes to General Purpose Technologies (GPT), can be justified
by external learning-by-doing and informational externalities for nascent technologies, as
well as their upstream nature.
While there are clear rationales in favour of targeted industrial strategies, the lack of
conclusive evidence on the effectiveness of targeted industrial policy instruments (see the
companion paper) and the pitfalls of targeted industrial policies (Box 4) call for prudence.
In particular, when designing targeted strategies, it is important to:
 Ensure that horizontal policies are not sufficient to reach the objectives of the
strategy. More generally, horizontal policy instruments can usefully complement
targeted policy instruments within a strategy to achieve a given objective . For
instance, to limit negative general equilibrium effects, strategies need to include
instruments favouring access to inputs (both at the targeted and horizontal levels).
It can be particularly useful to ensure that the necessary skills can be provided in
sufficient quantities.
 Make explicit the rationale behind the strategy and ensure that policymakers
can rely on the relevant technical and business knowledge. Governments having
a strong role to play in tackling societal challenges, asymmetry of information
could be limited for mission-oriented strategies. As targeted industrial policies are
very demanding on information, and since the choice of the selected projects is of
paramount importance, this may explain, and justify, the increasing appeal of
mission-oriented strategies (Rodrik, 2014[94]; Aiginger, 2014[112]);
 Pay particular attention to the governance of the strategy to limit the risk of
capture and attenuate information asymmetries (Paic and Viros, 2019 [64]; Romer,
1993[15]; Warwick, 2013[8]). Otherwise, targeted strategies may hinder competition
and therefore innovation. In particular, it is necessary to:
o favour their inclusiveness, notably by ensuring that young firms are solicited to
participate and that, to the extent possible, the specifications are technology -
neutral and do not discriminate between domestic and foreign firms;
o plan at inception scheduled assessments and evaluations;
o allow for failure, and plan a regular refit of the instruments and the strategy. It
is even more important when risks or ‘wickedness’ are high, in particular for
broad mission -oriented policies (Cantner and Vannuccini, 2018 [98];
Wanzenböck et al., 20 19[97]). Removing or retargeting industrial policy
instruments brings important political economy challenges.
More work is needed on best practices for the design of targeted strategies and the
identification of the rights targets. The ‘ARPA’ model (Advance Research Project Agency

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
from the US Department of Defence) is usually presented as close to best practices in terms
of governance (Azoulay et al., 2019 [89]; Rodrik and Sabe l, 2019 [31]; Larrue, 2021 [5]). In
particular, these papers put forward the agile organisational structure, the promotion of
risk-taking and the capacity of allowing a rapid withdrawal of ailing projects. This
governance is based on the role and the talent of the programme managers, whose academic
reputation is supposed to limit the asymmetry of information and to reduce the capture risk.
It complies with the three principles of embeddedness, discipline and accountability
(Rodrik, 2008[19]; Rodrik, 2014[94]). This literature rests on anecdotal evidence or technical
assessments (GAO, 2015[113]; Committee on Evaluation of the Advanced Research Projects
Agency-Energy (ARPA -E) et al., 2017 [114]), but, even though difficult, a quantitative
evaluation would be required.
Box 4. The pitfalls of targeted industrial policies
Economists, be they sceptics or s upportive of targeted industrial policy, usually point
out three main pitfalls in such interventions.
Access to information
The success of a targeted industrial policy relies on the ability of governments to pick
the right target. It requires gathering a vast amount of information on the expected
returns, risks, spillovers and other market failures for each project 23. Some argue that
this information is not available (be it for the government or for any other actor) and
others that it may be easier to acces s for businesses than for the government. Even if
this information could be gathered, technical experts, which are not necessarily available
in the public administration, should process it and then compare the different targets,
which requires common metri cs and/or cross -sectoral experts. This argument is
particularly important for economies at the technological frontier with policy projects
related to emerging and uncertain technologies, whereas it is looser for countries trying
to catch -up this frontier a nd benefiting from the experience and knowledge of first
movers.
Capture and rent-seeking
Ex-ante. Due to the asymmetric information between public and private sectors, there is
a risk of competition and lobbying between policy projects for being picked (Romer,
1993[15]), with two consequences. First, resources may be wasted in the lobbying process
(Bhagwati, 1982 [115]). Second, the outcome of the lobbying game is not necessarily
efficient and may favour the most organised projects, precisely the ones that are less
affected by coordination failures. The literature is abundant on this issue (Goldberg and
Maggi, 1999[116]; Ades and Di Tella, 1997[117]).
This capture effect may be reinforced when picking firms rather than policy projects, be
it for grants, VC investments, or even participation in coordination fora. First, the
government may be biased in favour of incumbents, which are easier to identify.
Second, it may be inclined to pick losers, in a try to smoothen adjustment costs.
Ex-post. The literature questions the ability to stop projects that are aili ng (both at the
level of the policy and at the firm level 24). Rodrik (2008[19]) stresses that successful
experiences of industrial policy in East Asia relied on both carrots (tax credits and
subsidies) and sticks.25 In contrast, these sticks were lacking in other targeted industrial
policy experiences, such as in Latin America during the 1950-1980 period.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  35
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
General equilibrium effects
By investing in a policy project, one reduces the availability of public funds, of
researchers, of capital, etc. These general equilibrium effects reinforce the need for an
appropriate selection of the policy projects. But this selection is the most debated issue
on targeted policies.
5.3. Demand side instruments can contribute to transformative industrial change
As mission-oriented industrial strategies have the ambition – going beyond innovation and
productivity – to transform the industrial structure, they tend to rely significantly on
demand side instruments. The latter are based on where consumption takes place ,
irrespective of the localisation of production. These affect the demand for products , by
changing either their price, availability or public demand. The underlying rationale is the
creation of demand (where imperfect markets fail to do so) in order to incentivise scaling-
up and improving efficiency through, e.g., learning by doing.
In the context of targeted industrial strategies, demand side policies are particularly
interesting as they may be less distortive than ta rgeted supply-side policies. For instance,
they are more likely to affect indirectly all the relevant firms, irrespective of their size, age
or connections with the administration. Renewable electricity purchase tariffs are for
instance more likely to be t echnology neutral (e.g. between wind and solar photovoltaic)
than targeted innovation support. The literature review (Criscuolo et al., 2022[1]) also shows
that public procurement may also foster innovation in cases where demand emanates from
the public sector (e.g. aerospace, defence, infrastructure).
Criscuolo et al. (2022[1]) provides evidence that demand -side policy instruments can
efficiently foster innovation, but also that they have important shortcomings. For instance,
they have ambiguous impacts on competitiveness, as innovation is not only stimulated for
domestic firms, but also abroad (e.g. impact of European subsidies to solar photovoltaic on
innovation in Asia). Regulatory standards can provide a short-run regulatory comparative
advantage to domestic firms but can entail long-run negative effects on business dynamics.
In conclusion, demand-side and supply-side instruments seem complementary in fostering
transformative industrial change (Anderson et al., 2021[10]). The most pressing policy issue
regarding demand-pull instruments regards their optimal combination with supply -push
instruments, which ultimately depends on the design of both types of instruments. Among
the main remaining unknowns is the overall and comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of
innovation-oriented public procurement, taking into account industry heterogeneity.
5.4. Governments need to put a strong emphasis on evaluation and regular re-
assessments of targeted policies
Despite renewed interest on targeted policies , the available evidence remains scarce and
mainly focused on the effect of investment incentives on their beneficiaries (Criscuolo
et al., 2022[1]). The lack of transparent, publicly available and easily accessible information
on the implementation of industrial policies hinders evaluation.
 This is all the more needed as the pitfalls of targeted policy instruments and strategies call
for systematic evaluations and cost -benefit analyses. In particular, it is worth asking the
following questions:

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
 What is the causal impact of the targeted policy instruments on the treated firms,
by type of instrument?
 What is the impact of the targeted policy instru ments on macroeconomic and
societal outcomes, such as productivity, employment, GDP, inequalities or
welfare? Answering this question needs to uncover the indirect effects of the policy,
e.g. on domestic non -treated firms, other domestic agents (government and
consumers) and foreign competitors. It is the first step towards a complete cost -
benefit analysis, taking into account the spillovers and market failures that many of
these instruments are trying to tackle, and the general equilibrium effects.
 What ar e the complementarities between targeted policy instruments? How to
compose an efficient industrial strategy?
 Are targeted industrial policies more efficient than horizontal ones?
Such a complete cost-benefit analysis of targeted industrial strategies is out of reach for the
time being but the very limited and mixed evidence on the effectiveness of targeted
industrial policies calls for (i) more work on the evaluation of targeted policy instruments
and strategies and (ii) caution when implementing targeted strategies.
Recent advances in data collection, storage and analytics (notably machine learning) may
lower the cost of policy impact evaluation , thereby improving the efficiency of targeted
interventions – see Box 5. While the evidence on the effectiveness of targeted interventions
is limited and mixed so far, digital technologies have the potential to improve the
effectiveness of these interventions, in particular by making evaluation richer, cheaper and
more timely.
Nevertheless, even if frequent re -assessments can contribute to more efficient policy
interventions, policy makers have to take into account the need for stability, and should
therefore avoid continual policy adjustments.
Box 5. The potential of new data sources and Machine Learning for designing targeted policies
The ongoing technological developments around big data and machine learning (ML)
allows:
 New ways to gather and match information on (new) ventures and innovation
inputs or outputs;
 New and more efficient methods to treat this information using Machine
Learning (ML) techniques.
This revolution has far -reaching consequences for firms (OECD, 2019[118]), industrial
organisation and thus affects industrial and innovation policies (OECD, 2018 [119];
Varian, 2018[120]). Big data and ML techniques do not only call for revising the policies,
they can also be used in the process of policy -making to improve their design and
efficiency (Johnstone et al., 2019[121]).
They are already used as a decision -support tool in a growing share of public pol icies,
e.g., justice, medicine, tax auditing – see Ubaldi et al. (2019[122]) or Berryhill et al.
(2019[123]). Nevertheless, industrial and innovation policies seem to lag behind.
However, the se new methods can affect the design and targeting of industrial and
innovation policies at four moments in the policy cycle26.
 Ex-ante, by improving the collection of data, either by accessing new data
sources (e.g., web scraping) or by allowing the matching between databases that

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  37
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
are not designed to be matched (e .g. patent databases do not feature identifiers
and are thus uneasy to match with administrative data (Tarasconi and Menon,
2017[124])).
 Ex-ante, using analyt ical techniques to foster the evidence -based design of
policies. Leveraging on usual data sources or on new types of data (and even
more promising by combining both), it is possible to better assess the strengths
and weaknesses of the innovation system (e. g., landscape of start -ups, of
scientific production, demand of skills)27.
 Ex-interim, by using the data in real -time to foster the effectiveness and
efficiency of the policy (e.g., increase of take-up rates by targeting likely eligible
firms, evaluation of investment or default rate for public VCs, subsidi sed loans
or guarantee schemes) – see, e.g., Andini et al. (2019[125]).
 Ex-post, by nurturing the evaluation process, allowing for instance to unco ver
heterogeneous treatment effects, feeding back into the design of the policy.
Machine Learning can bring large benefits in standard horizontal innovation policies,
by, for instance, increasing the take-up rates for R&D tax credits or guarantee schemes,
or allowing the identification of the firms that are the most reactive to an investment
incentive instrument. The main benefits are through the steps 3 and 4 of the policy cycle.
The advantages may even be higher when dealing with targeted industrial polic ies. It is
highly likely that the benefits can stem from the 4 steps of the previous policy cycle.
First, this type of policy may benefit from data on new ventures, not yet available from
business registers or other administrative data. It may also benefit from information
that is not readily available through these data, such as innovativeness, technological
field, or the track record of the management team. Second, these data may need to be
processed through machine learning techniques. For instance, iden tifying innovative
firms may be thought of as a classification or a clustering problem. In the same vein,
machine learning can be used to identify the strengths of an innovative system. Third,
the awareness on these policies, because they are restricted to a sub-sample of firms,
may be less widespread, resulting in low take-up rates and the need to identify potential
non-takers. Machine learning can also inform public agencies on sectoral issues when
designing and implementing public procurement programs or risk-sharing policy
instruments. Fourth, as for horizontal policies, the evaluation of heterogeneous
treatment effects can be carried out with machine learning techniques (Wager and
Athey, 2018[126]).

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Endnotes
1 While this paper focuses on developed economies, there is also a renewed interest in industrial
policies on the part of developing countries, partly based on the success sto ry of some East Asian
countries (Cherif and Hasanov, 2 019[7]; UNCTAD, 2018 [55]; Rodrik, 2008 [19]). In the context of
emerging and developing economies, see also, e.g., Maloney and Nayyar (2018[129]) on industrial
policy and government capacity, and Milberg, Jiang and Gereffi (2014[130]) on industrial policy and
GVCs.
2 Annex A shows concrete examples on how to link the rationale of the strategy and the choice of
the policy instruments.
3 Note that some authors restrict the definition of industrial policies to targ eted interventions, e.g.,
Pack & Saggi (2006[17]): “ According to us, industrial policy is basically any type of selective
intervention or government policy that attempts to alter the sectoral structure of production toward
sectors that are expected to offer better prospects for economic growth than would occur in the
absence of such intervention, i.e., in the market equilibrium.” See Warwick (2013[8]) for an inventory
of the definitions used in the literature.
4 The present conceptual framework necessarily simplifies the formulation of industrial policy. In
particular, some interventions are a combination of instrument types but do not necessarily qualify
as a strategy, e.g., the creation of State -Owned Enterpris es (SOEs), which combine the use of
implicit subsidies, low competition and specific governance by the public sector.
5 See also the recent American Jobs Plan (https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-american-jobs-plan/).
6 Different fields use different operational definitions of resilience. For example, regional science
thinks of resilien ce as three necessary, sequential conditions: a shock, a response by stakeholders
and a sustainable trajectory of growth, with the two first elements only constituting resistance – see
e.g. Sweeney, Mordue and Carey (2020[131]). Another example is the risk management literature,
which distinguishes between robustness ( ability to function despite a shock) and resilience ( ability
to return swiftly to normal operating performance after a shock) of supply chains –see e.g. Brandon-
Jones et al. (2014[132]). Resilience has also been a long-standing focus of agricultural policy (OECD,
2020[133]).
7 Gross and Sampat (2020[134]) discuss the lessons learnt from WWII for crisis innovation policy,
and how peacetime innovation and industrial policies can help prepare a crisis. They stress the
importance of basic science to lay the ground for the swift development of applications and of the
design of institutions able to pivot quickly. During a crisis, these institutions should be able to
coordinate and diffuse innovation among the relevant stakeh olders, be they public or private,
military or civilian.
8 Conversely, within instruments can increase business dynamics by favouring innovation.
9 Product standards are considered as demand-side instruments since they apply regardless of where
production takes place. On the contrary, regulations of production (e.g. health and safety
requirements in the workplace, see OECD (2021[12])) apply to the production stage and are ‘within
instruments’.
10 As evident from Figure 5, the four types of selection criteria correspon d to a stylised
representation. Although useful to understand the underpinnings of the industrial strategies design ,
it abstracts from the complexity of real world strategies, which often borrow characteristics from
several categories.
11 See OECD (2019[135]) and references therein.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  39
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022

12 Note that for strategic reasons, governments may however choose to subsidi se industries with
internal returns to scale, if they are at the same time deemed strategically important and national in
scope (Ding and Dafoe, 2021[48]).
13 The OECD TiVA database allows for the identification of upstream sectors.
14 The European Union’s New Industrial Strategy for Europe in part focuses on ecosystems, a
dynamic and modular concept that factors in risk and resilience (European Commission, 2021[80]).
15 See e.g. OECD (2020[136]) on resilience in GVCs during the COVID-19 pandemic.
16 Advanced Research Projects Agency. It refers to the type of interventions popularis ed by the
DARPA (Defense ARPA) in the US.
17 See also the Norwegian Government’s action plan for green shipping (Larrue, 2021[5]).
18 About than 9 out of 10 OECD countries have strategies that address societal challenges (Paic and
Viros, 2019[64]).
19 Other references include OECD (2019[135]) and the ref erences therein, as well as (Crescenzi,
2005[137]; Lee and Rodriguez -Pose, 2012[138]; Eder, 2018[139]; Freshwater et al., 2019[140]; McCann,
2019[141]; Iammarino, Rodríguez-Pose and Storper, 2020[33]).
20 https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/093.nsf/eng/home
21 https://www.manufacturingusa.com/
22 Diffusion policies are extensively reviewed in Calvino and Criscuolo (2022[67]).
23 See Pack and Saggi (2006[17]) for the list of information required.
24 In the COVID context, see for instance OECD (2020[142]) and Global Forum on Steel Excess
Capacity (2020[143]).
25 In the case of successful East Asian experiences, credits and subsidies were conditioned on export
performance, which avoided keeping unproductive firms alive. However, this is now prohibited by
WTO rules, except for export credits conforming to the OECD Arrangement on Officially Supported
Export Credits.
26 See for instance Pencheva, Esteve and Mikhaylov (2018[144]).
27 See for instance the Korean R&D Platform for Investment and Evaluation (R&D PIE ).
https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/rd-platform-for-investment-and-evaluation-rd-pie/

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  3
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
References

Acemoglu, D. et al. (2018), “Innovation, Reallocation, and Growth”, American Economic Review,
Vol. 108/11, pp. 3450-3491, https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20130470.
[73]
Ades, A. and R. Di Tella (1997), “National Champions and Corruption: Some Unpleasant Interventionist
Arithmetic”, The Economic Journal, Vol. 107/443, pp. 1023-1042, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
0297.1997.tb00005.x.
[117]
Aghion, P., A. Bergeaud and J. Van Reenen (2021), The Impact of Regulation on Innovation, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, https://doi.org/10.3386/w28381.
[78]
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992), “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”, Econometrica,
Vol. 60/2, p. 323, https://doi.org/10.2307/2951599.
[60]
Aiginger, K. (2014), Industrial Policy for a sustainable growth path. [112]
Aiginger, K. (2009), “Strengthening the Resilience of an Economy Enlarging the Menu of Stab ilisation
Policy to Prevent Another Crisis”, Intereconomics, Vol. 44, pp. 309-16,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10272-009-0308-9.
[44]
Alic, J., L. Branscomb and H. Brooks (1992), Beyond Spinoff: Military and Commercial Technologies in
a Changing World, Harvard Business Review Press, Cambridge, MA.
[14]
Altenburg, T. and D. Rodrik (2017), Green industrial policy: Accelerating structural change towards
wealthy green economies, German Development Institute.
[63]
Anderson, B. et al. (2021), “Policies for a climate-neutral industry: Lessons from the Netherlands”,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 108, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/a3a1f953-en.
[10]
Andini, M. et al. (2019), “Machine Learning in the Service of Policy Targeting: The Case of Public
Credit Guarantees”, SSRN Electronic Journal, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3431144.
[125]
Ando, S. (2021), “Size-dependent policies and risky firm creation”, Journal of Public Economics,
Vol. 197, p. 104404, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2021.104404.
[79]
Andrews, D., C. Criscuolo and P. Gal (2019), The global productivity slowdown, technology divergence
and public policy: A firm level perspective.
[28]
Autor, D., D. Dorn and G. Hanson (2019), “When Work Disappears: Manufacturing Decline and the
Falling Marriage Market Value of Young Men”, American Economic Review: Insights, Vol. 1/2,
pp. 161-178, https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20180010.
[35]
Autor, D. et al. (2020), “Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade
Exposure”, American Economic Review, Vol. 110/10, pp. 3139-3183,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20170011.
[37]
Azoulay, P. et al. (2019), “Funding Breakthrough Research: Promises and Challenges of the “ARPA
Model””, Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 19, pp. 69-96, https://doi.org/10.1086/699933.
[89]

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
4  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Baldwin, R. (1969), “The Case against Infant-Industry Tariff Protection”, Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 77/3, pp. 295-305.
[81]
Barbieri, N., A. Marzucchi and U. Rizzo (2020), “Knowledge sources and impacts on subsequent
inventions: Do green technologies differ from non-green ones?”, Research Policy, Vol. 49/2,
p. 103901, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103901.
[109]
Bartelme, D. et al. (2019), “The Textbook Case for Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data”, NBER
Working Paper, No. 26193, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
https://doi.org/10.3386/w26193.
[84]
Bartelsman, E. and M. Doms (2000), “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 38/3, pp. 569-594,
https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.38.3.569.
[59]
Bartik, T. (2020), “Using Place-Based Jobs Policies to Help Distressed Communities”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 34/3, pp. 99-127, https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.34.3.99.
[36]
Ben Hassine, H. and C. Mathieu (2020), “R&D crowding out or R&D leverage effects: An evaluation of
the french cluster-oriented technology policy”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
Vol. 155, p. 120025, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120025.
[106]
Berlingieri, G., P. Blanchenay and C. Criscuolo (2017), “The great divergence(s)”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 39, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/953f3853-en.
[29]
Berlingieri, G., S. Calligaris and C. Criscuolo (2018), “The productivity-wage premium: Does size still
matter in a service economy?”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers,
No. 2018/13, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/04e36c29-en.
[38]
Berlingieri, G. et al. (2020), “Laggard firms, technology diffusion and its structural and policy
determinants”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 86, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/281bd7a9-en.
[32]
Berryhill, J. et al. (2019), Hello, World: Artificial intelligence and its use in the public sector, OECD
Publishing, Paris,, https://doi.org/10.1787/726fd39d-en.
[123]
Bhagwati, J. (1982), “Directly Unproductive, Profit-Seeking (DUP) Activities”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 90/5, pp. 988-1002, https://doi.org/10.1086/261104.
[115]
Bloom, N., J. Van Reenen and H. Williams (2019), “A Toolkit of Policies to Promote Innovation”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 33/3, pp. 163-184, https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.3.163.
[21]
Brandon-Jones, E. et al. (2014), “A Contingent Resource-Based Perspective of Supply Chain Resilience
and Robustness”, Journal of Supply Chain Management, Vol. 50/3, pp. n/a-n/a,
https://doi.org/10.1111/jscm.12050.
[132]
Bravo-Biosca, A. (2016), “Firm growth dynamics across countries: Evidence from a new database” ,
Nesta Working Paper, No. 16/03, FORA-NESTA, https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/wp16-
03_firm_growth_dynamics-17.pdf.
[62]
Bresnahan, T. and M. Trajtenberg (1995), “General purpose technologies ‘Engines of growth’?”,
Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 65/1, pp. 83-108, https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4076(94)01598-t.
[101]

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  5
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Caldera Sánchez, A., M. Rasmussen and O. Röhn (2015), “Economic resilience: what role for policies?”,
OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1251, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jrxhgf61q5j-en.
[45]
Calvino, F., C. Criscuolo and C. Menon (2016), “No Country for Young Firms?: Start-up Dynamics and
National Policies”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 29, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, https://ideas.repec.org/p/oec/stiaac/29-en.html.
[74]
Calvino, F. et al. (2022), “Closing the Italian digital gap: The role of skills, intangibles and policies”,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 126, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/e33c281e-en.
[68]
Cammeraat, E., A. Dechezleprêtre and G. Lalanne (2022), “Innovation and industrial policies for green
hydrogen”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 125, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/f0bb5d8c-en.
[13]
Cantner, U. and S. Vannuccini (2018), “Elements of a Schumpeterian catalytic research and innovation
policy”, Industrial and Corporate Change, Vol. 27/5, pp. 833-850,
https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty028.
[98]
Cherif, R. and F. Hasanov (2019), “The return of the policy that shall not be named: Principles of
industrial policy”, IMF Working Paper, No. 19/74, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC,
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2019/03/26/The-Return-of-the-Policy-That-Shall-
Not-Be-Named-Principles-of-Industrial-Policy-46710 (accessed on 30 May 2021).
[7]
Chipman, J. (1970), “External Economies of Scale and Competitive Equilibrium”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 84/3, p. 347, https://doi.org/10.2307/1879425.
[83]
Coad, A. et al. (2014), “Whom do high-growth firms hire?”, Industrial and Corporate Change,
Vol. 23/1, pp. 293-327, https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtt051.
[71]
Committee on Evaluation of the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) et al. (2017),
An Assessment of ARPA-E, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.,
https://doi.org/10.17226/24778.
[114]
Consoli, D. et al. (2016), “Do green jobs differ from non-green jobs in terms of skills and human
capital?”, Research Policy, Vol. 45/5, pp. 1046-1060, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2016.02.007.
[127]
Crescenzi, R. (2005), “Innovation and Regional Growth in the Enlarged Europe: The Role of Local
Innovative Capabilities, Peripherality, and Education”, Growth and Change, Vol. 36/4, pp. 471-507,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2257.2005.00291.x.
[137]
Criscuolo, C., P. Gal and C. Menon (2016), “Do micro start-ups fuel job creation? Cross-country
evidence from the DynEmp Express database”, Small Business Economics, Vol. 48/2, pp. 393-412,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-016-9778-x.
[70]
Criscuolo, C. et al. (2022), “Are industrial policy instruments effective? A review of the evidence in
OECD countries”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 128, OECD
Publishing, Paris.
[1]
Decker, R. et al. (2017), “Declining Dynamism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 107/5, pp. 322-326, https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20171020.
[72]
DesJardine, M., P. Bansal and Y. Yang (2019), “Bouncing Back: Building Resilience Through Social
and Environmental Practices in the Context of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis”, Journal of
Management, Vol. 45/4, pp. 1434-1460, https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206317708854.
[42]

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
6  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Ding, J. and A. Dafoe (2021), “The Logic of Strategic Assets: From Oil to AI”, Security Studies,
Vol. 30/2, pp. 182-212, https://doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2021.1915583.
[48]
Dolfsma, W. and D. Seo (2013), “Government policy and technological innovation—a suggested
typology”, Technovation, Vol. 33/6-7, pp. 173-179,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2013.03.011.
[102]
EC/OECD (2019), STIP Compass: International Science, Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP)
Database, edition 2019, https://stip.oecd.org. – January 2020 version.
[53]
Eder, J. (2018), “Innovation in the Periphery: A Critical Survey and Research Agenda”, International
Regional Science Review, Vol. 42/2, pp. 119-146, https://doi.org/10.1177/0160017618764279.
[139]
Edler, J. et al. (2016), Introduction: Making sense of innovation policy, Edward Elgar Publishing,
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781784711856.00008.
[54]
Enderlein, H. et al. (2019), Beyon Industrial Strategy - Why Europe Needs a New Growth Strategy. [25]
Ergas, H. (1987), Does technology policy matter. [96]
European Commission (2021), Annual Single Market Report 2021,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/annual-single-market-report-2021.pdf.
[80]
European Commission (2021), Strategic dependencies and capacities,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/swd-strategic-dependencies-capacities_en.pdf.
[50]
European Commission (2018), Mission-oriented research and innovation - Assessing the impact of a
mission-oriented research and innovation approach, https://doi.org/10.2777/373448.
[90]
European Political Strategy Centre (2019), Rethinking Strategic Autonomy in the Digital Age. [24]
Feldman, M. and D. Kogler (2010), “Stylized Facts in the Geography of Innovation”, in Handbook of
The Economics of Innovation, Vol. 1, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation , Elsevier,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0169-7218(10)01008-7.
[104]
Foray, D., D. Mowery and R. Nelson (2012), “Public R&D and social challenges: What lessons from
mission R&D programs?”, Research Policy, Vol. 41/10, pp. 1697-1702,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.07.011.
[95]
Franco-German Manifesto (2019), A Franco-German Manifesto for a European Industrial Policy fit for
the 21st Century.
[2]
Freshwater, D. et al. (2019), “Business development and the growth of rural SMEs”, OECD Regional
Development Working Papers, No. 2019/07, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/74256611-en.
[140]
GAO (2015), DARPA: Key Factors Drive Transition of Technologies, but Better Training and Data
Dissemination Can Increase Success, https://www.gao.gov/assets/680/673746.pdf.
[113]
Garicano, L., C. Lelarge and J. Van Reenen (2016), “Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity
Distribution: Evidence from France”, American Economic Review, Vol. 106/11, pp. 3439-3479,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20130232.
[77]
Global Forum for Steel Excess Capacity (2020), 2020 GFSEC Ministerial Report,
http://www.steelforum.org/events/gfsec-ministerial-report-2020.pdf.
[143]

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  7
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Goldberg, P. and G. Maggi (1999), “Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 89/5, pp. 1135-1155, https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.89.5.1135.
[116]
Gopinath, G. et al. (2017), “Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe*”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 132/4, pp. 1915-1967, https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjx024.
[23]
Grashof, N. (2021), “Putting the watering can away –Towards a targeted (problem-oriented) cluster
policy framework”, Research Policy, Vol. 50/9, p. 104335,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104335.
[108]
Gross, D. and B. Sampat (2020), Inventing the Endless Frontier: The Effects of the World War II
Research Effort on Post-war Innovation, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
https://doi.org/10.3386/w27375.
[134]
Hall, B., J. Mairesse and P. Mohnen (2010), “Measuring the Returns to R&D”, in Handbook of the
Economics of Innovation, Volume 2, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation , Elsevier,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0169-7218(10)02008-3.
[66]
Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2013), “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large versus
Young”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95/2, pp. 347-361,
https://doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_00288.
[61]
Harstad, B. (2020), “Technology and Time Inconsistency”, Journal of Political Economy, pp. 000-000,
https://doi.org/10.1086/707024.
[100]
Hepburn, C. et al. (2020), “Will COVID-19 fiscal recovery packages accelerate or retard progress on
climate change?”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 36/Supplement_1, pp. S359-S381,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/graa015.
[9]
Hynes, W., M. Lees and J. Müller (eds.) (2020), Systemic Thinking for Policy Making: The Potential of
Systems Analysis for Addressing Global Policy Challenges in the 21st Century , New Approaches to
Economic Challenges, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/879c4f7a-en.
[46]
Iammarino, S., A. Rodríguez-Pose and M. Storper (2020), Falling into the middle-income trap? : a study
on the risks for EU regions to be caught in a middle-income trap : final report,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2776/0.
[33]
IPCC (2014), Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .
[146]
ITIF (2020), The Case for a National Industrial Strategy to Counter China’s Technological Rise,
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, https://itif.org/publications/2020/04/13/case-
national-industrial-strategy-counter-chinas-technological-rise.
[26]
Johnstone, N. et al. (2019), Using digital technologies to improve the design and enforcement of public
policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/99b9ba70-en.
[121]
Jüttner, U. and S. Maklan (2011), “Supply chain resilience in the global financial crisis: an empirical
study”, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 16/4, pp. 2–259,
https://doi.org/10.1108/13598541111139062.
[43]
Larrue, P. (2021), “The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers, No. 100, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
[5]

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
8  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Lee, N. and A. Rodriguez-Pose (2012), “Innovation and spatial inequality in Europe and USA”, Journal
of Economic Geography, Vol. 13/1, pp. 1-22, https://doi.org/10.1093/jeg/lbs022.
[138]
Lerner, J. (2009), Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital Have Failed--and What to Do About It, Princeton University Press.
[16]
Lincicome, S. (2021), Manufactured crisis: “Deindustrialization,” free markets, and national security,
Cato Institute, Washington, DC, https://www.cato.org/publications/policy-analysis/manufactured-
crisis-deindustrialization-free-markets-national-security (accessed on 6 May 2021).
[4]
Liu, E. (2019), “Industrial Policies in Production Networks”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 134/4, pp. 1883-1948, https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz024.
[87]
Maloney, B. and G. Nayyar (2018), “Industrial Policy, Information, and Government Capacity”, World
Bank Research Observer, Vol. 33, pp. 189–217, http://hdl.handle.net/10986/33273.
[129]
Mar, M. and N. Massard (2021), “Animate the cluster or subsidize collaborative R&D? A multiple
overlapping treatments approach to assess the impacts of the French cluster policy”, Industrial and
Corporate Change, Vol. 30/4, pp. 845-867, https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtab002.
[107]
Matsumoto, T. et al. (2019), “An integrated approach to the Paris climate Agreement: The role of
regions and cities”, OECD Regional Development Working Papers, No. 2019/13, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/96b5676d-en.
[39]
Mazzucato, M. (2018), “Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities”, Industrial
and Corporate Change, Vol. 27/5, pp. 803-815, https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty034.
[20]
Mazzucato, M. (2013), The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public v. Private Sector Myths, Anthem
Press, London: UK.
[3]
McCann, P. (2019), “Perceptions of regional inequality and the geography of discontent: insights from
the UK”, Regional Studies, Vol. 54/2, pp. 256-267, https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2019.1619928.
[141]
Melitz, M. (2005), “When and how should infant industries be protected?”, Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 66/1, pp. 177-196, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2004.07.001.
[82]
Neumark, D. and H. Simpson (2015), “Place-Based Policies”, in Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics, Elsevier, https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-444-59531-7.00018-1.
[103]
Neven, D., P. Seabright and G. Grossman (1995), “European Industrial Policy: The Airbus Case”,
Economic Policy, Vol. 10/21, p. 313, https://doi.org/10.2307/1344592.
[86]
Nomaler, Ö. and B. Verspagen (2019), “Greentech homophily and path dependence in a large patent
citation network”, UNU-MERIT Working Paper, No. 2019-051,
https://www.merit.unu.edu/publications/working-papers/abstract/?id=8404.
[110]
OECD (2021), Industrial Policy for the Sustainable Development Goals: Increasing the Private Sector’s
Contribution, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2cad899f-en.
[12]
OECD (2021), Policies for a Carbon-Neutral Industry in the Netherlands, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/6813bf38-en.
[11]
OECD (2021), The Role of Firms in Wage Inequality: Policy Lessons from a Large Scale Cross-Country
Study, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/7d9b2208-en.
[30]

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  9
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
OECD (2020), A systemic resilience approach to dealing with Covid-19 and future shocks,
https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=131_131917-kpfefrdfnx&title=A-Systemic-Resilience-
Approach-to-dealing-with-Covid-19-and-future-shocks.
[40]
OECD (2020), Building back better: A sustainable, resilient recovery after COVID-19,
http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/building-back-better-a-sustainable-resilient-
recovery-after-covid-19-52b869f5/.
[41]
OECD (2020), Coronavirus (COVID-19): SME policy responses, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/coronavirus-covid-19-sme-policy-responses-
04440101/.
[76]
OECD (2020), COVID-19 and global value chains: Policy options to build more resilient production
networks, http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/covid-19-and-global-value-chains-
policy-options-to-build-more-resilient-production-networks-04934ef4/.
[47]
OECD (2020), COVID-19 and international trade: Issues and actions. [136]
OECD (2020), “COVID-19 and the aviation industry: Impact and policy responses”, OECD Policy
Responses to Coronavirus (COVID-19), http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/covid-
19-and-the-aviation-industry-impact-and-policy-responses-26d521c1/.
[88]
OECD (2020), COVID-19: Competition policy actions for governments and competition authorities,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/COVID-19-competition-policy-
actions-for-governments-and-competition-authorities.pdf.
[18]
OECD (2020), Examples of AI National Policies, http://www.oecd.org/sti/examples-of-ai-national-
policies.pdf.
[145]
OECD (2020), International Compendium of Entrepreneurship Policies, OECD Studies on SMEs and
Entrepreneurship, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/338f1873-en.
[75]
OECD (2020), Strengthening Agricultural Resilience in the Face of Multiple Risks, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2250453e-en.
[133]
OECD (2020), Supporting businesses in financial distress to avoid insolvency during the COVID-19
crisis, https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=133_133330-0xcbam2j0c&title=Supporting-
businesses-in-financial-distress-to-avoid-insolvency-during-the-Covid-19-crisis.
[142]
OECD (2020), The Circular Economy in Groningen, the Netherlands,, OECD Urban Studies,OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/e53348d4-en.
[99]
OECD (2020), “The face mask global value chain in the COVID-19 outbreak: Evidence and policy
lessons”, OECD Policy Responses to Coronavirus (COVID-19).
[49]
OECD (2019), Artificial Intelligence in Society, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/eedfee77-en.
[118]
OECD (2019), OECD Regional Outlook 2019: Leveraging Megatrends for Cities and Rural Areas,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264312838-en.
[135]
OECD (2019), OECD SME and Entrepreneurship Outlook 2019, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/34907e9c-en.
[69]
OECD (2019), Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence. [111]

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
10  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
OECD (2019), The Path to Becoming a Data-Driven Public Sector, OECD Digital Government Studies,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/059814a7-en.
[128]
OECD (2019), Under Pressure: The Squeezed Middle Class, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/689afed1-en.
[34]
OECD (2018), “Perspectives on innovation policies in the digital age”, in OECD Science, Technology
and Innovation Outlook 2018: Adapting to Technological and Societal Disruption, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2018-8-en.
[119]
OECD (2015), The Innovation Imperative: Contributing to Productivity, Growth and Well-Being, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264239814-en.
[65]
Olley, G. and A. Pakes (1996), “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
Industry”, Econometrica, Vol. 64/6, p. 1263, https://doi.org/10.2307/2171831.
[57]
O’Sullivan, E. et al. (2013), “What is new in the new industrial policy? A manufacturing systems
perspective”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 29/2, pp. 432-462,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grt027.
[51]
Pack, H. and K. Saggi (2006), “Is There a Case for Industrial Policy? A Critical Survey”, The World
Bank Research Observer, Vol. 21/2, pp. 267-297, https://doi.org/10.1093/wbro/lkl001.
[17]
Paic, A. and C. Viros (2019), “Governance of science and technology policies”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 84, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2b3bc558-en.
[64]
Pencheva, I., M. Esteve and S. Mikhaylov (2018), “Big Data and AI – A transformational shift for
government: So, what next for research?”, Public Policy and Administration, Vol. 35/1, pp. 24-44,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952076718780537.
[144]
Philippon, T. and A. Reshef (2012), “Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Finance Industry: 1909 –
2006*”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127/4, pp. 1551-1609,
https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs030.
[22]
Pons-Benaiges, O. (2017), Did Government Intervention Target Technological Externalities? Industrial
Policy and Economic Growth in Postwar Japan, 1964-1983,
https://delong.typepad.com/06_tech_externalities_japan.pdf.
[85]
Popp, D., R. Newell and A. Jaffe (2010), “Energy, the Environment, and Technological Change”, in
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 2, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation ,
Elsevier, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0169-7218(10)02005-8.
[92]
Qureshi, Z. and C. Woo (eds.) (2022), Gone digital: Technology diffusion in the digital era, Brookings
Institution.
[67]
Rodrik, D. (2014), “Green industrial policy”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 30/3, pp. 469-
491, https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/gru025.
[94]
Rodrik, D. (2008), “Normalizing Industrial Policy”, Commission on Growth and Development Working
Paper, No. 3, World Bank, Washington, DC.
[19]
Rodrik, D. and C. Sabel (2019), Building a Good Jobs Economy,
https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3612&context=faculty_scholarship.
[31]

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  11
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Romer, P. (1993), “Implementing a National Technology Strategy with Self-Organizing Industry
Investment Boards”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, Vol. 1993/2, p. 345,
https://doi.org/10.2307/2534742.
[15]
Salasar‐Xirinachs, J., I. Nübler and R. Kozul‐Wright (eds.) (2014), Industrial Policy in the era of
vertically specialized industrialization, UNCTAD and ILO, Geneva, Switzerland,
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---
inst/documents/publication/wcms_315670.pdf.
[130]
Steinmueller, W. (2010), “Economics of Technology Policy”, in Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation, Volume 2, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Elsevier,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0169-7218(10)02012-5.
[52]
Sweeney, B., G. Mordue and J. Carey (2020), “Resilient or resistant? Critical reflections on resilience in
an old industrial region”, Geoforum, Vol. 110, pp. 125-135,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2020.02.005.
[131]
Syverson, C. (2011), “What Determines Productivity?”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 49/2,
pp. 326-365, https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.49.2.326.
[58]
Tagliapietra, S. and R. Veugelers (2020), Green industrial policy in the European Union, Bruegel,
https://doi.org/10.2307/resrep28602.1.
[6]
Tarasconi, G. and C. Menon (2017), “Matching Crunchbase with patent data”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2017/07, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/15f967fa-en.
[124]
Ubaldi, B. et al. (2019), State of the art in the use of emerging technologies in the public sector, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/932780bc-en.
[122]
UNCTAD (2018), World Investment Report 2018 - Investment and New Industrial Policies. [55]
Uyarra, E. and R. Ramlogan (2016), The impact of cluster policy on innovation, Edward Elgar
Publishing, https://doi.org/10.4337/9781784711856.00014.
[105]
Varian, H. (2018), “Artificial Intelligence, Economics, and Industrial Organization”, NBER Working
Paper, No. 24839, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
https://doi.org/10.3386/w24839.
[120]
Wager, S. and S. Athey (2018), “Estimation and Inference of Heterogeneous Treatment Effects using
Random Forests”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 113/523, pp. 1228-1242,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1319839.
[126]
Wanzenböck, I. et al. (2019), A framework for mission-oriented innovation policy: Alternative pathways
through the problem-solution space, Center for Open Science, https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/njahp.
[97]
Warwick, K. (2013), “Beyond Industrial Policy: Emerging Issues and New Trends”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 2, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k4869clw0xp-en.
[8]
Weber, K. and H. Rohracher (2012), “Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for
transformative change”, Research Policy, Vol. 41/6, pp. 1037-1047,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015.
[93]

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
12  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Werner, J. (2018), “China Is Cheating at a Rigged Game”, Foreign Policy August 2018,
https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/08/08/china-is-cheating-at-a-rigged-game/.
[27]
Wittmann, F. et al. (2020), Developing a typology for mission-oriented innovation policies, Fraunhofer
ISI, https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/215820.
[91]
WTO (2020), World Trade Report 2020 - Government policies to promote innovation in the digital age. [56]

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  13
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Annex A. Industrial strategies in practice
This annex describes two examples of industrial strategies – green and artificial intelligence
(AI) strategies – in a subset of countries or regions (China, European Union, Germany,
Japan, United Kingdom and United States). The aim is not to provide an extensive survey
of practices, but rather to use some examples to illustrate how real-world strategies fit into
the conceptual framework developed in this paper.
Green strategies are a particularly widespread example of mission-oriented strategies: 76%
of the strategies addressing societal challenges aim to support a sustainable economy (Paic
and Viros, 2019 [64]). As part of green strategies, demand -oriented instruments play a
particularly central role to make demand more sustainable, while supply -side instruments
(e.g. green innovation subsidies) complement the effect of demand-oriented instruments by
inducing green technologies. Part of these strategies concerns the manufacturing sector1, in
particular through innovation.
AI strategies2 are an example of technology-focused strategies. AI is considered by many
stakeholders as a GPT (OECD, 2019[118]), but there remains a lot of uncertainty on the
technical, ethical and market challenges around this technology.
This annex relies on the following sources:
 Official websites and publications;
 STIP Compass;
 The AI Observatory (oecd.ai).
The rest of this annex lists the types of instruments used in these strategies, explains how
their interactions are designed, in particular the interactions between demand -side,
framework and other instruments, and describes the governance arrangements, in particular
the diversity of stakeholders and the evaluation process.
Green strategies
Over the past few years, a growing number of economies have launched ambitious, long -
term green strategies. This subsection relies on the following examples: part of China’s
13th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development (2016 -2020), the European
Green Deal ( 2019-2024); Germany’s Climate Action Programme 2030 (2019 ); Japa n’s
2050 Zero Carbon Cities (2019 ); and 2 out of 4 Grand Challenges set out in the British
Industrial Strategy (2019 ). Each strategy consists of numerous instruments, targeting a
large number of climate-related industries, as well as households.
Consistently with the main rationale of mission-oriented strategies, green strategies are first
focused on demand-side instruments, whose primary goal is to limit environmental
externalities through for instance carbon taxes or green public procurement, and indirectly
incentivises firms to go green. Still, on top of demand -side instruments, they include
numerous supply-side instruments. The latter provide extra-incentives for firms to invest
in green technologies. These strategies also aim at alleviating coordination failures by
creating fora for the coordination of the relevant industries and, beyond that, by
coordinating expectations among producers and consumers, at the national and
international levels.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
14  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Specifically, c omparing the features of green strategies and instruments yields the
following insights:
 Strong goal orientation and uncertainty in technology . Strategies articulate public
objectives without knowing the way to reach them , nor guaranteeing their
technological/political feasibility (problem-led pathway). Modern green strategies
put more emphasis on the objective or its components (e.g., achieving carbon
neutrality by 2050, ban sale of gas/diesel vehicles by 2050, public investment into
the production and deployment of sustainable alternative transport fuels), rather
than on the technologies required to reach them. This is directly linked to the long-
term horizon of such strategies, typically up to 30 years, and the huge uncertainty
in the technological evolutions at this horizon.
 Demand side instruments play a central role. As the primary role of these strategies
is to correct for environmental ex ternalities, demand side instruments, such as
product regulation and standards, and Pigouvian taxes and subsidies, are
fundamental tools of these strategies.
 Complementary supply -side instruments . As innovation incentives may be
insufficient and there may be a need to tackle coordination failures in the production
system, green strategies also include supply -side instruments. They are rather
considered as complementary instruments, compared to the indispensable role of
demand side instruments. Supply -side instruments are used to facilitate and
accelerate the technological developments required to meet the goals. In addition,
skill policies ensure that the jobs created by green innovation can be filled (Consoli
et al., 2016[127]).
 International, national and local coordination fora . As mission-oriented strategies
deal with a large number of industries that are supposed to provide complementary
inputs to reach the objectives, green strategies also include coordination
mechanisms. They do not only coordinate domestic industries on compatible and
complementary investments, but also contribute to setting common expectations
for stakeholders, including consumers, and include international co-ordination (e.g.
IPCC, COPs). A green strategy often includes several sub-strategies, in which many
stakeholders are involved (e.g. mainstreaming sustainability in all EU policies,
2050 Zero Carbon Cities in Japan) – see also Matsumoto et al. (2019[39]).
 Governance. Some strategies, such as the Germany Climate Action Programme
2030, embed a legal monitoring and evaluation mechanism by annually defining
reduction targets by sector to ensure that the targets are met, but it is not explicit in
the other strategies.
AI strategies
Many economies have adopted AI strategies since the late 2010s. This subsection relies on
the following examples: China’s New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan
(2017-2020); the European Strategy for AI (2018); Germany ’s Artificial Intelligence
Strategy (2018); Japan’s AI Strategy 2019 (2019); the British AI Sectoral Deal (2018); and
the American AI Initiative (2019).
AI strategies cover a large number of instruments but rely in particula r on R&D support
policies. Complementary to these support measures, governments also try to increase the
supply of relevant skills and data infrastructures. They also put in place governance fora to
facilitate national and international coordination and st andards to foster trust in these
technologies and indirectly increase demand.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES  15
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Specifically, comparing the features of AI strategies and instruments yields the following
insights:
 Large public funding for AI R&D . To foster technological developments,
governments target a big push for the development of domestic AI expertise, with
public funding of both public and private R&D, as well as partnerships.
 Skills policy. Three main types of skills policies are observed: 1) actions to increase
the number of AI professionals, including the creation of professional degrees in
universities and more welcoming migration policies for skilled workers; 2) actions
to increase the number of teachers in this realm; 3) generic educ ation (AI
awareness) for students and workers. In practice, governments also adopt
regulatory measures, for instance to revise school curricula and visa frameworks.
 Data infrastructure. Storing, sharing and accessing massive amounts of data is one
of the main challenge of AI strategies . Coordination, standards, infrastructure,
interoperability and sharing functionalities are pivotal for the development and
application of AI technologies (OECD, 2019[128]). Valuing data as a strategic asset
requires a strong stakeholder coordination with both public and private sector.3
 New rules for data and algorithm governance . AI industry development requires
setting standards for safety and ethics. A failure in building trust around AI would
slow down the diffusion of AI and drastically reduce its benefits for consumers.
Hence, AI strategies often include rule making for data and algorithm governance,
both at the national and international levels (e.g. the OECD AI principles).
 Governance/evaluation. Given the rapid evolution of AI industry, governments
acknowledge the need of enhanced coordination with public and private
stakeholders for the development of realistic and impactful AI strategies. Likewise,
annual assessments of these strategies are needed, even though in practice they do
not specify targets and rely on a communication of their achievements to the public
and discretionary readjustments of policy implementation.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
16  AN INDUSTRIAL POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR OECD COUNTRIES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPERS
© OECD 2022
Endnotes to Annex A
1 Industry is responsible for 21 % of the greenhouse gas emissions (IPCC, 2014[146]).
2 For a more comprehensive review of AI national Policies, see OECD (2020[145]).
3 http://www.oecd.org/gov/infrastructure-governance/recommendation/
