
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
OPTIMISING THE
OPERATION AND
USE OF NATIONAL
RESEARCH
INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INDUSTRY
POLICY PAPERS
August 2020 No. 91

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF
NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES

STI POLICY PAPER

This paper was approved and declassified by the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy
(CSTP) on 16 July 2020 for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E. under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2020)3/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.

© OECD / Science Europe (2020)

You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs,
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright
owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to
rights@oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 3
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL
RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
Abstract
Research Infrastructures (RIs) play a key role in enabling and developing research in all
scientific domains and represent an increasingly large share of research investment. Most
RIs are funded, managed and operated at a national or federal level, and provide services
mostly to national research communities.
This policy report presents a generic framework for improving the use and operation of
national RIs. It includes two g uiding models, one for portfolio management and one for
user-base optimisation. These guiding models lay out the key principles of an effective
national RI portfolio management system and identify the factors that should be considered
by RI managers with regards to optim ising the user -base of national RIs. Both guiding
models take into consideration the diversity of national system s and RI operation
approaches.
This report also contains a series of more generic policy recommendations and suggested
actions for RI portfolio managers and RI managers.

Keywords: research infrastructures; portfolio management; user-base; user access.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Foreword
This report follows and complements recent work undertaken by the OECD Global Science
Forum and by Science Europe on the establishment, management and international
cooperation of research infrastructures (RIs). It addresses the challenges faced by RI
managers, operators and decision -makers in managing national portfolio of RIs and
optimising their access and use.
Most RIs are funded, managed and operated at a national or federal level, and provide
services mostly to national research communities. In a context of limited research budgets,
governments and funding agencies are confronted with the challenge of supporting
increasingly large and complex RI portfolios. Potential users of RIs are also increasingly
diverse and numerous, particularly as the data produced by RIs be comes progressively
more complex and varied. The operation and use of these national RIs therefore requires
careful balancing and optimisation.
This policy report presents a generic framework for improving the use and operation of
national RIs, including a number of options, which take into account the diversity of
national contexts and of RIs.
The framework also includes two guiding models, one for portfolio management and one
for user -base optimisation. These guiding models summarise the key principles o f an
effective national RI portfolio management system and the elements that should be
considered by RI managers with regards to optimising the user-base of national RIs. Both
guiding models take into consideration the diversity of national systems and RI operation
approaches. Examples of uses of the guiding models are included.
This report also contains a series of more generic policy recommendations and suggested
actions for RI portfolio managers and RI managers.
It should be noted that the COVID-19 crisis is likely to intensify some of the issues that are
addressed in this report, and that were highlighted by discussions at the “European
Research Infrastructures for a smarter future" conference (15 May 2020) related to
COVID-19 and the promotion of remote access to RIs. Many national funders have diverted
research funding to focus on the COVID -19 response, adding to the pressures on budgets
available to support RIs. Many RIs have also set up rapid or fast track access to allow
researchers to obtain resu lts as soon as possible, to respond to the needs of researchers
engaged in Covid- 19 research, as well as making arrangements to release results earlier
than is usually the case, highlighting the importance of optimised access mechanisms, data
sharing and user support provision.
This report was co -written by the GSF -Science Europe Expert Group chair (Catherine
Ewart), project consultants (Peter Fletcher and Isabel Bolliger), the GSF secretariat
(Frédéric Sgard), the Science Europe Office (James Morris), with extensive input from
Expert Group members.
We hope that this report will be informative and useful and we would be interested in
receiving comments f rom readers. The Global Science Forum staff can be reached at
gsforum@oecd.org and Science Europe Office staff at office@scienceeurope.org
.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 5
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

The OECD Global Science Forum (GSF)
The GSF is a Working Party of the OECD Committee for Science and Technological
Policies. Its main objective is to support countries to improve their science policies and
share in the benefits of international collaboration. GSF provides a venue for
consultations and mutual learning among senior science policy officials of OECD
member countries. It carries out analytical work on high-priority science policy issues.
The GSF's principal customers are the government science policy officials who bring
issues to the GSF for deliberation and analysis in an intergovernmental setting.
More information on our mission and activities is provided at
http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/global-science-forum.htm.

Science Europe
Science Europe is the association representing major public organisations that fu nd or
perform excellent, ground-breaking research in Europe.
We bring together the expertise of some of the largest and best -known research
organisations in the world to jointly push the frontiers of how scientific research is
produced and delivers benefits to society.
We advocate science and the scientific communi ty to help build the European Research
Area and shape the global scientific agenda.
More information on our mission and activities is provided at www.scienceeurope.org.
Science Europe AISBL, Rue de la Science 14, 1040 Brussels, Belgium

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table of contents
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH
INFRASTRUCTURES 3
Executive Summary 7
1. Introduction 10
1.1. Background and rationale 10
1.2. Terms of Reference and focus 10
1.3. Managing portfolios of RIs 11
1.4. Challenges 12
1.5. Methodology 12
1.6. Report 13
2. Managing portfolios of national research infrastructures 14
2.1. Findings 14
2.2. Conclusions from the survey 18
2.3. Towards an effective model 19
3. Optimising the User Base of national research infrastructures 21
3.1. Findings 21
3.2. Lessons learned 26
4. Conclusions and recommendations 30
Notes 36
References 37
5. Appendices 39
Appendix 1: Expert Group 39
Appendix 2: Ministries and agencies interviewed on portfolio management 41
Appendix 3: Online survey of RI managers 43
6. Glossary 46

FIGURES
Figure 1. Case study analysis of the model for portfolio management for the Canada Foundation for Innovation 20
Figure 2. Case study example (the Nanotechnology Platform, Japan) of the elements and questions that an RI manager
may wish to consider when seeking to optimise the user base 29
Figure 3. Key questions to be considered when testing the portfolio management guiding model 34
Figure 4. Key questions to be considered when testing the user-base guiding model 35

TABLES
Table 1. Responsibilities for RI portfolio management 14
Table 2. Examples of the benefits and risks of different strategies employed by RI managers to optimise or improve the
use of their RIs 28

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 7
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Executive Summary
Most research infrastructures ( RIs) are funded, managed and operated at a national or
federal level, and provide services mostly to national research communities. There is
demand for specific analysis of how to optimise the operation of these national research
infrastructures. This is in a context where research budgets are limited and governments
and funding agencies are confronted with the challenge of supporting increasingly large
and complex RI portfolios.
RIs are extremely diverse and good practices and policies may not necessarily apply to all
RI types. The study focused on RIs that provide access to their equipment/data/resources
to external users outside their host institution. Underlying data/computing infrastructure,
which connect and provide access to RI data, are included as well as data RIs that provide
services to users.
This policy report presents a generic framework for improving the use and operation of
national RIs. This includes a set of options which take into account the diversity of national
contexts and of RIs. It is based on the results from a study that was structured to address
two complementary areas: Managing portfolios of RIs and Optimising the user-base.
The activity was co-organised by the OECD Global Science Forum and Science Europe. It
was supervised by an international Expert Group (EG) nominated by both organisations
chaired by Dr Catherine Ewart (UKRI, United Kingdom). The EG conducted two surveys
and held two international workshops. One survey was conducted among funders and
decision-makers and the other among RI managers. A workshop in London discuss ed the
initial findings from the surveys, and a second one in Seoul discussed the emerging
recommendations.
Managing Portfolios
In response to the wide range of inputs received, the lessons learned were synthesised into
a “Guiding Model” which summarises the key elements of an effective national RI portfolio
management system. These are:
• A review or road -mapping process collecting bottom up and top down inputs to
create a forward plan for RI needs in the context of the national Research and
Innovation strategies;
• A means to act upon the forward looking plan and allocate resources, for capital
and operations, to ensure that the highest priority RIs are funded;
• Processes to gather inputs from the research community, RI operators and other
stakeholders in terms of research, data and operational needs;
• A management process that considers the whole portfolio of new and existing RIs
together;
• A process that encourages cooperation between RIs and allows competition to
ensure the highest priority facilities are supported or selected;
• The stimulation of international networking for national RIs, and embedding
international RI options alongside national RI options to find the best solutions to
deliver the research requirements of the national community;

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• Appropriate means to monitor the performance of national and international RIs on
an ongoing basis;
• A mechanism to identify, in good time, facilities that can be closed or divested to
other managers;
• Transparency so that the criteria and processes for deciding on investment are clear
to RI operators.
Optimising the User Base
Several major challenges emerge when considering user -base optimisation from an RI
manager perspective. These challenges were analysed to develop a “Guiding Model” that
recommends key elements that sho uld be considered by RI managers with regards to
optimising the user-base of national RIs. These elements are:
• The appropriate monitoring of RI users to inform strategies for the optimisation and
management of user bases.
• Consideration of the variety of options to optimise the use potential of RIs, and the
strategic evaluation of the benefits and risks of each.
• The provision and communication of clear and transparent mechanisms for
accessing RIs, and consideration of how to extend access to new
users/communities.
• The facilitation of access to data generated or managed by RIs, and the promotion
of collaboration between RIs to establish and standardise transparent data policies.
• The promotion of data sharing by RI users and the establishment of appropriate
mechanisms to monitor the secondary use of data generated or managed by RIs.
• The provision of ‘free-from-costs’ access for merit-based academic use, wherever
this is possible, and the establishment of clear and transparent pricing policies for
all potential users.
• Consideration of the resources devoted to users, both from a financial and personnel
perspective, and the engagement of RI funders/decision makers to increase funding
for extended support services, where beneficial.
Conclusions and Recommendations
This work has identified a wide range of management practices, which impact on the
optimisation of the operation and use of national research infrastructures. The diversity of
national systems and RI operation approaches means that there is no single model to suit
every country or RI, but some key factors or guiding principles have been identified ,which
it is hoped will be useful to policy makers, funders and managers interested in improving
or optimising their RI portfolios and user bases. These principles have been brought
together into two Guiding Models ( see chapter 5) to help policy makers, funders and RI
managers.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 9
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Suggested actions:
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers should assess their portfolio management
and user base approaches against the principles contained within each of the
Guiding Models (see chapter 5) to aid the development of their management
processes.
• RI portfolio manag ers and RI managers who have completed their assessments,
should work with peers at national and international level to exchange experiences
in using the Guiding Models. This can provide a basis for the creation of networks
focused on continuous improvement and mutual learning. Funders and policy
makers should consider ways of encouraging and providing support for the
establishment of such networks.
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers should work together to reach agreement
on standards and definitions for RI management and access including types of RIs
and Users. They should agree the minimum information to be made publicly
available on-line about RIs and the facilities, resources, and support that they offer.
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers should consider the relevance of the good
practice examples presented in this report for their own RIs, and consider adopting
similar approaches, where appropriate, within their own national contexts.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

1. Introduction
1.1. Background and rationale
Large and/or internatio nal research infrastructures (RIs) have been the focus of many
reports and initiatives in recent years to improve their governance, efficiency and
sustainability (OECD, 2017[1]; 2014[2]; 2010[3]; GSO, 2019 [4]; ESFRI, 2017 [5]). However,
most RIs are funded, managed and operated at a national or federal level (collectively
referred to for this report as ‘national RIs’), and provide services mostly to national research
communities. While some may have benefited from the recommendations and guidelines
generated by analysis of their international counterparts, there is a demand and opportunity
for more specific analysis of how to optimise the operation of these national RIs. This is in
a context where research budgets are limited and governments and funding agencies are
confronted with the challenge of supporting increasingly large and complex RI portfolios.
National RIs have become increasingly important in many national research str ategies as
well as in some supranational regional contexts such as of the European Research Area
(ERA). In this regard, Science Europe (which, like the GSF, counts ‘Research
Infrastructures’ as one of its long -term priority areas) has led several initiativ es to
investigate how strategic priorities regarding RIs are established (Science Europe, 2016
[6]),
and, in earlier work, the GSF undertook an extensive survey of national and international
road-mapping exercises (OECD, 2008[7]).
More recently, Science Europe organised a workshop on “Cross-border Collaboration and
Portfolio Management of Research Infrastructures”, which explored the challenges
associated with designing and managing balanced RI portfoli os through cross -border
collaboration, and addressing questions such as investment in new vs. existing RIs,
balancing discipline/field investment, and national RI investment vs. supporting
international projects (Science Europe, 2017
[8]).
The previous work of the GSF and of Science Europe on RIs has highlighted a clear need
for a comprehensive study combining the perspectives of both RI funders/decision makers
and RI managers specifically addressing the optimisation of the use and management of
national RIs, from both a facility and national portfolio standpoint.
The Global Science Forum authoris ed at its 39th Meeting on 30- 31 October 2018 the
launch of an activity on optimising the use of national RIs. Considering the interest of
Science Europe in the topic, a partnership was created between the GSF and Science
Europe for this activity, which was carried out by a joint GSF-Science Europe international
Expert Group (listed in Appendix 1), supported by both the GSF Secretariat and the Science
Europe Office.
1.2. Terms of Reference and focus
The objective of this study has been to identify policies and procedures that can increase
utilisation and improve the operation of national research infrastructures and prepare a
report for the use of OECD and Science Europe members.
RIs are extremely diverse and good practices and policies may not necessarily apply to all
RI types. The Expert Group therefore decided to focus on a subset of RIs that could
potentially benefit the most from policy r ecommendations. RIs addressed by this study
were required to have a long operational lifetime and not be virtual -only or loose

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 11
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

associations of laboratories created to carry out a specific project. This study also focused
on RIs that provide access to their equipment/data/resources to external users outside their
host organisation. Underlying data/computing infrastructure, which connect and provide
access to RI data, were included as well as data-driven RIs that provide services to users.
Several types of RIs were considered as less likely to benefit from this work (e.g. because
their services apply only to a very specific niche set of users so that optimising the user
base is not particularly relevant):
1. International RIs (those that are governed by a set of international partners);
2. RIs which are not open to users outside their host organisation or outside specific
collaboration agreements;
3. RIs which are only used by a very small community of users with specific needs;
4. Research infrastructures that mostly serve private users or are for -profit
organisations (including most Research Technology Organisations);
5. Archives and repositories that are freely accessible and require no interaction
between user and provider, e.g. no significant accompanying services are offered.
6. The study was conducted in two complementary areas: 1) Managing Portfolios of
RIs and 2) Optimising the User Base, recognising that optimising a portfolio of RIs
has a strategic component reflecting the decisions made on which RIs to support
and an operational component in how each RI within a portfolio is managed.
1.3. Managing portfolios of RIs
This study investigated the tools and options used by countries for long-term planning (e.g.
landscape analyses, road -mapping, strategic surveys, user feedback, etc.), investment
policies (e.g., national investment vs shared participation in international projects) and life-
cycle management, including divesture or termination. An important aspect of this analysis
was examining how portfolio managers (at agency or ministry level) reconciled the need
for flexibility with financial constraints.
Another element of the study involved exploring the development of synergies between
national (or between national and international) RIs, as well as with cyber infra structures,
for better services, efficiency and impact. How stakeholders can coordinate their action,
including how collaborations may be incentivised to rationalise investments, was also
examined. The scientific and socio-economic impact assessment of RIs were not covered
in this study, but have been discussed in detail in a previous OECD Policy Paper (OECD,
2019[9]).
Policies and practices to make more efficient procurements, calls for tender, or purchase of
equipment which might be developed through increased connections between RIs were
not be investigated in detail during this study. However, it is hoped that as networking
between RIs develops, as encouraged in the report, issues such as procurement will be
explored by the managers of equivalent RIs in different locations.
Optimising the user-base
Optimising the user -base of RIs, for the purposes of this project, denotes the processes,
mechanisms and policies that may be considered when attempting to maintain, improve,
extend, or better manage the user base of an RI.
This included identifying policies that can facilitate the use of national RIs by broader user
communities ( e.g., international users, users from scientific disciplines outside the

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

traditional remit of the RI, private sector users). Included in this assessment are policies
relative to access, proposal solicitation and evaluation, communication and cost-sharing.
An important aspect of this activity was an assessment of how RIs maintain, extend and/or
evolve their user base, as well as investigating potential opportunities (such as promoting
new ideas and perspectives) and challenges related to enlarged user communities (e.g.
increased need for developing career paths within RIs to deliver those services). A second
aspect was how RIs address their complementary roles of being service providers as well
as capacity builders that train the next generation of researchers and research support
professionals.
1.4. Challenges
Optimising the selection, use and operation of national RIs faces a number of challenges,
and constraints that often reflect existing working practices. This study identified a number
of specific challenges related to both the potential broadening of RI user -base and the
management of RI portfolios, which were investigated in depth. These include:
For portfolio management:
1. Addressing RI requirements in the context of the whole research base
1. Long term planning for RIs
2. Budget availability vs demand (including operating costs and balancing new and
existing RIs)
3. National vs international investment
4. Transparency of decision processes (including research, strategic and
socioeconomic factors)
For user-base optimisation:
1. Understanding and monitoring the current user base of RIs
2. Access mechanisms to facilities, resources, and services
3. Data access mechanisms
4. Cost sharing and pricing
5. Administrative and support services
1.5. Methodology
This activity was supervised by an international Expert Group nominated by both the
OECD Global Science Forum and Science Europe organisations (Appendix 1) and chaired
by Dr. Catherine Ewart (UKRI). Experts from international organisations interested in RI
policy were also invited. The Terms of Reference of the work were proposed by a Scoping
Group and approved by the Global Science Forum in April 2018.
A preliminary fact-finding exercise and discussion with the Expert Group was conducted
to identify existing policies and practices, regarding the management of RI portfolios and
generic RI user policies. This revealed a large diversity o f practices and approaches.
Surveys were conducted to obtain more detailed information and the results were further
discussed with relevant stakeholders during international workshops. Case studies were
also conducted to collect in-depth information.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 13
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Two surveys were carried out by the Expert Group:
• The first survey was conducted among funders and policy-makers using structured
interviews carried out by Expert Group members and focused on RI portfolio
management (Appendix 2).
• The second survey was con ducted among RI managers through a detailed online
questionnaire complemented by selected interviews. This was mostly focused on
user-base issues, although it also contained questions regarding portfolio
management. A broad range of RIs were selected (covering different scientific
domains, RI types and geographical areas, see Appendix 3) to ensure appropriate
representation.
It is important to note that the two surveys were designed to be illustrative rather than
statistically representative and were focussed on elucidating interesting cases from a
diversity of examples. The selected groups of participants for both surveys do not reflect
an exhaustive sample of all RI subtypes, but were deemed appropriate to capture
heterogeneities and commonalities across national RIs and national RI portfolios.
Two international workshops were organised, in London (17- 18 June 2019) and in Seoul
(28-29 November 2019). The workshop programmes, participants and presentations are
available on the GSF RI policy web space at
https://community.oecd.org/community/cstp/gsf/ripolicy. Break -out sessions were
organised during these workshops to facilitate discussion on selected topics.
Both workshops included presentations from portfolio managers and RI operators
illustrating the systems they use and the challenges they faced in optimising their activities.
The first workshop discussed the initial findings from the surveys, and the second the
emerging recommendations identified from the information gathered.
Several interesting practices and policies were identified during the surveys and workshops
and were the subject of further analysis to provide more detailed information on key
challenges and good practices which could be used by relevant stakeholders.
1.6. Report
This policy report provides a generic framework for improving the selection, use and
operation of national RIs. This includes a set of options which take into account the
diversity of national contexts and that of RIs. The report contains:
1. Policy recommendations to governments, funders and RI management that can help
enhance the efficient use of national RIs, maintain quality/excellence and foster
synergies
2. Guiding models for portfolio management and user -base optimisation that
summarise the lessons learned during the study
3. Illustrative examples that help to support specific recommendations and actions
towards optimising the use and operation of RIs
4. Specificities for different fields of research or categories of RIs (where applicable)
to highlight common or unique challenges

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

2. Managing portfolios of national research infrastructures
RI portfolio management may be led by a national ministry with research as part of its
portfolio, an agency or research council act ing with or on behalf of the ministry, or be a
complex process involving multiple actors, especially in countries with strong federal
systems.
As the number and diversity of RIs increases, in parallel with an increasing demand from
scientific communities for new RI capacities, sponsors have to face difficult choices, and
decision processes need to be properly informed.
The management of a research infrastructure portfolio typically involves several key
elements:
• long-term strategic planning that involves appropriate landscaping mechanisms and
community input
• transparent budgetary mechanisms that allow for flexibility and reduce
redundancies
• balancing exercises, that take into account opportunities and priorities (new vs old,
national vs international etc.)
• impact evaluation and foresight of the various investments as well as of
opportunities and need for phasing out of activities
• taking into account external drivers in the decision-making process.
• On the basis of the information gathered, it is clear t hat no single model for RI
portfolio management is being used globally. The models in Table 1 were identified
from the nations contributing to this activity.
Table 1. Responsibilities for RI portfolio management
Portfolio Management Models Countries
Ministry alone Australia, South Korea
Ministry and Agencies

France, Hungary, Ireland, Netherlands, Norway,
Switzerland, UK
Agencies alone USA
Ministry, Agencies and regional
authority
Canada, Germany, Japan, Spain
2.1. Findings
This analysis is derived from background material provided by Expert Group (EG)
members from their national ministries and institutions alongside views given in the
interviews conducted by EG members and the secretariat with portfolio managers (see
Appendix 2). These illustrate the wide range of approaches being taken by national
governments and agencies, where no two approaches are the same. Specific examples are
given of the approaches taken by some countries to address each area of action. Feedback
from the RI manager survey indicated similar concerns as those raised during the
interviews with policy-makers.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 15
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Roadmap, Landscape and Community input
“Our 2018 Roadmap for Research Infrastructure has three components: Area
strategies, large- scale research infrast ructures of national importance,
participation in International RIs.”1
“There is no set cycle of consistent tool usage for this type of planning – RIs are
considered alongside other capital and resource investments.”
“Prior to the revision of the road map research institutions were invited to
collaborate and prepare input to the area strategies on future needs for new or
upgraded infrastructure in high priority areas.”
“Rather than identify priority areas ourselves, we require universities and colleges
to develop their own Strategic Research Plans.”
While many countries have a road-mapping or planning process, these are not uniform in
methodology or outcomes and may depend on the level of maturity of countries in relation
to RIs. Top-down mechanisms usually include a means to receive input from the research
community while, in more bottom -up processes, the scientific community sends in their
wishes which are triaged by the relevant authori ty within their own framework. Survey
feedback recommends that a holist ic approach to be taken to science funding in which
consideration is given to RIs in the context of the wider research landscape. It was also
suggested that any roadmap process should include a comprehensive assessment of the RIs
within the total R&I system. This can be achieved through a landscape analysis of current
RIs and future requirements. Existing, well-coordinated communities may find this easier
to provide than research communities new to RI projects or new users of existing RIs.
Some countries prepare separate roadmaps at discipline level. Countries are also
increasingly taking into account RIs beyond their national borders in assessing their
national needs and include supranational inputs such as the European Strategy Forum on
Research Infrastr uctures (ESFRI) or as recommended by the European InRoad Project
(2018) (InRoad, 2018
[10]).
Norway has a clear road -mapping process covering all RIs, managed by the Norwegian
Research Council, funding the capital and start-up costs, with operational funding coming
from user research grants from the same body, or institutional funds. Australia completes
a roadmap every five years, then complements that with an investment plan every two
years, which is developed on the basis of a top down strategic approach and includes co-
investment by State Authorities.
The USA manages community input and planning at the discipline level, with inputs such
as Decadal Reviews, Portfolio Reviews and Mid -Point surveys. In Germany, the federal
ministry considers that there is a close relationship and contact between funders and the
scientific community; many decisions are driven by research centres and research agencies.
In South Korea, road-mapping is led by the ministry, but all decisions are made by experts
recommended by the scientific community. In addition, RIs are analysed and included in a
roadmap in the mid- to long-term development strategies of each science and technology
area.
Budget – redundancy and flexibility
“Each proposal for a new RI must discuss the availability of similar infrastructure
in the region or country, and justify the need for a new investment if there is
duplication.”

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

“The funding model requires matching funding. We set aside envelopes for each
competition however long it takes to expend the funds, so we don’t have so much
pressure on our budget.”
“The operating costs of the research infrastructure are to be covered by the
projects that use it. Applicants seeking funding to establish a research
infrastructure must include plans for how to achieve sustainable operation of the
infrastructure.”
Some countries have clear mechanisms to avoid redundancy in new RI proposals by
requiring applicants to co -ordinate in overlapping areas to present a single proposal, but
others operate mainly through competition. The Netherlands has created an “Inventory of
Memberships of RIs” across all Ministries to avoid duplication and asks universities and
institutes to decide where to invest, including encouraging competitors to work together on
joint proposals. These clusters set up a rolling agenda that is nearly a cluster -roadmap in
itself. This may also lead to synergy by prioritising, aligning needs and perhaps even have
more ambition than before. In France, the strategy is to promote complementarity rather
than competition. There is no direct link between being on the French roadmap and
funding; the ministry funds research performing organisations that in turn fund most RIs.
In contrast, the system leans towards the competitive side in Germany, each project having
to compete for its resources within a variety of funding mechanisms.
Flexibility in funding can be quite limited, but some countries offer to address new
requirements outside the normal planning cycle, when necessary. If a broade ning or
extending of a RI’s user base is considered, it needs to be clear who funds the associated
extra user costs – the RI, the funding agency or the research community of the new users.
In Canada, the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) does not work to an annual budget
so is able to adjust spending profiles to match project requirements if they change over
time. Planning is done by communities with no overall national roadmap.
The adoption of in- kind contributions for international RIs is recognis ed as a means of
enabling partners to engage actively in RI development, but adds complexity and risk,
which must be understood from the outset. It was also noted that decision-makers may have
to deal with a voluntary under-estimate of the costs of a project, which may be done by the
proposers in order to have it accepted. There can also be problems due to poor budget
management.
Having multiple funding sources can enable a RI draw in contributions from a wide range
of interested parties, including host ins titutions and regional administrations, but can add
complexity for managerial processes. Short funding timescales make it hard to plan the
effective construction and operation of an RI. In South Korea, there is an evaluation
process by the government at multiple stages (decision on initial fund, annual funding,
detailed equipment construction), and the funds are adjusted accordingly. Input from the
User base survey indicates that the costs of data management and storage are an increasing
challenge, and if countries want to increase RI use by encouraging the re- use of data they
need to ensure that such costs are recognised as part of the overall cost of the RI.
Balancing the portfolio
“The staff/operational costs to go along with the building costs are prov ided and
managed separately.”
“The national funding scheme provides funding for new research infrastructure
and upgrading of existing infrastructure, and the expansion of existing
infrastructures in order to meet new need.”

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 17
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

“This is largely an opportunity mechanism which can be a bit chaotic… However,
participation to international RIs is usually decided because there is no equivalent
at the national level.”
A formal strategy and mechanism for balancing investments among facilities already
supported vs new facilities is not always in place. Some countries report that they review
new and existing proposals alongside each other, although this may only be for capital
investment. Other countries evaluate investment in new RIs and the operation of existing
RIs in separate processes. In Norway, the Roadmap process looks at request for new RIs
and upgrades for existing RIs together to encourage the use of existing investments. In
contrast, in Switzerland, the Roadmap is developed as a planning instrument for new R Is,
with capital coming from Cantons and other agencies and operation costs managed by the
host institutions. In Japan, the Ministry looks for “reasonableness” of investment in a tight
budget environment, with a careful examination of the benefits of national or international
investment. It considers three categories of shared research infrastructures: specific
advanced large research facilities, shared research platforms, and “new shared facilities”.
In general, decisions about international RI involvement focus on the applicants
demonstrating, through a scientific case, that the necessary RI capacity cannot be delivered
at national level. In Japan, added value for national partners is a key criteria when joining
international projects. In Australia, project managers have a large autonomy in the use of
funds and can decide whether to invest at national level or into international collaboration
when facilities are not available in Australia.
Feedback gathered from experts in this study suggests that clustering should be encouraged
and supported, including internationally, where similar RIs are proposed. There should be
flexibility in the strategic process to allow for new RIs although some perceive that
reinvestment in existing facilities often takes lower priority than new ones.
Monitoring of international participations and Closure
“It is about which option gives us best value for money rather than national vs
international.”
“Yes, funding can be terminated but only as a result of the merit review process,
not as an administrative decision.”
“There are few terminations. However, phasing out are now identified in the
national roadmap.”
Although the initial decisions to participate to international RI projects are usually the
object of detailed assessments, many countries report only a limited level of monitoring of
the international RI commitments included in their national portfolios. For example, in
Norway applications to the Research Council for participation in international research
infrastructures must include a concrete description of the national contribution as well as
the national role and commitments under the international participation. However, the
Research Council has not fully established a system for evaluating previously signed
agreements to international infrastructures.
Most countries evaluate joining and continuing membership of international projects
through their roadmap or equivalent process, not through any formal review process. In
South Korea, there is no theoretical extra benefit in participating in an international project
for inclusion in the national roadmap. However, most of the RIs involving international
cooperation are ranked highly on the roadmap because of their strategic importance. In
Hungary, decisions on joining large international RIs and renewing memberships in
international RIs are made on a case by case, considering the costs and benefits. A number

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

of decision makers expressed a desire to do more on evaluating international RI
contributions in the future.
Limited numbers of closures are reported, but there is a move in several countries to include
full lifecycle planning in future strategic exercises. In most cases where funding is
withdrawn, the RI is divested to other funders who can support the RI and benefit from the
experience gained. If an RI is closed, then measures to mitigate the effects on the host
institution, such as scientific reorientation, may be considered.
In Germany, when a facility has to be closed, the priority of the research ministry is usually
to keep the site in activity, since this is where experienced human resources are located, so
a new RI to replace the older is likely to be built at the same location. In the U nited
Kingdom, when the national synchrotron reached the end of its lif etime, the decision was
made to decommission the facility and build a new 3rd generation light source at another
location. However, new activities have developed at the site of the former synchrotron.
Similar decisions have been made around telescopes when funding constraints do not
support investment in a new facility without the termination of support for old facilities.
Generally speaking, many policy-makers consider that RIs are set up for very long periods
of time and they are happy to delegate to the institutional players the responsibility to
manage their eventual closing down. For phasing out of large RIs the policy interest is
likely to be higher.
Transparency and External Drivers
“This is very variable but usually the higher the cost the stronger the influence of
external drivers…”
“Most critical RIs are inevitably influenced by external factors (political, regional,
and social).”
“All of these factors influence decision making with regard to an RI – it is funded
because it has a benefit to society.”
While some countries assert that external (i.e. non -scientific) drivers play no role in
decision-making, others are clear that such factors do play a part, and this may be difficult
for RI managers to address in their proposals. The application process and the criteria being
used for evaluation of projects for inclusion in a roadmap should be published clearly.
Aspects of proposals that are compared when making funding decisions should also be
clearly and transparently communicated to potential applicants.
An interesting case is Germany, which has multiple approaches and players that contribute
to decision making regarding RIs and uses discussion panels with the various funders and
stakeholders to identify gaps and needs for RIs. These help to allocate funding strategically
and combine both top down and bottom up processes.
2.2. Conclusions from the survey
There is no consistent single model through which nations seek to optimise the selection
and funding of their RI portfolios, whether activities are oper ated at national level or
delivered through participation in international RIs. It can be observed that:
1. Portfolio management mechanisms are extremely diverse.
2. There are countries with strongly managed programmes and others operating
largely responsively.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 19
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

3. Most countries choose mainly on the basis of the science case, not national or
international location, and consider new and continuing RIs using similar criteria
but not necessarily through the same process.
4. Most countries have some way of gathering research community input.
5. Funding, for capital investment and operational costs, is managed in many different
ways.
6. RI managers may have a different perspective to portfolio managers.
2.3. Towards an effective model
In response to the wide range of inputs received, it was concluded that many stakeholders
would appreciate some indication of how an effective model for portfolio management
should operate. A summary of the key elements that a national RI portfolio management
system should incorporate has been developed and is presented in the conclusions chapter
and discussed briefly below.
In implementing a portfolio management approach, countries should consider how the RI
component is determined if it is not managed separately from othe r parts of the research
base. It is also noted that Ministries or agencies may allocate capital and operating costs
separately, may contribute to operations by providing funds on a project related basis, or
may only offer a proportion of the overall costs, with the expectation that matc hed funds
should be found from other sources. In such cases, when resources come from multiple
sources, it is necessary to have an oversight mechanism to ensure that each RI is optimally
funded.
In the course of the activity, the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) evaluated its
portfolio management approach for RIs funded under its Major Science Initiatives Fund
(https://www.innovation.ca/awards/major-science-initiatives-fund)
 against the key
elements identified in this report.
The following diagram illustrates the elements of the guiding model developed in this study
and how this model can be used as a tool for national process optimisation.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 1. Case study analysis of the model for portfolio management for the Canada Foundation for Innovation

Source: Canada Foundation for Innovation based on authors’ model (see Figure 3)

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 21
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

3. Optimising the User Base of national research infrastructures
The user-base of any RI is a vital indicator of its role and potential impact. RI users may
be direct users of facilities or equipment, or secondary users of the data produced or
managed by a RI . Users may be extremely diverse; of local, national, or international
origin; from the traditional discipline of the RI as well as from different scientific domains;
and from the academic or private sector. Scientific achievements by the users can, in most
cases, be attributed to a contribution from a RI. However, the degree to which this
connection and/or reference is visible and transparent differs substantially and makes
impact assessment challenging.
Knowing their user-base is very important for RI managers as well as for RI stakeholders.
It is essential for understanding of the evolution of demand for a RI. It also constitutes a
powerful lever for optimising the use of the facilities, resources, or services offered.
Each RI has a strong interest in optimising its user -base to achieve maximal impact.
Optimisation of the user -base may entail improving the exploitation of the RI by the
existing user-base, or broadening or expanding the potential user-base into new areas. On
a strategic level, there is a keen interest from research institutions, funders and governments
in ensuring the optimal access of various user communities to the RIs that they host and
support.
3.1. Findings
The following findings have been obtained from an extensive survey that was conduc ted
among RI ma nagers (see details in Appendix 3). This used a detailed questionnaire and
was complemented by selected interviews. Findings were further supplemented by
feedback from discussion during the two international workshops. The findings and good
practices, illustrated with examples from specific RIs, and policies are highlighted below.
Monitoring the user-base
The first element analysed regarding the management of the user base related to the
mechanisms used for monitoring. The findings indicated that monitoring mechanisms are
heterogeneous, ranging from automated processes to no monitoring at all. Examples of
mechanisms include:
1. Collection of user access information during user meetings
2. Requests to users/principal investigators to provide information about their access
3. Regular surveys on facility or resource use
4. Extraction of information from the training records of users
5. Information compiled during annual reporting processes
6. Screening of publications that cite and/or acknowledge the RI
7. Extraction of data from proposals, user management portal, or facility/laboratory
operations management systems.
A number of single -sited RIs have developed and implemented automated mechanisms,
using portals for the managing applications and allocation of time. These can be used also
used to track information about users.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Several RIs reported not tracking the users of their data. The examples given were of data-
driven RIs that had moved away from log- in portals and other potential user -tracking
mechanisms in favour of ease-of-access (i.e. the reduction of barriers). Importantly, the
findings highlighted heterogeneity in the definition of what constitutes a ‘user’ of an RI.
This issue was particularly acute for data-driven RIs that offer virtual, remote, and/or open
access to their resources and services. Clear definitions are needed of what constitute the
user of a national RI. The ‘European Charter for Access to Research Infrastructu res’
(European Commission, 2016[11]) provides a definition of users, access units, and other RI
management terms1 that may be helpful in establishing definitions at national RI level. A
clear definition of an RI user is prerequisite for determining the need (or not) of an RI to
optimise its user base. There is a broader need for the standardisation of national RI
management definitions, which would necessarily include a definition of different RI user
types.

Examples of interesting practice for user-base monitoring
At the German Electron -Synchrotron, the DESY Online Office for Research with Photons
(DOOR) is an online system used to organise access to the RI. This allows for efficient
management of: the submission of proposals, the revi ew process, online safety training,
submissions of declaration of substances, registration of participants, travel reimbursement,
reports, registration of publications, user feedback and so forth. DOOR is also used to handle the
communication between the RI and its users and enables the monitoring of relevant information
for management purposes.
The European Magnetic Field Laboratory (EMFL) has an online user portal. Users of the facility
must register in the portal to be able to submit their proposal online. After projects are performed
at one of the EMFL laboratories, located in Dresden, Grenoble, Nijmegen and Toulouse,
information about the number of hours or pulses measured is registered in a database. This
enables the facility to automatically monitor the usage of the EMFL facilities.
Access mechanism
The second element analysed concerns access mechanisms. In the survey, differentiation
was made between access mechanisms to physical facilities or resources and access
mechanisms to data. This had an implication on the response rate of different types of RIs
to this specific topic, as data-driven RIs provided more information with regards to access
mechanisms for data (see ahead, Section 8.1.3.)
Most RI managers indicate that they use merit -based access, which is generally provided
free of charge, or free -from-cost for academic users. There are more formalized access
mechanisms in place when demand exceeds capacity. Mechanisms usually include
competitive calls for proposals and evaluation through expert panels. In cases where the
capacity is not fully exploited, access mechanisms tend to be less formalised and work on
a ‘first come/first served’ basis or through personal contacts.
Interesting prac tices include provisions for remote access, particularly in the case of
telescopes which can allow the conduct of observations at distance, and the possibility for
rapid access through a fast -track system. It was noted that rapid access mechanisms may
be particularly useful in the provision of paid industry/commercial use of RIs, where time
constraints are often prevalent.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 23
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Examples of interesting practice for providing user access
The access mechanisms to the PETRA III and FLASH synchrotron beamlines at DESY include
two calls for proposals ev ery year. Additionally, a rolling procedure is implemented for some
PETRA III beamlines and rapid access has been tested.
Depending on the facility requested and the scientific topic, project proposals are reviewed by
one of the several international Research Project Review Panels (PRPs). Each PRP consists of
approximately 5-15 external national and international experts (in total >10 0 scientific referees,
nominated for a period of 3 years) and a DESY Photon Science representative acting as secretary.
Referees are selected to cover the broad portfolio of both scientific fields of the submitted
proposals and techniques available at the RI. The delay between submission deadline and access
is typically about 10- 16 months for FLASH with a success rate of approximately 40% in 2018
(ca. 7 0 proposals), and for PETRA III the delay is 4 -10 months, with a success rate of
approximately 50% (covering roughly 1 000 proposals) in 2018. For rolling procedures and rapid
access, the delay is a few weeks.
In order to optimise the access capacity of PETRA III and FLASH the number of operation hours
and availability was increased in 2018. The operation of several new beamlines was initiated also
in 2018.
Data Access mechanisms
Two major approaches are apparent with regards to access mechanisms for data. Firstly, as
described in Section 8.1.2, data-driven RIs often do not have complex access mechanisms
in place, as they mostly provide open access. Such access often means reducing the number
of steps needed by a user to gain access to d ata. This can have knock-on implications for
the ability of RIs to accurately monitor user access: for instance, the removal of login
portals that were previously used to provide data access statistics.
A second finding was that user facilities do not oft en provide access to the data from
experiments carried out within their facilities to other users who are not part of the
experiments because of ownership agreements. In many cases the data is considered as
belonging to the team conducting the experiments and it controls access or access is
embargoed for an agreed period of time.
Policies relating to data sharing, data curation and data regulation have been discussed
widely and at length by many stakeholders, and many scientific disciplines and RIs are
considering a need to adapt their practices in relation to the emerging advice a nd
recommendations. Examples were given of RIs that openly share the (limited) data that
they ‘own’ as a facility (SNOLAB shares all baseline environmental monitoring data that
it owns, for instance), but the difficulty of ensuring that users, who are dat a owners, also
provide access to their data was highlighted.
Requiring users to submit Data Management Plans (DMPs) prior to the provision of access
to an RI may encourage users to consider compliance with FAIR (Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, Reusab le) data principles whilst planning their project (Wilkinson et al.,
2016
[12]). The alignment of requirements for Data Managem ent Plans (Science Europe,
2018[13]) used for RI access provision and those used more generally in academic research
should be considered to facilitate their adoption by researchers.
Means of incentivising data sharing were discussed during this study (reduced access costs
for those that commit to open data or FAIR agreements, for instance), but it was recognised
that incentivising data sharing is also a wider systemic research policy issue, not limited to
RIs. While respondents from data -driven RIs were more likely to indicate an under -
exploitation o f their open datasets, managers from service- driven or user facility RIs

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

reported challenges with the storage and management of the increasing amount of data their
RIs produce. The increasing costs incurred to store and maintain evermore data at facility-
level were highlighted as a concern for some RIs, and RI managers reported the need for
greater support for data -related activities and the management of data repositories at
national and/or international level.
The two opposing extremes, described above, of either FAIR / open access or very limited
data access provision, highlight the diversity in approaches of national RIs towards data
access, and the lack of clear policy guidance. Such policies are particularly needed with
regards to privacy regulations and ethical considerations, which were indicated as a
particular challenge by respondents from Health and Biology RIs. This may be a challenge
experienced by all RIs dealing with personal data, and therefore is also relevant for RIs in
the field of humanities and social sciences (see (OECD, 2016
[14])).
The current situation for many RIs, for which there is little monitoring of data use as well
as underdeveloped secondary use of data, suggests that there is great potential to increase
operational effectiveness. Monitoring of data use provides valuable information for
decision-makers and funders. Trends in both access and data use are important for informed
science policy development. Further, the secondary use of data offers a way to indirectly
increase the user base of RIs when the primary access capacity is already fully exploited.
The development of data access and reuse opportunities and associated services is a long-
term process that should be actively pursued in conjunction w ith the wider scientific
community and other relevant stakeholders.

Example of interesting practice for data access
At Canada’s The Centre for Phenogenomics (TCP) all users have an information manage ment
system (IMS) account that provides each user with access to all shared data in the IMS as well
as to their own data within the IMS. Each user is given secure credentials to access their IMS
account which dictates data restrictions for their profile.
In addition to data access, requests for research services are submitted through this centralised
IMS. The IMS provides a single point of access to data and also enables TCP to collect use and
re-use metrics based on user access. The centre uses Google Anal ytics to analyse website data
use and re-use metrics.
Regular measur es are taken to ensure 24/7 web -enabled access to TCP’s IMS. This includes
support for in-house maintenance, including regular upgrades.
Cost models and pricing
The cost models of most RIs differentiate between user groups of academic and industrial
origin. Access and use are usually provided for free or with very limited fees for academics
at RIs where operational costs are constant and not use -dependent, while i ndustrial use
(where permitted) is often charged. Policies regarding RI use by industry vary widely
between countries. Respondents from all types of RIs indicated that increasing operational
cost are challenging the sustainability of their existing business models. It was indicated
that funders do not always include all these operational costs in funding provisions.
Ensuring sustainability against a background of increasing operational costs has led to some
RIs implementing a freemium / premium model for ac cess charges: where basic access is
given for free, and premium access is charged. An example was given from a South African
RI where data access is charged according to the transfer speed (in bandwidth)

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 25
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

requirements of the user, where transfer speeds of u p to 1.5 Mbps were provided for free,
but higher transfer speed requirements (of up to 50 Mbps) were charged at a monthly rate.
For data-driven RIs, the cost of long-term maintenance is often not fully taken into account
(although an example was given from Norway of a funding system that requires full
costing, including data maintenance, to be included in proposals by RI managers). The high
cost of work related to essential referencing and indexing was also mentioned as a key
concern. Such work is often not prioritised or rewarded as the current research system
favours new data/new analyses over research related to checking and reproduction of
existing data, analyses, and ideas. RI managers stressed the need for existing data to be
considered as a critical r esource for research, which should facilitate the funding and
continued management of key datasets.
Managers from single- sited RIs reported lack of funding to cover travel and housing of
users. RIs in remote locations also face logistical challenges with r egards to physical
access.

Examples of interesting practices for pricing models
At the South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO), users do not pay for the use of the
telescope, only for their accommodation and meals at the SAAO hostel. National users are
usually subsidised for accommodation and meals, and therefore pay slightly less than
international users. Hosted facilities (which include telescopes from institutions from the USA,
the UK, Germany, Russia, Pola nd, South Korea, Japan, and The Netherlands, that are mostly
robotically and remotely operated) pay an annual site fee which covers the routine operational
requirements of the hosted facility, including daily checks, minor routine maintenance, and data
retrieval (if needed). The site fee also covers a share of the costs of maintenance of the on -site
infrastructure and basic services, such as roads, electricity infrastructure, water supply, sewage,
security, and access to internet connectivity. Hosted facilities that require larger bandwidth than
that which is covered in the site fee pay a monthly fee for that. For the operation of the Southern
African Large Telescope (SALT), which is situated at the SAAO field station, the pricing model
is based on the sha reholder percentage. Each partner contributes an amount equivalent to their
percentage of their share to the total annual operation costs.
At the Italian Synchrotron Elettra , users coming through the peer reviewed access mechanism
do not pay for the use, but only a limited number of external users can get travel support via
existing funding schemes. Industrial users pay for use, the prices being set by an internal
Industrial Liaison Office. The cos t model is based on the hours used. In order to calculate the
cost of one hour of beam -time at the Elettra storage ring and FERMI free electron laser, an
internal calculation method has been developed. The resulting numbers are updated every year
after approval of the annual budget of the RI.
Administrative and support services
The limited feedback received on this topic from the survey indicates that the majority of
RIs have some capacity to provide technical/scientific and administrative support to
external users. Further, some indicated having data administrators also providing support.
RI managers reported a general lack of funding provided for administrative and support
services from funders.
An example was given from The Netherlands, where no specific funds are available for
supporting processes to expand the user bases of RIs. Thus, any money allocated by an RI
to support services in this regard must come from a pre -existing budget line. It was noted
that mechanisms for optimising the use of national RIs (as described above, in

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

section 8.1.2) often require a significant inv estment of resources and funds. For instance,
attracting users from different and new disciplines may necessitate outreach activities,
which require a time investment from a range RI staff.
It is also recognised that internal capacity building is key to e xpanding user -bases:
attracting less experienced users necessarily requires a higher level of internal support.
Thus, additional demands on technical and administrative support staff must be included
in planning and decisions related to user-base changes.
Some RIs report difficulties in retaining professional research support staff because they
cannot offer the right conditions and incentives for them. This must receive attention if
expanding the user base increases the demands on such staff. The Japanese
Nanotechnology Platform showcased a flexible strategy, with the ability to hire temporary
support staff in line with the changing demands on their facility.
Overall, it was agreed that RI managers should engage with funders and decision -makers
to ensure that necessary support for users is included in funding provisions. However, it
was considered that a ‘standard practice’ model for such support systems would not be
feasible due to the diversity of RIs, different support needs and differing priorities.
3.2. Lessons learned
A number of major challenges emerged when considering user -base optimisation from a
RI manager perspective:
1. Challenges and practices vary greatly across different types of RIs. This is seen
most clearly when comparing observational single-sited RIs, service-driven RIs and
data-driven RIs. More fundamentally, there is difficulty in grouping, characterising,
and defining RIs (by access provision type, for instance). RI managers described
the need for the standardisation of definitions, highlighting that this would help to
further define common challenges and best practices across the community.
2. A prerequisite to the targeted optimisation/improvement of the user base of an RI
is a thorough understanding of its current usage and user base, and preferably an
understanding of recent trends in usage also. Such an understanding is important in
determining whether additional policies and mechanisms to optimise the user base
of a RI are needed. Further, understanding and monitoring the user base of a RI can
provide data that is of use for: 1) the accurate assessment of operational costs,
2) justification of future or continued funding, and 3) as a rationale for adapting
management strategies.
3. Thorough consideration of the costs, benefits and risks of im plementing
mechanisms to broaden the user base of RIs should be a pre-cursor to any decision
to adapt a RIs strategy with regards to its use. Various mechanisms to optimise the
use of a RI can be used. Two major factors should be taken into account:
o Firstly, user base optimisation should be considered according to the type of RI
in question.
o Secondly, optimising a RIs user base should be considered according to
whether the facility, resource, or service in question is running at capacity, has
limited cap acity to expand its use, has unlimited capacity of use, or is
considered to be running at over -capacity. A table detailing the potential
benefits and risks of different forms of user base optimisation is provided below
(Table 2).

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 27
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

A number of common challenges expressed within similar RI categories indicate that RI
managers can benefit from mutual learning and exchange of good practices with their
counterparts. Exchange and collaboration to jointly elaborate harmonized solutions, such
as automated monitoring mechanisms or data policies would allow for cost sharing and/or
cost saving.
There are also challenges that cut across all RI types, and require cooperation and exchange
across the entire RI landscape. This applies particularly to many issues related to d ata,
where user facilities can benefit from the experience of-, and potentially collaborate with,
data-driven RIs with regards to storage and management of large amounts of data.
The need for transparency and clarity in the information presented to potenti al users was
universally recognised. Regarding access mechanisms, for instance, a wide variety of
access pathways are available to potential users. Whilst many RIs offer access through a
proposal evaluation scheme (merit -based), others provide access on a ‘first come, first
served’ basis. And others offer training -oriented access, or rapid access opportunities.
Different access mechanisms have their own associated benefits and costs, which are
themselves case dependent. Further, access mechanisms at RIs may change according to
temporal demand, and such flexibility in access processes may help in reducing
administrative and management costs.
The minimum information to be made publicly available about RIs and the facilities,
resources, and services/support they offer, and how both physical access and access to data
is provided should be agreed upon. This will help all stakeholders, but particularly potential
users, in understanding the types of service on offer to them (useful examples of digital
platforms can be found in (OECD, 2017
[15])).

A number of key elements are commonly considered by RI managers when appraising or
reappraising their strategies towards the optimisation and management of RI user -bases.
Assessing RI policies and practices according to each of these elements may help guide RI
managers in understanding where a change of strategy may be most beneficial to their RI.
A summary of these key elements and questions are shown in a Guiding Model in Figure 2
alongside a set of answers provided by one of the responding RIs (the Nanot echnology
Platform, Japan).

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table 2. Examples of the benefits and risks of different strategies employed by RI managers to optimise or improve the use of
their RIs
Capacity to increase the number of users Strategy Benefits Risks
Limited capacity – may be due to time limitations
on use, space limitations, or limitation in the size of
the potential user-base for highly specialised RI
resources.
Optimise RI use by existing user base ‒ Improves exploitation of existing RIs and
provides possibility to be more selective
according to quality criteria.
‒ Strengthens the position of RI with regards to
their original mission.
‒ Increases pressure on evaluation procedures and support
services.
‒ Potentially requires more investment in support and
administrative staff.
‒ May lead to increased competition with other similar RIs.
 Increase diversity of academic users
(diversity can be seen in terms of career
stage, country of origin, or by discipline).
‒ Promotes more international and/or multi-,
inter, trans-disciplinary collaborations.
‒ Attracts new sources of funding and
‒ May cause dilution of core mission of RI and/or
jeopardize relevance for primary user group.
‒ Requires more support and administrative effort.
‒ May reduce / dilute the competitiveness of overall
research outputs, particularly with regards to the core
mission of the RI.
 Allow non-academic use ‒ Possibility to charge for use.
‒ Promotes greater industry/commercial –
academic links and technology transfer
potential.
‒ Brings greater visibility to the RI.
‒ Results/data are less likely to be shared openly.
‒ May reduce availability of the facility/resource for
academic use.
 Promote secondary use (of data) ‒ Better potential exploitation of experimental
results by the wider research community.
‒ Brings greater visibility to the RI.
‒ Provides further justification for funding and
may help to attract new sources of funding
(particularly for data sustainability).
‒ Complexity and cost of providing FAIR data.
‒ May pressure primary users / data owners to exploit
results prematurely.
‒ Immediate opening of data may have unintended
consequences, e.g. on early career researchers.
‒ Secondary use may be hard to track, and therefore more
difficult to justify the cost and effort associated with
promoting it.
Unlimited capacity – most commonly associated
with data infrastructures, where the resource
provided may potentially be exploited by any
interested user.

Increase number and diversity of users ‒ Promotes more international and/or multi-,
inter-, trans-disciplinary collaborations.
‒ Attracts new sources of funding and brings
more visibility

‒ Promotes specialised expertise of
researchers at different career stages.
‒ May require more support and administrative effort.
‒ Will require promotion of the RI, which requires
resources.
Over subscription – in re-appraising its user base,
a RI may consider that a reduction in user
numbers overall, or a reduction of selected user
groups may improve the overall scientific
functioning of the RI.
Reduce number of users overall, or from
selected user groups
‒ Improve the concentration of user activity
towards the core mission of the RI.
‒ Reduce pressure on management and
support services and allow for better support
towards targeted user groups.
‒ Reduce the attractiveness of the RI to potential new
users.
‒ May reduce the ability of the RI to attract funding from a
wider range of sources.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 29
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 2. Case study example (the Nanotechnology Platform, Japan) of the elements and questions that an RI manager may wish
to consider when seeking to optimise the user base

Source: Nanotech Japan based on authors’ model (see Figure 4)

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

4. Conclusions and recommendations
This activity has identified a wide range of practices in RI portfolio management and
operation which impact on the optimisation of the operation and use of national research
infrastructures. The diversity of national systems and RI operation approaches means that
there is no single model to suit every country or RI, but some key factors or guiding
principles have been identified in this study which it is hoped will be useful to policy
makers, funders and managers. These prin ciples can be brought together in two Guiding
Models (see below).

Suggested actions:
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers should assess their portfolio management
and user base approaches against the principles contained w ithin each of the
Guiding Models (see Figures 3 and 4) to aid the development of their management
processes.
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers who have completed their assessments,
should work with peers at national and international level to exchange experiences
in using the Guiding Models. This can provide a basis for the creation of networks
focused on continuous improvement and mutual learning. Funders and policy
makers should consider ways of encouraging and providing support for the
establishment of such networks.
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers should work together to reach agreement
on standards and definitions for RI management and access including types of RIs
and Users. They should agree the minimum information to be made publicly
available on-line about RIs and the facilities, resources, and support that they offer.
• RI portfolio managers and RI managers should consider the relevance of the good
practice examples presented in this report for their own RIs, and consider adopting
similar approaches, where appropriate, within their own national contexts.

A Guiding Model for RI portfolio management
Countries seeking to operate an active RI portfolio management programme should incorporate
some or all of the following elements in their approach:
Strategic planning
A strong review process is required, collecting bottom up and top down inputs (which may also
include societal challenge perspectives) to create a forward plan for RI needs in the context of
the national Research and Innovation s trategy. The strategic document produced may be
aspirational or only involve funded RIs. Landscape analysis, putting new RIs in the context of
the existing RI portfolio, can assist. The process, focussing attention on the case for each RI, can
be as important as any resulting roadmap. The output should retain some flexibility to address
changing requirements, and should be publicised to promote further (international) coordination
and cooperation.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 31
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Community input
Processes should be set up to gather inputs from the research community, RI operators and other
stakeholders in terms of research, data and operational needs. This can be through the strategic
planning process or separate subject community reports. Research communities with less
experience of RI operation and use may require support to create collective inputs, including
where RIs are broadening their use base or new RI types are being added to the portfolio.
Inclusiveness
The whole portfolio should be considered so that there is the opportunity to examine new and
existing RIs together, which may require a process that can look at both capital investment and
operating (including personnel) costs.
Competition and complementarity
Portfolio management should ensure that new RI proposals identify existing capacity and justify
new requirements. Cooperation should be encouraged between smaller scale centres through a
clustering approach but competition allowed ultimately at the strategic planning stage to ensure
the highest priority facilities are selected. Ensure that regional policies do not lead to duplication
of RIs and sub-optimal investment and usage.
International engagement
The stimulation of international networking for national RIs, and embedding international RI
options alongside national RI options is necessary to find the best solutions to deliver the research
requirements of the national community, and also promotes an international perspective within
national systems.
Funding process
This should take into account strategic planning as well as resources allocation (capital and
operating funds), to ensure that the highest priority RIs are properly funded. This may be by via
centralised allocation or competition. The full life cycle costs of the RI should be recognised,
including the cost of management and long -term storage of data, and funding allocated for
adequate periods to enable the RI to achieve its planned goals.
Monitoring
There is a need to develop efficient mechanisms to monitor performance of national and
international RIs in terms of research, benefits (impact), management and governance.
Closure
The consultation and strategic processes need to identify facilities that can be closed or divested
to other managers. This should be embedded as early as possible in long-term plans to optimise
spend profiles and allow for an orderly transition.
Transparency
There is a need to ensure that the scientific community is clear on the process for project
selection, especially where additional factors such as economic, political or social may be taken
into account for funding decisions.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

A guiding model for optimising and managing RI user-bases
Managers of national RIs seeking to optimise the use of their facilities, and the data generated
from them, should consider incorporating some or all of the following elements into their
management strategies:
Understanding and monitoring of user-bases
An RI should have a clear understanding of its overall user base, and how access units (an RI -
specific measure specifying the access offered to user s), resources, and costs are distributed
within that user base (including in -house users). Such an understanding will help in identifying
any underused potential or limitations. A clear rationale should be defined prior to the
implementation of measures to optimise the use of an RI and should be accompanied by a
thorough analysis of benefits and costs. Further, an RI should establish and maintain appropriate
measures for the continuous monitoring of its user base and these measures should be reappraised
whenever the strategy of an RI is adapted. In this regard, RI managers should consider the
automation of user monitoring processes, where this is feasible.
Optimising use potential
Where a capacity -limited RI is seeking to optimise its use, such optimisation may necessitate;
1) the adaptation of current user selection processes and quality assessment criteria, 2) the
improved management of the time or space occupied by users, or 3) the promotion of remote,
virtual, and/or secondary access. Where an RI has some or unlimited capacity to expand, then
further consideration of the potential to optimise through broadening their user base by attracting
new user groups may be beneficial. A broadening of an RI’s user base may entail; 1) opening
access to new groups of r esearchers; 2) encouraging researchers from different disciplines;
3) allowing use from other sectors, e.g. public sector and industrial, incl. commercial; or
4) opening access to international researchers.
Clarity of access mechanisms
An RI should be clear and transparent about the access mechanisms that are in place and the
conditions that apply to different access modes to ensure that potential users understand the basis
on which they may access an RI.
Accessibility of data
It is important that RIs have an open and transparent data policies in line with the FAIR principles
to broaden their user base. Collaborating with other RIs to federate repositories and harmonize
meta-data may be an important step in standardising open and transpa rent data policies across
the RI community.
Promotion of data sharing and monitoring of secondary access
The data generated from national RIs is often unique and highly valuable. An RI should strongly
encourage RI users (who are often the owners of the data generated) to develop data management
plans (DMPs) for their activities, and to follow the FAIR principles within a reasonable (and
agreed upon) time after projects are completed. In order to understand and highlight the benefits
of facilitating secondary access, RIs should provide guidance on how to reference datasets and
equipment, and ensure that persistent digital object identifiers (DOIs) are used wherever possible.
Costs of access
There are a wide variety of pricing policies, both between and also within individual RIs, and the
need for some flexibility is recognised. RIs should ensure that their pricing policies for all access
modes are clear and cost -transparent, and that merit -based academic usage is provided openly
and ‘free-from-costs’, wherever possible.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 33
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Resources available to users, and user support
RI managers should ensure that they have good knowledge of the resources devoted to their users
from both a financial and human resources perspective. Support services such as travel, training,
and accommodation grants can improve the attractiveness of access for certain user groups.
Where funding for dedicated support services are deemed necessary, an RI should engage with
funder/decision-makers to highlight the benefits of offering such additi onal services. RIs of
similar types should encourage the development of synergies and complementarities (via ad hoc
networks, for instance) to reduce their costs, and potentially offer better services to users.
Networking between data- driven RIs and physic al RIs may also be considered as a way of
offering unique complementarities.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 3. Key questions to be considered when testing the portfolio management guiding model
Source: authors’ original design

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES | 35
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 4. Key questions to be considered when testing the user-base guiding model
Source: authors’ original design

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

 Notes
1 Introductory phrases, in italics, reflect insights from case study reports that were prepared
by secretariat or expert group members who conducted interviews. They are extracts from
these case notes and are not verbatim quotations
2 ‘Users’ of Research Infrastructures can be in dividuals, teams and institutions from
academia, business, industry and public services. They are engaged in the conception or
creation of new knowledge, products, processes, methods and systems and also in the
management of projects. Teams can include researchers, doctoral candidates, technical
staff and students participating in research in the framework of their studies.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
37 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

References

ESFRI (2017), Sustainable European Research Infrastructures, a call for action , EC
Publications Office, Luxembourg, https://ec.europa.eu/research/infrastructures/pdf/swd -
infrastructures_323-2017.pdf#view=fit&pagemode=none.
[5]
European Commission (2016), European Charter for Access to Research Infrastructures:
Principles and Guidelines for Access and Related Services, European Commission,
Brussels, https://ec.europa.eu/research/infrastructures/pdf/2016_charterforaccessto -
ris.pdf.
[11]
GSO (2019), Framework for Global Research Infrastructures, GSO,
http://www.gsogri.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/gso_framework_criteria.pdf.
[4]
InRoad (2018), Final Report - Main Findings and Recommendations, InRoad, Bern,
https://www.inroad.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/InRoad_finalreport.pdf.
[10]
OECD (2019), “Reference framework for assessing the scientific and socio-economic impact of
research infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 65,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/3ffee43b-en.
[9]
OECD (2017), “Digital platforms for facilitating access to research infrastructures” , OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 49, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/8288d208-en.
[15]
OECD (2017), “Strengthening the effectiveness and sustainability of international research
infrastructures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers , No. 48, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/fa11a0e0-en.
[1]
OECD (2016), Research ethics and new forms of data for social and economic research ,
OECD, Paris, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/research-ethics-and-
new-forms-of-data-for-social-and-economic-research_5jln7vnpxs32-
en;jsessionid=rC30vjF8Pkajo-VaDKFdtdu3.ip-10-240-5-29.
[14]
OECD (2014), International Distributed Research Infrastructures, OECD, Paris,
http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/international-distributed-research-infrastructures.pdf.
[2]
OECD (2010), Establishing Large International Research Infrastructures: Issues and
Options, OECD, Paris, http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/47057832.pdf.
[3]
OECD (2008), Roadmapping of Large Research Infrastructures, OECD, Paris,
http://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/41929340.pdf.
[7]
Science Europe (2018), Practical Guide to the International Alignment of Research Data
Management, Science Europe, Brussels,
https://www.scienceeurope.org/media/jezkhnoo/se_rdm_practical_guide_final.pdf .
[13]
Science Europe (2017), Cross-border Collaboration and Portfolio Management of Research
Infrastructures, Science Europe, Brussels, https://www.scienceeurope.org/our -
resources/cross-border-collaboration-and-portfolio-management-of-research-
infrastructures/.

[8]

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Science Europe (2016), Strategic Priorities, Funding and Pan -European Co-operation for
Research Infrastructures in Europe, Science Europe, Brussels,
https://www.scienceeurope.org/our-resources/strategic-priorities-funding-and-pan-
european-co-operation-for-research-infrastructures-in-europe/.
[6]
Wilkinson, M. et al. (2016), “The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and
stewardship”, Scientific Data, Vol. 3/1, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18.
[12]

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
39 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

5. Appendices
Appendix 1: Expert Group
Country Name Affiliation
Canada Heidi Bandulet Senior Program Officer, Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI)
China Qijiang Zhai Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST)
France Isabelle Diaz Research and innovation general directorate, Ministry for Higher
education and research
Hungary Attila Havas Senior Research Fellow, Institute of Economics, Centre for
Economic and Regional Studies, Hungarian Academy of Sciences
Japan Toshiki Nagano
Program Officer, Nanotechnology Platform Japan,
Fellow, Center for Research and Development Strategy (CRDS),
Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)
Korea
Myeun Kwon Research Fellow, National Fusion Research Institute
Yong-Joo Kim Policy team, National Research Facilities and Equipment Center
(NFEC)
Eun Ju Lee Korea Basic Science Institute
Netherlands Jeannette
Ridder-Numan
Senior Advisor Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
Department for Research and Science Policy
Norway Robert Bjerknes Vice Rector and Professor, University of Bergen (UiB)
South Africa Clifford
Nxomani
Deputy Chief Executive Officer
National Research Infrastructure Platforms, NRF
Switzerland
Stefan Janssen Head - User Office, Paul Scherrer Institute PSI, CH
Mirjam van
Daalen Head of staff of the photon science division, PSI
United Kingdom Catherine Ewart
(chair)
Associate Director, Stakeholder and International Relations,
UKRI- Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC)
United States Samuel
Howerton
Deputy, Office of International Science and Engineering
National Science Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Robert Smith
(Chris)
Senior Advisor for Facilities for MPS, National Science
Foundation
ERF AISBL
Andrew
Harrison
Chair, Association of European-level Research Infrastructure
Facilities
Florian
Gliksohn
Executive secretary, European-level Research Infrastructure
Facilities
Science Europe
expert Jean-Luc Barras head of international cooperation, Swiss National Science
Foundation / SNSF, Switzerland
Science Europe
expert Michael Royeck Programme Officer, Scientific Instrumentation and Information
Technology, German Research Foundation / DFG
Science Europe
expert Oonagh Ward Programme manager, Health Research Board / HRB, Ireland
Science Europe
expert
Joaquín Tintoré
Subirana
Research Prof., Spanish National Research Council / CSIC and
Director SOCIB RI, Spain
OECD
Frédéric Sgard GSF secretariat
Carthage Smith GSF secretariat
Peter Fletcher GSF consultant
Science Europe Maud Evrard Science Europe Office
 James Morris Science Europe Office
 Isabel Bolliger Science Europe consultant

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
41 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Appendix 2: Ministries and agencies interviewed on portfolio management
Australia
Tony Rothnie, Director, National Research Infrastructure Program Management Team, Department of
Education, Australian Government
Canada
Dr. Heidi Bandulet, Senior Programs Officer, Canada Foundation for Innovation
France
Christian Chardonnet, Head of Dep artment for Large RIs, Ministry for Higher education, research and
innovation
Germany
Peter Wenzel-Constabel, Head of Division: Infrastructures for Research, BMBF
Dr. Sören Wiesenfeldt, Head of Department Research, Helmholtz Association
Annika Thies, Director, Brussels Office, Helmholtz Association
Hungary
Dr. István Szabó, Vice-President, National Research, Development and Innovation
Japan
Toshiki Nagano, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan (MEXT)
Korea
Dr. Jung Euh-duck, Chairman, National research Facilities and Equipment Center (NFEC)
Dr. Kim Yong-joo, RI Policy Team, NFEC
Netherlands
Stan Gielen, Chair of the Board, NWO (funding agency)
Lutgarde Buydens, Dean of Science Faculty, Radboud University
Rob Mudde, Vice-president/vice-rector of the Board, Technical University Delft
Frank Zuydam, Director Academic Affairs, University of Amsterdam
Hans van Duijn, Chair, Permanent Committee for the Roadmap for Scientific Infrastructures
Oscar Delnooz, Deputy Director Research and Science Policy, Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
Christa Hooijer, Director, NWO-i (funding agency separate part for their institutes)
Erik Drop, Director Strategy and government relations, TNO (institutes for applied science)
Wim van Saarloos, President, Royal Academy of Sciences (KNAW)
Norway
Solveig Flock, Department Director, The Research Council of Norway
Switzerland
State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI)
ETH Board
United Kingdom
BEIS, the UK Government’s department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Mark Thompson, Executive Chair of the Science and Technology Facilities Council, part of UK Research
and Innovation
USA
Robert Smith (Chris), Senior Advisor for Facilities for MPS, National Science Fou ndation

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
43 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Appendix 3: Online survey of RI managers
55 RI managers responded to the online survey to date, in a varying degree of detail. The
first section of the survey included questions on metadata to classify the type of responding
RI. The respondents were able to select multiple answers, but it should be clarified that the
respondents might have different understandings of the classifications that were indicated,
and may have identified with multiple categorisations. The following tables summarise the
responses to the self-classification survey section:
Type of RIs
National International Distributed Single-sited e-Infrastructure
26 8 8 11 6

Disciplinary scope of responding RIs
Social
Sciences and
Humanities
Health/
Biology
Environment Material
Sciences/
Engineering
Physics/
Astronomy
Information
and
Communication
Technology
5 16 14 19 21 9

The main mission of the responding RIs
Service-driven User facility Data-driven Other
15 27 10 9

The location of the responding RIs
Europe N S Asia Africa
America
UK DEU DNK ESP FRA IRE CHE ITA NLD CAN CHL JPN KOR ZAF
1 7 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 7 1 7 1(19)* 5
16 8 13 (31)*

The responding RI managers were asked to describe characteristics and trends regarding
their user-base, incl. the distribution of external vs. internal users, the specific use of the
facility (equipment, primary, or secondary use of data), as well as the d istribution of
international vs. national vs. local users and their disciplinary background. It should be
noted that the information provided for these questions varied greatly with regards to the
depth of answer received. Nonetheless, the responses reveal a diverse picture regarding the
user bases of national RIs.
* In Korea, the response was centrally coordinated by a single unit that covered 19 individual RIs. In this case,
individual RIs did not respond directly via online survey, and the information was gathered centrally. The level
and detail of information provided for each RI was less than for RIs from other countries where RI managers
responded individually via the online survey.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Managers from the following RIs took part in the survey:
 * = signifies an RI that did not respond via online survey but provided information directly
– here detail of responses may vary.
Region Country Research Infrastructure (RI)
Africa South Africa iThemba LABS
South African Astronomical Observatory (SAAO)
South African Environmental Observation
South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity
South African Radio Astronomy Observatory, (SARAO)
North America Canada The Canadian Light Source Inc
*Canada’s National Design Network (CNDN)
The Canadian research icebreaker CCGS Amundsen
Érudit
Ocean Networks Canada
SNOLAB
The Centre for Phenogenomics
South America Chile Platform for sequencing and omics technologies
Asia Japan Advanced characterization nanotechnology platform (ACNP)
*High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK)
Large Helical Device (LHD)
Nanotechnology Platform Japan
Magnetic Field Laboratory
*RIKEN
Subaru Telescope
Korea *KSTAR
*Gyeongnam environmental toxicity center
*Inhalation toxicity research center
*Korea Chemical bank
*Medium and large ion beam accelerator
*Super permeable electron microscope
*Test lines and hangars for magnetic levitation trains
*15T Multipurpose Mass Spectrometer, Korea
*Bio ultrahigh voltage transmission electron microscope
*Korean VLBI Network
*National Primate Research Center
*Metallic material center
*Large wind tunnel experiment center
*Pohang Light Source
*Mobile convergence technology center
*International GNSS global data center
*National Supercomputing Center
*Global Science experimental Data hub Center (GSDC)
*Advanced bioResource Information System (ARIS)
Europe Denmark ASTRID2 Synchrotron
France * Grand équipement national de calcul intensif (GENCI)
Germany Synchrotron Lightsource BESSY II of Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin
*Center for Biomolecular Magnetic Resonance (BMRZ) at the
Goethe-University
Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron DESY
Center for High-power Radiation Sources (ELBE)
Ion Beam Center of Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf
Jülich Centre for Neutron Science
100-m Radio Telescope Effelsberg,

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
45 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

 Ireland Health Research Board Clinical Research Coordination Ireland
(CRF)
Italy Elettra Synchrotron Trieste
The Netherlands *Netherlands Infrastructure for Ecosystem and Biodiversity
Analysis (NIEAMBA)
European Magnetic Field Laboratory (Dutch facility)
Spain ALBA Synchrotron
Switzerland *Solar Research Institute Locarno (IRSOL)
United Kingdom * Clothworkers’ Centre for the Study and Conservation of Textiles
and Fashion

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 | OPTIMISING THE OPERATION AND USE OF NATIONAL RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURES
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

6. Glossary
Cyber infrastructures – computational systems, data and information management,
advanced instruments, visualisation environments, and people, all linked together by
software and advanced networks to improve scholarly productivity and enable knowledge
breakthroughs and discoveries not otherwise possible
Data-driven RI – a RI whose main mission is to provide data to users for the facilitation
of research.
Divestment – passing financial responsibility for the operation of an RI to one or more
other bodies rather than closing the facility entirely
Free-from-cost – Also termed ‘free at the point of access’ - all associated costs are covered
through central funding, and users are not charged for any aspect of their access.
Portfolio management – the process by which a country selects and funds the RIs it will
make available to its communities of researchers, covering the planning, building,
operating, upgrading, and termination of the RIs.
Research infrastructure – although there is no single definition of a research
infrastructure, it is understood in this report as an organisational structure dedicated to
deliver facilities, resources (such as data), or services for basic or applied research. In this
report, the focus is on research infrastructures serving primarily academic research.
Service-driven RI – a RI whose main mission is to support staff/visiting researchers who
are usually engaged with the RI through a contract.
Stakeholders – Planners, funders, operators and primary users of RIs, and all others with
an interest in the output of an RI, e.g. secondary users such as policymakers using data or
regional authorities interested in local impact
User base – all users (ph ysical, virtual, and remote, external and in- house) of a facility,
resource, or service, including secondary users of the data or science outputs generated by
an RI.
User facility RI – a RI whose main mission is to provide external users with access to the
shared facilities, resources, or services offered.
