
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL
WORKFORCE
CAPACITY AND
SKILLS FOR DATA-
INTENSIVE SCIENCE
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY
AND INNOVATION
POLICY PAPERS
July 2020 No. 90

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND
SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE

STI POLICY PAPER

This paper was approved and declassified by the Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy
(CSTP) on 19 June 2020 for publication by the OECD Secretariat.

Note to Delegations:
This document is also available on O.N.E. under the reference code:
DSTI/STP/GSF(2020)6/FINAL

This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.

©OECD (2020)

You can copy, download or print O ECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from
OECD publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs,
websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright
owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to
rights@oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 3
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Abstract
This report looks at the human resource requirements for data intensive science. The main
focus is on research conducted in the public sector and the related challenges and training
needs. Digitalisation is, to some extent, being driven by science and at the same time it is
affecting all aspects of scientific practice. Open Science, including access to data, is being
widely promoted and there is increasing investment in cyber -infrastructures and digital
platforms but the skills that are required by researchers and research support professionals
to ful ly exploit these tools are not being given adequate attention. The COVID -19
pandemic, which struck as this report was being finalised, has served to emphasise the
critical importance of data intensive science and the need to take a strategic approach to
strengthen the digital capacity and skills of the scientific enterprise as whole. This report
includes policy recommendations for various actors and good practice examples to support
these recommendations.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Foreword
Over the past decade, as part of overall movement towards Open Science, there has been
growing policy interest and public investment in enhancing access to data and in data
intensive research. This parallels the rapid development of information and communication
technologies and digital tools, which are being adopted across the scientific enterprise as a
whole. With this comes the promise new scientific breakthroughs, greater transparency
and reproducibility in scientific results and increased innovation with overall benefits for
science and society. This promise is beginning to be realised but is also limited in many
areas by the need for an appropriately skilled scientific workforce.
This report was commissioned by the OECD Global Science Forum to identify: the skills
needs for data intensive science ; the challenges for building sustainable capacity as these
needs evolve; and, the policy actions that can taken by different actors to address these
needs. The principle focus is on the requirements of public sector/academic research, with
it being recognised that many of the skills that are required for data intensive research are
transferable across different sectors, including business and industry. The focus is also on
the specific requirements of post -graduate scientific research and related training rather
than generic digital skills and the roles of undergraduate and school education. The role of
education in relation to digital skills and competencies is addressed in many other reports
from OECD and other organisations and this work is not repeated here.
Whilst this report was being finalised, the world underwent a dramatic transformation with
the COVID-19 pandemic threatening the lives and livelihoods of millions of people. This
has emphasised the increasing dependency of citizens, businesses, public authorities and
scientific research on digital tools and data. Those with access to these tools and the skills
and capacity to use them are generally better equipped to cope with the massive disruptions
that the pandemic is creating. Data-intensive science is proving to be critical for mapping
the course of the pandemic and informing policy- making. Integration of data and
information from many different scientific domains and new software de velopment are
important for modelling and assessing the longer-term socio-economic effects. Digital tools
are playing a major role in fundamental research and international collaboration to
understand the functioning of the virus and develop diagnostics, therapies and vaccines. At
the same time the capacity of some of these tools to collect, link and analyse personal data
raises new ethical and legal concerns, with important implications for science and society.
The global research community has responde d rapidly to COVID -19 to develop digital
platforms that facilitate access to research methods and outputs, not only to other
researchers but also to government, industry and the broader community. In as much as
these initiatives are new, they also demonst rate that in other contexts the infrastructure
required to provide open access to critic al research is not yet in place. The success of the
scientific response to COVID -19 largely depends on the existence of resources in
appropriately curated, interoperable, and preserved states. A skilled workforce is needed to
create and utilise these resources. This requires both digitally skilled research support
professionals and digitally skilled researchers. Several of the case studies included in this
report, including the ELIXIR bioinformatics network, are at the forefront o f the research
response to COVID -19 and there ar e important lessons that can be l earned from their
experiences in strengthening digital skills and capacity.
The COVID-19 pandemic highlights the importance and potential of data intensive science.
All countries need to make digital skills and capacity for science a priority and they need
to work together internationally to achieve this. To this end, the recommendations in this
report are even more pertinent now than they were when they were first drafted in late
2019.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 5
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Acknowledgements
An international Expert Group (EG, annex 1), was established through nominations from
GSF delegates, to oversee and implement this project. The EG was chaired by Michelle
Barker (Australia). This final policy report is the product of that Group’s work. It was
drafted by the chairwoman, with input from all EG me mbers and support from the
OECD-GSF Secretariat, Carthage Smith and Yoshiaki Tamura.
In addition to the EG me mbers, a number of other experts made important contributions.
This included the project leaders for the 13 case studies who kindly shared their valuable
experience in interviews and provided comments on the final report. Many of these project
leaders participated also in the dedi cated project workshop, held in Cologne, Germany in
October 2019 (see annex 3). The workshop was generously hosted by the Leibniz Institute
for the Social Sciences (GESIS) with thanks to Christof Wolf (GESIS President) and Ingvill
Mochmann (EG member).

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table of contents
Executive Summary 8
Building Digital Workforce Capacity and Skills for Data-Intensive Science 11
1. Introduction 11
2. What is known about the digital workforce needs for data-intensive science? 12
3. A digitally skilled society and a digitally-skilled workforce for science 16
4. The science ecosystem and case studies 18
5. What is needed to build a digitally skilled research workforce? 22
6. Recommendations for various actors 35
7. Recommendations for universities 44
8. Conclusion: the need for concerted policy action 47
Notes 49
References 51
ANNEXES 58
Annex 1: Expert Group members 58
Annex 2: Case study interview questions 59
Annex 3: Workshop on Digital Skills for Data Intensive Science 61
Glossary 62

Tables
Table 1. Case studies classified by key characteristics 19
Table 2. Opportunities for actors to effect change across the five main action areas 36
Table 3. Key recommendations for universities and libraries 45

Figures
Figure ES1. Five key action areas and goals for digital research workforce capacity development 9
Figure 1. Digital skills requirements as perceived by different disciplines 13
Figure 2. Challenges for data-intensive research in different countries 14
Figure 3. Venn diagram of roles and responsibilities 24
Figure 4. Five key action areas and goals for digital research workforce capacity development 35
Figure 5. Digital workforce capacity maturity model 37

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 7
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Boxes
Box 1. Defining digital skills needs 26
Box 2. Addressing training needs for digital workforce capacity 28
Box 3. Community building for digital workforce capacity 30
Box 4. Improving career paths and reward structures 32
Box 5. Enabling factors and digital research workforce capacity building 34
Box 6. What are governments doing? 38
Box 7. What are research funding agencies doing? 40
Box 8. What are professional science associations doing? 41
Box 9. What are research infrastructures doing? 42
Box 10. What international collaboration is occurring? 43
Box 11. How are universities working together? 46

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Executive Summary
As we move into a new era of data -intensive science, expectations are high. Big data
analysis and access to new forms of data are already providing important and novel
scientific insights and driving innovation. As the ability to combine and analyse data from
different domains increases, complex societal challenges, including those embedded in the
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, are becoming more amenable to
scientific analysis. Data-intensive science has the potential to generate the new knowledge
that is necessary to inform transformations to more sustainable and prosperous futures..
Digitalisation is transforming all fields of science, as well as other fields of scholarly
research. In addition to opening up important new directions and avenues for research, it
presents an important opportunity to inc rease the transparency, rigour, and integrity of
research. Digital technologies and access to data are driving change, but human digital
capacity and skills are likely to be the critical determinant of scientific success in the future.
This report builds on recent work from OECD and other organisations that analyse s the
digital workforce capacity that will be required across different industrial sectors, and
examines the specific requirements of data intensive science. This encompasses all fields
of science, including social sciences and humanities..
The analysis, which includes thirteen in -depth case studies, explores what actions to date
have led to improvements in digital workforce capacity for data intensive resear ch, and
what further actions are required. This includes an assessment of how the digital workforce
requirements for science differ from other sectors of society and the economy, concluding
that there are unique conditions in science that are reflected in specific skills requirements.
Some of these requirements are generic for science as a whole and some are specific to
disciplines or domains of research.
There is a need for both digitally skilled researchers, who have a common set of
foundational digital skills coupled with domain-specific specialised skills, and a variety of
professional research support staff, including data stewards and research software
engineers. Increasingly research is conducted in teams and the distribution of competencies
within a team is highly variable, so it is difficult to be prescriptive as to what should be
expected of researchers and what can be best provided by support services. This will vary
across different research domains. However, it is increasingly recognised that data
intensive science requires not only technical skills but also people- focused skills, such as
communication and team working. In many fields there is also a need for ethical and legal
expertise, particularly when sensitive data is being used.
There are five key action areas that need to be addressed in parallel in order to build and
maintain digital workforce capacity for science (see
FIGURE ES1 below). Multiple actors,
including governments, research funders, science associations, research institutions, and
universities, need to work together across these areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 9
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure ES1. Five key action areas and goals for digital research workforce capacity development

Source: authors’ design.

Important actions that national governments can take include:
• Recognising at the policy level the need for a digitally skilled workforce in
research, and the importance of strategic planning that integrates the five key areas
that are necessary to build and maintain this workforce: defining needs; provision
of training; community building; career paths and rewards; and broader enablers.
• Analysis of national digital workforce capacity needs and the status (or
preparedness level) of the research ecosystem to provide the training and other
actions necessary to meet these needs. In this context, it is important to take account
of international as well as local developments, and to consider how government
actions can most effectively leverage these.
• Facilitation and coordination of the efforts to build workforce capacity at the speed
and scale necessary to optimise the benefits of data intensive science, including
monitoring and assessment processes that keep pace with a changing landscape.
Actions that research agencies can take include:
• Ensuring that funding mechanisms support digital workforce capacity development
• Aligning strategies and investment for physical research infrastructure and for
digital workforce capacity
There are also a range of broader policy actions that national governments and/or research
funders can take, with regard to education, open science, scientific integrity and research

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

evaluation and assessment which provide an enabling environment for data intensive
science and reinforce efforts to strengthen the digitally skilled research workforce.
Universities are the main centres of tertiary education, training, and public research in most
countries and hence have a central role to play in building sustainable digital research
capacity. Whilst universities have considerable autonomy, they are also responsive to the
mandates and incentives that governments and research agencies provide. Universities can
take a number of actions in each of the five key areas that need to be addressed to strengthen
digital workforce capacity and skills for data-intensive science. These include:
• Provision of training for scientists and research support staff; and
• Development of new career paths with appropriate evaluation , recognition and
reward mechanisms.
A more detailed description of actions that universities can take is given in chapter 7. Some
of these actions can be built on existing structures, e.g. university libraries can provide a
focus for facilitating the development of data management ski lls and computing
departments can help to propagate software and coding skills across the research
endeavour. Other actions will require more systemic structural and cultural changes.
A number of other actors, including science associations and academies, research institutes,
and research infrastructures have an important role to play, particularly in relation to
community building and training provision and more detailed recommendations for all
actors are included in Sections 6 and 7 of this report. There is also an important role for
private sector actors to play both in the provision of training and in working together with
public sector partners to define and address digital research capacity needs.
Many countries and institutions are already implementing some of these recommendations
and there are considerable opportunities for mutual learning. A general recommendation
for all actors is to engage in international collaboration in this area and share materials and
experiences.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 11
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Building Digital Workforce Capacity and Skills for Data-Intensive
Science
1. Introduction
The digital age is changing the practice of science 1 and all fields of research are
increasingly data dependent. At the same time, there is a strong move towards open science,
which is being enabled by digitalisation, and new challenges are emerging with regards to
ensuring the rigour and integrity of science. These changes are happening rapidly and
present a challenge for workforce development, particularly in scientific domains that have
historically been less data -rich. Digital workforce capacity is required at multiple levels,
including: individual scientists, research teams, data service providers, research
infrastructures and institutions. There are different professional roles emerging, including
multiple types of “data scientist”, some of whom are supporting research and others who
are actively involved in conducting research. Different fields of research require different
types and levels of digital expertise.
It has been estimated that up to 5% of the scientific research budget needs to be dedicated
to the management of FAIR (findable, accessible, in teroperable and re-useable) data and
that 1 in 20 staff in the research workforce should be digitally skilled research support
professionals (Mons, 2020
[1]). In Europe alone, this means about 500 000 professionals of
various kinds to support researchers through experimental design and data capture,
curation, storage, analytics, publication and reuse.
Many activities are taking place in different research domains and different countries to
address perce ived gaps in digital workforce capacity; however, they are disparate and
largely uncoordinated activities, and more strategic approaches may be beneficial. Whilst
there has been a lot of focus on digital skills, frameworks and roles, other areas including
provision of training, community building, career structures and reward mechanisms are
equally important. There has also been a tendency to focus on technical skills, although it
is becoming increasingly apparent that data intensive science is a team game and people-
focussed skills will be an important element for success in the future. Likewise, in the new
era of open science, ethical and legal issues will continue to move from the periphery to
the core of research and corresponding capability will need to be developed.
There are separate but related policy discussions on the digital skills and training required
for scientists in the age of open science, and the new incentive systems and career paths
that will be required for various types of staff. Many tr aining initiatives are already being
provided by a variety of public and private actors and steps are being taken to define
professional roles and new career paths, but it is not clear that these are adequate to meet
immediate and future needs. It is necessary to consider human digital capacity for science
more systematically in order to identify gaps and good practices, and to develop effective
policy. The emergence of Artificial Intelligence (AI) as an enabling technology that is
likely to become pervasiv e across much of science exemplifies some of the urgent
challenges, including the importance of data ethics, and the need for a balance between
cooperation and competition between academia and industry for skilled personnel.
This report has been produced by an OECD Global Science Forum (GSF) Expert Group on
Digital Skills for Data -Intensive Science (members are listed in Annex 1) and aims to
provide inform ation and options for policy makers to strengthen the development of a
digitally skilled workforce for science. One of the first tasks was to agree on a common

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

language and definitions of key terms and concepts as used throughout the report. These
are listed in a Glossary at the end of the report. The main report begins with a short
description of the digital science ecosystem, the importance of a digitally skilled workforce
for data-intensive science and what is needed to build and sustain this. An introduction to
the thirteen in-depth case studies that were undertaken to inform this work is then provided
as the basis for the analysis that follows. This analysis focuses on five key action areas:
1. Defining needs: Digital skills, frameworks and roles
2. Provision of training
3. Community building
4. Career paths and reward structures
5. Broader enablers of digital workforce capacity
Utilising this analysis, five corresponding goals are identified. Multiple actors have roles
to play in achievement of these goals, and specific recommendations are made for national
governments, research agencies, professional science associations/academies, research
institutes and infrastructures, and universities and libraries.
2. What is known about the digital workforce needs for data-intensive science?
A number of recent studies have examined labour market demand and digital skills.
However, this work has largely focused on broader societal needs and not specifically on
the needs of science. This section examines the type of broader analysis that is available,
including on the economic importance of a digitally skilled research workforce, and details
the small amount of specific work undertaken on supply and demand issues in the research
sector. It is clear that there are gaps in current needs assessments even taking into account
that the rapid evolution of technology and research can make it difficult to predict future
need.
The need for a digitally skilled research workforce
There are number of studies that analyse digital skills in the context of the labour market,
often in conjunction with the role of education systems. These commonly identify the need
for increased digital literacy across many sectors of the workforce, and for both digital and
people-focussed skills. An example of the type of broad data that is available is Piatetsky’s
2018 analysis of work examining increasing dema nd based on job advertisements, which
noted that IBM claimed ”that by 2020 the number of Data Science and Analytics job listings
is projected to grow by nearly 364 000 listings to approximately 2 720 000” (Piatetsky,
2018[2]).
With specific regard to science, a recent report from the UK on Dynamics of data science
skills (The Royal Society, 2019[3]) notes that “with major industry players hiring many of
the most experienced data scientists and AI researchers, media reports have suggested that
the natural flow of researchers from academia to industry may be reaching unsustainable
levels.” The report’s analysis of job advertisements shows that in 2013, 6.7 million
UK-based job postings in relevant digitally skilled roles were listed. In 2017 there were
9.2 million postings (an increase of 36%).
Several recent OECD GSF reports on open science highlight the need for digitally skilled
professionals and professions. This includes reports on research data repo sitories,
international research data networks, and open and inclusive collaboration in science
(OECD, 2017
[4]; Dai, Shin and Smith, 2018[5]; OECD, 2017[6]). These studies recognise the
significance of expertise across all scientific domains in key areas such as data curation and

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 13
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

stewardship, data analysis and software development, leadership, teamwork,
communication and problem-solving. Similarly, at the European level there have been calls
for “an unprecedented effort in training of data scientists as a specialised profession and of
broad data literacy to enable more and more users of the data system” (European Strategy
Forum on Research Infrastructures, 2018
[7]).
Charting the digital transformation of science (Bello and Galindo-Rueda, 2020[8]) includes
a detailed analysis of the nature and effects of digitalisation on scientific research. The
report is based on an analysis of ~10 000 individual responses to the 2018 OECD
International Survey of Scientific Authors (ISSA2), a global online survey of that explored
four distinct facets of digitalisation in scientific research:
• Adoption of digital tools and digitally -enabled practices throughout all stages of
the scientific process
• Digitally-enabled diffusion of data and code
• Use of advanced and data -intensive digital tools to gain insights and develop
predictions
• Development of digital identity and online communication of scientific work.
These facets are used to map how different communities, fields, sectors and even countries
are responding to the digitalisation of research. The results provide empirical evidence that
digital workforce capacity and requirements vary considerably across, fields or disciplines
(Figure 1) and countries (Figure 2). It is also apparent from this survey analysis that skills
profiles are significantly influenced by factors such as age and gender.
Figure 1. Digital skills requirements as perceived by different disciplines

Most important skills for scientific authors’ research work. Percentage of authors in different disciplines, who
deem each type of skill as important. Note: Weighted estimates based on sampling w eights adjusted for
nonresponse.
Source: Bello and Galindo-Rueda (2020), based on the OECD International Survey of Scientific Authors 2018.
http://oe.cd/issa.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 2. Challenges for data-intensive research in different countries

Most important challenge faced by scientific authors, by country of residence. Percentage of authors within
each field selecting the relevant option. Note: Weighted estimates based on sampling weights adjusted for
nonresponse.
Source: Bello and Galindo-Rueda (2020), based on the OECD International Survey of Scientific Authors 2018.
http://oe.cd/issa.
There are a number of estimates of the potential economic returns from enhancing data
access and use in research (which requires a digitally skilled research workforce). The
recent publication, Cost-benefit analysis for FAIR research data (European Commission,
2019[9]), estimates that the overall cost to the European economy of not having FAIR
research data is EUR 10.2 billion per year in Europe. Earlier Australian studies also
indicate the value of increasing skills to maximise research outcomes, with a 2014
study estimating that the value of data in Australia's public research to be at least
USD 1.9 billion and possibly up to USD 6 billion a year (Houghton and Gruen, 2014[10]).
Supply and demand issues for digital skills in data-intensive science
Whilst the higher education sector has well-developed processes for analysing supply and
demand for some types of skills to inform their offerings, very little work has been
undertaken specifically on digital skills for those who remain in the science research sector.
Accurately predicting supply and demand figures for the science sector is not
straightforward (Ashley, 2016[11]). However, there are a limited number of studies , which
all point in the same direction, i.e., that demand far exceeds supply for digital training and
skills. Recent studies, conducted in 2106-2018, include:
• An analysis of US National Science Foundation principal investigators in biological
sciences, which identified that the most unmet need was training : "These needs
suggest that NSF, universities, and other institutions have done a fantastic job at
providing physical computational resources but haven’t provided some of the
necessary catalysts for their effective use" (Barone, Williams and Micklos,
2017
[12]).
• Australian analysis of bioscience infrastructure elements, which categorised
researchers in terms of their data and technique intensity and found that significant
changes were expected to occur over the next five years as more bioscience

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 15
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

researchers require data- intensive and bioinformatics -intensive skills (Lonie and
Francis, 2017[13]).
• Japanese analysis of research data management skills in research libraries, which
revealed that 41% of staff were not familiar with data management planning
(Kurata, Matsubayashi and Takeda, 2017[14]).
There is limited data on the numbers of digitally skilled research support professionals in
science and reliable data on the demand for these roles in not available, partially reflecting
the challenges in defining clear roles and variability in needs across different research
domains (discussed ahead 5.1). An analysis of data librarians at R1 universities (doctoral
universities with very high research activity) in the US in 2019 concluded: “Around a
quarter of R1 universities don’t have any dedicated data librarians on staff. Another quarter
have only one dedicat ed staff member. Around a third have a small team of two to three
data librarians, while the remaining small proportion of R1 libraries have large research
data teams of four to ten. The average number of data librarians per R1 university is a little
over two” (Springer, 2019
[15]). A recent analysis of the Australian research -IT support
workforce (Buchhorn, 2019[16]) calculated the number of equivalent -full-time (EFT) staff
providing digital support to researchers as follows:
• 1 EFT per 60-70 researchers for collection and analysis of research data
• 1 EFT per 90 researchers for management or stewardship of research data
• 1 EFT per 250 researchers providing training/advice on research data
• 1 EFT per100 researchers involved in various software-engineering roles
• 1 EFT per 200 researchers providing training and advice on software-engineering.
In the European context it has been proposed that 1 in 20 members of the research
workforce should be digitally skilled research support professionals , which supports
anecdotal evidence that the present ratios are inadequate. It is suggested that in Europe
alone, at least 500 000 professionals of various kinds will be requ ired to support
researchers, and that up to 5% of the scientific research budget needs to be dedicated to the
management of FAIR data (Mons, 2020[1]).
There is a need for more information on supply versus demand for digitally skilled research
staff, both broadly speaking and in specific domains. The importance of this type of
information is illustrated by the fact that it was a primary driver for the development of
several of the training initiatives that were included as case studies in the current work:
• Canadian company, Element AI, reports that Ca nada was training >500 graduate
students in AI in 2018-2019 in universities (Kiser and Mantha, n.d.[17]). However,
it estimated that thousands are needed. Canada’s aim to increase the current levels
led to the development of the Pan Canadian AI strategy, to address both lack of
training and the effects of international mobility on reducing the talent pool. The
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR, see ahead, table 1) is leading
the implementation this strategy.
• In 2014, the Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) completed a survey of 15 000
randomly chosen researchers from 15 different research -intensive Russell Group
universities in the UK. More than 90% of respondents acknowledged software as
being important for their own research, and about 70% of researchers said that their
research would not be possible without software. This highlighted the need for
professional skills in research software development, which became a key focus of
SSI.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• The Carpentries training is built on identified need, such as a 2013 Australian
bioscience community survey, in which “more than 60% of researchers surveyed
said that their greatest need was additional training, compared to a meagre 5% who
need access to additional compute power …” This sentiment is shared by
bioscience researchers in other countries and has been clearly identified by ELIXIR
in Europe” (Teal et al., 2015[18]).
In conclusion, it is important that more nuanced analysis of supply and demand issues for
digital skills in data intensive science be undertaken. In this context, Measuring the Digital
Transformation: A Roadmap for the Future (OECD, 2019
[19]) provides suggestions on how
new insights into supply and demand issues could be gained, by exploiting and harmonising
detailed national surveys on tasks and skills and by working with the business community
to define new metrics of skill shortages.
3. A digitally skilled society and a digitally-skilled workforce for science
A key question for this project was whether any issues relating to the digitally skil led
workforce are unique to science. This section examines the context around the research
sector that creates unique conditions and how these are reflected in specific skills
requirements that extend beyond those described in generic digital skills framew orks.
Scientific research itself is heterogeneous and the differences between different research
domains are explored also.
Public research systems have typically developed in different ways to research in other
sectors, creating their own unique conditions. A recent analysis of digital workforce issues
in Germany (German Council for Scientific Information Infrastructures (RfII), 2019
[20])
observed that, “the scientific labour market is subject to conditions that differ from thos e
for research and development in the digital economy or in industry. Some of these
conditions are helpful to promote change and innovative responses to the digital
transformation while others tend to hinder them .” These conditions will be examined in
more detail in Section 5, and include barriers to movement between academia and industry,
and academic salaries and career paths that are often not competitive with those in the
commercial sector.
Analysis of the thirteen case studies that are described in the next chapter shows that the
science endeavour often frames digital workforce issues in the context of new
requirements, such as open science, ensuring integrity and reproducibility in data intensive
research or the ethical use of algorithms and data. T hese requirements are sometimes
perceived as specific to science, or at least as more important in science than in other
sectors, although in practice this is not necessarily the case. For example, whilst
requirements for open science may be specific to pu blic sector research, the requirements
for both reproducibility and ethical practice are shared by researchers in both the public
and private sector.
This project analysed whether different skills are required by science relative to society at
large. An ev aluation of the competencies encompassed in the European Commission’s
Digital Competence Framework for Citizens (DigComp)
2 was undertaken to assess the
relevance and adequacy of these competencies for science. DigComp is one example of a
framework that is considerably broader and more general than those which focus on the
research or data- intensive domain. It consists of five areas that categorise the key
components of digital competence, and each area contains general competencies that can
be usefully applied to research:

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 17
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• Information and data literacy: Browsing, searching and filtering data; critically
evaluating credibility and reliability of data sources; organising and storing data.
• Communication and collaboration: Sharing data ; knowing about referencing and
attribution practices; using digital tools and technologies for collaborative
processes; protecting one’s reputation.
• Digital content creation: Creating new, original and relevant content and
knowledge; understanding copyrights and licenses; programming and software
development.
• Safety: Protecting personal data.
• Problem solving: Customising digital environments to personal needs; using digital
tools to create knowledge and innovate processes; identifying digital competence
gaps and seeking opportunities for self-improvement.
The DigComp framework provides a sound basis to assess the overall skillset of those
engaged in research. However, there are potential missing competencies, or competencies
needing extension, in each area that are required in a publicly-funded research context (and
possibly also in other research sectors):
• Information and digital literacy: Understanding of statistics to help evaluation and
analysis of data; understanding of requirements for reproducibility.
• Communication and collaboration: Following open science principles to share data,
information and content, engage in good digital citizenship, and improve
collaboration; extend knowledge of referencing and attribution practices to research
data and software citation/referencing; protecting academic reputation, both of
one’s own organisation and that of academic research more generally.
• Digital content creation: Visualisation of data and information to convey
knowledge.
• Safety: Protection of sensitive data, understanding of tools and techniques such as
delinking, anonymisation and safe havens.
There are also differences in the mix of skills required in research, which is affected to
some degree by the discipline/s in which the research occurs, and the size, type and variety
of data they produce and consume (Figure 1). Some disciplines have had a strong
computational base for decades, resulting in undergraduate courses that produce
researchers with a high level of relevant digital skills. High -energy physics, astronomy,
bioinformatics and medical informatics are commonly used examples here, but even in
these disciplines, researchers may need additional training and access to digitally skilled
research support staff. In contrast, some disciplines are in the early stages of integr ating
computational approaches into their discipline, and these researchers can lack even basic
digital research skills. The maturity of a science field in handling large datasets can also
affect the size and nature of the digital capacity gap, with fields with a more recent increase
in their computational base possibly requiring a substantive investment in basic digital
skills. It is important to understand the disciplinary differences that exist, as this affects
approaches to generic training (or training in foundational skills) for all researchers.
Between disciplines, some differences in the skills required also emerge due to the nature
and scale of data produced by individual research projects, and the degree of data
integration necessary to produce dat asets which can answer different research questions.
High-energy physics typically produces large datasets which present technical challenges
in distribution and analysis, but which do not require integration with data from many, if

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

any, other sources. Clinical research can benefit from integrated analysis of the results of a
modest (10 - 100) number of clinical trials, each of which themselves may have had to
integrate data from a variety of clinical settings. Bioinformatics will often integrate the
result of hundreds of thousands of experiments carried out by thousands of researchers, and
the shift to digital astronomy makes large integrated studies possible which could never
have been carried out when telescope images resided on photographic plates. The curation
of integrated data collections in these latter fields require skills that are less relevant to
high-energy physics. How these skills requirements map onto professional roles and
composition of research teams is highly variable and is discussed ahead in section 5.1.
In summary, there are unique digital skills or competencies (or levels of competency) that
are required for science, although these are mainly an expansion of the basic digital skill
set that is required across all sectors of society and industry. These skills relate not only to
the performance of data intensive-science but also to other related drivers such as the shift
towards open science and need to ensure reproducibility of research. They are not unique
to academic/public sector resea rch and many of them are equally relevant in the private
sector. However, the mix of required skills varies across scientific disciplines and domains.
4. The science ecosystem and case studies
The challenges for science in developing digital workforce capabilities reflect the ways in
which the science ecosystem operates. Countries typically deploy a range of approaches
for assessing and building digital research capacity that reflect their unique mix of actors,
history and culture. These approaches are themselves situated in the broader research,
societal, and economic context, which includes national digital and skills strategies and
factors such as internet connectivity. This complexity raises interesting questions for
science policy makers regarding how to identify strengths and weaknesses and gaps in their
own systems, and how best to support or encourage the most relevant initiatives.
The thirteen case studies that were undertaken as part of this project are introduced in this
chapter. The case studies represent initiatives from different parts of the digital science
ecosystem and a range of countries. All the case studies were led by public sector actors
and focus mainly on academic research needs, although several work closely with private
sector actors. The key features of th e cases are summarised in Table 1 and each is then
described in more detail.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 19
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table 1. Case studies classified by key characteristics
 Structure (remit) Target audience Disciplines
Alan Turing Institute (Turing) Research institution (national) Doctoral students All disciplines, some focus on
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
American Data Science Alliance
(ADSA)
University network
(national)
Researchers at all levels and
Research Software Engineers
(RSEs)
All disciplines
Australian Research Data Commons
(ARDC)
Government programme (national) Researchers and research
support professionals
All disciplines
Canadian Institute For Advanced
Research (CIFAR)
Government programme
(National)
High school to Early Career
Researchers (ECRs)
All disciplines, focus on AI
The Carpentries Community programme
(International)
Researchers at all levels All disciplines
CODATA-Research Data Alliance
(RDA) School of Research Data
Science
Community programme
(International)
ECRs All disciplines
Delft University of Technology (TU
Delft)
University
(local)
Researchers at all levels All disciplines

ELIXIR Intergovernmental organisation
(International)
Researchers and research
support professionals
Focus on bioinformatics
GESIS - Leibniz Institute of the
Social Sciences (GESIS)
Research infrastructure (national) Mid-career to advanced
researchers
Focus on application in social
sciences
Japanese Consortium for Open
Access Repositories (JPCOAR)
Research network (national) Librarians All disciplines
Millennium Institute of Astrophysics
(MAS)
Research institution (national) ECR and RSEs Focus on application in
astronomy
RSE Association Professional association
(international)
RSEs All disciplines
Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) Government program (national) Researchers at all levels and
RSEs
All disciplines, focus on
software

More details are provided below on the thirteen case studies, classified as international,
national, disciplinary or university/multi-university initiatives.
International initiatives
International initiatives are able to leverage expertise and support from multiple countries
and can be a critical adjunct and/or support for developing and implementing national and
institutional strategies for digital capacity. The international initiatives included in the case
studies encompass both inter-governmental and community-led initiatives.
I. The Carpentries: This international program delivers training in the basics of data
analytics and programming for researchers and those working with them. It has
transitioned from being a grant -funded activity to a membership subscription
model. Materials are all open access, and the role of the central organisation
includes managing this ma terial as well as validating instructors. The materials
(Library Carpentry, Software Carpentry and Data Carpentry) are generic, but

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

training events are provided in the context of the learner's discipline and
background.
II. CODATA-RDA School of Research Data Science: This is an international
initiative delivering two -week training events in data science skills at locations
around the world and also producing open, reusable training material. It focusses
on the needs of students from low and middle -income countries and course topics
are selected through discussions with researchers from these areas. It uses some
material from the Carpentries and follows other elements of that model; schools are
delivered by a mix of roving tutors and local staff, and students ar e encouraged to
become instructors in future. Content is not specific to low and middle -income
countries; demand exists in high-income countries and, in the longer term the aim
is to leverage support for events in OECD countries to support delivery elsewhere.
III. ELIXIR: ELIXIR is an international distributed research infrastructure for life
sciences data and training is coordinated via one of five technical platforms.
Training empowers researchers to use ELIXIR’s services and tools through
developing skills for managing and exploiting data. ELIXIR provides open
materials on a portal, events, a toolkit, and train -the-trainer activities. As well as
training development and delivery, ELIXIR builds community capacity by assisting
knowledge transfer from more mature national activities to newer entrants.
IV. RSE Association: This is a UK professional membership organisation established
by the SSI but now independent of it. It organises regular events to allow RSEs to
meet, exchange knowledge and collaborate and works to raise awareness of the role
of RSEs and improve career paths for them. The model is now being taken up in
other countries to develop an international RSE network.
National initiatives
A number of the case studies are national government -supported initiatives and help to
illustrate the range and potential impact of direct government actions in this area.
I. ARDC: ARDC is a national initiative to support Australian research, with skilled
workforce development part of one of its five areas of activity (people & policy)
As a research infrastructure itself, ARDC recognises that optimising the use of
research infrastructures requires skills that not all will have. It facilitates in-person
and online training and development of communities of practice. Activities include
train-the-trainer programs and leadership of digital skills training initiatives for
research software professionals.
II. CIFAR: Training activities delivered by CIFAR, under the Pan-Canadian Artificial
Intelligence Strategy, focus on maintaining and improving national strengths in AI
in Canada. Training ranges from specialised techniques for able graduate students,
to work with high school students. Other activities include workshops and
conferences. Many activities concentrate on under -represented groups, including
young women, and at least one activity includes students from developing
countries. By supporting the research activities of a network of AI institutes and
Chairs, the Strategy helps create a rich training environment that promotes
attraction, retention and development of AI talent in Canada.
III. JPCOAR: The Research Data Management Training Materials Development
Project of the Working Group of Research Data of JPCOAR aims to promote
research data management in Japan, in partnership with the Natio nal Institute of
Informatics (NII). These organisations are working together as part of a broader
initiative to promote open science. This work began with a focus on data skills for

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 21
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

librarians but has since broadened its reach. The project develops course materials
and runs courses based on them and this involves reuse and translation/adaptation
of open source training materials from other sources.
IV. SSI: SSI is supported by research funders in the UK to maximise utility of
investment in research software; sk ills development for RSEs and researchers
generally are one part of its activity. Skills development is carried out through a
mix of activities, including workshops and a fellowship programme. There is a
strong focus on career paths and professional recogn ition for RSEs, and training
addresses the demand from this group for both technical and people-focussed skills
(e.g., team leadership).
V. Turing: This national UK initiative on data science is intended to conduct and apply
research, develop future leaders and act as a national voice and focus. Most
activities are focussed on PhD students, either in partnership with universities who
offer a f ormal place at the Turing or are collaborators. e.g., Centres of Doctoral
Training. There is a strong cross- disciplinary focus and trainees are expected to
have already acquired foundational skills, with the Turing providing specialised
training in areas such as AI that is tailored to specific research questions.
Discipline level initiatives
Discipline level initiatives can be international, regional and/or national in focus. There
were three initiatives chosen as case studies that had a specific disciplinary focus [ELIXIR
(see III above) can fit also under this classification].
I. GESIS: GESIS has a long-standing national role in archiving social survey data and
in research on survey methodology and computer science. Data sources for this
type of research ar e changing – personal devices, smart homes – and GESIS is
refocusing several activities, including those related to skills, in recognition of this.
GESIS runs on- site training days open to all as well as longer workshops and
summer schools in computational social sciences. The GESIS training program
focusses on the specialist research areas where it has the greatest expertise/can
make most difference. At the same time, GESIS is a member of the Consortium of
European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA), which runs training courses in
foundational digital skills for social science.
II. Millennium Institute for Astrophysics (MAS): MAS is a National Chilean initiative
focussing on the skills necessary to address specific challenges in astronomy. The
skills required in the emerging sub-discipline of astro-informatics include real-time
event identification in high -volume data streams and have wider potential
application beyond astronomy. MAS runs a mixture of activities including
workshops and graduate programmes, w ith a focus on ECRs. It has its own legal
status but has strong links to several national universities and is working also to
strengthen private sector links.
University or multi-university level initiatives
Universities have a critical role to play in building capacity for data intensive science and
university staff were centrally involved in all the case studies (that is, not only those case
studies initiated by universities). Two University-led case studies were included.
I. ADSA: A younger initiative than many of the other case studies, though building
on earlier funded work in a small number of US universities. Its plan is to support
teaching and use of data- intensive tools and techniques throughout research and
education. It has a variety of delivery mech anisms, including hack -weeks, mini-
workshops and grants for alumni of the preceding programme (Moore-Sloan Data

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Science Environments), typically offered on the campus of an affiliated data
science institute or organisation with a University.
II. TU Delft: TU Delft’s activities are university-led and focussed on its own data and
staff. By funding embedded data stewards and appointing researchers as data
champions it spreads skills through peer networks as well as with training events
and online learning facilities. The focus is on tasks other than data analysis, such
as preparation, curation and management as well as on translating generic policy
into discipline-specific actions. Skills developed are thus a mixture of generic and
discipline specific.
Key personnel from each of the case studies were interviewed via videoconference by one
or two members of the Expert Group utilising the interview questions in Annex 2 B.
Interview questions focused on issues, challenges, and good practices that were likely to
have policy implications. The case studies also contributed to an international workshop on
28-29 October 2019, hosted by GESIS in Cologne, Germany (Annex 3). This workshop
facilitated interactive discussions and exchanges of experiences and perspectives that
informed the policy messages and recommendations that are included in this report.
5. What is needed to build a digitally skilled research workforce?
A digitally skilled workforce is required to complement investments in data -intensive
scientific infrastructure. An inclusive workforce needs to reflect the diversity of society in
order to not only improve science but to ensure it is more responsive to societal needs. This
workforce needs to be built, nurtured and maintained over the long -term, and as a goal in
itself. To achieve this advancements are needed in five key areas: defining needs;
addressing needs; scaling up; ensuring sustainability and facilitating change. Each of these
areas is explored in this chapter.
5.1. Defining needs: Digital skills, frameworks and roles
As described in section 2.2, there appears to be a substantial unmet need for training in
digital skills and overall digital capacity for science in many countries and research fields.
This sub-section delineates approaches to identifying the key digital skills needed for data
intensive science, including the use of frameworks for digital competencies and how these
link with new emerging roles. Understanding of these has particular value at a
policy-making level, allowing appropriate interventions to be more effectively designed
and targeted.
Digital skills for science include both specialised and foundational skills. Specialised
digital skills needs differ across scientific domains and evolve over time in response to the
state of the discipline and to new technologies and policy requirements. At the same time,
there is a baseline of more generic foundational digital skills for research that evolves more
slowly and should ideally be embedded in undergraduate science education but currently
is not. These foundational skills need to incorporate the broad concepts and processes
associated with Open Science and the social accountability of research.
The digital skills that are commonly listed as being required for data intensive science are
sometimes placed into distinct categories. However, the terms and categories utilised vary
considerably. For example, Turning FAIR into reality: Final report and action plan from
the European Commission expert group on FAIR data (European Commission, 2018
[21]),
defines the two major areas of competencies as data science and data stewardship, with the
following definitions:

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 23
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• Data science skills can be understood as comprising knowledge from computer
science, software development, statistics, visualisation and machine learning. This
also covers computational infrastructures and knowledge of information modelling,
algorithms and information integration.
• Data stewardship is a set of skills to ensure data are properly managed, shared and
preserved throughout the research lifecycle and in subsequent storage. During the
active research process, this could involve data cleaning to remove inconsistencies
in data sets, organising and structuring data, adding or checking metadata, and
resolving data management issues.
By extrapolation, one might conclude that data scientists and data stewards are needed, and
that capacity building efforts should be focussed acc ordingly but this would be
over-simplifying a complex relationship between skill and roles that plays out differently
in different parts of the science community. Data science, and its derivative, data scientist,
are particularly difficult terms for which to achieve consensus definitions, and their
definitions and usage vary in different domains. Because of these ambiguities the term data
scientist is of limited use from a policy or planning perspective. It is an umbrella term, but
one needs to dissect out its components further to assess the status of digital skills in the
science workforce. This will be returned to later with regard to Figure 3.
A number of initiatives have produced lists or frameworks for digital competencies
(OECD, 2019 [22]; European Commission, 2017 [23]; FAIR4S, 2019 [24]; Research Data
Alliance, 2015 [25]; Demchenko, Belloum and Wiktorski, 2017 [26]; Molloy, Gow and
Konstantelos, 2014[27]). With specific regard to research, the EDISON project was an early
attempt build a comprehensive framework of skills and competencies for ‘data scientists’
(Demchenko, Belloum and Wiktorski, 2017 [26]). More recent efforts have built on and
extended the EDISON project's work to include competencies related to data stewardship,
and as a result are seeing reuse in a wider context.
These frameworks vary in their depth and flexibility. More nuanced approaches are
apparent in frameworks such as FAIR4S, in particular the recognition that a competency,
when applied as a skill, can be done so at a variety of expert levels. In FAIR4S these levels
are basic (awareness/comprehension), intermediate (ability to apply) and expert (ability to
change practice in this skill.) A role profile then includes both skills and the l evels of
expertise expected in that role. Work has also been done to identify different types of data
stewards in the life sciences, broken down into responsibilities and tasks (Scholtens et al.,
2019
[28]).
Despite their imperf ections, frameworks for digital skills have particular value at a
policy-making level. An appropriate framework can help to identify how many people with
particular skills at a given level of expertise are required at different scales, from national
to local. Some types of frameworks will also indicate how those skills can be acquired - for
example, through formal education, self -paced learning or mentoring. This allows
appropriate policy interventions to be more effectively targeted. A simplified
representation of the main skills and roles that are required for data intensive research was
developed at an early stage of this project. This ‘meta- framework’ was used to clarify the
focus of individual case studies and is included with the interview questions in Annex 2.
The meta-framework describes a set of roles relevant to data-driven research and activities
requiring specific skills or groups of skills at different points in the research lifecycle.
Whilst this provided a useful as a way to compare across case studies, the different cases
that were interviewed in this work were inclined to modify it in different ways, often
wanting to introduce more granularity to reflect the specificities of individual research

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

fields. At a minimum, this illustrates the role o f frameworks in structuring the discussion
around digital skills for research.
Skills definition can be used to identify emerging professional roles. Figure 3 illustrates the
main areas that need to be addressed and combined for data intensive science (see also the
Glossary at the end of this report). These areas include not only data and software but also
related legal and ethical issues. The diagram shows four roles and the principle
responsibilities of each (rather than the skills required in each). Hen ce, a data steward is
responsible for data and needs to have a thorough understanding of the legal and ethical
ramifications of its use, an RSE is responsible for software engineering based on an
understanding of the research goals, and a data analyst is r esponsible for conducting
analysis of the data based on an understanding of software. The researcher role is more
difficult to demarcate and depends heavily on the research domain and the size and
structure of the research team. In some cases, the researcher and data analyst roles may be
the same, whereas in larger teams they may be quite distinct. It should be noted that, as for
most attempts to categorise human capacities, this diagram is not definitive. The dotted
lines within the diagram are used to den ote permeability between overlapping roles and
responsibilities.
Figure 3. Venn diagram of roles and responsibilities

Source: adapted by authors from an original diagram by Simon Hettrick (SSI) that was developed at the project
workshop.
Whilst definition of professional roles can be important, there are limits to how prescriptive
role definitions can, or should, be. As the need for a digitally skilled workforce for data-
intensive science has continued to evolve, discussions are focusing more on the skills and
competencies encompassed, and their placement within a team, rather than attempting to
agree on specific job descriptions. In reality, roles such as, data scientist, RSE, data analyst,
data steward, data manager, data librarian, or digital curator, encompass a range of
competencies but people with these job titles have different skill sets based on their
particular speciality. In small research teams, generalists may be needed, whereas larger
teams may have more specialist requirements. In some environments, specialist skills may

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 25
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

be delivered by groups or service providers external to the research team, such as might be
found in a data repository function in a research institution. Thus, all research groups need
access to people with a range of particular skills but not all research groups need to have
all skills embedded within them. This is even more true of the lone researcher who will
often be dependent on an external technical infrastruct ure and skills to undertake and
disseminate research.
Whilst recognising their limitations, defining skills required and roles (or ‘labels’) for
certain skill groups is important not only for policy development and training but also for
the establishment and recognition of professional communities and associated career paths.
This is particularly important in academia, which is largely organised around disciplines in
a way that is not necessarily compatible with digital workforce structures (see ahead, 5.3
and 5.4). Assessment of the skills needs for data intensive science, can also have broader
implications for research governance. For example, the importance of ethics and legal
issues has implications not only for researchers and research support professionals but also
for the composition of Institutional Review Boards (Grant and Bouskill, 2019
[29]; OECD,
2016[30]).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 1. Defining digital skills needs
The case studies provide examples of both systematic and informal approaches to
defining skills and training needs:
• The Turing collaborates with UK universities to create a program framework
that recognises the team approach to science, the need for community
development, and the importance of people -focussed skills focused on
collaboration. The resulting program brings doctoral students into the Turing
community to work in collaborative environments, in alignment with Turing’s
ambitions to deliver new training and research opportunities, enhance the data
science and AI skills agenda nationally, and support the next generation of data
science and artificial intelligence leaders.
• CODATA-RDA School of Research Data Science provides an increasing
number each year of two week -long courses each attended by 30- 60 ECRs in
low to middle -income countries. The course content draws heavily on the
Carpentries and development has been guided by collaboration with students
past and present, some of whom have become course tutors. Course content
more strongly incorporates community identified needs than application of top
down frameworks.
• In implementing the Pan -Canadian AI strategy, CIFAR emphasises the
importance of engagement by all disciplines with Machine Learning (ML) and
AI - to the extent that they be considered as part of the foundational digital skills
requirement for research. CIFAR cites examples of progress in this direction,
such as the University of Toronto’s strong ML programme in its business
school.3 CIFAR also supports workshop an d projects between researchers and
machine learning experts with purpose to identify how AI and ML to could be
applied in specific disciplines.
• GESIS, as both a research data infrastructure and research -performing
organisation, has good insight into the re quirements of researchers needing to
use this content, and uses this to continually refine what the training that it offers.
It also responds to more substantial changes in the data environment with
targeted activity to develop material covering emerging areas such as data from
smart devices.
5.2. Provision of training
Provision of appropriate training is essential for building digital workforce capacity. This
section examines the variety of teaching and learning modes that can be utilised for
training, the challenges in scaling up training efforts, the need for training to encourage
diversity in the digitally skilled workforce and the role of the commercial sector in the
provision of training.
A commonly cited issue in the case studies was the extent to which available digital skills
training fails to meet supply, and the difficulties for organisations in scaling up to meet the
ever-increasing demand. The people providing training are usually not certified trainers,
and often do not receive recognition for their expertise and contributions in training.
Several of the case studies utilise large volunteer workforces to provide training, raising
concerns about long-term sustainability. These initiatives usually have limited budgets that

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 27
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

do not extend to paying for trainers, and training is usually offered for free. A recent
Australian poll asking 79 research training initiatives on a variety of digital skills how well
their supply could meet demand showed that demand exceeded supply for more than 75%
of initiatives, with 9% stating that demand was more than 5 times higher than supply.
4
There are many different teaching and learning modes that can be used to instil and upskill
digital skills. Some of the digital upskilling needed for both scientists and research support
professionals may eventually be achieved by changes to mainstream undergraduate
education pathways. However, even if appropriate foundational skills become embedded
in undergraduate science education, digital tools are evolving so rapidly that postgraduate
training, both formally within Masters and PhD courses, and on a more responsive ad hoc
basis, will surely be required. A range of types of training are available, ranging from more
traditional coursework approaches through to Massive Open Online Cou rses (MOOCs),
on-the-job training, hackathons, summer schools, conferences and drop-in sessions such as
hacky hours (see case studies, section 4). In the ideal world, formal accredited courses and
informal training would complement each other, with the for mer providing a good
grounding in digital skills and the latter ensuring up-skilling as technologies and methods
evolve. Given the speed of digital evolution, acquisition of digital skills for research must
be supported by lifelong learning, as is being advocated across many sectors of the digital
economy.
Scaling up of training is a commonly identified challenge, particularly for the community-
led or grassroots organisations that are an important part of the digital research ecosystem.
These organisations are often created to progress issues that mainstream organisations are
not addressing, or to address these issues at a scale that can transcend organisational and/or
national boundaries. Case studies for this project that fit into this category include the
Carpentries, CODATA-RDA School of Research Data Science, and the RSE Association.
Capacity building efforts need to create a workforce that reflects the diversity of society in
order to ensure that science is not only more productive but also more responsive to societal
needs. There is substantial evidence of gender inequality in the digital world, with reports
such a s Bridging the Digital Gender Divide (OECD, 2018
[31]) showing how policy
interventions can help pave the way to greater inclusion of women. There is a fundamental
role for education and training in bridging the (digital) gender divide. This needs to be part
of systemic approach that includes: promoting ICT use, skills and learning, and
empowering educators and making them active agents of change. There are now a range of
initiatives that encourage gender diversity in digital roles (and more broadly in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics). Other types of workforce diversity also
beginning to be addressed through initiatives such as the CARE Principles for Indigenous
Data Governance (Research Data Alliance International Indigenous Data Sovereignty
Interest Group, n.d.[32]).
There is an important role for the private sector, including the not-for profit sector, both as
an employer of digitally skilled scientists and as a partner with various public sector actors
in supporting the development of this workforce. This is particularly the case in ‘hot’ fields
such as Artificial Intelligence, where on-the-job training opportunities such as mentorships
and internships are being adopted. There are commercial initiatives for training in digital
research skills, such as DataCamp and the Khan Academy, that are an important part of the
overall ecosystem. Multinationals such as Google, Microsoft and Amazon also engage in
various ways, including provision of financial support and placements for ECRs, or
involvement of students in activities, such as the Google Summer of Code.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 2. Addressing training needs for digital workforce capacity
Examples from the case studies include:
• TU Delft have partnered with the University of Edinburgh, Digital Curation
Centre (DCC) and Research Data Netherlands to develop a MOOC on delivering
research data management. The course teaches development and delivery of
effective data management services to improve research in an organisation.
• The Carpentries uses a train-the-trainers model to train researchers with digital
skills in educational pedagogy and inclusive teaching practices through their
instructor training program. This prepares trainers to be able to effectively
organise and teach Carpentries work meshops. There are currently more than
2000 trained volunteer instructors who ran approximately 600 workshops
around the world in 2019. Learners who go through Carpentries workshops
value the training and approach and some go on to become instructors
themselves. ELIXIR has a similar train-the-trainer programme that focuses on
bioinformatics (Morgan et al., 2017[33]).
• The CODATA-RDA School of Research Data Science has a focus on the needs
of low to middle -income countries, and aims to develop into an international
network which makes it easy for partner organisations and institutions to run the
schools in a variety of l ocations. An annual event is organised in Trieste, and
other schools have been organised with local partner institutions in Brazil,
Rwanda, Ethiopia, USA and Australia.
• The Carpentries also have a substantive focus on diversity, as part of
democratising access to digital tools. Their Nine Core Values include inclusive
of all, access for all, and strength through diversity. Actions to support these are
contained in the Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility Roadmap (The Carpentries,
2019[34]).
• Promotion of gender equity and diversity in the digitally skilled workforce is
one of CIFAR’s over all aims. To this end, it supports specific training
programmes for schoolgirls, to raise awareness of AI, and for young women.
5.3. Community building
Professional communities are an important part of the development of digital workforce
capability, enabling diverse groups of people with common interests to come together to
achieve change at various levels. The focus of these communities varies, ranging from
standardisation of curricula, to sharing of best practice and mutual support, or influencing
policy change around career paths. This section examines issues relevant to community
building, including the need to support communities of trainers, learners, and leaders.
A number of professional communities have developed ‘bottom up’ and are increasingly
gaining recognition for certain skill groups or roles, including RSEs, data stewards and
librarians. From a policy perspective, the UK’s Technician Commitment, is a good example
of how communities can be supported elsewhere in science. It is a sector -wide initiative
led by the UK Science Council to help address key challenges facing technical staff
working in research and was created as a response to the demand for technicians increasing
by 5% annually (Science Council, n.d.
[35]). Universities and research institutions from
across the UK have backed the Technician Commitment, which is ensuring greater

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 29
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

visibility, recognition, career development and sustainability for technicians across all
disciplines.
Communities of trainers are valuable for a number of reasons, including knowledge transfer
and mutual learning, enabling collaborative curriculum development and evaluation
methods, and encouraging reuse of training materials. Trainers are usually volunteers and
face challenges in receiving recognition and credit for their training work. Training and
accreditation for trainers can also be a challenge. There are a number of ini tiatives that
create and support communities of trainers as part of their train- the-trainer programs, and
this is a core part of the Carpentries approach. In another example, researchers and research
support professionals associated with the Social Sciences and Humanities Open Cloud
(SSHOC) are now developing a SSHOC Train the Trainer Toolkit and establishing a
SSHOC Training Network.
The existence, but lack of recognition, of this volunteer work force is a key problem in
scaling up training efforts and is not often acknowledged. Scroggins and Pasquetto have
undertaken analysis that highlights the invisible labour that underpins data science, noting
that “behind data -intensive science’s technological facade lies a bewildering array of
human labour, some per formed in the spotlight by star scientists, but most performed
behind the scenes by the precariously employed in conjunction with computational
machines.” They identify invisible labour in five main areas: authoring, administering,
maintaining, archiving and collaborating, arguing that “a full and nuanced understanding
of data-intensive science can only be obtained by starting with the in situ work and labour
of scientific practice in all its manifold forms” (Scroggins and Pasquetto, 2020
[36]).
Communities of digital science leaders are also emerging, particularly through programs
that emphasise development of leadership skills and the establishment of formal and
informal networks for decision makers. It is important to bring together key influencers to
share best practice and collaborate on international solutions, and these communities need
to continue to grow. Open, Data -driven Science for Decision -Makers is a community -
driven initiative to target decision makers in biological and biomedical sciences, who need
to be able to understand the wider policy implications of open science and new
developments in data intensive science. Training is focused on funding agencies/program
managers, grant reviewers, investigators, and educators who review research proposals or
training curricula that make use of data integration, software development, and large-scale
computation.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 3. Community building for digital workforce capacity
Examples from the case studies include:
• ADSA supports academic data science leadership to share and promote the
institutional changes needed to integrate data science into the full spectrum of
university research and education. ADSA is a community building and
networking organisation for academic data science practitioners that enables
better sharing of ideas and solutions to common challenges, including
facilitating and supporting academic science leaders to make institutional
changes. ADSA program components include sharing of learnings through
white papers and a data science community summit/conference; an annual
meeting for leads of data science institutes on university campuses; and support
and facilitation of Moore -Sloan Data Science Environments alumni to spread
the development of data science practices across universities.
• SSI builds communities through activities such as the SSI Fellowships Program,
which provides funding for researchers who want to improve how research
software is used in their doma ins and/or area of work . While Fellows are
funded for a specific term, they can continue to use this title and are linked to
the continuously growing set of fellows, building a community that become
more senior over time. Some SSI Fellows have now moved in to leadership
positions.
• An example of both successful community development and professionalisation
of a new role is the work of the RSE Association, with chapters of this new
professional society now found in Europe, USA, and Australia. These groups
campaign for the recognition and adoption of the RSE role within academia
along with the need for appropriate reward and career opportunities for RSEs.
• The CODATA-RDA schools are often attended by individuals who are working
in isolated environments and the s chools are sometimes the first opportunity
they have to work with many others with similar skills and experiences. The
students have thus established their own community network, enabling them to
develop further. Although not a planned part of the schools the value of this
community is recognised and supported by students and organisers alike.

Community-led initiatives can provide mutual support and learning and help to strengthen
the essential role that individuals can play in the development of a digita lly skilled
workforce. Individual action is emphasised also in the Open Science Policy Platform
established by the European Commission to encourage practical commitments for
implementation of open science by different stakeholders. Both institutions and individuals
are encouraged by the platform to consider what they can do to make open science happen,
and to make commitments within their jurisdiction (Méndez, 2019
[37]).
5.4. Career paths and reward structures
Building and maintaining the digitally skilled workforce that is needed for data intensive
science requires attention to careers and reward structures. New roles are emerging for
digitally skilled professionals in research, who may come from diverse educational

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 31
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

backgrounds, and appropriate human resources structures and policies are needed to
support this.
There is a need for digitally skilled researchers as well as a new cadre of professional
support staff, most notably data steward s and RSEs (see earlier section 5.1). In addition,
research support professions that have historically played a critical role in scientific
information management, such as librarians, archivists, and curators, are adopting the
‘digital’ prefix as they take on new roles and acquire new skills in coordi nating and
managing digital assets. Individual scientists may have some of the digital skills that might
be expected of these support professions, and in different contexts they may assume these
support functions as part of research teams, with varying degrees of recognition.
Pathways into the newly emerging digitally skilled roles vary. For example, some RSEs
start off as researchers who spend time developing software to advance their research.
Because they enjoy this part of their work and have invested in developing specialist skills,
they continue to focus on software and its use in research. Others start off from a more
conventional software-development background and are drawn to research by the challenge
of using software to further research (Software Sustainability Institute, n.d. [38]).
Recognising the value of each skill set and providing progression opportunities is critical.
However, the long -term career pathways needed for these new professional research
support roles are only emerging very slowly.
There is a need for incentive mechanisms both for researchers and research support
professionals to encourage and reward acquisition and application of digital skills. There
are a number of published reports that emphasise the lack of incentives and career paths for
digitally skilled personnel in academia (Berente et al., 2018 [39]; Working Towards
Sustainable Software for Science: Practice and Experience, n.d.[40]).
As mentioned earlier in this report, there is considerable competition between the academic
and other sectors for digitally skilled personnel, particularly in ‘hot areas’ such as artificial
intelligence. With regards to training provision, different sectors are to some extent
working together and, as illustrated by some of the cases included in this report, there are
also good examples of exchange schemes and joint appointments between academia and
industry. Whilst academia may find it difficult to compete in terms of salaries, the academic
research environment can be attractive for digitally skilled personnel at different stages of
their careers. However, it is currently difficult to move between industry and academia, or
between vocational and academic career tracks. Again, one of the main obstacles is the
expectations for an ‘academic cv’ – no matter what an individual may have achieved in a
commercial research setting, without publications in science journals he or she will struggle
to be accepted in academia. When it comes to consideration of digital skills, this ‘academic
cv’ needs to be re-considered.
Addressing these issues requires considerable adaptation of traditional academic promotion
criteria. In hiring, promotion, and tenure-review, data and software need to be recog nised
alongside publications as valuable outputs and assets for science. This is not a new issue:
the Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA, 2012
[41]), which is widely acclaimed,
recommends that research assessment consider the value and impact of all research outputs,
including datasets and software, and this is beginning to be implemented in some countries.
However, the predominant approach in academia is still to value and reward individual
academic research on the basis of p ublication outputs. Recognition of the value of digital
outputs – data, software, algorithms and code – remains limited.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 4. Improving career paths and reward structures
Some examples from the case studies in this area include:
• TeSS is the training registry for the ELIXIR com munity that enables training
providers to register training events and materials, facilitating the attribution of
credit and owner ship to their authors. In April 2019 the Training Platform
contained links to 1 208 training materials, 289 upcoming events, and more than
9 200 previous events (Europe's distributed infrastructure for life-science data,
n.d.[42]).
• TU Delft have a significant focus on developing data stewardship within the
institution. Since 2016, every TU Delft faculty has had a dedicated data steward
to assist researchers with research data management. The focus of these roles is
based on high -level understanding of the areas where improvement by
researchers in research d ata management would make the most im pact, based
on a survey in 2017- 18 of around 700 staff. The data stewards begin by
providing a core of generic training and then provide discipline-specific training
that builds on this. The establishment of data stewar d posts embedded
throughout faculties is part of a process of recognising and valuing the
contribution to research of those with this set of skills, and ultimately to
providing onward career paths for them.
• Close collaboration between academia and knowledge users is a focus for
CIFAR. Many of the 80 national AI Research Chairs in Canada have cross-
appointments in industry. The AI institutes, supported by the Pan-Canadian AI
Strategy, are designed to foster interaction, the exchange of ideas, and
side-by-side collaboration between academia, industry and innovators.
• MAS identify their legal status as an autonomous centre that is embedded in the
higher education system in Chile but formally independent of universities, as
having enabled valuable flexibilit y in human resources management . Salaries
are an area where MAS has some flexibility , relative to Universities, which
enables it to recruit and retain digitally skilled staff in the face of competition
from industry.

5.5. Broader enablers of digital workforce capacity
Whilst the main focus of this project is on the science enterprise, it is situated in broader
research, societal, and economic contexts. Development of a digitally skilled research
workforce is intertwined with the adoption of broader enabling pol icies, such as support
for open science and guidelines on research integrity. At the same time, having strong
digital workforce capacity is necessary to deliver the objectives of these broader policies.
This section explores some of the broader policy actions and contextual issues that can have
positive influences on the development of the digital workforce.
Understanding of the broader socioeconomic environment is important as this provides the
enabling context in which to situate scientific research . This broader environment can be
broken down into a number of key parts, in which policy development can directly or
indirectly have a substantial influence on the development of digital research workforce:

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 33
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• Economic environment, e.g., open science and open data funding.
• Demographic environment, e.g., digital literacy, labour market.
• Technological environment, e.g., digital connectivity.
• Legal and political environment, e.g., open science policies, database legislation.
• Sociocultural environment, e.g., values around education may affect the success of
grassroots training initiatives if top-down, formal training is the main approach to
education.
• Global/international environment, e.g., international relations between countries
may affect the degree to which so me countries will cooperate on digital capacity
building initiatives
A major enabler is an education system that incorporates digital skills training at all levels,
creating a pipeline of appropriately skilled students going into research careers. In this
context, one can cite Hungary’s Digital Education Strategy, which aims to increase digital
literacy in harmony with sectoral strategies and professional objectives at all levels of the
education system (EC/OECD, 2020[43]). Similarly, Portugal’s National Initiative for Digital
Skills e.2030 is a joint initiative of several governmental sectors that aims to stimulate and
ensure the development of digital skills as a tool for paving the way for a future- oriented
society (EC/OECD, 2020[43]).
Broader national and international trends in science policy are helping to make the case for
digital skills acquisition, and were widely acknowledged by the thirteen case studies as
important enablers for their capacity building efforts. The increasing emphasis on ensuring
transparency and openness to enable reproducibility is an important driver as it has a clear
requirement for open data and a workforce that has the digital skills to generate
reproducible results that stand up to open scrutiny. Systems and processes that ensure that
open research practices are supported, encouraged, and rewarded are increasingly being
adopted and all of these depend on having a workforce with the necessary digital skills.
Other pa rts of the wider research ecosystem can also have a positive influence on the
development of digital workforce capacity, with several case studies noting that
requirements by organisations such as journal publishers that data and code are accessible
have a major influence on the behaviour of the research community and increase the
demand for relevant digital skills. Similarly, promotion of Open Source Software raises
awareness of the need for digital skills.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 5. Enabling factors and digital research workforce capacity building
Example of actions, identified in case studies, that are not directly targeted at digital
capacity building but that enable it include:
• The Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED) no w
requires that information on data management plans in funding applications
include details of the person who will be responsible for implementing them. It
has also funded training in data management and reuse for its staff and for
researchers that it fun ds. This supports the work of JPCOAR in their ongoing
development of research data management training tools for librarians. This
training helps librarians acquire the skills needed to meet data management plan
requirements.
• TU Delft note the positive effect of funder requirements for sharing of data and
code and data management plans in driving researchers to acquire new data
skills. The Dutch Research Council (NWO) and the European Commission,
have such requirements and are enforcing compliance. Journal requirements for
data access are also driving change.
• GESIS has benefitted from the work of the German Council for Scientific
Information Infrastructures in mapping out future educational needs at both
vocational and scientific research levels. Whilst in th e past there were no
vocational training programs in their field, the first graduates are now emerging
from a vocational studies course that includes development of skills in recording
and documenting data throughout the data lifecycle, to support survey w ork in
the social sciences. In addition to the science education in digital skills, this
assists GESIS in achieving their vision of enlarging services around new data
sources as a complement to more traditional survey data.
• ARDC’s work is enhanced by Austr alian government initiatives including the
National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy requirement that all of
its funded projects embrace the FAIR data principles. The ARDC plays a key
role in shifting national research culture to making FAIR data a priority, and
provides an extensive repository of online training guides.

5.6. Linking action areas to goals
Building on the five key action areas described above, where advancements are needed, it
is possible to identify five corresponding goals that need to be achieved to advance digital
workforce capacity. Creating and maintaining a productive science workforce is a shared
responsibility between multiple stakeholders and work towards these goals needs to be
undertaken by diverse actors.
The five goals are illustrated in tandem with the five key action areas that they relate to, in
Figure 4.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 35
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 4. Five key action areas and goals for digital research workforce capacity development

Source: authors’ design.

The next two chapters of this report examine how various actors can focus their energies
towards achieving these goals.
6. Recommendations for various actors
Having defined a number of main action areas and goals, a return to the earlier discussion
of the science ecosystem (Section 4) helps to identify who the key actors are and what
actions they can take to deliver these goals. From a policy perspective, five key actors can
be identified: national and regional governments, research agencies, professio nal science
associations, research institutes and infrastructures, and universities. Recommendations for
the first four groups are laid out in this chapter and illustrated by examples of relevant
efforts that are already underway. This finishes with a shor t section on international
cooperation and potential actions for all actors in this area. The role(s) of universities are
discussed in a dedicated chapter that follows this one.
An overview is presented in Table 2, which indicates where actors might have the greatest
opportunities to effect change across the five main action areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table 2. Opportunities for actors to effect change across the five main action areas
 Defining
needs
Provision of
training
Community
building
Career paths
rewards
Broader
enablers
National/regional
governments
Research agencies

Professional
science
associations

Research
institutes and
infrastructures

Universities

Key: Large ticks denote areas where actors can exert significant change; small ticks indicate where actors can have a smaller
influence. NOTE: This table shows a generalised view of where different actors can have the most significant impact; an
individual organisation’s actual opportunity areas may differ in practice.
Table 2 shows a major focus on the role of universities, which is perhaps not surprising as
these are the main centres of education, training, and public research in most countries.
However, from a policy perspective, it is recognised that these are largely autonomous
bodies that need to be encouraged and steered rather than directed by top- down national
policies. At the same time, having a digitally skilled academic workforce is critical for these
institutions and it is in their self -interest to ensure that they cooperate closely with other
actors to design and implement appropriate digital capacity building steps and create an
enabling environment for data intensive science. Detailed actions t hat universities can
implement are described in more detail in the next chapter.
A general recommendation for any organisation or community is to evaluate and improve
the maturity of their digital workforce capacity strategy. Maturity models are commonly
used to help organisations assess effectiveness in a given area and to support understanding
of what is needed to improve performance. They are most effective when linked with
strategic leadership. Figure 5 provides a digital workforce capacity maturity model that can
be used at a variety of levels – by national governments to evaluate their national strategy,
or by any type of organisation or community to improve their internal strategy

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 37
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Figure 5. Digital workforce capacity maturity model

Source: adapted from (Cox et al., 2017[44]).
6.1. National or regional governments
There are a number of actions that governments can take to facilitate the development of a
digitally skilled research workforce. First and foremost, it is important for the responsible
authorities to understand the urgency of this issue, and the potential negative effects on
research competitiveness of not taking action. Governments are recommended to:
• Recognise at the policy level the need for a digitally skilled workforce in research,
and the importance of strategic planning that integrates the five key areas that must
be addressed in parallel to build and maintain this workforce: defining needs;
provision of training; community building; career paths and rewards; and broader
enablers of digital workforce capacity.
• Analyse national digital workforce capacity needs and the status of the research
ecosystem to meet these needs in order to inform strategic planning and investment.
It is important to take account of, international and disciplinary initiatives as well
as local developments, and to consider how government actions can most
effectively leverage and support these.
• Facilitate coordination of the effort needed to build workforce capacity at the speed
and scale necessary to optimise the benefits of data intensive science, including the
implementation of regular monitoring and assessment processes that can keep pace
with the evolving landscape.
There are also a range of broader actions that governments can take that help to provide an
enabling environment for data intensive science:
• Provide policy support for open science, and efforts to ensure the reproducibility of
research and research integrity.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• Implement research assessment systems that reward data and software outputs as
well as publications.
• Encourage proactive and flexible initiatives to address digitally skilled workforce
needs in a constantly evolving landscape, including, training provision, community
building, and career paths and reward structures.
• Develop digital skills at all educational levels, with clear delineation of which
ministries have responsibility for digital skills for science at different education and
training levels.
Box 6. What are governments doing?
Examples of national and regional government initiatives include the following:
• The Finnish Ministry of Education and Culture established a data management
and scientific computing development programme in 2017, as a key part of the
national initiative on Open Science and Research. This focuses on the
development of data management an d computing research infrastructures,
services and expertise to support research and education at Universities.
• Germany’s Council for Scientific Information Infrastructures has a focus on the
digitally skilled workforce; the key areas to be supported throu gh targeted
initiatives in the area of research data in the years ahead include policies and
regulations, digital skills and the federation of infra-structures (German Council
for Scientific Information Infrastructures, 2019[45]).
• Japan’s Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
supports the Doctoral program for Data-Related InnoVation Expert (D-DRIVE).
D-DRIVE enables universities and companies to collaborate on development
and implementation of training programs to acquire skills including those
related to data science for doctoral students and PhD holders. The programs
foster the acquisition and development of practical skills through problem -
solving learning and internships that utilise company data (Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, n.d.[46]).
• South Africa’s Department of Science and Innovation supports the multi -
institutional National e-Science Postgraduate Teaching and Training Platform.
The P latform is developing a suitable qualification, curricula and pedagogic
interventions to advance the training of postgraduate students in the rapidly
developing cross-disciplinary fields involved in e -Science (National e-Science
Postgraduate Teaching and Training Platform, n.d.[47]).
• The European Commission is supporting a number of trans -national initiatives
(policies, programs and/or projects) dealing with digital skills in relation to the
European Open Science Cloud (EOSC). An EOSC Skills and Training Working
Group has been established to identify how skills development and training can
be embedded in different levels of EOSC (EOSCsecretariat.eu, n.d.[48]).
6.2. Research funding agencies
The division of responsibilities between governments and research agencies for strategic
planning and funding varies across countries. The actions identified above for national or
regional governments with regards to strategic planning are often shared wit h research

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 39
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

agencies; what is important is that these actions are effectively implemented. Likewise,
when it comes to research funding, the mechanisms differ across countries and the
following actions are targeted at the relevant responsible authority(ies):
• Ensure that funding schemes include elements that support digital workforce
capacity development, such as funding opportunities to build and develop training
for researchers and research support professionals, exchange programmes between
academia and industry, and flexibility on staff recruitment profiles and salaries.
• Align planning, policies and investment for physical research infrastructure and for
digital workforce capacity, recognising that both physical and human resources are
needed to support data intensive science.
Funding agencies also share responsibility with governments and other actors for creating
a broader enabling environment for data intensive science. They play a major role in
establishing the mandates and incentives that shape how resea rch is conducted. In this
context, the following actions are particularly relevant for research agencies:
• Ensure that data and software management plans are a requirement in funding
schemes, and that there are processes in place to monitor and enforce compliance.
• Recognise data and software as outputs that should be properly valued and taken
account of in peer review and research assessment processes.
• Include digital workforce issues in guidelines and processes that relate to
responsible conduct of research, research integrity and ethics.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 7. What are research funding agencies doing?
Aside from providing funding for capacity building and training, funders are taking a
number of actions to promote digital workforce development. Examples include:
• The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey, TUBITAK, has
launched a Research Data Training Portal as part of the TUBITAK Open
Science Policy (TUBİTAK, n.d. [49]). The portal provides a resource where
sample data management plans are shared to assist the researchers in data
management through sharing of sample data management plans, as part of
opening data sharing to conduct scientific studies in a much more efficient and
productive way (TUBİTAK, n.d.[50]).
• In the Netherlands, NWO is changing the rewards system for researchers and
piloting a narrative curriculum vitae format in the Veni scheme, its major
funding instrument for early career researchers. This new format has two
categories, academic profile and key output, where key outputs can include
diverse types of output, including data and software (DORA, 2019[51]).
• The UK’s Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) requires that PhD
students include digital skills in their training. Based on the Vitae framework,
students are encouraged to acquire knowledge and understanding of existing and
new methodologies, such as numerical, data management, and statistical
techniques or software, web and social media communication tools (Arts and
Humanities Research Council, 2014[52]).
• Several countries have deployed systems that manage information on science,
technology, and innovation related to individual researches and institutions,
such as the Science Experts Network Curriculum Vitae (SciENcvUSA), Lattes
(Brazil), National Academic Research and Collaboration Information System
(NARCIS, Netherlands) and Researchfish (UK). These systems recognise a
wide variety of research outputs, such as curated data, software and workflows.
As a result, higher value is placed on them and the skills required to produce
them, driving behaviour change in researchers and the organisations that they
work for.

6.3. Professional science associations and academies
Academies and professional societies can play a leading role in ensuring a strong focus on
digital workforce capacity in their communities through initiatives that:
• Define the community-specific needs for digital workforce capability and advocate
for resources and mechanisms to address these needs.
• Promote discussions and networking in conferences and events on: digital skills,
frameworks and roles; provision of training; community building; and, career paths
and reward structures.
• Develop and openly disseminate digital training materials and contribute to
curricula development.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 41
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

• Contribute to the development of workforce transformation plans with, and on
behalf of, their communities, with regard to data intensive science.
• Produce reports on data intensive science and skills that are influential at the
research community and science policy levels and promote exchange of good
practices across countries.

Box 8. What are professional science associations doing?
Examples of initiatives that science associations are undertaking in this area include:
• The American Astronomical Society is supporting the Carpentries to develop
curriculum for a Data Carpentry workshop for astronomy. This workshop will
be offered at the annual American Astronomical Society meeting. Society
support provides a strong connection with the community for both development
and delivery of the curriculum.
• The Australian Academy for the Humanities initiated a three -year Future
Humanities Workforce project in 2018, to provide a comprehensive account
of Australia’s humanities research workforce and plan for its future knowledge
and skills requirements. This aims to identify skills and knowledge priorities for
future research environments, with a focus on data and digital literacy
(Australian Academy of the Humanities, n.d.[53]).
• The UK Academy of Medical Sciences report on how to fully realise the benefits
of AI in health identified five key themes that included data and computing
technology, working across sectors and disciplines, and training and capacity
building. The report notes: “The lack of a clear career pathway and lower
salaries in academia were cited as two of the main reasons for leaving academic
research, though this is often at the expense of scholarly and intellectual
freedom” (The Academy of Medical Sciences, 2019[54]).

6.4. Research institutes and infrastructures
Research institutes and research infrastructures produce and analyse large amounts of data
and are an important focus for data intensive research. A number of organisations that were
case studies in this project, including ARDC, ELIXIR, GESIS and SSI, can be categorised
as research infrastructures that provide a service to the broader community. MAS and
Turing are autonomous research institutes or centres of excellence. There are similarities
between these organisations and the universities in their roles of producing research and
employing research staff and research support professionals; consequently research
institutes and infrastructures can also play a role in enacting many of the recommendations
that will be detailed for universities and libraries in the next section. As research service
providers and centres of excellence and expertise, they can play a particularly important
role in training. To perform this role effectively, capacity building should ideally be part of
their overall mission, and they have to be well connected with universities, have strong
links into national and international networks, and have the necessary resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Box 9. What are research infrastructures doing?
Some case studies in this area include
• The Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities (DARIAH-EU,
2019[55]) is a European research infrastructure supported jointly by a consortium
of 18 member countries, which includes a focus on guiding and training
researchers in terms of data management practices. DARIAH’s mission to
empower research communities in the arts and humanities with digital methods
to create, connect and share knowledge about culture and society has resulted in
training approaches including the DARIAH ERIC Sustainability Refined
(DESIR) Winter School . This aims to strengthen the skills of the arts and
humanities communities in researc h data management, curation, sharing,
preservation and reuse
• The Research Software Program of the Canadian Network for the Advancement
of Research, Industry and Education (CANARIE, 2020 [56]) is a research
infrastructure that has funded software teams at Canadian institutions to work
directly with researchers since 2018. CANARIE designs and delivers digital
infrastructure as a non -profit corporation, with the majority of its funding
provided by the Canadian Government. CANARIE’s 2020 funding round aims
to enhance the availability of software teams to researchers, regardless of
discipline, and will provide guidance, training, expertise, and software
development specific to advancing research.
• The Consortium of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA, n.d.[57])
Training Working Group creates a place where CESSDA service provider staff,
archivists, data producers and researchers working in the wide area of social
science and humanities can find training, advice and educational resources .
These cover a range of topics including : research data management, data
discovery and use, digital preservation and data archiving.

6.5. International cooperation
As described in Section 3, several of the case studies that were considered in this project
are inherently international, i.e., they exist to serve an international community. There was
a strong interest across all the case studies in understanding other digital workforce
programs, with almost all case studies citing other organisations or initiatives locally or
internationally they either engaged with or looked to as an exemplar. This engagement took
different forms, including partnerships between organisations (such as CODATA an d
RDA), and sharing of training materials and/or trainers. The international initiatives were
often strongly linked with national and institutional training activities, although that they
were not always recognised as formal partners. Whilst some competition between institutes
and countries can help drive forward the training agenda, there is much to be gained from
cooperation and open sharing of experience and materials.
Digital research capacity needs and the extent to which they are being met, i.e. overall
digital preparedness levels (Figure 5) vary across countries (Figure 2) Whilst much of the
responsibility for building sustainable capacity resides at the national and sub -national
level, there is also a shared global responsibility to ensure that scien tists, no matter where

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 43
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

they reside, can carry out research that contributes both to science and to socioeconomic
development. Scientific research is inherently international and public research data can be
considered as a global public good that should contribute to addressing the sustainable
development goals. As discussed in this report, access to data is only useful when there is
the capacity to exploit it, and the global community has a shared responsibility to help build
digitally skilled research capacity wherever it is required.
All actors should take advantage of opportunities to:
• Engage in international collaboration wherever relevant and possible
• Share training materials, good practices and experiences across countries and
communities
• Support digital research capacity development efforts in countries or research
communities that can benefit from data intensive science but currently have
extremely limited capacity

Box 10. What international collaboration is occurring?
Some of the examples in this area include:
• Since 2018, different international data common initiatives have been meeting
regularly to advance collaboration. These include: ARDC, EOSC, the African
Open Science Platform and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Data
Commons. There is interest in convergence on a framework to facilitate
alignment, efficiency and interoperability.5
• The many collaborators working with ELIXIR’s training platform reflect the
importance of partnerships in building a global life sciences data community.
ELIXIR engages with many organisations and initiatives including the
Carpentries, CODATA, RDA, H3ABionet (a Pan African Bioinformatics
Network for the Human Heredity and Health in Africa consortium), Partnership
for Advanced Computing in Europe (PRACE), USA’s NIH’s Big Data To
Knowledge (BD2K , now Data Commons ), and the Global Organisation for
Bioinformatics Learning, Education and Training (GOBLET). Formal training
collaboration agreements are in place with several of these organisations .
ELIXIR is also an important contributor to the planning for the European Open
Science Cloud in terms of training and capacity-building.
• The Research Data Alliance (RDA) is a global grassroots organisation that
brings together different communities with an interest in data intensive science
in order to build technical and social bridges. It has a number of open interest
groups and working groups that are focused on developing practical solutions.
For example, RDA Plenary 14 in 2019 included a session to explore what is
needed and what challenges need to be addressed to professionalise data
stewardship (Research Data Alliance (RDA), n.d.[58]).
• The World Data System and a number of other international networks of data
repositories have been established and many of these play either a formal or
informal role in training and community building (OECD, 2017[6]).

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

7. Recommendations for universities
In most countries, universities are the central actors with regards to building digital
workforce capacity and skills for data intensive science. They have responsibility both for
supporting and conducting academic research (internal) and for the provision of education,
including science education, to serve society more generally (external). Whilst
governments and research agencies have a major role in supporting and incentivising
universities, universities have both autonomy and capacity to set their own policies.
All the case studies identified the pivotal role of universities in producing and employing
digitally skilled researchers and research support professionals. There is a pressing need
for universities to respond to the need for a digitally skilled scientific workforce. This must
be done at scale and will require leadership and investment. There is a perception in some
communities that universities are not only unable to meet this need at present but will
continue to be unable to do so in the future. At the same time, there are many good practices
in individual institutions that could be more widely promoted. There are an increasing
number of cross -institutional initiatives that align best practice undertaken by individual
universities.
Academic libraries and librarians are a natural focus for digital skills support and capacity
building within universities. Librarians both use digital assets and tools in their own work
and become advocates for and train others in dat a and software practices, particularly in
relation to foundational skills and data stewardship. “Because training is a well-established
service-category for academic librarians (in areas such as information literacy) and is
accepted as a key component of existing staff liaison roles, libraries have the potential to
integrate digital skills training with existing training activities relatively easily” (Cox et al.,
2017[44]). Consequently, libraries can be an important resource for universities to increase
their digital workforce capacities, provided that the necessary investment is made.
Computing science or research IT departments are also natural places for seeding digital
skills within a University, particularly skills relating to coding and software development.
Institutions that host facilities, such as high-performance computing or specialist research
data storage facilities, can also use these as a training resource. In some cases, enterprise
IT organisations
6 have been established to provide digital research support services and
training both for university staff and industry. In all of these cases, as for libraries, training
needs to be properly supported and valued for it to be effective and sustainable. In practice,
most large Universities have a mixture of different digital skills training capabilities and
the challenge is to make sure that these work together coherently to meet evolving needs
across all scientific domains.
Key recommendatio ns for universities, including libraries, are listed in Table 3. These
recommendations are separated into the five main action areas described earlier in this
report: defining needs: digital skills, frameworks and roles ; provision of training;
community building; career paths and reward structures; and broader enablers of digital
workforce capacity. They have also been divided into internal (academic research
focussed), and external-facing activities.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 45
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Table 3. Key recommendations for universities and libraries
Note: Internal activities focus on strengthening (data-intensive) academic research. External activities focus on strengthening
science education for society more broadly, for example through incorporation of digital skills in undergraduate science
education.
Internally focussed: academic research Externally focussed: science and society
1. Defining needs: digital skills, frameworks and roles
• Conduct surveys of digital research needs
and develop integrated strategies to
address these.
• Ensure that digital skills are integrated
into frameworks to promote open science
and research integrity
• Work with non-academic stakeholders,
e.g. from industry, to define digital
research skills and training needs
2. Provision of training
• Provide wide access to both foundational
and specialised digital skills training for
existing researchers and research support
professionals (with outsourcing of
training an option).
• Provide staff training and support to
ensure that funding proposals have well-
defined and well-resourced data
management plans and software
equivalents (e.g., software management
plans).
• Include mentorship in digital skills in the
specified requirements for supervision of
research.
• Provide generic undergraduate training
for foundational digital skills for research
across all science disciplines.
• Integrate comprehensive, relevant, and
up-to-date digital skills training from
undergraduate level onwards into
curricula, including for life-long learning.
• Ensure flexibility in education curricula
and training to keep pace with
technological change.
• Work with outside users, including from
industry, to develop and support life-long
digital research training programmes
3. Community building
• Actively promote workforce diversity as a
key element of digital capability.
• Recognise of the importance of training
provision, and community involvement
and/or leadership in career evaluations.
• Support the development of professional
communities in emerging roles such as
data stewards and RSEs, and for trainers
and leaders of digital skills initiatives.
• Establish digital skills support desks for
data-intensive research support and
assistance, and/or integrate staff with
these skills into research teams.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

4. Career paths and reward structures
• Develop and adopt frameworks to employ
digital research support professionals in
stable positions with opportunities for
career advancement.
• Implement systemic institutional change
around careers paths and alternative
metrics to recognise and reward a
broader range of research contributions
at all academic levels.
• Recognise datasets and software as
valued research outputs.
• Incentivise collaborations between
domain researchers and digital support
staff with metrics that recognise the
contributions of all members of research
teams.
• Promote collaboration and exchange
across industry and academia and
recognise non-academic success for
people wishing to re-enter academia.
• Encourage and support cross-sectoral
digital skills initiatives.

5. Broader enablers of digital workforce capacity
• Adopt open science, reproducibility and
research integrity principles.
• Ensure that Institutional Review Boards
have the support and capacity to assess
ethical issues in data-intensive research.
• Support open science, reproducibility and
research integrity at policy levels.
• Engage with other sectors in defining and
addressing digital research capacity needs
There is considerable potential for universities to work together at different geographic
scales, learning from each other and combining expertise and resources where appropriate
to address common digital workforce training and capacity challenges. This can be done
via informal networks and exchanges or more for mal partnerships, and it can be done at
the level of the whole institution, at an appropriate sub- structural scale, or via individual
networking. Libraries can be an important unit for engagement between universities. Some
examples of inter-university cooperation are given in Box 11.

Box 11. How are universities working together?
Examples of cross-institutional university initiatives include:
• ADSA convened the 2019 Data Science Leadership Summit in the US to bring
together the leaders of data science institutes, centres, and programs, and faculty
interested in creating new initiatives on their campuses. The Summit aimed to
form an academic comm unity for data science; to share best practices where
they face similar challenges and opportunities; and to take collective
responsibility in preparing next -generation data scientists to contribute in the
best interests of society (The 2019 Data Science Leadership Summit, 2019[59]).
• The UK Reproducibility Network (UKRN) is a consortium involving more than
20 universities and a range of other stakeholders that is investigating the factors
that contribute to robust research, promoting training activities, disseminating
best practice, and working with stakeholders to ensure coordination of efforts
(University of Bristol, n.d.[60]). SSI are partnering with UKRN on a range of joint
initiatives, including training in software development and data management
skills (SSI, 2020[61]). The UK also has an emerging collaboration across eight

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 47
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

universities in the N8 Research Partnerships, examining similarities, challenges
and opportunities for RSE groups (N8 CIR, 2020[62]).
• Leaders of eight university networks from multiple nations signed the Sorbonne
declaration on research data rights in early 2020. The signatories commit to
actions including: “Encouraging our universities in setting up training and skills
development programs that create an environment to promote open research
data management” (LERU, 2020 [63]). The signatories are the Association of
American Universities, African Research Universities Alliance, Coordination of
French Research-Intensive Universities, German U15, League of European
Research Universities, RU11 in Japan, Russell Group in the UK and the Group
of Eight in Australia.
University libraries are combini ng their forces to build digital science capacity in a
number of different ways:
• JPCOAR uses openly available training materials from other institutions to
develop tailored on-line training courses for librarians in Japanese universities.
These courses are delivered via a national MOOC platform and focus on
foundational research data management skills.
• The Council of Australian Librarians (CAUL) has introduced a Digital Dexterity
program with two objectives: that Australian universities recognise the
importance of digital dexterity in accomplishing their missions and that they
engage with CAUL on its delivery; and that Australian graduates have access to
the digital skills to enable them both to thrive in a global work context and to
become effective global citizens (Council of Australian University Librarians,
2019[64]).
• The Canadian Association of Research Libraries (CARL), has funded a multi -
year activity aimed at supporting data services and skills development for its
members and providing national services where appropriate, such as for data
management planning. It has attracted funding from federal agencies to continue
and enhance the work.
• Europe’s research library network, Ligue des Bibliothèques Européennes de
Recherche (LIBER) is developing research libraries as hubs for digital skills and
services in both physical and virtual research environments. LIBER provides
training and/or data services for members, and does advocacy with policy
organisations to support data skills development.

8. Conclusion: the need for concerted policy action
Digital technologies are changing the practice of science, and a digitally skilled workforce
is needed to maximise the potential scientific and socioeconomic benefits of data-intensive
science. There is a critical need to accelerate the speed and scale at which the workforce
issues associated with the digital transformation are being addressed. Whilst many
organisations in different countries are involved in initiatives to improve digital workforce
capacity for research, a more coordinated approach would be beneficial. There are many
good initiatives underway and there is much that can be learned from what others are doing.
This project has explored the elements required to develop and sustain workforce capacity
for data intensive science. There are five main action areas where focus is needed: defining

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

needs; provision of training, community building, career paths and rewards; and broader
enablers of digital workforce capacity. Whilst there are many initiatives that are addressing
these at different levels and in different domains, there are few comprehensive strategic
approaches that integrate all five areas.
There are a range of actors throughout the science ecosystem who can implement acti ons
to advance in these different areas. This report identifies the main areas where policymakers
and other actors might concentrate their efforts, and includes specific recommendations on
actions that can be taken to facilitate the development of a digitally skilled workforce.
Many individuals and institutions are working actively to promote digital skills for data
intensive science and there is a critical role for policymakers to support and enable them so
that their efforts can be effective at the scale necessary to achieve a common vision:
A world where effective policies, incentives, and investments sustain a
future-focused, world-leading research workforce that can realise the
full potential of data -intensive science and help provide solutions to
complex societal challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 49
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Notes
1 The terms science and research are used interchangeably throughout this report and include natural sciences, social
sciences and humanities.
2 See https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/digcomp
3 This and similar program in a range of disciplines are described in the Canadian Vector Institute’s list of AI programs
(Vector Institute, n.d.[94]).
4 Poll conducted at Australian eResearch Skilled Workforce Summit, 2019 (Australian Research Data Commons,
n.d.[95]).
5 Meetings have occurred at SciDataCon 2018 and RDA plenaries ( under the Global Open Research Commons
Interest Group).
6 For example, the Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre is an enterprise IT centre that provides specialised IT
services and training for researchers at the University of Edinburgh and for local SMEs (EPCC, n.d. [96])

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 51
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

References

Apostel, L. et al. (eds.) (1972), Towards Interdisciplinarity and Transdisciplinarity in Education
and Innovation, OECD Publications Center.
[74]
Arnstein, S. (1969), “A Ladder Of Citizen Participation”, Journal of the American Institute of
Planners, Vol. 35/4, pp. 216-224, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225.
[75]
Arts and Humanities Research Council (2014), AHRC Research Training Framework for
Doctoral Students, https://ahrc.ukri.org/documents/projects-programmes-and-
initiatives/ahrc-research-training-framework-for-doctoral-students/ (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[52]
Ashley, K. (2016), Review: Developing skills for managing research data and software,
Wellcome Trust, https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.4133916.v1.
[11]
Australian Academy of the Humanities (n.d.), Future Humanities Workforce ,
https://www.humanities.org.au/advice/projects/future-workforce/ (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[53]
Australian Research Data Commons (n.d.), The Australian eResearch Skilled Workforce
Summit, https://ardc.edu.au/events/the-australian-eresearch-skilled-workforce-summit/
(accessed on 5 June 2020).
[95]
Babuska, I. and J. Oden (2004), “Verification and validation in computational engineering and
science: basic concepts”, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
Vol. 193/36-38, pp. 4057-4066, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2004.03.002.
[67]
Bello, M. and F. Galindo-Rueda (2020), “Charting the digital transformation of science: Findings
from the 2018 OECD International Survey of Scientific Authors (ISSA2)” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2020/03, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/1b06c47c-en.
[8]
Berente, N. et al. (2018), Organizing and the Cyberinfrastructure Workforce,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3260715.
[39]
Buchhorn, M. (2019), Surveying the scale of the research-IT support workforce,
https://ardc.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/ARDC-National-Workforce-report-final-
v3.pdf (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[16]
CANARIE (2020), Local Research Software Support – Call 1,
https://www.canarie.ca/software/funding/lrss-call1/ (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[56]
CASRAI (n.d.), Resources, https://casrai.org/resources/ (accessed on 5 June 2020). [66]

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

CESSDA (n.d.), Working Groups, https://www.cessda.eu/About/Working-Groups (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[57]
Council of Australian University Librarians (2019), CAUL Digital Dexterity Position Statement ,
https://www.caul.edu.au/caul-digital-dexterity-position-statement (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[64]
Cox, A. et al. (2017), “Developments in research data management in academic libraries:
Towards an understanding of research data service maturity”, Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology, Vol. 68/9, pp. 2182-2200,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.23781.
[44]
Dai, Q., E. Shin and C. Smith (2018), “Open and inclusive collaboration in science: A
framework”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2018/07, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/2dbff737-en.
[5]
DARIAH-EU (2019), DESIR Winter School: Shaping new approaches to data management in
arts and humanities, https://www.dariah.eu/2019/09/09/desir-winter-school-shaping-new-
approaches-to-data-management-in-arts-and-humanities/ (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[55]
Demchenko, Y., A. Belloum and T. Wiktorski (2017), EDISON Data Science Framework: Part 1.
Data Science Competence Framework (CF-DS) Release 2,
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1044346.
[26]
DORA (2019), Quality over quantity: How the Dutch Research Council is giving researchers the
opportunity to showcase diverse types of talent, https://sfdora.org/2019/11/14/quality-over-
quantity-how-the-dutch-research-council-is-giving-researchers-the-opportunity-to-
showcase-diverse-types-of-talent/ (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[51]
DORA (2012), San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment, https://sfdora.org/read/. [41]
Dutch Techcentre for Life Sciences (n.d.), About Research Data Management ,
https://www.dtls.nl/fair-data/research-data-management/research-data-management/
(accessed on 5 June 2020).
[68]
EC/OECD (2020), STIP Compass: International Database on Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy (STIP), https://stip.oecd.org (accessed on 14 May 2020).
[93]
EC/OECD (2020), STIP Compass: International Database on Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy (STIP), https://stip.oecd.org (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[43]
Enengel, B. et al. (2012), “Co-production of knowledge in transdisciplinary doctoral theses on
landscape development—An analysis of actor roles and knowledge types in different research
phases”, Landscape and Urban Planning, Vol. 105/1-2, pp. 106-117,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.12.004.
[86]
EOSCsecretariat.eu (n.d.), Skills & Training Working Group,
https://www.eoscsecretariat.eu/working-groups/skills-training-working-group (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[48]
EPCC (n.d.), EPCC, https://www.epcc.ed.ac.uk/ (accessed on 8 June 2020). [96]
European Commission (2019), Cost-benefit analysis for FAIR research data,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2777/02999.
[9]

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 53
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

European Commission (2018), Turning FAIR into reality: Final report and action plan from the
European Commission expert group on FAIR data, Publications Office of the European
Union, http://dx.doi.org/doi: 10.2777/1524.
[21]
European Commission (2017), Evaluation of Research Careers fully acknowledging Open
Science Practices; Rewards, incentives and/or recognition for researchers practicing Open
Science, Publications Office of the European Union, http://dx.doi.org/doi: 10.2777/75255.
[23]
European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (2018), Big Data and e-Infrastructure
Needs, ESFRI, http://roadmap2018.esfri.eu/.
[7]
Europe’s distributed infrastructure for life-science data (n.d.), Welcome to TeSS: ELIXIR’s
Training Portal, https://tess.elixir-europe.org/ (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[42]
FAIR4S (2019), EOSC FAIR4S, https://eosc-fair4s.github.io/ (accessed on 5 June 2020). [24]
German Council for Scientific Information Infrastructures (2019), Empfehlungen zu Berufs- und
Ausbildungsperspektiven für den Arbeitsmarkt Wissenschaft,
http://www.rfii.de/download/digitale-kompetenzen-dringend-gesucht.
[45]
German Council for Scientific Information Infrastructures (RfII) (2019), DIGITAL
COMPETENCIES – URGENTLY NEEDED!, http://www.rfii.de/?p=4015 (accessed on
5 June 2020).
[20]
Grant, S. and K. Bouskill (2019), Open Science and Institutional Review Boards: Aligning
Transparency with Regulatory Protections for Human Research Subjects ,
http://www.metascience2019.org/poster-session/sean-grant/.
[29]
Gredig, D. (2011), “From research to practice: Research-based Intervention Development in
social work: developing practice through cooperative knowledge production”, European
Journal of Social Work, Vol. 14/1, pp. 53-70,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691457.2010.516624.
[81]
Hadorn, G. et al. (eds.) (2008), Handbook of Transdisciplinary Research, Springer Netherlands,
Dordrecht, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6699-3.
[73]
Hernandez Montoya, A. (ed.) (2017), “Interdisciplinary Collaboration between Natural and
Social Sciences – Status and Trends Exemplified in Groundwater Research”, PLOS ONE ,
Vol. 12/1, p. e0170754, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0170754.
[76]
Houghton, J. and N. Gruen (2014), Open Research Data report,
https://www.ands.org.au/working-with-data/articulating-the-value-of-open-data/open-
research-data-report.
[10]
Hulhoven, X. (n.d.), Develop a sustainable future for Brussels through a co-creation project,
https://innoviris.brussels/co-creation (accessed on 27 May 2020).
[89]
Jahn, T., M. Bergmann and F. Keil (2012), “Transdisciplinarity: Between mainstreaming and
marginalization”, Ecological Economics, Vol. 79, pp. 1-10,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.04.017.
[82]
Kiser, G. and Y. Mantha (n.d.), Global AI Talent Report 2019, https://jfgagne.ai/talent-2019/
(accessed on 5 June 2020).
[17]

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Klein, J. (2008), “Evaluation of Interdisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Research”, American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, Vol. 35/2, pp. S116-S123,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.05.010.
[78]
Kurata, K., M. Matsubayashi and M. Takeda (2017), “Research data management in Japanese
universities and research institutions: Status report based on questionnaire survey”, Journal
of Information Processing and Management, Vol. 60/2, pp. 119-127,
https://doi.org/10.1241/johokanri.60.119.
[14]
Lang, D. et al. (2012), “Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science: practice, principles,
and challenges”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 7/S1, pp. 25-43,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11625-011-0149-x.
[83]
LERU (2020), Data Summit in Paris, https://www.leru.org/news/data-summit-in-paris
(accessed on 8 June 2020).
[63]
Lonie, A. and R. Francis (2017), An Australian Bioscience Data Capability Project Report -
Phase 2, https://www.embl-abr.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/ABDC-Project-Report-
Phase-2.pdf.
[13]
Méndez, E. (2019), Open Science?... Darling, we need to talk, https://www.open-science-
conference.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Eva-Mendez.pdf.
[37]
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (n.d.), Doctoral program for
Data-Related InnoVation Expert(D-DRIVE),
https://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/jinzai/data/index.htm (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[46]
Molloy, L., A. Gow and L. Konstantelos (2014), “The DigCurV Curriculum Framework for Digital
Curation in the Cultural Heritage Sector”, International Journal of Digital Curation , Vol. 9/1,
pp. 231-241, http://dx.doi.org/10.2218/ijdc.v9i1.314.
[27]
Mons, B. (2020), “Invest 5% of research funds in ensuring data are reusable”, Nature ,
Vol. 578/7796, pp. 491-491, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-00505-7.
[1]
Morgan, S. et al. (2017), “The ELIXIR-EXCELERATE Train-the-Trainer pilot programme:
empower researchers to deliver high-quality training”, F1000Research, Vol. 6, p. 1557,
http://dx.doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.12332.1.
[33]
Moser, S. (2016), “Can science on transformation transform science? Lessons from co -design”,
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, Vol. 20, pp. 106-115,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2016.10.007.
[69]
N8 CIR (2020), N8 RSE Leaders and Aspiring Leaders Meeting,
https://n8cir.org.uk/events/rse-aspiring-leaders/ (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[62]
National e-Science Postgraduate Teaching and Training Platform (n.d.), National e -Science
Postgraduate Teaching and Training Platform, http://www.escience.ac.za/ (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[47]
Noah, W. and M. Jean (1980), Webster’s New Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English
Language, Unabridged, W. Collins.
[72]
OECD (2019), Measuring the Digital Transformation: A Roadmap for the Future, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264311992-en.
[19]

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 55
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

OECD (2019), OECD Skills Outlook 2019 : Thriving in a Digital World, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/df80bc12-en.
[22]
OECD (2018), Bridging the Digital Gender Divide: Include, upskill, innovate ,
http://www.oecd.org/internet/bridging-the-digital-gender-divide.pdf.
[31]
OECD (2017), “Business models for sustainable research data repositories”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 47, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/302b12bb-en.
[4]
OECD (2017), “Co-ordination and support of international research data networks”, OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 51, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/e92fa89e-en.
[6]
OECD (2017), “Open research agenda setting”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy
Papers, No. 50, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/74edb6a8 -en.
[88]
OECD (2016), “Research Ethics and New Forms of Data for Social and Economic Research” ,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 34, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jln7vnpxs32-en.
[30]
Ouellette, F. (ed.) (2017), “Unmet needs for analyzing biological big data: A survey of 704 NSF
principal investigators”, PLOS Computational Biology, Vol. 13/10, p. e1005755,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005755.
[12]
Piatetsky, G. (2018), How many data scientists are there and is there a shortage?,
https://www.kdnuggets.com/2018/09/how-many-data-scientists-are-there.html (accessed
on 5 June 2020).
[2]
Pohl, C., P. Krütli and M. Stauffacher (2017), “Ten Reflective Steps for Rendering Research
Societally Relevant”, GAIA - Ecological Perspectives for Science and Society, Vol. 26/1,
pp. 43-51, http://dx.doi.org/10.14512/gaia.26.1.10.
[84]
Pohl, C. et al. (2011), Questions to evaluate inter- and transdisciplinary research proposals, td-
net for Transdisciplinary Research.
[90]
Research Data Alliance (2015), Task Force on Defining data handling related competences and
skills for different groups of professions - Working area, https://www.rd-
alliance.org/group/education-and-training-handling-research-data-ig/wiki/task-force-
defining-data-handling (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[25]
Research Data Alliance (RDA) (n.d.), RDA 14th Plenary - Programme, https://www.rd-
alliance.org/rda-14th-plenary-programme (accessed on 22 June 2020).
[58]
Research Data Alliance International Indigenous Data Sovereignty Interest Group (n.d.), CARE
Principles for Indigenous Data Governance, https://www.gida-global.org/care (accessed on
5 June 2020).
[32]
Roux, D. et al. (2010), “Framework for participative reflection on the accomplishment of
transdisciplinary research programs”, Environmental Science & Policy, Vol. 13/8, pp. 733-
741, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2010.08.002.
[77]

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Schneider, F. et al. (2019), “Research funding programmes aiming for societal transformations:
Ten key stages”, Science and Public Policy, Vol. 46/3, pp. 463-478,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy074.
[87]
Scholtens, S. et al. (2019), Life sciences data steward function matrix,
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2554973.
[28]
Science Council (n.d.), What is the Technician Commitment?,
https://sciencecouncil.org/employers/technician-commitment/ (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[35]
Science Europe (2018), Science Europe Data Glossary,
http://sedataglossary.shoutwiki.com/wiki/Main_Page (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[65]
Scroggins, M. and I. Pasquetto (2020), “Labor Out of Place: On the Varieties and Valences of
(In)visible Labor in Data-Intensive Science”, Engaging Science, Technology, and Society,
Vol. 6, p. 111, http://dx.doi.org/10.17351/ests2020.341.
[36]
Software Sustainability Institute (n.d.), Research Software Engineers,
https://www.software.ac.uk/research-software-engineers (accessed on 9 June 2020).
[38]
Springer, R. (2019), Counting Data Librarians, https://sr.ithaka.org/blog/counting-data-
librarians/ (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[15]
SSI (2020), Software Sustainability Institute joins forces with the UK Reproducibility Network ,
https://www.software.ac.uk/news/software-sustainability-institute-joins-forces-uk-
reproducibility-network (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[61]
Stauffacher, M. et al. (2008), “Analytic and Dynamic Approach to Collaboration: A
Transdisciplinary Case Study on Sustainable Landscape Development in a Swiss Prealpine
Region”, Systemic Practice and Action Research, Vol. 21/6, pp. 409-422,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11213-008-9107-7.
[85]
Swiss Academies of arts and sciences (n.d.), td-net Network for Transdisciplinary Research,
http://www.transdisciplinarity.ch/en/td-net/Transdisziplinarit-t/Definitionen.html
(accessed on 27 May 2020).
[91]
Teal, T. et al. (2015), “Data Carpentry: Workshops to Increase Data Literacy for Researchers”,
International Journal of Digital Curation, Vol. 10/1, pp. 135-143,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2218/ijdc.v10i1.351.
[18]
The 2019 Data Science Leadership Summit (2019), About the Summit ,
https://sites.google.com/msdse.org/datascienceleadership2019/home/about- the-summit
(accessed on 8 June 2020).
[59]
The Academy of Medical Sciences (2019), Artificial intelligence and health: Summary report of
a roundtable held on 16 January 2019, https://acmedsci.ac.uk/file-download/77652269.
[54]
The Carpentries (2019), The Carpentries Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility Roadmap ,
https://carpentries.org/files/assessment/equity_inclusion_accessibility_roadmap.pdf .
[34]
The Royal Society (2019), Dynamics of data science skills, https://royalsociety.org/topics-
policy/projects/dynamics-of-data-science/ (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[3]

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 57
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

The World Commission on Environment and Development (1987), Report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development - Our Common Future.
[79]
Tress, B., G. Tress and G. Fry (2006), “Defining concepts and the process of knowledge
production in integrative research”, in Tress, B. et al. (eds.), From Landscape Research to
Landscape Planning: Aspects of Integration, Education and Application, Springer,
Dordrecht.
[71]
TUBİTAK (n.d.), Research Data Management Training Portal, https://acikveri.ulakbim.gov.tr/
(accessed on 8 June 2020).
[49]
TUBİTAK (n.d.), TUBITAK Open Science Policy Accepted,
https://ulakbim.tubitak.gov.tr/en/haber/tubitak-open-science-policy-accepted (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[50]
University of Bristol (n.d.), The UK Reproducibility Network,
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/psychology/research/ukrn/ (accessed on 8 June 2020).
[60]
Van Noorden, R. (2015), “Interdisciplinary research by the numbers”, Nature, Vol. 525/7569,
pp. 306-307, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/525306a.
[70]
Vector Institute (n.d.), List of Recognized AI-Related Programs, https://vectorinstitute.ai/list-
of-recognized-ai-related-programs/ (accessed on 5 June 2020).
[94]
Working Towards Sustainable Software for Science: Practice and Experience (n.d.), About
WSSSPE, http://wssspe.researchcomputing.org.uk/about-wssspe/ (accessed on
8 June 2020).
[40]
Wright Morton, L., S. Eigenbrode and T. Martin (2015), “Architectures of adaptive integration in
large collaborative projects”, Ecology and Society, Vol. 20/4, http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/es-
07788-200405.
[80]
Zinsstag, J. et al. (2015), One Health: The Theory and Practice of Integrated Health
Approaches, CABI.
[92]

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Expert Group members
Country Name Affiliation
Australia Michelle Barker
(Chair of Expert Group) Director, Skilled Workforce and Partnerships, ARDC
Belgium Bart Dumolyn* Department of Economy, Science and Innovation, Flemish
Government, Brussels Area
Belgium Inge van Nieuwerburgh* Ghent University Library
Canada David Castle Vice-President Research, University of Victoria
Chile Marcelo Arenas Professor, Dept of Computer Science, Catholic University of
Santiago
European
Commission Konstantinos Repanas Unit for Open Science, Directorate-General Research and
Innovation
European
Commission Carlos Casorran Unit for Open Science, Directorate-General Research and
Innovation
France Nathalie Denos* Higher Education General Directorate, Ministry for Higher
Education and Research
France Mehdi Gharsallah* Higher Education General Directorate, Ministry for Higher
Education and Research
Germany Ingvill C. Mochmann
Head of EUROLAB, Knowledge Transfer, GESIS-Leibniz
Institute for the Social Sciences, Vice President for Research
and Knowledge Transfer, Professor of International Politics,
Cologne Business School
Japan Nobukazu Yoshioka Associate Professor, National Institute of Informatics
Korea Seo-Young Noh Assistant Professor, Chungbuk National University, Korea
Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI)
Netherlands Karel Luyben Rector Magnificus Emeritus, Delft University of Technology
Norway Gard Thomassen Assistant Director, University Centre for Information
Technology, University of Oslo
United
Kingdom David McAllister
Associate Director, Research and Innovation Talent- UKRI-
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(BBSRC)
United
Kingdom Kevin Ashley Director, DCC
United
Kingdom
Lauren Clarke International Policy Manager, UK Research and Innovation
United States Daniel S. Katz
Assistant Director, National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA), University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign
United States Todd K. Leen Program Director, Computer Information Science and
Engineering, Information Intelligent Systems, NSF
The
Carpentries
Tracy Teal Executive Director, The Carpentries
CODATA Simon Hodson* Executive Director, CODATA, International Science Council
SSI Neil Chue Hong Director, SSI, University of Edinburgh

* Participated in the 1st EG meeting only.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 59
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Annex 2: Case study interview questions
1. General information
a) Please give a brief description of this initiative.
b) How is it funded/supported? What is its business model?
c) When did it start and what is its expected duration?
2. Overview and focus
a) What types of skills does your initiative aim to help develop, for who and through what
delivery method/s?
b) How did you decide which skills to focus on (e.g., generic vs discipline-specific, technical
skills versus softer skills like collaboration)?
c) Can you map highlight the cells in the meta -framework (that is provided as an annex) that
are the main focus of your initiative?
d) Are the roles identified in the meta- framework (see annex) appropriate for your
project/policy/initiative? Is the framework missing some key roles?
e) Are the skills (horizontal axis) identified in the meta -framework appropriate for your
project/policy/initiative? Is the framework missing some key skills?
f) Are there other initiatives with a similar focus to this one and do you cooperate with these?
3. Broader context and drivers
a) What was the main driver for your program? Has your program been driven by an
assessment of supply and/or demand (or some sort of market analysis), and if so, what?
b) Does your program look at broader enablers to facilitate the development of a skilled
workforce, such as career paths and recognition for different types of research outputs,
inclusion of digital expertise in research teams, funder mandates to recognise the importance
of digital professionals etc.? How does your initiative fit with this broader context?
c) Can you identify broader enablers that support the success of your program, e.g. does your
program implement more successfully when certain types of support from other
organisations is present?
4. Policy requirements
a) What are the best examples of actions (e.g., mandates or incentives, including funding)
which have led to improvements in digital skills development for data intensive research at
scale?
b) What actions are required to promote digital skills for research by the following actors:
• National or regional governments
• Research agencies
• Professional science associations
• Research institutes
• Research community
5. Future perspectives
a) What are the most in-demand digital skills for science? What are the skills whose demand
is growing fastest? Is there any skill that you think will not be so important in the future?
b) Does your initiative take into account how research may be different in 10 years (influenced
by digitalisation, e.g., AI)?
c) Do our current skills programs/policies ready us for this?
d) If not, what new skills or new programs will be needed? What enablers would be needed to
support these?

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Digital Skills Meta-Framework

This framework is designed to help define the scope and principle focus of initiatives that focus on
digital skills for science, i.e. the case studies. Whilst some initiatives may cover all stages of the research
cycle (horizontal axis) and all roles or skill groupings (vertical axis), it is likely that most initiatives
concentrate on particular aspects. Interviewees are invited to highlight those cells that are the main focus
of their case study.

Definition of terms:
Data analyst: This is someone who knows statistics. They may know programming, or they may
be an Excel wizard. Either way, they can build models based on low-level data. Most importantly,
they know which questions to ask of the data.
Data engineer: Operating at a low level close to the data, they are people who write the code that
handles data and moves it around. They may have some machine learning background.
Data manager/steward: A data steward is a person responsible for the management of data objects
including metadata. These people think about managing and preserving data. They are information
specialists, archivists, librarians and compliance officers.
Research software engineer: A growing number of people in academia combine expertise in
programming with an intricate understanding of research. These Research Software Engineers may
start of as researchers who spend time developing software to progress their research or they may
start of from a more conventional software-development background and be drawn to research by
the challenge of using software to further research.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 61
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Annex 3: Workshop on Digital Skills for Data Intensive Science
The workshop was held on 28-29 October 2019 at the Leibniz Institute for Social Sciences
(GESIS), Cologne, Germany.
The workshop was organised in four main sessions that focussed on: 1. The broad context
and drivers for digital skills; 2. Defining skills needs; 3. Policy requirements; 4. Future
perspectives.
Attendees
Country Name Affiliation
Australia Ms. Michelle BARKER* Director, Skilled Workforce and Partnerships, ARDC
Ms. Rachel WEBSTER Head of Astrophysics, University of Melbourne
Belgium Mr. Alexander BOTZKI Manager BITS Core Facility, Bioinformatics, Flemish life
Sciences Institute VIB
Canada Mr. David CASTLE* Vice-President Research, University of Victoria
Chile Mr. Andres JORDAN Director, MAS
France
Mr. Cedric LOMBION Open Data and Data Literacy Consultant, School of Data / Open
Knowledge France
Mr. François MICHONNEAU Infrastructure Team Lead, Curriculum Development Lead, The
Carpentries
Ms. Laura MOLLOY Committee on Data for Science and Technology, CODATA
Germany
Ms. Helene BRINKEN State and University Library, Georg-August-University Göttingen
Mr. Dietmar JANETZKO* Professor of Information Systems and Business Process
Management, Cologne Business School
Japan Mr. Nobukazu YOSHIOKA* Associate Professor, Information Systems Architecture Science
Research Division, National Institute of Informatics
Netherlands
Mr. Alastair DUNNING Head of Research Data Services at TU Delft and Head of 4TU,
Centre for Research Data, Technische Universiteit Delft
Ms. Celia VAN GELDER Head of Training Platform, Dutch Techcentre for Life Sciences
(DTL), ELIXIR
New Zealand Mr. Nick JONES Director, NeSI, University of Auckland
Norway Mr. Gard THOMASSEN* Assistant Director - Research Computing, University of Oslo
South Africa Mr. Anwar VAHED Director, Data Intensive Research Initiative of South Africa,
Council for scientific and industrial Research (CSIR)
United
Kingdom
Mr. Harriet BARNES Head of Higher Education & Skills, British Academy
Mr. Simon HETTRICK Deputy Director, Software Sustainability Institute
Ms. Corinne MARTIN External Relations Officer, ELIXIR
Mr. David MCALLISTER* Associate Director – Research and Innovation Talent, BBSRC,
UK Research and Innovation
Mr. Ben MURTON Head of Professional and Academic Development, the Alan
Turing Institute
Mr. Xavier POTAU Principal Consultant, Technopolis
Mr. Hugh SHANAHAN
Professor of Open Science, Department of Computer Science,
Royal Holloway, University of London, Co-chair, CODATA-RDA
School of Research Data Science
United States Mr. Daniel S. KATZ Assistant Director, National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Ms. Tracy TEAL* Executive Director, The Carpentries
European
Union Mr. Konstantinos REPANAS Policy Officer, Open Science & EOSCDG Research
GESIS-
Leibniz
Institute for
the Social
Sciences
Mr. Fabian FLÖCK Department Knowledge Transfer, Team EUROLAB, GESIS
Ms. Ingvill Constanze
MOCHMANN* Department Knowledge Transfer, Team EUROLAB, GESIS
Ms. Katrin WELLER Team Leader "Social Analytics and Services, Computational
Social Science, GESIS
Project
consultant Mr. Kevin ASHLEY* Director, DCC, University of Edinburgh
OECD-
STI/GSF
Mr. Carthage SMITH Senior Policy Analyst
Mr. Yoshiaki TAMURA Policy Analyst
* Members of the OECD GSF Expert Group on Digital Skills for Data Intensive Science.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62 | BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Glossary
One of the challenges in considering the digital workforce needs of science is reaching a
common understanding across different communities, including scientists from different
disciplines, and educators and policymakers from different backgrounds. This is further
complicated by translation into different languages and cultures. Many detailed glossaries
of digital terms in relation to science already exist. The key words that are used regularly
in the current report – and which are likely to be useful to science policy makers - are
defined below. These definitions have been adopted or adapted from other works in the
field (Science Europe, 2018 [65]; CASRAI, n.d. [66]; Babuska and Oden, 2004 [67]) and are
commonly used in the scientific research community.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) AI is the theory and development of computer systems able to perform tasks normally
requiring human intelligence
Big data Big data is an evolving term that describes any voluminous amount of structured,
semi-structured or unstructured data that has the potential to be mined for
information. Big data is often dynamic and ensuring its reliability can be a challenge.
Data Facts, measurements, recordings, records, or observations about the world, with a
minimum of contextual interpretation. Data may be in any format or medium, including
numbers, symbols, text, images, films, video, sound recordings, drawings, designs or
other graphical representations.
Data curation Data curation covers data selection, storage, preservation, annotation, provenance
and other meta-data maintenance, and dissemination, and is needed to increase data
interoperability. This includes the required hardware and software support for these
tasks.
Data ethics Data ethics is a new branch of ethics concerned with responsible use of data,
algorithms and corresponding practices.
Data governance The exercise of authority, control and shared decision making (planning, monitoring
and enforcement) over the management of data assets.
Data-intensive science Data-intensive science is considered to be the fourth paradigm of science after the
three interrelated paradigms of empirical, theoretical, and computational science. It is
seen as a data-driven, exploration-centred style of science, where IT infrastructures
and software tools are heavily used to help scientists manage, analyse, and share
data.
Data lifecycle All the stages in the existence of digital information from creation to destruction. A
lifecycle view is used to enable active management of the data objects and resource
over time, thus maintaining accessibility and usability.
Data literacy The ability to read, interpret, create and communicate data as information.
Data management The activities of data policy development, data planning, data element
standardisation, information management control, data synchronisation, data sharing,
and database development, including practices that acquire, control, protect, deliver
and enhance the value of data and information.
Data science Data science encompasses the processes that deal with the extraction of meaning or
knowledge from data.
Data stewardship Data stewardship is the management and oversight of an organisation's data assets
in order to provide professional users with high quality data that is easily accessible in
a consistent manner.
Digitalisation Digitalisation describes the way in which many domains of professional and social life
are restructured around digital information and communication technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
BUILDING DIGITAL WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND SKILLS FOR DATA-INTENSIVE SCIENCE | 63
 OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY POLICY PAPER

Digital skills Digital skills can be defined as a range of abilities to use digital devices,
communication applications, and networks to access and manage information. In the
context of science, these skills include an understanding of software, tools and data.
FAIR data FAIR data is data which meet the principles of Findability, Accessibility,
Interoperability, and Reusability.
Machine Learning Machine Learning (ML) is a branch of Artificial Intelligence that is focused on
developing systems that can learn from data. An ML algorithm is trained by learning
from examples, which normally requires very large datasets.
Metadata Literally, "data about data"; data that defines and describes the characteristics of
other data, often using standardised formats.
Open data Data that is accessible, freely shared. Open can be freely used, reused, built on and
redistributed by anyone and may be subject to the requirement to attribute and share
alike.
Open science Open science promotes openness and early sharing of research ideas, papers,
solutions, data and processes. Open science stresses the scientific, economic and
societal benefits of increased and open scientific collaboration.
People-focussed skills People-focussed skills differ from the system-focus of technical skills and include
communication, teamwork collaboration, etc.
Research data Data that are used as primary sources to support technical or scientific enquiry,
research, scholarship, or artistic activity, and that are used as evidence in the
research process and/or are commonly accepted in the research community as
necessary to validate research findings and results.
Software Software is a set of instructions, data or programs used to operate computers and
execute specific tasks.
Roles
Data analyst This is someone who knows statistics. They may know programming, or they may be
expert in spreadsheets. Either way, they can build models based on low-level data.
Most importantly, they know which questions to ask of the data.
Data steward A person responsible for planning and executing of all actions on digital data before,
during and after a research project, with the aim of optimising the usability, reusability
and reproducibility of the resulting data (Dutch Techcentre for Life Sciences, n.d.[68]).
Data scientist A practitioner of data science. It is a generic term that encompasses many fields of
specialised expertise. In the current report, data analysts, data stewards and research
software engineers are considered as sub-groups of data scientists. In certain
contexts, data scientist is also sometimes used in a more limited ways that make it
equivalent to either the data analyst or software engineer roles.
Research Software
Engineer (RSE)
A growing number of people in academia combine expertise in programming with an
intricate understanding of research. These RSEs may start of as researchers who
spend time developing software to progress their research or they may come from a
more conventional software-development background and are drawn to research by
the challenge of using software to further research.
Research support
professionals
In the context of digitalisation, these are the people who support scientific researchers
conducting data-intensive science. They are not necessarily part of a research team
and might be considered as service providers. This is a broad category that can
include data stewards, RSEs, data managers, librarians and archivists.
