
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy
Dilemmas for the mobilization of research

Exploratory Study

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 2
Authors
Esther Baar, Chris Eveleens, Vincent Baarslag and Jasper
Deuten

Illustrations:
Rathenau Instituut/Laura Marienus
Cover photo:
Humanoid robots during the 100-metre sprint at the World Humanoid Robot
Games in Beijing on 14 August 2025. (Photo: Adek Berry/AFP/ANP).
Please cite as:
Rathenau Instituut (2026). Geopolitiek in wetenschapsbeleid. Dilemmas in
mobilising research; The Hague. (Authors: Baar, E. J. M., Eveleens, C. P.,
Baarslag, V., & Deuten, J. J.)

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 3
Foreword
If you ask scientists, administrators, policymakers and politicians about the role of
science in these geopolitically turbulent times, the answers vary. Take the dilemma
of whether to collaborate with illiberal countries such as Russia, China, Iran, Israel,
and – new to this list – the US.

One expert will argue that now, more than ever, we must continue to collaborate, as
it provides access to talented researchers and state-of-the-art knowledge. A second
calls for clear boundaries to cooperation to avoid becoming dependent. And a third
wants to sever ties to prevent undesirable knowledge transfer.

All three have valid arguments. Every answer or perspective seems logical. Only
when you zoom in do you realise that different public values lie behind the various
perspectives.

In this exploratory study, the Rathenau Instituut lists the eight most common
perspectives. These perspectives are employed, for example, by government
departments, advisory bodies, knowledge institutions and other intermediary
organisations.

Complex policy issues often involve multiple perspectives simultaneously. This
gives rise to tensions regarding the direction and organisation of science. The
current geopolitical climate only makes these tensions more urgent and complex.
This creates complex dilemmas, such as whether = to collaborate with illiberal
countries, and the need to safeguard open science versus prioritising military
interests.

With this exploratory study, we aim to strengthen the public and political debate on
science and science policy so that our country can make well-considered, balanced
and, therefore, democratic decisions.

Prof. Dr. Eefje Cuppen
Director of the Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 4
Summary
Technological and geopolitical developments, such as war in Europe and the rise of
new world powers, are leading to changes in scientific research and science policy.
We see these changes in the substantive priorities of research and in the
organisation of research. The Netherlands and other NATO countries, for example,
have agreed to invest significantly more in defence-related research in the coming
years. There is also a more critical assessment of which countries and institutions
are desirable partners for international research collaboration.

International collaboration and open science no longer seem to be a given. Some
types of research, such as basic research or climate research, appear to be losing
priority. On the contrary, other research domains – such as key enabling
technologies – are receiving greater attention.

These changes are far-reaching and their consequences are uncertain. Moreover,
they touch upon a number of key values in science, such as transparency,
openness and the importance of international cooperation. Many people within and
outside the scientific community are concerned. They feel that the changes in
science are happening too quickly or, conversely, too slowly. At the same time,
there is little clarity on the exact impacts of geopolitical unrest on science. This
makes it more difficult to weigh policy options and pursue sensible policymaking.

Based on an exploratory study, the Rathenau Instituut presents an overview of how
Dutch policymakers and practitioners understand the relationship between
geopolitics and science. It also outlines the implications of these perspectives for
the science system..

By ‘science system’, we mean the entirety of public organisations involved in the
implementation, organisation and management of scientific research in the
Netherlands. In addition to knowledge institutions, such as universities of applied
sciences, universities and research institutes, the science system also includes the
organisations responsible for management, funding and coordination, such as
ministries, research funding bodies and advisory councils.

The present exploratory study yielded eight characteristic perspectives. These
perspectives illustrate the various ways in which stakeholders interpret the
changing geopolitical situation (the problem analysis) and the way in which they
subsequently translate this interpretation into policy and action (possible solutions).

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 5
These perspectives embody assumptions and ideas about what science can and
should be, and what it should do. Depending on the perspective of the beholder,
certain changes to the science system are more or less desirable.

Each of the perspectives centres on a characteristic concept. These are: strategic
autonomy, technological sovereignty, competitiveness, national security, knowledge
security, sustainability transitions, academic freedom, and science diplomacy. Each
perspective has its own views regarding the science system and, when dominant,
has consequences for science policy. Which perspective is or will become dominant
partly determines the shape of the science system.

By juxtaposing these perspectives, we can see emerging tensions and dilemmas. In
part, these are existing dilemmas that are gaining relevance due to geopolitical
developments. And in part, they are also new dilemmas.

The five key tensions and dilemmas are:
1. Open science versus military interests; concerning the implications and
trade-offs surrounding the growing budgets for defence-related research.
2. European coordination versus national science policy; concerning the
relationship between European and national coordination of the Dutch
science system.
3. Applied versus basic research; on the extent to which the science system
should align with changing political priorities and societal needs.
4. Security versus sustainability; on the extent to which research for security
objectives can be effectively combined with research for sustainability
objectives.
5. Whether to collaborate with illiberal countries; on the conditions for
international collaboration with countries and institutions that do not share
the same democratic or academic values.

We propose that people within the scientific community engage in dialogue with one
another about these dilemmas and about the why, what for, what and how of
science. Such a conversation or dialogue can foster mutual understanding and
appreciation for the pluralistic values of science. Furthermore, this dialogue helps to
guide, coordinate and organise scientific research in these times of geopolitical
turmoil.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 6
Contents
Foreword ................................................................................................................. 3
Summary ................................................................................................................. 4
Contents ................................................................................................................. 6
1 Introduction ................................................................................................... 7
2 Changes in the science system ................................................................ 11
2.1 Strategic autonomy ...................................................................... 13
2.2 Technological sovereignty .......................................................... 14
2.3 Competitiveness ........................................................................... 16
2.4 Academic freedom ........................................................................ 17
2.5 National security ........................................................................... 18
2.6 Knowledge security ...................................................................... 19
2.7 Societal challenges ...................................................................... 20
2.8 Science diplomacy ....................................................................... 22
3 Five dilemmas ............................................................................................. 27
3.1 Open science versus military interests ...................................... 28
3.2 European coordination versus national science policy ........... 30
3.3 Applied versus basic research .................................................... 31
3.4 Security versus sustainability ..................................................... 32
3.5 Whether or not to collaborate with illiberal countries ............... 34
4 Continued .......................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
Appendix 1 Approach used ................................................................................ 38
Appendix 2 Sources ............................................................................................ 41

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 7
1 Introduction
For a long time, international students and staff at universities and universities of
applied sciences were seen as a sign of quality and an opportunity for the Dutch
labour market. Now, hundreds of foreign researchers and opportunities for
collaboration are being turned away because they are deemed to pose too great a
risk.1 In the Science Vision 2025, drawn up over ten years ago, scientific
collaboration with China was seen as an opportunity. The 2022 threat assessment
on state actors states that ‘China poses the greatest threat to Dutch knowledge
security.’2 In places where flyers on sustainability used to hang, we now see posters
from the Ministry of Defence.3 And during a recent opening ceremony, outgoing
Prime Minister Schoof said that universities and universities of applied sciences
‘train people [who] will soon become the best recruits for our armed forces.’4 These
are a few examples that show that the science system in the Netherlands has
changed significantly in recent years as a result of geopolitical shifts.

Geopolitics concerns international power relations between countries. In recent
years, we have seen rapid changes in how countries and power blocs operate in
relation to one another.
5 Geopolitics is not only about military power, but also about
international power relations in other domains, such as the economy, food, raw
materials, the media and international regulation (such as the UN or the
International Criminal Court). Science and technology are increasingly becoming
explicit elements of geopolitical relations.The Netherlands and Europe are
confronting a new world order in which they feel significantly more vulnerable—
economically, institutionally, and militarily—than before..

Science and technology play a significant role in the shifting geopolitical landscape.
On the one hand, they act as a driving force behind these changes. China, for
example, has developed into an economic and military superpower through years of
targeted investment in science and technology. On the other hand, geopolitical
shifts also have implications for how countries wish to manage, fund and organise
their science systems. The Netherlands and other NATO countries, for example,

1 https://nos.nl/artikel/2560912-universiteiten-wijzen-honderden-buitenlandse-onderzoekers-en-
samenwerkingen-af.
2 AIVD et al., 2022.
3 https://hvana.nl/nieuws/laat-de-hva-zich-voor-karretje-van-defensie-spannen .
4 'Just as the University of Twente and Saxion are training people here for research and development, with a
view to eventually producing the best equipment for our armed forces and for the entire supply chain that
contributes to this.' https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/toespraken/2025/09/01/toespraak-mp-schoof-bij-
opening-hogeschool--en-academisch-jaar.
5 Scientific Council for Government Policy, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 8
have agreed to invest significantly more in research and technology development
for defence. And there is a more critical assessment of with whom international
cooperation is desirable and under what conditions.

Consequences of the changing geopolitical landscape are already clearly visible in
the way scientific research is organised in the Netherlands.
6 International
cooperation is under greater pressure. The open science movement is facing
restrictions due to knowledge security concerns.7 Cuts are being made to basic
research and education, whilst key emerging technologies and defence are being
given higher priority and more funding.8 There appears to be a consensus that
adjustments are necessary, but a clear and widely supported plan is lacking.

These changes are therefore leading to uncertainty and a lack of clarity regarding
the scope, direction and organisation of scientific research in the Netherlands. This
complicates the political assessment of alternatives for the structure of the science
system and the implementation of sensible policy.

Moreover, the changes affect a number of key values in science, such as
transparency, openness and the importance of international cooperation in
addressing global challenges, for example. There are serious concerns from
various quarters about the consequences of geopolitical developments for science.
Are we bidding farewell to the open and international character of science, and
what do we stand to lose as a result?
9 Or had internationalisation actually gone too
far?10 Are we being too naïve in our cooperation with high-risk countries?11 What is
the role of universities and research institutes in a technological arms race, and
what legal, political and ethical questions arise in relation to military research?12
Which democratic and academic values are at stake?

6 This is also in line with other OECD countries (OECD, 2025).
7 See the NWO website on knowledge security (https://www.nwo.nl/kennisveiligheid); the KNAW position paper
on knowledge security (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2023); and the AWTI advisory
report on knowledge security (Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2022).
8 Examples of this include the National Technology Strategy (Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy,
2024); the new industrial policy (Ministry of Economic Affairs, 2025b); and the AWTI advice on knowledge for
defence (Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2024a).
9 https://www.knaw.nl/nieuws/statement-van-de-knaw-wetenschap-kent-geen-grenzen-behoud-het-open-
wetenschapssysteem; https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2025/03/25/wetenschap-floreert-bij-open-grenzen-het-
huidige-beleid-gooit-de-grenzen-juist-dicht-a4887575.
10 https://www.ewmagazine.nl/nederland/opinie/2023/06/omtzigt-e-a-het-kabinet-moet-nederlands-weer-
verplicht-stellen-op-universiteiten-1044058.
11 With China: https://hcss.nl/news/follow-the-money-ook-samenwerken-met-gewone-chinese-universiteiten-
levert-risicos-op. Or with Israel: https://www.tudelft.nl/2025/tu-delft/nieuwe-samenwerkingen-met-israel-per-
direct-opgeschort-bestaande-samenwerkingen-onder-herbeoordeling.
12 See, for example, https://universonline.nl/nieuws/2024/12/04/best-university-we-need-to-talk-about-
militarisation or https://www.scienceguide.nl/2025/10/duitse-oppositie-wil-opnieuw-vredesclausules-tegen-
militarisering-universiteiten-en-hogescholen.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 9
Exploring the implications for the science system
The Rathenau Instituut conducts ongoing research into how developments in
society and in science influence one another.13 After all, it is important that scientific
research is properly aligned with society’s changing needs, expectations and
demands regarding science. Geopolitical developments raise important questions
about this alignment.

The first aim of this publication is to identify what the changing geopolitical relations
mean (or will mean) for the Dutch science system (see Box 1 for an explanation of
what we mean by the science system). Scientific education fell outside the scope of
this research, but is of course closely intertwined with scientific research. The
second aim is to explore the strategic questions to which science policy must find
answers. This publication thus provides a basis for political debate and policy
development, for example by working with stakeholders in the science system to
further develop these strategic questions and dilemmas into actionable
perspectives.

The central question in this exploration is:
How do geopolitical developments translate into changing priorities and
organisation of the science system, and what strategic questions and
considerations arise from this?

To answer this question, we investigated how policymakers and other stakeholders
involved in the science system translate the changing geopolitical situation into
different priorities for science, different policy approaches, and a different scale or
distribution of public research funding.

To this end, we first conducted a document analysis of policy papers, letters,
advisory reports and other documents. Additionally, we conducted a number of
interviews with policymakers and policy implementers and participated in various
external meetings, including dialogues and conferences. Furthermore, we studied
the debate surrounding geopolitics and science by reading news articles and
opinion pieces. For a more detailed explanation of the used methods, see Appendix
1.

13 Examples of this include a foresight study on science policy (Rathenau Instituut, 2024) and research into
digital dependency (https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/digitalisering/naar-een-nieuwe-verhouding-tot-
technologiebedrijven/van-digitale-afhankelijkheid-naar-digitale-autonomie).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 10
Box:1 What do we mean by ‘science system’?
By ‘the science system’, we mean the collective body of public organisations
involved in the implementation, organisation and management of scientific
research in the Netherlands. The system comprises a broad mix of public
knowledge institutions dedicated to academic and applied research. It includes
universities, universities of applied sciences, research institutes for
fundamental and applied research, university medical centres and all manner
of other public and policy-oriented knowledge organisations. The researchers
at these organisations conduct scientific research, organising themselves into
projects, programmes, consortia and networks. The science system also
includes the (policy) organisations and other bodies responsible for the
management, funding and coordination of research. A key player is the
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (OCW), which is responsible for
the research and science system. However, it also involves other ministries
with knowledge or innovation policies, research funders such as NWO and
ZonMw, coordinating bodies (such as programme committees) and advisory
organisations (such as the KNAW and the AWTI).
Reading guide
Chapter 2 describes the perspectives through which various parties within the
science system interpret the changing geopolitical relations and the implications this
has for the governance, funding and organisation of science in the Netherlands.
Chapter 3 then introduces five dilemmas for science policy arising from tensions
within and between these perspectives. The final chapter, Chapter 5, calls for a joint
search for answers to these dilemmas.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 11
2 Changes in the science system
The rapidly changing geopolitical landscape is leading to divergent reactions among
the various policymakers and other parties involved in the governance, coordination
and funding of science in the Netherlands. Our exploratory study found that
different stakeholders interpret the geopolitical context in diverse ways, leading to
varying expectations, knowledge needs, and demands for science..

We identified eight recurring perspectives that characterised the way in which
parties interpret the changing geopolitical situation (the problem analysis) as well as
the way in which they subsequently translate this interpretation into different or new
priorities and approaches with which the Netherlands should steer, fund and
organise the national science system (the solution direction). We use the concept of
perspectives to gain insight into the way in which actors define changing situations
and problems and formulate corresponding solution approaches.

These perspectives embody assumptions and ideas about what science can and
should be, and about which geopolitical developments matter and are most urgent.
Perspectives are also linked to which values come to the fore and which fade from
view. They also influence the allocation of resources – i.e. the instruments, rules
and programmes deemed acceptable or desirable. Which perspectives receive
attention therefore has real consequences for the science system (see also Figure
1).

The eight perspectives:
1. Strategic autonomy (section 2.1).
2. Technological sovereignty (section 2.2).
3. Competitiveness (section 2.3).
4. Academic freedom (section 2.4).
5. National security (section 2.5).
6. Knowledge security (section 2.6).
7. Societal challenges (section 2.7).
8. Science diplomacy (section 2.8).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 12
Figure1 Eight perspectives on the science system

Eight perspectives through which you can view the science system in the light of geopolitical unrest. The
perspective you adopt influences how you view science and has consequences for its scope, direction and
organisation. Source: Rathenau Instituut.
In the following sections, we describe each perspective by outlining which aspects
of changing geopolitical relations it emphasizes, the values it prioritizes, the actors
that commonly adopt it, the policy domains it informs, and the adjustments to the
science system associated with it. We distinguish between adjustments in the scale
of research funding, the governance and direction of research, and the organisation
of research.
In practice, as our exploratory study shows, some perspectives overlap. A summary
of the perspectives and the accompanying analysis is provided in Table 1 at the
end of this chapter.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 13
2.1 Strategic autonomy
The first perspective focuses on strategic autonomy. It refers to a country’s ability,
as a global player and in collaboration with international partners, to safeguard its
national interests and public values based on its own insights and choices, and to
remain resilient in an interconnected world.14 In the EU and the Netherlands, the
concept of open strategic autonomy has been embraced to emphasise the
importance of open trade and international cooperation.15 For the European
Commission in particular, strategic autonomy plays a central role in the perspective
through which it translates the changing geopolitical situation into other policy
priorities and policy approaches for science, technology and innovation. In the
Netherlands, strategic autonomy characterises the perspective through which the
Ministry of Defence, the Advisory Council on International Affairs and the Ministry of
Economic Affairs translate geopolitical developments into different priorities and
approaches for research and innovation policy.

From the perspective of strategic autonomy, it is important that scientific research
and education contribute to the knowledge and technology needed to make
independent strategic choices across a wide range of fields. A key feature of this
perspective is the call for larger R&D budgets, both for R&D in general, but
particularly in strategic domains such as research for innovation in defence, energy
or the microchip sector.
16 Because the Netherlands is too small to compete at the
forefront of science across all fronts, this perspective advocates choosing strategic
niches. A niche may be an industrial hub, such as the ecosystem surrounding
ASML, but it may also have a scientific focus, such as large-scale scientific
infrastructure or an excellent research group. Leadership in strategic niches
improves the geopolitical balance of power relative to other countries, as it can
serve as a means of exerting pressure or as strategic leverage in mutual relations.

One policy strategy in which this perspective is clearly evident is the National
Technology Strategy. It identifies ten technology domains as priorities in light of two
geopolitical developments: increased international technological competition, and
other countries’ strategic focus on strategic technology domains. For example, it

14 Letter from the government on open strategic autonomy (Ministry of Foreign Affairs et al., 2022).
15 ‘For the government, the European Union’s open strategic autonomy represents its ability, as a global player
and in cooperation with international partners, to safeguard its public interests and remain resilient in an
interconnected world, based on its own insights and choices.’ (Ministry of Foreign Affairs et al., 2022, p. 3).
16 For example, the AWTI advisory report on a ‘knowledge offensive’ for defence (Advisory Council for Science,
Technology and Innovation, 2024a), the AIV advisory report on ‘smart industrial policy’ (Advisory Council on
International Affairs, 2022); and the news item from the national government on ‘Project Beethoven’
(https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/actueel/nieuws/2024/03/28/nederland-investeert-25-miljard-euro-in-sterk-
ondernemingsklimaat-voor-microchipsector-brainport-eindhoven).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 14
states that for the Netherlands, ‘it is important to (…) continue to participate in the
rapid global technological developments.’17

Furthermore, from this perspective, there is a call to reduce existing dependencies
in science. From this perspective, science and technology have become part of a
geopolitical power struggle
18 , in which rival power blocs undermine the scientific
and technological sovereignty of other regions through interference, espionage and
strategic takeovers. Based on this reasoning, the Ministries of Education, Culture
and Science (OCW), Economic Affairs (EZ) and Justice and Security (J&V), and the
Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (AWTI) advocate
countering interference, undesirable knowledge transfer in science, foreign
mergers, and investments and acquisitions of strategic, knowledge-intensive
companies.
19

From this perspective, the main challenge facing society – and (indirectly) the
scientific community – is that, due to significant dependencies in the technological,
economic and military spheres, Europe’s geopolitical position of strength is
diminishing in relation to other power blocs that are, at least in some respects,
rivals. Think, for instance, of China (raw materials and goods), Russia (gas) or the
US (digital technology, defence). These dependencies undermine the ability to
safeguard national interests based on our own insights and choices. Furthermore,
they can lead to a loss of control over key European values, for example where
technology infringes on privacy or when sustainability depends on raw materials to
which we have no access. Conversely, strategic autonomy also involves creating
and exploiting dependencies amongst rivals.
20 Values that are important to parties
within this perspective include (broad) prosperity, national and economic security,
innovation, speed, (in)dependence, competition and cooperation.
2.2 Technological sovereignty
Technological sovereignty is the ability of a country, or a group of countries, to
develop and use technologies that are important for its own well-being, potentially in
collaboration with others, without being unilaterally or structurally dependent in the

17 Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, 2024, p. 7.
18 Scientific Council for Government Policy, 2024.
19 Oberon and Dialogic, 2024; Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2022; Ministry of
Education, Culture and Science, 2024. See also a news report on the takeover of control of Nexperia by
outgoing Minister Karremans of Economic Affairs (https://nos.nl/artikel/2586846-chinees-exportverbod-op-
cruciale-chips-voor-auto-industrie-hoe-nu-verder).
20 TNO Vector, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 15
process.21 This perspective has received considerable attention in recent years as a
result of the increased dependence of governments in the digital domain, the
changed stance of the US towards the EU, and the COVID-19 pandemic.

As the above definition already shows, there is a significant overlap between
technological sovereignty and strategic autonomy (section 2.1). Nevertheless, we
also see differences between the two perspectives. Not only in the priorities that
arise from them, but also in the consequences for the science system and the
parties that adopt these perspectives. The starting point for technological
sovereignty is that the Netherlands or the EU must possess the technological
capabilities in-house to safeguard vital functions and services, such as healthcare,
food and security, and thus to reduce dependencies. Consequently, the focus is
primarily on its own functioning and well-being. Strategic autonomy has a different
focus, with a stronger emphasis on safeguarding national interests through a
country’s strategic options for action vis-à-vis other countries.

A focus on technological sovereignty has at least three relevant implications for
science.
22 The first implication is that, from this perspective, it is important to be
actively involved in research areas necessary for safeguarding vital functions and
services. This is because different countries may have different approaches to
organising matters such as healthcare, education and security. The idea behind
technological sovereignty is that by conducting research yourself, you are in the
driver’s seat and can design and use technology in a way that is in line with a
country’s interests and values.

The second implication for science is that, under technological sovereignty,
research priorities stem from what is needed to better safeguard vital functions and
services and reduce any dependencies. This contrasts with strategic autonomy, in
which national and public interests can also be achieved through dominance in a
number of strategic niches. An example of research priorities being derived from
what is needed to safeguard vital functions and services – in this case healthcare –
is the way in which ZonMw currently funds medical research. In this context, a

21 Edler et al. (2023) define technological sovereignty as ‘the ability of a state or a federation of states to provide
the technologies it deems critical for its welfare, competitiveness, and ability to act, and to be able to develop
these or source them from other economic areas without one-sided structural dependency.’ Technological
sovereignty therefore involves a combination of reliable access to technology or relevant components, which
can be ensured both through domestic provisions (own capabilities) and through relationships with other
economic regions (external networks). Lee et al. (2023) emphasise that technological sovereignty should not
be equated with ‘technonationalism’ and protectionism. No single country can master a technology in all its
components. Similarly, March and Schieferdecker (2023) also argue that technological sovereignty should not
be confused with a pursuit of autarky and nationalism. International cooperation and trade are, in fact,
important for strengthening technological sovereignty.
22 Related interventions that fit within this framework include a greater emphasis on public procurement,
technology regulation and import duties.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 16
budget is made available for research into a relevant issue, and scientists from
various disciplines are invited to submit proposals.

The third implication for science is how this perspective advocates for the protection
of knowledge development. The focus here is not so much on the undesirable
transfer of knowledge to rival states, but rather on undesirable external influence,
as this undermines our own capabilities.

In the Netherlands, alongside the European Commission, it is primarily government
departments that are actively addressing this issue, such as the Ministry of the
Interior and Kingdom Relations for digital technology, the Ministry of Defence for
military technology, and the Ministry of Climate and Green Growth for energy
technology. The Ministry of Economic Affairs and TNO also apply this perspective
to some extent in the National Technology Strategy (NTS) (and likely in the
forthcoming industrial policy). As mentioned, technological sovereignty also touches
on knowledge security, in which the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
plays a major role. As with strategic autonomy, there is a shared awareness among
these parties that most Member States cannot achieve technological sovereignty on
their own, and that the Netherlands will therefore also become more dependent on
European cooperation in technology development.

Society is deeply intertwined with technology. How that technology works influences
how society functions: from the way we interact with one another to our production
and consumption. Technological sovereignty reveals which public values are
strengthened or compromised due to our own (deficient) technological capabilities.
One example is the concern for privacy in certain digital communication
technologies originating from China, such as 5G technology. If we lack sovereignty
over this technology, citizens’ privacy and the security of the Netherlands may be
compromised. Which values are important therefore depends partly on the
technology in question. In general terms, the values of sovereignty, independence,
competition and broad prosperity (of people and businesses) are important to those
involved in this field.
2.3 Competitiveness
A third perspective revolves around the concept of competitiveness.
Competitiveness describes the extent to which the Netherlands or the EU can offer
products and services on the market that are more attractive than those of
competing countries or power blocs. Although this perspective is certainly not new,
we are seeing a renewed appreciation of it in times of geopolitical unrest,
particularly thanks to the influential report written by Mario Draghi on behalf of the

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 17
European Commission.23 Key stakeholders adopting this perspective include,
alongside the EC, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, TNO and business lobby groups
such as VNO-NCW.

From the perspective of competitiveness, the mobilisation of research for economic
strength, productivity and growth markets is central. Sometimes stakeholders speak
of a knowledge reservoir, which can be tapped for economic growth and
prosperity.
24 Concrete examples include calls for: increasing R&D expenditure,
strengthening public-private partnerships in R&D, stimulating technological
breakthroughs for economic gain, and the importance of creating space for
innovative, fast-growing companies, for example through commercialisation policy
and attractive regulations for knowledge-intensive start-ups.
25 The idea that
technological development is a race that society wants to win is clearly reflected in
this perspective.

The thinking is that competitiveness leads to economic growth and that the
economic benefits can then be used to deliver public services and thus ensure
resilience – socially, economically and militarily. In this way, we could protect our
European, democratic values. Those within this perspective attach great
importance to the values of economic growth and (broad) prosperity. This requires
a strong business climate, entrepreneurship, technological innovation, and the
ability to attract international talent.
2.4 Academic freedom
The fourth perspective concerns academic freedom. Academic freedom is ‘the
principle that staff at academic institutions are free to conduct their scientific
research, publish their findings and teach’.
26 Academic freedom, often alongside
freedom of expression, is regarded as an essential pillar of the democratic legal
order, and concerns both the freedom of scientists and that of academic institutions.
Key stakeholders that uphold this perspective include the Royal Netherlands
Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), the Ministry of Education, Culture and
Science, UNESCO, UNL and AWTI. Various developments, including geopolitical
ones such as the direct undermining of academic freedom in, for example, the
United States, , have led to renewed attention being paid to the importance of and
safeguarding academic freedom.

23 Draghi, 2024.
24 Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2020.
25 Ministry of Economic Affairs, 2025a.
26 Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2021 .

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 18
This perspective focuses specifically on science and has a number of important
implications for the direction and organisation of the science system. In terms of
direction, it advocates freedom for scientists and institutions to make their own
choices through sufficient unrestricted funding. This does not mean that scientists
simply do as they please; after all, academic freedom is not absolute but is
bounded by professional standards of scientific practice as laid down in the Dutch
Code of Conduct for Scientific Integrity. These standards are determined by five
principles: honesty, diligence, transparency, independence and responsibility. In
terms of organisation, it is important for parties within this perspective that careful
consideration is given to the implications of measures relating to collaboration with
third parties, such as policies on knowledge security and international cooperation.

The perspective of academic freedom is at odds with some of the other
perspectives described in this chapter. This tension arises when, from a different
perspective, there are calls for more conditions, restrictions and control. This may
jeopardise academic freedom. Consequently, concerns are being raised and critical
questions asked about the demarcation, restriction and isolation of knowledge
institutions, research and education. At the same time, it is also recognised that
science must be protected against undue external influence, whether from
businesses, the government or foreign actors. To this end, additional measures are
sometimes indeed necessary. Important values associated with this perspective,
alongside freedom, are: democracy, human rights, international cooperation and
multilateralism.
2.5 National security
The fifth perspective focuses on national security. National security is the ability of a
country’s government to protect its citizens, economy, values and other institutions.
For example, the AIVD website states: ‘We stand for the security of the Netherlands
and for protecting democracy against national and international threats’
27 . In
addition to the obvious protection against military attacks, national security in the
21st century increasingly involves various aspects such as physical, digital,
economic, energy, domestic, cyber, human or environmental security. Key bodies
adopting this perspective include the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Security
and Justice (including the National Coordinator for Security and Counter-Terrorism)
and the security services, namely the AIVD and MIVD. The Military Police, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (including the network of diplomatic missions) and the
police are also key stakeholders.

27 www.aivd.nl, accessed on 27 November 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 19
The implications for science are, first and foremost, the prioritisation of research
that serves national security. In particular, the importance of defence research
stands out. Scientific research and technological development serving defence are
crucial from this perspective. To illustrate this, the Ministry of Defence recently
announced an additional €35 million ‘for research to maintain a combat
advantage’.28

In addition, there are significant implications for the organisation of science that
overlap with the perspective of knowledge security (see section 2.6). This involves
limiting vulnerabilities in national security through science by preventing the
undesirable transfer of sensitive knowledge that could undermine national security.
Examples of such sensitive knowledge include technological knowledge of drones,
missiles or naval vessels, but also knowledge about critical infrastructure, such as
waterways, railways and digital networks. In addition to preventing the undesirable
transfer of knowledge, national security also involves preventing foreign
interference in science. This too relates to the perspective of knowledge security
(see section 2.6). Science can potentially be used to disrupt societal domains, such
as education, energy supply, elections and journalism, in order to sow internal
unrest.

From the perspective of national security, the idea is that our country’s democratic
values must be protected against internal and external threats. Recently, there has
been a particular focus on external threats in the form of state and non-state actors,
with the emphasis on conflict between nations. Consequently, a key element of this
perspective is the idea of a race, a competition. National security then easily
becomes a zero-sum game: the security of one comes at the expense of another,
and vice versa. Within this perspective, alongside the value of security, attention is
paid to values such as freedom, the international legal order, broad prosperity, a
strong armed forces, economic resilience, technological leadership, a strong
defence industry, stability and sovereignty.
2.6 Research security
Reserach security concerns the international risks associated with scientific
research. In particular, it involves preventing the unauthorised transfer of
knowledge and preventing undue interference. The unauthorised transfer of
knowledge includes, for example, espionage, theft or the illegal use of knowledge,

28 https://www.defensie.nl/actueel/nieuws/2025/11/07/extra-35-miljoen-voor-onderzoek-om-voorsprong-in-het-
gevecht-te-behouden. The research programmes are organised through NWO. With this investment, the
Ministry of Defence and NWO are acting on the recommendation of the Advisory Council for Science,
Technology and Innovation (2024a).

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 20
but also legal knowledge exchange that, intentionally or unintentionally, jeopardises
national security. Consider, for instance, the sharing of knowledge about critical
infrastructure or technology that could be used for military purposes. Undue
interference occurs when scientists are pressured with the aim of influencing the
scientific process, for example by not publishing certain findings.
29 Sometimes,
promoting ethical conduct in international cooperation is also seen as part of
knowledge security. Consider, for instance, preventing the exploitation of
inadequate enforcement of environmental or human rights in countries for the
purpose of conducting research. Key parties that adopt this perspective include the
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, as well as the Ministry of Economic
Affairs, Justice and Security, the AWTI and the KNAW.

This perspective focuses directly on scientific research and has implications
primarily for the organisation of science. The National Knowledge Security
Guidelines
30 and teams and committees at universities are seeking to raise
awareness.31 A research programme and the Knowledge Security Helpdesk are
working to improve the level of knowledge among researchers and institutions. And
in early 2025, a bill was submitted for consultation with knowledge institutions
regarding the screening of researchers and students working in sensitive research
areas.32

The call for ‘open where possible, closed where necessary’ is central to European
and national policy
33 and fits well with this perspective. This call captures the
tension and balance between openness and closure; two key values in this context.
This perspective fits well with how geopolitics and science are viewed from the
standpoint of national security, strategic autonomy and competitiveness, particularly
where the prevention of undesirable knowledge dissemination is concerned.
Furthermore, the perspective aligns with academic freedom and institutional
autonomy, insofar as it addresses how external parties (companies, countries)
interfere in research.
2.7 Societal challenges
In this perspective, the importance of mobilising science to address major societal
challenges is central. For over twenty years, scientists – spurred on by government,
international agreements and/or intrinsic motivation – have been working alongside

29 The Clingendael Institute (2020) conducted a study into China’s influence on education in the Netherlands.
30 Central Government et al., 2022.
31 Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, 2024.
32 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/actueel/nieuws/2025/04/07/screening-voor-wetenschappers-die-met-sensitieve-
kennis-willen-werken.
33 Central Government et al., 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 21
governments, civil society organisations and companies to tackle challenges such
as climate disruption, biodiversity loss, health, resource shortages and social
inequality.34 A characteristic of many societal challenges is that there are differing
views on exactly what the problem is and what the best solution would be.
Innovation can be used to improve existing systems, but also for radical renewal
and systemic change. The perspective that places societal challenges at the centre
focuses on the consequences of geopolitical developments (such as war,
authoritarian leadership and protectionism) for the substantive priorities for which
science is mobilised and for the scope scientists have to collaborate internationally.

In recent years, science and innovation policy has increasingly focused on
specifically stimulating research to tackle societal challenges. For instance, the
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy introduced the mission-driven top
sectors and innovation policy (MTIB) to direct research and innovation towards
societal issues in the fields of energy, food, water, healthcare and security. In the
EU, a substantial part of the Horizon Europe programme was linked to the
European Green Deal. Within NWO, for example, the Dutch Climate Research
Initiative was established to mobilise scientific knowledge for transitions towards a
climate-neutral and climate-resilient society.

From this perspective, the focus is particularly on the implications of shifting
geopolitical relations for the direction and organisation of mission-oriented research.
Is political interference in knowledge and innovation agendas changing? Are
funding conditions and requirements regarding who may collaborate on projects
changing?
35 Are different priorities being set? How much scope is emerging, or
remains, for transformative innovation policy aimed at just sustainability transitions?
What shifts are occurring in the attention and scope that research funders have for
matters such as socially responsible research and innovation, action research,
transdisciplinary research or citizen science?
36

It remains unclear how changing geopolitical relations will affect the government’s
priorities and its approach to directing research toward societal challenges.
It is possible that working on societal challenges will no longer be seen as a global
task, but primarily as part of national security or sovereignty. A growing focus on
security issues could come at the expense of research into other societal

34 The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that accelerated transitions in our
economic and social systems (such as food, energy and cities) are needed to limit global warming to a ‘safe’
limit of 1.5 degrees, to adapt to the inevitable consequences of climate change, and to remain within planetary
boundaries. The Climate Act stipulates that the Netherlands must be climate-neutral by 2050.
35 See, for example, the (provisional) agreement intended to make it easier to fund dual-use innovation within
Horizon Europe: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2025/11/05/eu-investments-in-
defence-council-and-parliament-agree-to-support-faster-more-flexible-and-coordinated-investments-in-
european-defence.
36 Rathenau Instituut, 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 22
challenges such as climate change and biodiversity loss. On the other hand, it
could also lead to greater attention being paid to research into the circular economy
and the energy transition in order to reduce strategic dependencies on raw
materials and fossil fuels.37
For example, the European Commission is exploring how to pursue the policy
objectives of sovereignty and sustainability simultaneously within its research and
innovation policy.
.
2.8 Science diplomacy
Science diplomacy describes the various practices in which science and diplomacy
converge. Three forms of science diplomacy are generally distinguished.
38 Science
for diplomacy, which involves utilising scientific cooperation to strengthen diplomatic
relations and serve political objectives. Science in diplomacy encompasses the idea
of evidence-based foreign policy, in which research leads to better foreign policy.
And diplomacy for science, which concerns the deployment of diplomatic actions to
promote scientific cooperation.

As both science and diplomacy are under pressure due to geopolitical changes,
science diplomacy is receiving renewed attention. Organisations adopting this
perspective include the International Science Council, the European Commission,
UNESCO, the Dutch Ministries of Education, Culture and Science and Foreign
Affairs, NWO, the British Royal Society and the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS). A recent development in the science system is
the co-creative design and publication of a new European framework for science
diplomacy.
39

From the perspective of science diplomacy, science is viewed, on the one hand, as
a means by which (groups of) countries can exercise and expand their power vis-à-
vis other countries.
40 For example, in a new European framework for science
diplomacy, the EC writes: ‘As science and technology have increasingly become a
geopolitical bargaining chip, science diplomacy is emerging as a key element in
leveraging our strength and partnerships for a global Europe.’
41

37 European Parliamentary Research Service, 2022.
38 The Royal Society & The American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2010.
39 European Commission: Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, 2025. See also the news item
announcing the report: https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/news/all-research-and-innovation-
news/european-framework-science-diplomacy-2025-02-13_en.
40 https://www.scienceguide.nl/2025/09/nederland-moet-dringend-investeren-in-academische-samenwerking-
met-mondiale-zuiden.
41 European Commission: Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 23

On the other hand, science diplomacy is also an opportunity to tackle shared
challenges that affect multiple countries or even the entire planet. In this capacity,
science is precisely a means of improving and normalising relations between
(groups of) countries and pursuing shared interests. Based on these two seemingly
contradictory goals, those who adopt this perspective therefore advocate above all
for the promotion of international scientific cooperation.
This primarily results in policy adjustments to the organisation of scientific research,
rather than to its direction.
.

Within this perspective, various, sometimes conflicting values come into play, as the
values of science and those of diplomacy converge here. Collaboration is a key
value: between international researchers, between researchers and policymakers,
and between countries. At the same time, national interests and security are, from a
diplomatic perspective, precisely what matters, and this creates tensions with
regard to the openness and freedom that are crucial for science and scientists.

Famous examples of where diplomacy and science converge include CERN and
the IPCC. Multiple forms of cooperation are at play simultaneously. At CERN,
researchers from all over the world work together, even from countries at war with
one another. The IPCC is an example of where diplomatic efforts, via the UN, have
resulted in international scientific cooperation on the cross-border issue of climate
change, which in turn can contribute to international climate policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 24
Table1 Eight perspectives summarised and analysed
 Strategic
autonomy
Technological
sovereignty
Competitiveness Academic
freedom
Central focus A country’s ability
to safeguard its
national interests
and public values
based on its own
insights and
choices, and to
remain resilient in
an interconnected
world.
A country’s ability
to develop and
use the
technologies it
deems necessary
itself, without
being overly
dependent on
external actors.
The extent to
which the
Netherlands or
the EU can offer
products and
services on the
market that are
more attractive
than those of
competing
countries or
power blocs.
The principle that
scientists are free
to conduct their
research, publish
their findings and
teach. Key actors EC (and Draghi),
EZ, AIV, AWTI,
Defence
Sectoral
ministries
(Defence, Home
Affairs and
Kingdom
Relations,
Infrastructure and
Water
Management,
Agriculture,
Nature and Food
Quality, Climate
Policy), Ministry of
Economic Affairs,
Ministry of
Education,
Culture and
Science,
European
Commission.
EC, EZ, TNO,
VNO-NCW
OCW, KNAW,
UNESCO, UNL,
AWTI.
Perspective
on public
values
Economic and
industrial;
National security;
Sustainability
Economic and
industrial;
National security;
Academic
freedom and
institutional
autonomy;
Democratic rule of
law and human
rights; Transitions
and major societal
challenges.
Economic and
industrial
Academic
freedom and
institutional
autonomy;
Democratic rule of
law and human
rights;
International
cooperation and
multilateralism.
Impact on
science
(expenditure)
Intensification Intensification Intensification Sufficient, but not
necessarily any
more.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 25
 Strategic
autonomy
Technological
sovereignty
Competitiveness Academic
freedom
Impact on
science
(direction)
Focus on
strategic sectors,
such as defence,
energy or
manufacturing
A greater focus,
particularly on
STEM fields and
research into
vulnerabilities and
dependencies.
No political bias;
rather, research
agendas tailored
to the business
community and
technological
excellence.
Explicitly no
external influence.
Influence on
science
(organisation
)
Countering
interference and
undesirable
knowledge
transfer in science
Countering
interference and
undesirable
knowledge
transfer in science
Public-private
partnerships and
economic
valorisation
through new
companies.
Primarily basic
research,
protection against
interference.

 National security Knowledge
security
Societal
challenges
Science
diplomacy
Core focus The protection of
a country, its
citizens,
infrastructure and
interests against
threats from
within and
without.
Preventing the
unauthorised
transfer of
knowledge,
preventing undue
interference, and
promoting ethical
conduct in
international
cooperation.
Mobilising
research to
address major
societal
challenges, such
as the transition
to a sustainable,
healthy and just
society.
Practices and
activities where
science and
diplomacy
intersect; this
collaboration is
initiated from both
sides.
Key actors Ministry of
Defence, Ministry
of Justice and
Security, AIVD,
MIVD, NTCV
Ministry of
Education,
Culture and
Science, Ministry
of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of
Justice and
Security, AWTI,
Royal
Netherlands
Academy of Arts
and Sciences
Ministry of
Education,
Culture and
Science, Ministry
of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of
Infrastructure and
Water
Management,
LVVN, NWO, SIA
UNESCO,
International
Science Council,
EC, Ministry of
Education,
Culture and
Science and
Ministry of
Foreign Affairs,
NWO
Perspective
on public
values
National security National security;
Economic and
industrial
perspective;
Academic
freedom and
institutional
autonomy
Cooperation,
equality, ethics,
sustainability,
justice, planetary
health, human
and animal rights,
change
Cooperation,
academic values
(openness,
integrity,
independence),
but also
(preservation and
strengthening of)
national interests
and security

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 26
Impact on
science
(expenditure)
Sufficient for
national security,
but competes with
other defence
expenditure
Not applicable Intensification Not applicable
Impact on
science
(direction)
Focus on areas
relevant to
national security.
Not applicable Focus on
understanding
and addressing
societal
challenges
Not applicable
Impact on
science
(organisation
)
Preventing the
undesirable
transfer of
knowledge to
rivals.
Preventing
interference and
the undesirable
transfer of
knowledge within
science, and
promoting ethical
practices
Encouraging new
collaboration
between different
actors and
sectors (e.g.
through
transdisciplinary
research)
Embassy Science
Fellowships
(NWO), Science
Diplomacy Fund
Source: Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 27
3 Five dilemmas
In the previous chapter, we introduced eight perspectives that frequently feature in
discussions about the relationship between scientific research and geopolitical
developments. These perspectives are employed by various stakeholders, such as
government departments, advisory bodies, research institutions and other
intermediary organisations. Many parties combine multiple perspectives: the
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science takes into account both the focus of
research on transitions (such as it is set out in the NWA) and academic freedom.
This means that policy often refers to multiple perspectives as well. Horizon
Europe, for example, is aimed at ‘tackling climate change, achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, and contributing to Europe’s competitiveness and
growth.’
42

Each perspective emphasises certain aspects and facts, makes assumptions about
how these are interrelated, and prioritises certain values in doing so. Because
multiple perspectives apply to complex policy themes such as geopolitics and
science, tensions arise regarding the governance (direction and organisation) of
science. In this chapter, we outline five key dilemmas that have implications for
science policy. These dilemmas stem from our analysis and are also highlighted
and examined in the grey and academic literature and by organisations around us,
such as the AWTI and KNAW. They concern, in turn, the organisation of defence
research, the role of Europe, the importance of basic research, the waning focus on
sustainability, and international cooperation.

The five dilemmas in brief (see also Figure 2, below):
1. Open science versus military interests (section 3.1).
2. European coordination versus national science policy (section 3.2).
3. Applied versus basic research (section 3.3).
4. Security versus sustainability (section 3.4).
5. Collaboration with illiberal countries (section 3.5).

42 https://commission.europa.eu/funding-tenders/find-funding/eu-funding-programmes/horizon-europe_en .

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 28
Figure2 Five dilemmas surrounding geopolitics in science policy

The five dilemmas in science policy are somewhat like sliders on a volume control. Source: Rathenau Instituut
3.1 Open science versus military interests
A key response to geopolitical developments is the increase of investments in
defence-related or military research. This encompasses both the development of
weapons and other technology used in warfare, and the development of knowledge

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 29
regarding strategic intelligence, social resilience, and science diplomacy.43 This
makes the Ministry of Defence a key player in national science policy, with growing
influence over, and responsibility for, the governance, funding and organisation of
the Dutch science system.

Examining this development from different perspectives and underlying value
orientations reveals a clear tension.
44 This debate currently takes place within the
European Union in response to the draft of the new Horizon Europe Framework
Programme for R&D, under which dual-use research projects may also be eligible
for funding.45 On the one hand, there is a desire to better align the civilian sector of
the science system with the knowledge needs of the Ministry of Defence and the
defence industry. On the other hand, there is a desire to safeguard academic
freedom and open knowledge practices at universities and universities of applied
sciences, and there are serious ethical issues surrounding the development of
knowledge, technology and innovations that are used to kill people.
46

Some MEPs are questioning whether the budget increase is really such a gift for
the scientific community if it comes with restrictions and stricter conditions regarding
how and with whom the research is conducted.
47 Defence-related research often
requires knowledge practices in which openness and international cooperation are
subject to restrictions.
48 Could or should such knowledge practices also be
organised within universities and universities of applied sciences? Or is it better to
organise this in separate (departments of) knowledge institutions?

This raises the question of the extent to which the science system—whether in part
or as a whole—should be mobilised in support of military knowledge and innovation
agendas, and what the short- and long-term implications of such a shift would be.
.
49 Many (key enabling) technologies have both civilian and military applications,
and it is difficult to draw a clear distinction between civilian and military knowledge
and technology development. How do we prevent the civilian and military spheres

43 One estimate suggests that an additional €6 billion per year would be allocated to defence-related research
and innovation. https://esb.nu/de-nieuwe-navo-norm-zit-innovatiebeleid-in-de-weg.
44 See also a background article in De Morgen ‘Flemish universities push for more military research: “The
circumstances have changed”’ (Author: Simon Tibo), 30 July 2025, https://www.demorgen.be/nieuws/vlaamse-
universiteiten-sturen-aan-op-meer-militair-onderzoek-de-omstandigheden-zijn-gewijzigd~b5962024/.
45 Dual-use means that the knowledge (or the item) has both a civilian and a military application; research into
drones is a clear example. In practice, the dividing line between what is and is not dual-use is often unclear.
46 See, for example, a column on the collaboration between Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences and the
Ministry of Defence: https://hvana.nl/nieuws/laat-de-hva-zich-voor-karretje-van-defensie-spannen.
47 https://sciencebusiness.net/news/dual-use/dual-use-undermines-promised-horizon-budget-increase-says-
mep-repasi.
48 https://www.demorgen.be/nieuws/vlaamse-universiteiten-sturen-aan-op-meer-militair-onderzoek-de-
omstandigheden-zijn-gewijzigd~b5962024.
49 See, for example, the case of a Norwegian professor who ended up in prison after unsuspectingly inviting four
Iranian PhD students into a laboratory that also housed a scanning electron microscope:
https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20220914104835727.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 30
of knowledge production and technology development within the science system
from becoming too intertwined, and ensure that this does not come at the expense
of academic freedom and open science?50 And how might we ensure synergy
where possible?

Another aspect of this dilemma is that defence investment budgets can also be
used to strengthen strategic autonomy and economic resilience.
51 An example of
this is the call to use the broader part of the new NATO standard for dual-use R&D
with and for the chip industry.52 Encouraging public-private partnerships between
public knowledge institutions and the defence, arms or high-tech industries is
viewed by some as a matter of strategic autonomy and national security. Economic
and military interests can reinforce one another and thus play a proportionally
greater role in the governance, funding and organisation of the science system.
This may jeopardise other values of science, such as academic freedom and open
collaboration for the sake of sustainability transitions.
3.2 European coordination versus national science
policy
Many of the documents we have studied highlight the importance of the EU and
European cooperation for strategic autonomy, technological sovereignty,
competitiveness, science diplomacy and knowledge security. To date, Europe has
played a relatively modest role in the governance, funding and organisation of
national science systems. However, geopolitical developments raise questions
about the relationship between national and European science policy.
53 Indeed,
Europe’s role is expected to grow in the coming years.54

According to the latest plans for the Tenth Framework Programme for R&D, the
European Commission is set to invest significantly more in R&D. The Commission
is also seeking to play a more active role in various policy areas that are important
for science, technology and innovation, such as industrial policy, security policy and
science diplomacy. In short, the trend is that the European Commission will play a
more prominent role in the governance of the Dutch science system. Until now, that

50 Markussen, 2025.
51 Incidentally, there are also concerns that these investments do not contribute to autonomy and
competitiveness at all, as Europe is heavily dependent on the US militarily. Only with a well-considered
framework for assessment can the enormous additional defence expenditure actually benefit strategic
autonomy, economic prosperity and the sustainability of our planet. https://esb.nu/de-nieuwe-navo-norm-zit-
innovatiebeleid-in-de-weg.
52 https://esb.nu/gebruik-bredere-gelden-defensie-voor-investeringen-in-chipindustrie.
53 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2025/11/05/eu-investments-in-defence-council-and-
parliament-agree-to-support-faster-more-flexible-and-coordinated-investments-in-european-defence.
54 https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2025/09/25/de-kracht-van-europas-zwakte-a4907231.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 31
role has mainly been complementary to national science policy. However, certain
developments raise the question of whether national sovereignty and resources
should be transferred to Europe in order to achieve greater innovative capacity? If
so, which parts and in what way? 55

From the perspective of strategic autonomy and technological sovereignty, one
would wish to coordinate and organise the research that contributes to these
ambitions at European level. For example, through the strong clustering of high-
quality European research in specialised centres or at European universities
capable of competing with the major American universities. On the other hand,
universities and universities of applied sciences are also part of a national and
regional culture, economy and political accountability. They play an important role in
regional and national ecosystems with regard to policy, businesses and civil society
organisations. The question is what constitutes a good mix between European,
national and regional governance of the science system. And whether there should
be more attention for knowledge institutions that organise themselves at European
level. The Netherlands is a medium-sized country in Europe, and it is not self-
evident how the Netherlands should position itself in relation to large Member
States with bigger R&D budgets.
3.3 Applied versus basic research
The science system in the Netherlands is highly diverse, with an assortment of
universities, universities of applied sciences, research institutes and other public
knowledge organisations. It provides room for all kinds of knowledge production
required to meet society’s various knowledge needs. In some parts of the science
system, universities for example, there is a strong emphasis on basic and
fundamental research in which PhD students and postdoctoral researchers play a
key role. In other parts such as applied research institutes, universities of applied
sciences, government knowledge institutions, there is a strong emphasis on
application and collaboration with knowledge users in industry, government and
society, and the research is mostly carried out by permanent staff.

The changing geopolitical situation raises the question of what the right balance is
between the various knowledge practices, now that national priorities appear to be
shifting.
56 On the one hand, for example, there is a need to mobilise researchers
more strongly for research that contributes to societal challenges such as the
transition to a climate-neutral and climate-resilient society, tackling social inequality,

55 European Commission: Joint Research Centre, 2024a.
56 Von Schomberg, 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 32
improving health, and strengthening economic and military resilience. On the other
hand, there is a need to cherish the academic freedom and institutional autonomy
of universities and universities of applied sciences in order to perpetuate their
independent role in the democratic constitutional state. And sometimes it is
precisely the unfettered, fundamental research that leads to technological
breakthroughs (for example in the field of quantum technology), which is desirable
from the perspective of technological leadership. What is a good balance between
basic and applied strategic research?
3.4 Security versus sustainability
In recent years, there has been a trend in the Netherlands and Europe to dedicate
part of science policy to sustainability transitions, as articulated, among other
things, in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
57 This involves
conducting (action oriented) research that contributes to fundamentally changing
production and consumption systems so that they become sustainable. In Europe,
the European Green Deal served as a key guiding principle for European research
and innovation policy. Both the EU and the Netherlands introduced mission-driven
innovation policy to achieve sustainability goals. Within NWO, the Climate
Research Initiative Netherlands (KIN) was established to conduct research into
sustainability transitions. In addition to giving greater priority to the climate theme,
appropriate research methods were developed, centring on open and inclusive
collaboration, not only between different scientific disciplines but also with societal
partners.

There are now concerns that increased geopolitical unrest and rivalry are leading to
sustainability challenges being pushed into the background within the science
system.
58 Tensions between security and sustainability arise, for example, from the
strong link between defence and fossil fuels. Research aimed at phasing out the
fossil fuel industry may thus conflict with research into national security.
59 The
increased importance of secrecy for security reasons can also hinder the
dissemination of knowledge that could benefit sustainability. After all, an efficient
energy supply can be regarded as strategic. And a leadership positions in clean
technology is part of a technology race with rival nations. At the same time,
synergies are also possible between research for security and research for

57 https://sdgs.un.org/goals
58 Green European Foundation (2024)
59 The tension between food security and sustainability is also addressed in this article in De Telegraaf, ‘Striking
statement from Brussels: European Commissioner Hansen says livestock numbers do not need to shrink
further’, 20 March 2025, https://www.telegraaf.nl/binnenland/opvallend-geluid-uit-brussel-eurocommissaris-
hansen-zegt-dat-veestapel-niet-verder-hoeft-te-krimpen/64069368.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 33
sustainability. Climate change and security risks are closely interlinked.60 And the
solutions can also be synergistic. Research and innovations in areas such as
sustainable energy, food or the living environment could also lead to the
Netherlands becoming less dependent on rival nations in the field of fossil fuels and
raw materials. Public procurement could seek to harness this synergy. Furthermore,
long-term processes that guide the response to global environmental changes nd
social inequality could be linked to peacebuilding.
61

One question is how the perspectives of sustainability transitions and strategic
autonomy can or should be combined into a joint approach to the governance,
funding and organisation of the science system.
62 What form and degree of
coordination is necessary and desirable between the various policy areas and
ministries responsible for sustainability challenges and those responsible for
strategic autonomy and national security?

Furthermore, we see that participating in and leading the way in technological
development plays a significant role in many responses to geopolitical unrest.
However, for an effective approach to sustainability and security challenges, a
focus on technical sciences is too narrow: the social sciences and humanities are
also indispensable for making the Netherlands more sustainable and secure.
63 That
is why recent efforts have centred on societal missions, socially responsible
research and innovation, inter- and transdisciplinary partnerships, and citizen
science.
64 These organisational changes within the scientific community should
ensure that research serves societal challenges and becomes part of solution
pathways that genuinely make society more sustainable and safer.65 A strong
emphasis on participating in and leading the way in technology races can result in
research into the societal embedding of these new (and disruptive) technologies
being given lower priority. This carries the risk that money and time will be invested
in technological applications that ultimately do not serve a sustainable society. So
how do we ensure that research and innovation on security issues are also carried
out in a responsible manner?

60 Middendorp, 2022.
61 See also the CIPGeS project (2024–2026), which links analyses of the rapidly changing geopolitical and
security context to the future development of a challenge-driven innovation policy. (
https://www.syke.fi/en/projects/cipges ).
62 European Commission: Joint Research Centre, 2024b.
63 Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation, 2024b.
64 See, for example, Rathenau Instituut (2019; 2025)
65 https://sshraad.nl/mentale-gezondheid-jeugd-nnr.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 34
3.5 Collaboration with illiberal countries
One of the most visible consequences of rising geopolitical tensions is the issue of
international cooperation with research institutions in illiberal countries such as
Russia, China, Iran, Israel and, more recently, the US.66 How, if at all, should we
collaborate with research institutions in countries that violate democratic and
academic values, human rights, the laws of war or other international law?
67 There
are arguments from various perspectives and parties within the scientific community
for maintaining, limiting or severing institutional research collaborations with such
countries.

The perspectives outlined in the previous chapter shed a different light on
international cooperation in scientific research. Viewed from the perspective of
strategic autonomy, competitiveness, technological sovereignty and national
security, international cooperation is both necessary and risky. It is necessary to
gain access to international state-of-the-art knowledge and talented researchers
and knowledge workers who help to strengthen domestic economic and military
capabilities and resilience. However, it must not lead to interference, undesirable
knowledge transfer, through espionage, for example), or unilateral dependencies on
rival nations.
68

Viewed from the perspectives of academic freedom and sustainability transitions,
open and international cooperation is seen as a crucial, but not absolute,
component of science, and knowledge institutions (especially universities) are
positioned as bastions of moral integrity.
69 Furthermore, international cooperation is
seen as crucial for effectively tackling global problems, such as climate change and
biodiversity loss. From these perspectives, there are therefore arguments both for
and against freezing formal and institutional collaborations with foreign knowledge
institutions. In the days following the Russian attack on Ukraine, for example,
institutional collaborations were frozen following an urgent appeal from the Minister
of Education, Culture and Science, as the attack was seen as an ‘attack on freedom
and democracy, the fundamental values on which academic freedom and
collaboration are based.’
70 In response to this decision, many academic institutions

66 Rathenau Instituut, 2021; https://www.clingendael.org/event/reconnect-china-conference-2025, and
https://www.trouw.nl/binnenland/bedrijven-van-nederlandse-universiteiten-werken-met-israel-aan-omstreden-
technologie~b93b5ca6.
67 https://english.wrr.nl/latest/news/2025/09/29/book-presentation-navigating-a-fragmenting-world-order.
68 https://www.scienceguide.nl/2025/07/nederlands-hoger-onderwijs-onverminderd-doelwit-van-spionage and
https://www.scienceguide.nl/2025/10/belgische-wetenschap-werkt-steeds-meer-mee-aan-chinese-militaire-
opbouw.
69 https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20250116112443619, and Shih and Wagner, 2024.
70 https://www.universiteitenvannederland.nl/actueel/nieuws/4-maart-2022-nederlandse-kennisinstellingen-
bevriezen-samenwerkingsverbanden.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 35
highlighted the importance of maintaining contact with individual students and
researchers, particularly in times of war and conflict.

From the perspectives of knowledge security and science diplomacy, we might
seek a balance between openness and closedness regarding international
cooperation and exchange. In knowledge security, the motto is ‘open where
possible, closed where necessary’. In science diplomacy, international cooperation
in science is seen as a means (soft power) of maintaining international relations
with other countries.

Therefore, an overarching question is how and whether we can promote and
safeguard international cooperation in scientific research whilst taking these
different values, interests and international law into account.
71 One possible
solution, which we are in fact already seeing in practice, is a differentiated
approach. Under this approach, knowledge institutions make distinctions based on
different research areas, along the fundamental-applied research axis (TRL levels),
by type of knowledge institution, or by the nature of the cooperation partner.
However, this approach raises questions about how we make and justify the choice
of who we do and do not collaborate with (e.g. ad hoc, on a project-by-project basis,
strategically or, conversely, comprehensively), and what selective collaboration or
boycotts mean for trust in science, discrimination and the image of universities as
neutral.

71 Huang and Soete, 2025.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 36
4 Next steps
This exploratory study shows how geopolitical developments affect the Dutch
research system. These developments raise fundamental questions about the
governance, funding and organisation of scientific research. By comparing the eight
different perspectives, it becomes clear that there are multiple arguments for what
changes are needed, and that each perspective entails its own problem analysis,
normative considerations and potential solutions.

This gives rise to five dilemmas concerning the government’s public duty with
regard to the science system. This exploratory study is not intended to provide
definitive answers to these dilemmas, but is intended as a prelude to further debate
and dialogue. In a way, then, the current geopolitical situation can be viewed as an
urgent invitation to engage in dialogue about the why, what for and how of science.
The search for what needs to happen and change has only just begun. In this
concluding chapter, we highlight two elements that are important for this search.
Diversity and complexity as a starting point
In the quest to determine what needs to happen and change, it is important to take
the diversity and complexity of the science system as a starting point. We note that
most perspectives adopt an instrumental view of science, whereby research or
public funding for research is placed at the service of (geo)political goals. At the
same time, it is evident that not all scientific research within the science system
should be mobilised for this purpose. There must also remain scope for curiosity-
driven, independent, non-instrumental research.

This may point to a possible solution: different components (institutions, disciplines)
of the science system can be organised and managed in different ways. The
organisation of scientific education, which is inextricably linked to scientific
research, must be taken into account in this regard. Regional differentiation may
also play a role here. At the same time, such a differentiated approach is not
without its challenges: What does it mean if values only apply in some cases?
Clarifying layered concepts
A second building block is clarification of what different parties mean by complex,
layered concepts such as strategic autonomy, technological sovereignty or
(national) security. What exactly is meant by these objectives, and how and by
whom are these definitions and the path towards them determined?

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 37
Behind every perspective there are underlying values. Geopolitical pressures may
lead to the emphasis on certain perspectives in lieu of others. How do we ensure
that we keep important values in mind? And who gets to decide which values are
important?

We have noticed that various (political) parties share ambitions such as security,
resilience or sustainability to a certain extent, but when it comes down to it have
something else in mind. That is precisely where the problem lies, and that is what
public debate should focus on. The overview of perspectives and dilemmas that we
provide in this exploratory study can support this discussion.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 38
Appendix 1 Approach used
To gain an understanding of how geopolitical unrest influences the science system,
we investigated the points within the system where this change might take shape.
The science system comprises all manner of actors, at various levels, who fulfil
different roles (see box below). The key actors in the science system collectively
shape the science system. As these are primarily public organisations, their
strategies and plans are often readily accessible. These strategies and plans are
set out in various documents.

Box2 Three levels in the science system
It is possible to distinguish three levels within the science system.
1. The policy level, with policy arenas in which politicians and policymakers
in ministries develop political priorities and policy strategies.
2. The intermediate level, with arenas and bodies in which knowledge
agendas and programmes are developed, and research funding is
allocated.
3. And the implementation level, in which researchers and knowledge
organisations organise themselves into concrete projects and
partnerships (knowledge ecosystems).

The final governance structure is established through a combination of top-
down policy implementation and bottom-up responses from researchers and
intermediary organisations to opportunities and possibilities they identify for
(funding of) research they consider important.

As a first step, we have identified which organisations are active within the science
system. Which organisations play a major role in shaping science policy, research
programming, funding, and its implementation? This concerns the actual
formulation of policy and its implementation, but also the provision of advice in this
regard. This led to a list of seventeen organisations, namely government bodies
(Ministry of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, NWO,
SIA, LVVN, Ministry of Defence and the European Commission), advisory councils
(WRR, AWTI, AIV), bodies representing science in the Netherlands and abroad
(UNL, KNAW, TNO, LERU, ISC), and international organisations (UN, G7).

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 39

The second step was to identify a number of key documents from these key players
and make a selection for interviews. Key documents reflect how the organisations
view and influence the science system, such as letters to parliament, advisory
reports, position papers, strategic agendas, visions for the future, and action plans.
These are indicated in the list of sources with an asterisk (*). In addition to the
documents themselves, we also sought out news articles, opinion pieces or
interviews to provide further context.

For each of the key documents, we created a fact sheet (short summary) based on
eight predefined categories:
1. What are the (revised) priorities for the science system?
2. What is the (revised) organisation of science?
3. What are the (revised) funding arrangements for science?
4. Which geopolitical developments are cited as the reason for the (revised)
policy?
5. What definitions are used for new key concepts, such as strategic autonomy,
technological sovereignty, knowledge security, etc.?
6. Which public values are mentioned in the document?
7. Which actors were involved in the drafting of the document?
8. What else stands out?

The interviews focused on similar topics, albeit in a slightly different order.

The third step was to produce a synthesis based on these categories. In particular,
we identified:
1. what the geopolitical developments were;
2. what policy changes stood out;
3. which terms, concepts and perspectives recurred frequently; and
4. which values were mentioned.

In this synthesis, we found that these findings could consistently be grouped into
eight perspectives. These were more or less coherent combinations of:
• a specific interpretation of geopolitical developments;
• terminology;
• science policy; and
• values.

Each of these perspectives had its own view of science, with implications for the
scope, organisation and direction of scientific research. This constituted a key
finding of the research.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 40
It then became apparent that, although each perspective told a more or less
coherent story, there were clear and not always easily reconcilable differences
between them. These tensions were also partly highlighted in the interviews we
conducted. These observations were supported by secondary material we found in
opinion pieces and policy documents on this subject.

We thus identified five urgent issues and dilemmas for the science system, arising
from geopolitical unrest. We explored these issues and dilemmas in greater depth,
which constituted a second key finding of the research.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 41
Appendix 2 Sources
The articles marked with an asterisk (*) were part of the structured analysis of key
documents (see Appendix 1).

* Advisory Council on International Affairs (2022) Smart industrial policy: a task for
the Netherlands in the EU, AIV Advisory Report 120, The Hague: AIV.

* Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (2022) Knowledge in
conflict – Balancing security and freedom, The Hague: AWTI.

* Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (2024a) Knowledge
offensive for defence – Research and innovation for a safe Netherlands, The
Hague: AWTI.

Advisory Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (2024b) A Natural
Connection – Embedding Social Sciences and Humanities Research in Innovation,
The Hague: AWTI.

AIVD, MIVD and NCTV (2022) Threat Assessment: State Actors 2, 28 November
2022.
https://www.aivd.nl/binaries/aivd_nl/documenten/publicaties/2022/11/28/dreigingsbe
eld-statelijke-actoren-dbsa-2/Dreigingsbeeld+Statelijke+Actoren+2.pdf.

Clingendael Institute (2020) China’s influence on education in the Netherlands: an
exploratory study, Clingendael Report, June 2020 (Authors: D’Hooghe, I., & Dekker,
B.) https://www.clingendael.org/sites/default/files/2020-
07/Rapport_politieke_beinvloeding_in_het_onderwijs_juni_2020.pdf.

* Draghi, M. (2024) The Future of European Competitiveness – A Competitiveness
Strategy for Europe, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
https://commission.europa.eu/document/97e481fd-2dc3-412d-be4c-
f152a8232961_en.

Edler, J., Blind, K., Kroll, H., & Schubert, T. (2023) Technology Sovereignty As an
Emerging Frame for Innovation Policy. Defining Rationales, Ends and Means,
Research Policy 52(6), July 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104765

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 42
European Commission: Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2025) A
European framework for science diplomacy – Recommendations of the EU Science
Diplomacy Working Groups. (Editors: Gjedssø Bertelsen, R., Bochereau, L.,
Chelioti, E., Dávid, Á., Gailiūtė-Janušonė, D., Hartl, M., Liberatore, L., Mauduit, J.-
C., Müller, J. M., & Van Langenhove, L.), Luxembourg: Publications Office of the
European Union, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/9235330.

European Commission: Joint Research Centre (2024a) European security in a
changing geopolitical context. From the European Research Area to the European
Defence Research and Innovation Area and from Cohesion to European territorial
security policy, JRC139401, Seville: European Commission. (Authors: Kattel, R., &
Soete, L.).

European Commission: Joint Research Centre, (2024b) Pursuing sustainability
transitions and open strategic autonomy. A policy mix perspective on synergies and
trade-offs, JRC139504, Seville: European Commission. (Authors: Kivimaa, P., &
Rogge, K.).

European Parliamentary Research Service (2022) Sustainability in the age of
geopolitics, PE 679.092. (Authors: Kononenko, V., & Noonan, E.).

* G7 (2024) Communiqué from the G7 meeting of Ministers for Science and
Technology in Bologna and Forlì, 9–11 July 2024 https://www.g7italy.it/wp-
content/uploads/G7-Science-and-Technology-Ministers-Meeting-Communique.pdf

Green European Foundation (2024) Post-growth and geopolitics. Global challenges
for a European Union beyond growth (Editor: Wouters, R.),
https://www.wetenschappelijkbureaugroenlinks.nl/sites/wetenschappelijkbureau/file
s/2024-02/2024_Postgroei_en_geopolitiek.pdf.

Huang, C., & Soete, L. (2025). Reconciling open science with technological
sovereignty, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10438599.2025.2459764.

Lee, J.-D., Kim, H., Si, S., & Lee, S. (2024) Techno-Nationalism to Collaborative
Technology Sovereignty, Science and Public Policy 51(6), December 2024, 1185–
1190, https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scae046

Kattel, R., & Soete, L. 2024 JRC Working Paper Series For a Fair, Innovative and
Sustainable Economy, 06/2024

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 43
* European Commission: Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2025) A
European framework for science diplomacy – Recommendations of the EU Science
Diplomacy Working Groups. (Editors: Gjedssø Bertelsen, R., Bochereau, L,
Chelioti, E., Dávid, Á., Gailiūtė-Janušonė, D., Hartl, M., Liberatore, L., Mauduit, J.-
C., Müller, J. M., & Van Langenhove, L.), Luxembourg: Publications Office of the
European Union, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/9235330.

Kattel, R., & Soete, L. (2024) European security in a changing geopolitical context.
From the European Research Area to the European Defence Research and
Innovation Area and from Cohesion to European territorial security policy. JRC
Working Paper Series For a Fair, Innovative and Sustainable Economy, 06/2024.

* Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (2021) Academic freedom in
the Netherlands. A conceptual analysis and guideline, Amsterdam: KNAW
https://www.knaw.nl/publicaties/academische-vrijheid-nederland.

* Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (2023) Knowledge security,
KNAW position paper, https://www.knaw.nl/publicaties/kennisveiligheid-knaw-
position-paper.

March, C., & Schieferdecker, I. (2023) Technological Sovereignty as Ability, Not
Autarky, International Studies Review 25(2), June 2023,
https://doi.org/10.1093/isr/viad012

Markussen, H. R. (2025) How Dual Use Puts Research Under the Microscope,
Issues in Science and Technology 41(3), Spring 2025, 60–62.
https://doi.org/10.58875/DXXW9659.

Middendorp, T. (2022) Climate General. Building Resilience, Amsterdam: Podium
Publishers.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Ministry
of Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation (2022) Open Strategic Autonomy,
Government Letter, 8 November 2022, No. 35982-9,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2022D46237.

* Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Economic Affairs (2025) Defence Strategy for
Industry and Innovation 2025–2029, Government Letter, 4 April 2025, No. 31125-
134, https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2025D15100.

* Ministry of Defence (2025) Strategic Action Agenda for Industry, Innovation and
Knowledge – Defence (STRAIIK-D) 2025, Annex to Government Letter, 4 April

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 44
2025, No. 2025D15101,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2025D15101

* Ministry of Economic Affairs (2023a) Revised missions of the mission-driven
innovation policy, Government Letter, 30 May 2023, No. 33009-120,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2023D22850.

* Ministry of Economic Affairs (2023b) Elaboration of the Economic Security
Protection Mechanism and overview of Economic Security instruments,
Government Letter, 19 September 2023, No. 30821-199,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2023D37876.

* Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy (2024) The National Technology
Strategy: Building blocks for strategic technology policy, Annex to Government
Letter, 19 January 2024,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2024D01639

* Ministry of Economic Affairs (2025a) Investing in a resilient and future-proof
economy: the 3% R&D action plan, Government Letter, 11 July 2025, no. 33009-
165, https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2025D33535.

Ministry of Economic Affairs (2025b) Focused industrial policy, Government letter,
17 October 2025, no. 29826-277,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2025D44449.

* Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (2024) Progress on the knowledge
security approach in higher education and science, Government letter, 25 October
2024, no. 31288-1158,
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2024D40959.

Oberon and Dialogic (2024) Knowledge security policy in higher education and
research. Sector overview of universities of applied sciences, report for the Ministry
of Education, Culture and Science. (Authors: Bokdam, J., Wester, A., Kemman, M.,
De Boer, T., Van Wijk, F., & Van der Geest, J.)
https://www.tweedekamer.nl/downloads/document?id=2024D09239.

OECD (2025) OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2025: Driving
Change in a Shifting Landscape, Paris: OECD Publishing,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5fe57b90-en.

Rathenau Instituut (2019) Innovation for societal goals, The Hague: Rathenau
Instituut. (Authors: Deuten, J., & Van den Broek, J.)

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 45
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/werking-van-het-wetenschapssysteem/innoveren-voor-
maatschappelijke-doelen.

Rathenau Instituut (2021) Knowledge security in higher education and science: A
shared responsibility, Report to Parliament,
(https://www.rathenau.nl/sites/default/files/2021-
01/Kennisveiligheid_in%20hoger_onderwijs_en_wetenschap_Bericht_aan_het_Parl
ement_Rathenau_Instituut.pdf).

Rathenau Instituut (2024) Knowledge of the Future – An Exploration for Science
Policy, The Hague: Rathenau Instituut. (Authors: Diederen, P., Hessels, L., & Van
Tooren, M.) https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/werking-van-het-
wetenschapssysteem/wetenschap-onder-druk/kennis-van-de-toekomst.

Rathenau Instituut (2025) Experimenting with challenge-driven research. A Crutzen
workshop for climate research, The Hague. (Authors: Baar, E., Hessels, L., &
Deuten, J.) https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/kennis-en-innovatie-voor-
transities/opgavegericht-kennis-en-innovatiebeleid/experimenteren-met-
opgavegericht-onderzoek.

* SIA Steering Committee ‘New KIEM incentive for defence research’ (4 February
2025) https://regieorgaan-sia.nl/nieuwsoverzicht/nieuwe-kiem-stimulans-voor-
defensieonderzoek/

Central Government, NWO, Universities of the Netherlands, KNAW, Association of
Universities of Applied Sciences, NFU, TO2 Federation (2022) National Guidelines
on Knowledge Security. Safe international collaboration,
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2022/01/14/nationale-leidraad-
kennisveiligheid.

Shih, T., & Wagner, C. (2024) The Trap of Securitizing Science, Issues in Science
and Technology 41(1), Autumn 2024, 100–103.
https://doi.org/10.58875/ZSDO9141.

The Royal Society & The American Association for the Advancement of Science
(2010) New Frontiers in Science Diplomacy: Navigating the Changing Balance of
Power, RS Policy document 01/10, London: The Royal Society.
https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/publications/2010/4294969468.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 46
* TNO (2025) TNO Strategic Plan 2026–2029, Pushing Boundaries
https://www.tno.nl/nl/over-tno/strategie/;
https://publications.tno.nl/publication/34644951/IAYoMa2L/TNO-Strategisch-2026-
2029.pdf

TNO Vector (2024) Grasping control points: A review of the literature, study
commissioned by the Ministry of Economic Affairs, TNO 2024 R11817. (Authors:
Pisa, D., Vierhout, J., Geurts, A., & Van Bree, T.).

* UNESCO (2023) Science Diplomacy in a Rapidly Changing World: Building Peace
in the Minds of Men and Women; report on the UNESCO Global Ministerial
Dialogue on Science Diplomacy, programme and meeting document, Paris:
UNESCO, https://doi.org/10.54677/DTIP7777.

* Universities of the Netherlands (2025) UNL Strategic Agenda 2025–2028,
https://www.universiteitenvannederland.nl/files/publications/Strategische%20agend
a%20UNL_def%20versie.pdf.

* Universities of the Netherlands (2023) Choosing Quality in 2040: The Future of
Our Universities in 9 External Trends, 9 Contributions to the Netherlands, and 9
Aspirations, report for Universities of the Netherlands, 7 July 2023,
https://www.universiteitenvannederland.nl/files/publications/UNL%20Kiezen%20voo
r%20Kwaliteit%20in%202040_FIN.pdf.

Von Schomberg, R. (2025) On Technological and Innovation Sovereignty: A
Response to Carl Mitcham's Call for a Political Theory of Technology (25 January
2025). https://ssrn.com/abstract=5162348 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5162348.

* Scientific Council for Government Policy (2024) The Netherlands in a Fragmenting
World Order, WRR Report 109, The Hague: WRR.

The articles marked with an asterisk (*) were part of the structured analysis of key
documents (see Appendix 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Geopolitics in Science Policy 47
© Rathenau Instituut 2026
Reproduction and/or publication of (parts of) this work for creative, personal or
educational purposes is permitted, provided that copies are not made or used for
commercial purposes and on condition that the copies contain the full reference
above. In all other cases, no part of this publication may be reproduced and/or
published by means of print, photocopy or in any other way without prior written
permission.

Open access
The Rathenau Instituut operates an open access policy. Reports, background
studies, academic articles and software are published freely. Research data is
made available in accordance with legal provisions and ethical standards
governing research relating to third-party rights, privacy and copyright.
Contact details
Anna van Saksenlaan 51
PO Box 95366
2509 CJ The Hague
070-342 15 42
info@rathenau.nl
www.rathenau.nl
Board of the Rathenau Instituut
Drs. Maria Henneman (Chair)
Prof. Dr Noelle Aarts
Prof. Dr Nynke van Dijk
Dr Laurence Guérin
Dr Radjesh Manna
Joep Munten MSc
Prof. Dr Behnam Taebi (Vice-Chair)
Kees Verhoeven

Secretary to the Board:
Prof. Dr Eefje Cuppen (Director of the Rathenau Instituut)

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
The Rathenau Instituut promotes public and political discourse on the societal
aspects of science and technology. We conduct research and organise debates
on science, innovation and new technologies.
