
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Industry seeking university
The emergence of strategic public-private research
partnerships

Report

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Industry seeking university 2

 Authors
Sue-Yen Tjong Tjin Tai, Jos van den Broek, Timo Maas, Tomas
Rep and Jasper Deuten

Editor
Frank Steverink
Cover Image
Encounter on Eindhoven’s High Tech Campus. Photo: Norbert van Onna -
Hollandse Hoogte
Design and layout
Rikkers Infographics*
Preferred citation
Tjong Tjin Tai, S.Y., J. van den Broek, T. Maas, T. Rep and J. Deuten (2018).
Industry seeking university – The emergence of strategic public-private research
partnerships. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut

* (table 1 en figure 4)

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Industry seeking university 3

Preface
Large high-tech enterprises such as Microsoft, Intel, Philips, ASML and Siemens
are developing new methods for effective and efficient collaboration with higher
education. Recently, they have also been entering into long-term partnerships with
carefully selected universities. Dutch universities are following this trend and are
successfully locking in global firms worldwide. Multiple Dutch universities are now
home to joint laboratories or research centres.

In this report, we look at how strategic research partnerships differ from other forms
of cooperation between universities and industry. We do that by reviewing both
theory and practice, studying the literature, interviewing stakeholders, and
examining case studies. Our aim is to understand the emergence of strategic
research partnerships and identify the new opportunities that close cooperation
affords the partners.

At the same time, this is a trend that calls for critical reflection. What considerations
and trade-offs does a university face when a multinational wants to work with one of
its professors or research groups? The world of open science does not necessarily
fit in with the world of commercial innovation. Who ensures that there is no conflict
between public and private interests? Strategic research partnerships appear to be
suitable mainly for large multinationals. What does that mean for SMEs or public-
sector parties that have less financial clout? How does incoming knowledge and
talent compare with outgoing knowledge and talent abroad when universities
collaborate with foreign firms? Such questions make strategic research
partnerships an important topic of political debate and, consequently, an important
topic for our institute.

It is time to develop an integrated assessment framework that will help stakeholders
at universities, in industry and in government to size up the various interests,
opportunities and risks when deciding whether or not to enter into or support a
strategic research partnership.
Dr Melanie Peters
Director Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Industry seeking university 4

Summary
Large firms tend to organise their research and innovation activities on a global
scale. They seek to cooperate with the best universities in Europe, the US and
Asia. A recent trend is that they enter into strategic partnerships with a select
number of carefully chosen universities. Such partnerships allow them to develop
joint programmes in which they work closely with researchers over a lengthy period.
In many cases they invest in a joint laboratory and/or in setting up their own
research centre on a campus. Universities are receptive to such strategic
partnerships and are themselves actively seeking out financially robust and
knowledge-intensive partners.

The Rathenau Institute has investigated the emergence of strategic public-private
research partnerships. How do they differ from other forms of public-private
cooperation in research? What new opportunities do they offer the partners on both
sides? What societal issues and ensuing trade-offs do they entail for the firms and
universities involved? And what are the political and policy implications with regard
to science, innovation and regional development?
A new type of public-private research partnership
Strategic research partnerships are more selective and exclusive, closer and longer
lasting than other types of public-private cooperation in research. What typifies the
strategic nature of such partnerships is the involvement of senior management at
both the universities and the firm in the decision-making process. The partners want
to build a relationship with each other, a necessity if they are to cooperate closely
and trust each other enough to share knowledge, data, systems and facilities. The
aim is to reduce or bridge the gap (geographical, cognitive, social, organisational)
between university and industry in a variety of ways, for example through frequent
personal contact between academic and industry researchers.
New opportunities for partners
This strategic type of public-private partnership creates new opportunities for the
partners. For example, it allows industry researchers to get closely involved in
innovative research and puts them in close contact with top researchers and
talented PhD students. Strategic partnerships also open up new opportunities for
universities in all three of their core tasks, i.e. education, research and valorisation.
Close cooperation with industry researchers and developers, for example, allows
PhD candidates to receive a broader training. University researchers can benefit
from access to the firm’s expertise, knowledge of technology and markets, data and
facilities. By attracting large firms to its campus, the university can contribute to
regional economic development.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Industry seeking university 5

Considerations and trade-offs for partners
These new opportunities also give rise to new considerations and trade-offs.
Strategic partnerships serve both public and private interests. It is precisely
because the partners pursue ‘border crossings’ so vigorously that they must keep
each other at an appropriate arm’s length and avoid conflicts of interest. The
partners must get to know and guard their own and each other’s boundaries. In fact,
strategic partnerships call for a new way of working and a research culture in which
both partners share responsibility for striking the right balance between academic
and commercial interests.

Strategic partnerships not only impact the research groups involved but also the
rest of the faculty and university. A strategic partnership with a multinational must
therefore be consistent with the university’s long-term perspective on the type of
knowledge institution it wants to be, and for which stakeholders. Possible criteria for
engaging or not engaging with industry include: whether the firm will contribute to
boosting knowledge ecosystems on or around the campus (in the longer term); the
risk of an exodus of strategic knowledge and world-class talent to other countries,
particularly outside the EU; and the firm’s reputation in terms of responsible
business conduct.
Towards an assessment framework
All sorts of public and private interests converge in strategic partnerships. They not
only bring together the interests of public and private researchers and the
organisations they work for, but also those of public policymakers in different
domains and tiers of government. Their importance for the Dutch Ministry of
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy lies in the contribution strategic partnerships
make to the primary aim of the government’s enterprise and innovation policy: to
work towards a competitive business and business location climate that incentivises
firms to do business in the Netherlands in a way that is both sustainable and
innovative. The (potential) importance of strategic partnerships for the Dutch
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science and the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research (NWO) lies in their contribution to the general aim of science
policy: to create an internationally competitive research environment that
challenges researchers to work to the best of their ability and that is closely attuned
to the needs of society. Strategic partnerships are also important for provincial and
municipal authorities because they contribute to the regional or urban economy.
They can help to bring large enterprises to the region and boost regional innovation
ecosystems.

Strategic partnerships are still in the throes of development. Now is a good time to
devise an integrated assessment framework that will allow stakeholders to weigh up
the various public and private interests, opportunities and risks involved. That will
help them take an informed decision as to whether they want to enter into or

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Industry seeking university 6

support a strategic partnership, and on which conditions. A sound assessment
framework should in any event address the following issues:
 How does a strategic partnership impact the access to public knowledge and
researchers of firms outside the partnership?
 How does a strategic partnership impact research agendas and the balance
between the various academic, social and economic agendas that mobilise
science?
 Geopolitical considerations. Knowledge generation and technological advances
are pawns in the battle for economic and military power. Does a strategic
partnership help to strengthen the regional / Dutch / European economy or
does it boost the economy of global competitors? Is it contributing to the
outflow of knowledge and (top-class) researchers to other countries, or is it in
fact bringing about an influx of knowledge and talent?
 How does a strategic partnership fit in with the university’ s long-term
perspective on the knowledge institution that it wants to be for stakeholders
(and which ones)? How does it fit in with the government’s long-term outlook
on the research and science system?
 How does a strategic partnership tie in with the regional development strategy?
How does a strategic partnership impact the dynamism and vitality of regional
ecosystems for R&D and innovation?

This report is based on a study of the literature, three case studies (Chemelot
InSciTe, DELTA Lab and ARCNL) and interviews with experts and stakeholders.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Industry seeking university 7

Contents
Preface ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 3
Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 4
1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ . 9
1.1 Aim, questions and method ................................ ........................ 11
1.2 Reader’s guide................................ ................................ ............. 12
2 A conceptual study of strategic partnerships ................................ ......... 14
2.1 A new type of public-private research partnership ................... 14
2.2 Theoretical perspectives on the emergence of strategic
partnerships ................................ ................................ ................ 23
2.3 Emergence of strategic partnerships: historical background . 25
2.4 In summary ................................ ................................ .................. 31
3 An empirical study of strategic partnerships ................................ .......... 33
3.1 Chemelot InSciTe ................................ ................................ ........ 33
3.1.1 History ................................ ................................ .......................... 34
3.1.2 Agreements ................................ ................................ ................. 35
3.1.3 Experiences ................................ ................................ ................. 37
3.2 DELTA Lab ................................ ................................ ................... 40
3.2.1 History ................................ ................................ .......................... 41
3.2.2 Agreements ................................ ................................ ................. 43
3.2.3 Experiences ................................ ................................ ................. 44
3.3 ARCNL ................................ ................................ ......................... 46
3.3.1 History ................................ ................................ .......................... 47
3.3.2 Agreements ................................ ................................ ................. 49
3.3.3 Experiences ................................ ................................ ................. 50
3.4 In summary ................................ ................................ .................. 53
4 Typology of strategic partnerships ................................ ......................... 55
4.1 What are strategic public-private research partnerships? ....... 55
4.2 Typical motives for entering into strategic partnerships ......... 56
4.3 Typical agreements in strategic partnerships ........................... 61
4.4 Maintaining the relationship ................................ ....................... 64
4.5 In summary ................................ ................................ .................. 66
5 New options and trade-offs ................................ ................................ ...... 69
5.1 Industry: options and trade-offs................................ ................. 70
5.2 Universities: options and trade-offs ................................ .......... 73

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Industry seeking university 8

5.3 Government: options and trade-offs ................................ .......... 78
5.3.1 Enterprise and innovation policy ................................ ............... 78
5.3.2 Science policy ................................ ................................ ............. 80
5.3.3 Regional government policy ................................ ....................... 84
5.3.4 Policy coordination ................................ ................................ ..... 84
6 Conclusions ................................ ................................ .............................. 85
Bibliography ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 92
Appendix 1: Individuals involved ................................ ................................ ...... 97
Appendix 2: Additional information on the research approach ...................... 99
Appendix 3: Agreements on intellectual property and scientific publications
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 100

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Industry seeking university 9

1 Introduction
Public-private research partnerships between universities and industry have
become commonplace in the Netherlands in recent decades. Since the 1980s, the
Dutch government has also explicitly encouraged cooperation across successive
generations of innovation policy, currently in the form of a public-private partnership
allowance (the PPP allowance).1 A key policy rationale is that PPPs help science to
contribute to industry innovation and competitiveness. Wide-ranging consortia,
virtual research institutes and individual projects illustrate how varied PPPs are. In
recent years, however, there has been a new trend in PPPs in which large firms
and universities enter into strategic research partnerships. There are some
interesting examples of this in the Netherlands. For example, Delft University of
Technology and the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research
(TNO) are conducting research into quantum computing in the QuTech research
centre with such industrial partners as Microsoft and Intel. Philips, Eindhoven
University of Technology and three regional hospitals are collaborating on research
into healthcare innovations at the Eindhoven MedTech Innovation Center (e/MTIC).
Examples abroad include the Volkswagen Automotive Innovation Laboratory (VAIL)
for automotive technology research at Stanford University School of Engineering,
and the biotechnology research partnership between the University of Basel and
the Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, which is funded largely by
pharmaceutical company Novartis.

In these examples, public and private partners collaborate closely and for lengthy
periods of time in large-scale research programmes. Strategic partnerships go
farther and deeper in many respects than the more customary public-private
partnerships that focus on individual research projects or take the form of broad
research consortia. Are the ‘border crossings’ between the world of public science
and the world of private innovation in strategic research partnerships becoming so
extreme that they could cause boundaries to blur? Does the emergence of strategic
research partnerships mark a new phase in the way universities and (large) firms
collaborate?

These questions inspired us to study this new form of cooperation. We have done
so based on the Rathenau Instituut’s mission, which is to analyse and interpret
trends and developments in knowledge ecosystems in an effort to encourage the
formation of public and political opinion about the social aspects of science and
innovation. We need a close analysis of the phenomenon of strategic public-private

1 The Ministry of Economic Affairs’ ‘Top Sector’ policy, for example, supported more than a thousand public-
private partnership projects between 2013 and 2016. (See the factsheet Stimulering publiek-private
samenwerking via de PPS-toeslag. Onderzoek en Innovatie by the Rathenau Instituut, 11 February 2018,
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/het-geld/stimulering-publiek-private-samenwerking-de-pps-
toeslag-onderzoek-en).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Industry seeking university 10

research partnerships because there is some controversy surrounding cooperation
between universities and industry.
Cooperation between university and industry controversial
Opinions differ as to the desirability of public-private partnerships in scientific
research. Evidence for this can be found in the Rathenau Instituut’s report Trust in
Science in the Netherlands – Survey Monitor 2018, which shows that in the
Netherlands, public trust in science declines when industry pays for research.
Doubts about the integrity of scientists increase as soon as they work for industry
(and government). Almost half (41%) of the Dutch believe that scientists will modify
their research data to get the results that the contracting firm wants. The Dutch also
do not have a positive view of government and industry within the context of
contract research: a large majority think that firms will make use of research results
only if those results support their own ideas, and about 60% believe that
government and industry will try to obstruct unwanted results. On the other hand,
many Dutch people also believe that it is acceptable for scientists to let their choice
of research topic be guided by the interests of business (Van den Broek-Honingh &
de Jonge, 2018). The varying views of the Dutch on university-industry relationships
have been echoed in the Dutch House of Representatives, where a recent debate
showed that MPs too have differing opinions on the subject.2

An article in a recent three-part series in NRC Handelsblad about the influence of
funding bodies on scientific research also clearly shows that there are questions
surrounding private-sector funding of research.3 For a pittance, firms can leverage
considerable influence on research. A reconstruction of the ARCNL strategic
partnership shows how diverging interests, corporate cultures and expectations
cause inherent tensions in public-private partnerships.
Strategic partnerships in knowledge ecosystems
In this study, we regard strategic public-private research partnerships as a new
phenomenon in knowledge ecosystems. We define knowledge ecosystems as the
totality of producers and users of knowledge that are organised around a joint
knowledge search (Järvi, Almpanopoulou, & Ritala, 2018).

Knowledge ecosystems are dynamic: they emerge, they grow, and they shrink.
Actors join; they flourish or disappear. In knowledge ecosystems, universities,
public knowledge organisations, industry and government depend on one another
to generate new knowledge. They influence one another, they compete and they
collaborate. Knowledge ecosystems can develop around specific research themes
or technological or societal challenges. Geographical hotspots often emerge within
knowledge ecosystems because actors seek others nearby to promote more

2 Dutch House of Representatives, Debate on links between fossil fuel industry and universities, 7 September
2017, see: Handelingen II, 2016/2017.
3 NRC Handelsblad, 6 September 2018, p. 10-11.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Industry seeking university 11

effective collaboration and to benefit from clustering advantages, for example a
concentration of knowledge workers.

The actors in knowledge ecosystems focus on generating new knowledge in a pre-
competitive setting. They therefore differ from innovation ecosystems in which the
actors work mainly on knowledge exploitation. In innovation ecosystems, the point
is to use knowledge to create value for the economy or society, for example through
start-ups that commercialise that knowledge. PPPs forge a link between knowledge
and innovation ecosystems that connects R&D to innovation processes.

Strategic partnerships change how knowledge ecosystems function. They offer the
partners alternative courses of action and frameworks, both in the lab and in the
corporate and faculty/university boardrooms. They change the research agenda
and the way research is programmed, funded and carried out. The same holds true
for the way in which knowledge is disseminated, transferred and valorised. In
addition, when a select group of parties enter into a strategic partnership, that
partnership changes the rest of the relevant knowledge ecosystem, if only because
others then have fewer opportunities for cooperation or because there are changes
in the way knowledge and staff circulate in the knowledge ecosystem.

For the strategic partners themselves, the alternative courses of action are
accompanied by new responsibilities and new considerations and trade-offs. For
example: who should be allowed to leverage how much influence on research
agendas, and who should be given which type of access to researchers and
(interim) research results? How can a strategic partnership serve both academic
and commercial interests at one and the same time? What do strategic partnerships
mean for the role that universities play in society? To what extent do they help to
make the Netherlands an attractive research hub?
1.1 Aim, questions and method
The aim of this study is to gain more insight into the phenomenon of strategic
public-private research partnerships between universities and industry, and their
potential impact on the functioning of knowledge ecosystems. Such insight can help
politicians, policymakers and other decision-makers in knowledge ecosystems to
respond (more effectively) to this trend.

The Rathenau Instituut has undertaken this study to answer the following questions:
1. Are strategic public-private research partnerships a new type of public-private
research partnership? If so, what are the distinguishing features of strategic
partnerships?4

4 In this report, we refer to ‘strategic public-private research partnerships’ simply as ‘strategic partnerships’.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Industry seeking university 12

2. How can we understand the emergence of strategic partnerships?
3. What do strategic partnerships mean for the functioning of knowledge
ecosystems? What new opportunities does a strategic partnership offer firms
and universities?
4. What new questions and trade-offs do such partnerships entail, both for the
stakeholders themselves and for government’s science, innovation and
regional policy? What are the implications for society and, consequently, for
science, innovation and regional policy?

To find answers to these questions, we started by carrying out a conceptual study
of public-private research partnerships based on the academic literature and other
publications. We then conducted an empirical study by examining three cases of
strategic partnerships in the Netherlands. They are:
 Chemelot InSciTe (Institute for Science and Technology)
Partners: Province of Limburg, DSM, Eindhoven University of Technology,
Maastricht University and Maastricht Universiteit Medical Centre+
Theme: Biomedical and biobased materials
 DELTA Lab (Deep Learning Technologies Amsterdam)
Partners: Bosch, University of Amsterdam
Theme: Artificial intelligence
 ARCNL (Advanced Research Center for Nanolithography)
Partners: Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), University
of Amsterdam, VU Amsterdam, ASML
Theme: Nanolithography

We conducted desk research and interviews with stakeholders from the partner
organisations in these case studies. We also interviewed other individuals (outside
these organisations) about their expertise and experience. We further discussed
interim research results during a liaison meeting and a meeting with experts and
stakeholders.5
1.2 Reader’s guide
Chapter 2 presents the findings of our conceptual study of strategic partnerships as
a new type of public-private research partnership. We describe what is new or
different about this strategic version of the PPP. Chapter 2 also explains how the
emergence of strategic partnerships relates to the changing strategies of firms,
universities and governments in recent decades.

Chapter 3 sets out the results of our empirical study of strategic partnerships based
on three case studies. We show why partners seek one another out in strategic

5 See Appendix 1 for a list of persons involved and Appendix 2 for additional information on the research
approach.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Industry seeking university 13

partnerships, which agreements they then make entering the partnership, and how
they give shape and substance to their relationship in practical terms.

Chapter 4 combines the findings from the conceptual and empirical studies to arrive
at a typology of the strategic partnership phenomenon. We identify typical
university, industry and government motives for establishing strategic partnerships,
the typical agreements they make when entering into a partnership, and typical
ways in which partners maintain their strategic relationship.

Chapter 5 considers what strategic partnerships mean for the dynamism of
knowledge ecosystems and their impact on society. We then look at the alternative
courses of action this creates for firms, universities and governments, and the
questions it raises for them and society.

We summarise the findings of this report in Chapter 6.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Industry seeking university 14

2 A conceptual study of strategic
partnerships
What is new or different about strategic public-private research partnerships
compared to existing forms of public-private partnership (PPP) or university-industry
collaboration? Why have strategic partnerships emerged in recent years? How can
we explain their emergence? This chapter presents the results of a conceptual
study of strategic partnerships. Section 2.1 produces a typology of PPPs in which
strategic partnerships exemplify the closest form of collaboration. Sections 2.2 and
2.3 explain the emergence of strategic partnerships from a theoretical and historical
perspective. Section 2.4 summarises the chapter.
2.1 A new type of public-private research partnership
To gain a better understanding of what strategic partnerships are and how they
differ from existing forms of research PPPs, we conducted a literature study. One
good starting point for a conceptual study of strategic partnerships is the general
definition used by the OECD.6 In the domain of science, technology and innovation
a PPP may be defined as:

‘any formal relationship or arrangement over fixed-term/indefinite period of
time, between public and private actors, where both sides interact in the
decision-making process, and co-invest scarce resources such as money,
personnel, facility, and information in order to achieve specific objectives in
the area of science, technology, and innovation’ (OECD, 2005).

Defining elements of a PPP are joint decision-making and co-investment in
research by public and private parties.

From the perspective of firms, the research PPP is an intermediate form that lies
halfway between in-house research and outsourcing research to third parties
(contract research). From the perspective of universities, it is an intermediate form
that lies halfway between publicly funded research and contract research funded by
industry (KNAW-werkgroep opdrachtonderzoek, 2005).

6 The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has 36 member countries and was
founded to foster discussion, study and coordination of social and economic policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Industry seeking university 15

These intermediate forms can also be observed in the type of research associated
with PPPs. PPP research combines an interest in basic research with a focus on
potential applications in innovative solutions. In terms of Pasteur’s quadrant
(Stokes, 1997), it is ‘use-inspired basic research’ (see Figure 1).7 It differs in that
sense from pure basic research (the Bohr cell) and pure applied research (the
Edison cell), making it interesting to both academic researchers and industry
researchers and developers.

Figure 1 Pasteur’s quadrant: Classification of scientific research
 Considerations of use?
No Yes
Quest for
fundamental
understanding?
Yes Pure basic research
Bohr
Use-inspired basic research
Pasteur
No Pure applied researach
Edison
Source: Stokes, 1997

The research PPP can serve a broad range of purposes for the various participants.
Not all of them necessarily consider the actual research results equally important.
Firms often regard the access that a PPP gives it to students, researchers and
professors – and their research networks – as an important reason to participate,
especially when talent is scarce. Universities may regard access to private research
funding and expert knowledge of high-tech markets as important motives.

Because research PPPs can serve different purposes, they take many different
forms. The size of the PPP structures varies from small-scale, temporary projects to
permanent, large-scale organisations with hundreds of industry partners (Perkmann
& Walsh, 2007). Corporate involvement ranges from funding and guiding research
to collaboration in the lab.

In 2014, the OECD Working Party on Innovation and Technology Policy (2014)
noted that research PPPs were becoming increasingly strategic in nature, i.e. more
focused on achieving real and specific innovation targets. In strategic PPPs, all the
partners have the same primary goal: to generate the new (high-tech) knowledge
that they need to attain their own strategic goals. In other words, what distinguishes
a strategic from a non-strategic PPP is the huge importance that both the public
and the private parties attach to the actual research results of the partnership.

As yet, there is no extensive academic literature on the phenomenon of strategic
public-private partnerships. A few years ago, the Centre for Science, Technology &

7 This type of research is also known as strategic basic research or strategic science.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Industry seeking university 16

Innovation Policy (CSTI) at the University of Cambridge organised a workshop on
‘Building Long Term Strategic University-Industry Partnerships’ (Coates Ulrichsen &
O’Sullivan, 2014). The researchers attribute the recent emergence of these
partnerships – specifically in the United States and the United Kingdom – to the fact
that large R&D-intensive multinationals have been rationalising their investment in
universities and increasingly limiting such alliances to a small number of strategic,
longer-term partnerships with a select group of universities. They are better able to
absorb and utilise knowledge in this way. According to the researchers, strategic
partnerships with large multinationals can unlock significant added value for
universities by enabling them to gain access to more diverse sources of funding
and to use basic research to meet technological challenges. Universities in the
United States and the United Kingdom are actively seeking partners with which they
can build strong, deep and enduring relationships.

Of note is that the CSTI report refers to two models that position strategic research
partnerships as the closest form of cooperation on a ‘continuum’ or ‘stairway’:

1. The Partnership Continuum model developed by the University-Industry
Demonstration Partnership (2012) in the United States places strategic partnerships
at one end of a continuum characterised by an increasing degree of engagement,
from ‘transactional’ to ‘collaborative’ to ‘alliance’.8 The model is broad in scope and
considers not only cooperation in research but also in education, research facilities
and valorisation. ‘Transactional’ cooperation focuses on sharing materials, software
and hardware, consulting and advising, giving lectures and organising seminars
and workshops. A more far-reaching form of ‘cooperation’ involves sponsoring
research projects and clinical trials, as well as sabbaticals, emeritus professors and
gifts. The closest form of cooperation in this model is ‘alliance’ (what we refer to as
the strategic partnership). Alliances are long-term in nature, involve a substantial
commitment (and sometimes sacrifices) that need to be made by the partners, the
alignment of aspirations and objectives, and the development of deep, trust-based
relationships.

2. The Stairway model developed by the Münster University of Applied Sciences in
Germany, combines the institutional level at which the commitment is made and at
which coordination takes place with the strategic relevance of the relationship
(Davey, Baaken, Golan Muros, & Meerman, 2011). The stairs of the model are tied
to the number of joint projects (from a few irregular projects to several and regular
joint activities), the length of the collaboration (from short- to long-term), the number
of people involved (few to multiple) and the management level (from individual
researcher or professor to faculty (dean) and university management). The highest
step is the strategic partnership.9

8 The model distinguishes between five stages in the relationship: Awareness, Involvement, Support,
Sponsorship and Strategic Partner.
9 The four stairs are Formation, Basic Collaboration, Joint Collaboration and Strategic Partnership.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Industry seeking university 17

Yet another study of university-industry partnerships is by Casper & Miozzo (2013),
who focused on the pharmaceutical industry, where research PPPs have been
common for decades. They noted a new trend in the way in which large
pharmaceuticals and universities engaged with one another. In the 1980s, ‘rights-
oriented partnerships’ were customary between pharmaceutical firms and university
researchers. The firms were mainly interested in gaining a ‘window on science’ and
concluded multi-year contracts with universities for this reason, paying considerable
amounts in upfront funding in exchange for access to intellectual property
developed at the university. Part of the funding was often ‘unrestricted’ while other
components were limited to supporting collaborative, more application-driven
projects between university and industry researchers. In reality, these partnerships
were unable to live up to the firms’ expectations and also proved difficult to
manage. In the 1990s, ‘tapping-in’ partnerships emerged. Firms would establish a
research centre on the university campus to ‘tap into’ local university research
projects and networks. Partnerships were subject to a legal framework in the form
of a ‘master agreement’ that the firms concluded with the entire university. Specific
partnership projects would come from the bottom up, often as a result of
interactions between university and industry researchers. The firm would make a
contribution in kind. Intellectual property (IP) rights were based on co-ownership of
patents. In practice, this model did not lure many top researchers at US universities
to enter into collaborations, mainly owing to IP issues.10 Entrepreneurial professors
who wanted to set up their own spin-offs found it particularly constraining. That is
why a new partnership model has emerged in recent years, referred to as
‘contracting for innovation’, which is inspired by the research and innovation
partnerships that have developed in the biotechnology industry. In this model, the
goal of the pharmaceutical firm is not so much to gain a ‘window on science’ or to
‘tap into’ research projects and networks but to involve university researchers in
drug development; it facilitates close collaboration by establishing an R&D centre
on campus. ‘Contracting for innovation’ differs from previous partnership models in
that industry ties its funding to drug discovery and development milestones on the
path towards commercialisation. This allows university researchers to share in the
commercial profits, incentivising them to commit to innovation-driven research. The
main goal of the partnership is to build a good relationship in which the parties
(learn to) trust one another. One example is the joint steering committee, in which
the firm and the university have an equal say in the selection of projects for funding.
Research proposals are usually initiated by university researchers and then – after
selection – developed into full proposals in collaboration with industry researchers.

10 American universities reward their researchers financially for their (patented) inventions, for example by
paying them a percentage of the royalties or by investing in a researcher’s start-up firm. It is therefore less
interesting for more enterprising researchers to cooperate with industry because their intellectual property
rights to inventions are transferred to the firm. In the Netherlands, the law regards the university (as the
researcher’s employer) as the owner of the intellectual property. The law also stipulates that employees must
receive ‘fair compensation’ if their employer makes use of their invention. Delft University of Technology has
implemented a ‘1/3rd scheme’ in this regard; inventors are entitled to a third of the profits accruing from the
invention. Source: http://www.delftenterprises.nl/kennisvalorisatie/beloning-uitvinders/

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Industry seeking university 18

The study carried out by Casper & Miozzo (2013) shows how large pharmaceutical
firms are always seeking effective ways to access (tacit) knowledge held by top
scientists, steer research into areas that align with their business strategy, promote
innovation, and reduce conflicts about IP rights. The trick is to make the
partnerships interesting for all the partners and keep them that way.
A typology of research PPPs
Drawing on the various studies, we can distinguish three types of research PPPs
(see Table 1).11 We have also noted a more basic type of cooperation (type 0), but
this is not a PPP in the formal sense because there is no joint decision-making. The
typology shows that the various types of PPP serve different aims and interests,
depending on the partner, and also have different functions in knowledge
ecosystems. Type 0 consists of networks between academic and industry
researchers. Type 1 prioritises coordination between academic research and
commercial innovation. A group of firms active in a specific area of innovation may
help determine academic research agendas in relevant fields of research. This is
referred to in policymaking as ‘demand-driven cooperation’. In type 2, demand-
driven academic research agendas transition into collaboration based on a joint
research programme. In type 3, collaboration transitions into a strategic partnership
between a select group of universities and firms that wish to cooperate closely in
research. This is the closest form of cooperation and can be regarded as a
response to the changing goals and strategies of firms, universities and
government, as the table shows. We describe the four types in more detail below.

11 See also: Curley & Salmelin, 2018; Davey et al., 2011; Frølund, Murray, & Riedel, 2017; Hagedoorn, Link, &
Vonortas, 2000; Hessels & Deuten, 2013; Koschatzky, 2017; Mowery, 1998; Savage, 2017.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Industry seeking university 19

Table 1 Typology of public-private research partnerships

Type 0
Networking

Type 1
Coordination

Type 2
Collaboration

Type 3
Strategic
partnership
Function in
knowledge
ecosystem
Building and
maintaining
networks between
academic and
industry researchers
Coordinating
academic research
agendas with
commercial
innovation targets
Cooperation based
on a joint research
programme
Joint programming
of knowledge
generation geared to
strategic business
interests
Composition
/size
Individual projects
based on personal
contacts
Broad programme
consortia, smaller
project consortia
Broad programme
consortia, smaller
project consortia
Exclusive
collaboration
between select
groups of partners
Involvement
of industry
Ad hoc, e.g.
participation in
supervisory
committee for
graduation project
Making suggestions
and co-decision-
making about
programme; project
supervision
Co-decision-making
about programme;
participation in
projects
Close collaboration
in programmes and
projects
What the
firm wants
To stay abreast, to
gain access to
students, graduates
and researchers
To steer scientific
research towards
topics relevant to the
firm
To participate in
scientific research
that is relevant to
the firm
To jointly build a
strategic knowledge
base
What the
university
wants
To connect
students, PhD
candidates and
researchers to firms
as knowledge users
and potential
employers
To benefit from
demand-driven
cooperation and
access to funding
To exploit
opportunities for
use-inspired
research (and
funding); use firms’
knowledge and
skills.
To benefit from
various advantages:
use-inspired
research, funding,
access to
knowledge and
facilities, personnel
policy, etc.
What
government
wants
N/A To close the ‘gap’
between scientific
research and
commercial
innovation by
‘demand-driven’
cooperation
To get firms to make
better use of public
knowledge
institutions
To encourage
science with impact,
boost the innovative
capacity of industry
and the (regional)
economy
Financial
contribution
by firms
Small-scale (in kind) Modest (e.g. 10-
20%)
Significant (e.g. 20-
30%)
Substantial (e.g. 30-
80%)
Source: Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Industry seeking university 20

Type 0: Networking
In the ‘networking’ type, universities and firms are primarily interested in building
and maintaining networks between academic and industry researchers. Firms want
to cooperate with university researchers to stay abreast of developments relevant to
their field, to gain access to experts (professors) and their networks, and to scout
and recruit talented students and PhD candidates. University researchers seek to
cooperate with firms to tap into an important source of jobs for their students and
PhD candidates, to arrange traineeships, and to keep up with commercial and
technological advances in the field.

This is a bilateral, small-scale, ad hoc form of cooperation, often based on personal
contacts between university and industry researchers. For example, professors
network with former students and PhDs who have gone to work in industry. Firms
often make no more than a small contribution (often in kind) to the cooperation (e.g.
a graduation project). Their involvement in the university’s research agendas and in
the research itself is usually limited to making suggestions, for example as a
member of a committee supervising a student’s or PhD candidate’s research
project. It is not the actual results (of the traineeship or graduation project) that
matter, but the networking.
Type 1: Coordination
In the ‘coordination’ type, the aim of the PPP is to align university research more
closely with industry innovation activities. By cooperating in programmes, university
research groups can bring their research agendas into line with the knowledge
requirements of industry in key areas of innovation. Firms active in that area thus
encourage scientific research in fields that have relevance for them. The parties
coordinate with each other on a specific innovation theme or area of technology,
usually by cooperating in programmes as members of a broad consortium. Firms
influence research agendas and programmes only in a general sense and their
financial contribution is therefore relatively modest. They may, for example, have a
seat on the programme council and project supervisory committee.

Government plays an important role in establishing PPPs of this kind. It tempts
public and private parties to participate by making funding available and gears its
policy towards resolving ‘system failure’: when universities and industry fail to
connect, opportunities for innovation are lost.

Example of type 1: Coordination

The Netherlands’ Innovation-oriented Research Programmes (IOPs) were a
good example of the coordination-type PPP. The first IOP began in 1979 and

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Industry seeking university 21

last few ended in 2010. The main purpose of the lOPs was to coordinate
scientific research in emerging fields of technology with the demand for
innovation in Dutch industry. Firms actively influenced research programmes,
while researchers took the lead in projects. They drafted research proposals in
response to programme-led calls for proposals.
Type 2: Collaboration
In this type of PPP, cooperation focuses on the joint execution of PPP projects
within the context of an overall research programme. The programme is often set
up and managed by a broad consortium of knowledge institutions and firms. The
projects that fall under the programme are developed and carried out by individual
groups within the broader consortium. Firms make a larger contribution than in the
foregoing PPP types. Collaboration requires firm agreements about IP rights and
the publication of the research results, as they can or will have a direct impact on
the participating firms’ innovation agendas.

Government plays an important role as a facilitator. By making grants available, it
creates leverage that makes it attractive for public and private parties to participate
and contribute themselves. Its intervention goes a step further than merely getting
the two worlds of R&D to cooperate, however. Its aim is also to get firms to make
better use of knowledge institutions – and vice versa – in order to arrive at specific
innovations.

Example of type 2: Collaboration

The Top Technology Institutes (TTIs), first established in the mid-1990s, were
a good example of the collaboration-type PPP. The aim of the TTI scheme
(cancelled in 2010) was to get firms and publicly funded knowledge institutions
to enter into in multi-year cooperation agreements on research topics
important to the Dutch economy. They were meant to generate knowledge in a
specific area of research that would provide answers to basic strategic
questions in industry. They undertook basic and applied research and pre-
competitive development activities. Industry co-financed the research
programmes (25%). Firms were involved not only in programme development,
project selection and funding but also in carrying out research projects, for
example by contributing equipment and expertise. One explicit aim was to
translate research results into actual innovations. A TTI functioned as a joint

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Industry seeking university 22

virtual research institute in which the research was carried out mainly by the
participating knowledge institutions.
Type 3: Strategic partnership
In this type of PPP, a select group of public and private parties cooperate in a multi-
year research programme. They choose one another with great care and intend to
undertake joint activities for a longer period of time and build a good relationship
with one another. The research programme is geared to strategic business
interests. Researchers in strategic partnerships benefit from several advantages
through their participation in a multi-year agreement with an R&D-intensive firm, for
example the possibility of conducting advanced, use-inspired basic research or of
undertaking research activities that enable new technologies. Such partnerships
provide access to extra research funding and to the firm’s data, knowledge and
facilities. The advantages, for example being able to recruit good researchers and
offer them attractive career prospects, accrue to the university as a whole. By
working closely with university researchers, firms can gain access to new
knowledge and work with them on building a strategic knowledge base.

Unlike types 1 (cooperation) and 2 (collaboration), strategic partnerships are not
about broad consortia in which competing firms also participate, but rather about
exclusive (sometimes bilateral) cooperation in which a select group of partners
make a long-term commitment to one another. The partners make a substantial
investment (in cash and in kind) and take considerable risks. If academic and
commercial aims and interests are to be combined productively in the partnership,
the partners much make firm agreements about IP rights and publications.

Examples of type 3: Strategic partnership

Two examples of strategic partnership are the Advanced Research Center
Chemical Building Blocks Consortium (ARC CBBC) and Eindhoven MedTech
Innovation Center (e/MTIC).

The ARC CBBC was set up to implement a long-term, large-scale use-inspired
basic research programme. It investigates energy carriers, functional materials
and coatings that will promote clean energy, the circular economy and
sustainable chemical processes. Knowledge-building is of strategic importance
for industry partners AkzoNobel, BASF and Shell. Their strategic partners are

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Industry seeking university 23

Utrecht University, Eindhoven University of Technology and the University of
Groningen.12 The firms make a substantial investment in the research
programme (at least 30%). Public funding is provided by the universities, both
as cash in hand and in kind, and by the other founding partners, i.e. NWO, the
Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, and the Top
Consortium for Knowledge and Innovation in the Chemicals Industry. The
firms are closely involved in formulating the research questions. While the
research is being carried out, they are updated regularly on progress and also
take a strong interest in the research itself.

In the e/MTIC, set up by Philips, Eindhoven University of Technology, Máxima
Medical Centre, Kempenhaeghe Epilepsy and Sleep Center and Catharina
Hospital, the partners’ researchers work together on one another’s sites in the
Eindhoven region. The e/MTIC was founded in 2014 to develop and
implement healthcare innovations based on sensors, artificial intelligence and
data science. It focuses on common cardiovascular complaints, sleep
disorders and perinatal issues treated at non-university hospitals. The
researchers work with patients. Philips regards the e/MTIC as a means to
accelerate innovations in healthcare. The partnership offers the universities
interesting research projects and the possibility of valorisation and allows the
hospitals to work on efficiency and improvements in patient care. The partners
exchange staff. All partners support the partnership financially. New partners
may only join with the consent of the existing partners.
2.2 Theoretical perspectives on the emergence of
strategic partnerships
The literature offers different theories that can explain why companies enter into
strategic partnerships (Koschatzky, 2017). Below, we look at three: transaction cost
theory, innovation economics and economic geography.
Transaction cost theory
Transaction cost theory suggests that strategic partnerships arise because the
actors want to keep their transaction costs as low as possible. In other words, a
strategic partnership will emerge when it is the most cost-effective way for the
actors to achieve their goals. A firm that needs knowledge can obtain it in different
ways. It can develop it in-house. It can procure it from external knowledge suppliers

12 ARC CBBC consists of three bilateral partnerships to foster more strategic research projects (one bilateral
partnership per industry partner, with the private partner providing two-thirds of the funding and the public
partner one-third) and a joint multilateral research programme (with the private partners providing one-third of
the funding and the public partners two-thirds) (ARC CBBC, 2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Industry seeking university 24

through contract research, or it can acquire it through a PPP. Each type of
coordination has its own transaction costs. According to the theory, strategic
partnerships emerge when it is costlier, more difficult or riskier for firms to organise
research in-house or outsource individual research projects to external parties
(Hagedoorn et al., 2000). At the moment, many firms are pursuing an ‘open’
innovation strategy precisely because they find it too expensive and risky to
organise research in-house. However, contract research is not always an effective
(or cost-effective) way of gaining knowledge either. The transaction costs involved
in outsourcing, for example, include the cost of searching for and selecting suitable
researchers, drawing up contracts, overseeing compliance with agreements, and so
on. Once the firm has entered into a certain number of individual ‘transactions’, it
becomes interesting to concentrate them into a formal type of cooperation because
that lowers the transaction costs. Broad and open PPP consortia are unsuitable for
addressing firms’ complex and strategic knowledge demands because the
transaction costs of keeping strategic business information confidential are very
high. In addition, firms are not prepared to run the risk (of incurring extra costs)
posed by possible conflicts with competitors about IP and decision-making
(Hagedoorn et al., 2000). It is therefore worth their while to invest in a close
relationship with a knowledge partner and create the sort of mutual trust that can
reduce transaction costs.
Innovation economics
According to innovation economics, knowledge is the main driver of economic
growth because entrepreneurs innovate through acquired knowledge. Innovation
systems play an important role in this theory because public and private parties
need each other in such systems to innovate. Innovation is a non-linear process in
which basic and applied research, technological advances and commercialisation
constantly feed into one another. Interaction and knowledge exchange are crucial
for innovation. Public-private research partnerships arise when firms and
universities need each other to produce and apply knowledge. The more complex
the innovation challenge is, the more knowledge has to be accumulated from
multiple sources, and the more the parties prefer using PPPs to coordinate
research and innovation (Chesbrough, 2003; Koschatzky, 2017). Strategic industry-
university partnerships emerge because the actors need to organise research and
innovation in ‘ecosystems’ in which they can cooperate effectively.
Economic geography
Economic geography suggests that proximity between cooperating parties is
beneficial and to some extent even necessary for effective research cooperation.
Parties who are located near to one another, for example on a campus, can work
together more effectively because personal interactions are easier and occur more
frequently. Proximity need not be of the geographical kind; there are other forms of
proximity as well, such as cognitive proximity (the degree to which the partners
understand each other’s work), organisational proximity (the degree to which the

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Industry seeking university 25

partners’ standards, values and practices are a good fit) and social proximity (the
degree to which individuals know, understand and trust each other because they
are part of the same networks or have worked together before, for example)
(Boschma, 2005; Heringa, 2014).

Viewed from this perspective, PPP offers firms and universities a way to increase
their cognitive and social proximity and therefore build mutual understanding and
trust. Strategic research partnerships are a variation on this idea in which firms
maximise the geographical, cognitive, organisational and social dimensions of
proximity to universities.
2.3 Emergence of strategic partnerships: historical
background
To help readers understand the emergence of strategic partnerships, we briefly
review how firms, universities and governments developed their strategies and the
role that public-private research partnerships played in that context. We see
examples of the various types of PPPs in our outline history of public-private
partnerships.13
A brief history of PPPs
Public-private research partnerships first emerged in the 1980s and have taken a
variety of different forms since then. Universities and industry interacted and formed
alliances before the 1980s, of course, but they rarely established formal public-
private partnerships ‘where both sides interact in the decision-making process, and
co-invest scarce resources such as money, personnel, facility, and information in
order to achieve specific objectives in the area of science, technology, and
innovation’ (OECD, 2005). The main purpose of their interaction and cooperation
was to build and maintain networks. Firms that wanted to involve universities in
actual research did so through consultancy or contract research arrangements.

Large industrial research labs
In the post-war period, large firms often set up their own research labs to meet most
of their demand for basic or applied research in-house. Until the 1960s, industry
research labs were patterned on the linear model that dominated after the Second
World War: groundbreaking basic research would eventually lead to new insights
that could then be translated into innovations by means of applied research and
technological advances. Corporate management therefore gave their private
research labs considerable scope to put more basic research on the agenda.
Researchers working in these labs also had the leeway to maintain close ties with

13 This historical account is based on: Curley & Salmelin, 2018; Dorsman & Knegtmans, 2007; Faasse, 2018;
Hessels & Deuten, 2013; Homburg, 2003; Knegtmans, 2000; Lintsen & Velzing, 2012; Shapin, 2010.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Industry seeking university 26

the academic community, for example by attending conferences, publishing in
scientific journals, participating in working groups and supervisory committees,
accepting part-time appointments at a university, and so on. Industry researchers
often had one foot in the academic world. It was important for firms to create a
research environment that would attract and retain good researchers. By
maintaining networks with academia, they also had the opportunity to scout and
recruit talented students and researchers. During this period, formal public-private
partnerships in broad consortia were not really conducive to the R&D strategies
typically pursued by large firms. That strategy was aimed at gaining a competitive
knowledge advantage by doing research mainly in their own labs, in some specific
instances supplemented by bilateral contract research carried out by third parties.

Figure 2 History: universities, firms and PPP policy

Based on: Curley & Salmelin, 2018; Faasse, 2018; Lintsen & Velzing, 2012; Niosi, 1999; Nobelius, 2004; van der
Zee, Goetheer, & Gijsbers. 2016

Autonomy of university research agendas
University research groups also enjoyed a large measure of freedom to set their
own research agenda in the post-war period. ‘Pure’ science was regarded as the
core task of universities, an attitude somewhat at loggerheads with the idea of
public-private partnerships. There was a huge gap between basic and applied
research. Cooperation with industry and alignment with its needs were much more
common in applied research. The Netherlands Organisation for Applied Research
(TNO) functioned as the organising and coordinating body for applied technical
research. Research was also coordinated on a national scale in the agricultural
sciences.

Business-driven industrial research
From the late 1960s onwards, firms began to focus more on their own innovation
needs in their in-house research. Corporate research labs were reorganised and a
considerable number of them became separate business units. It turned out to be
quite expensive to maintain large research labs, and not always the most effective

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Industry seeking university 27

way to generate innovations. Portfolio management became popular in the 1970s
(i.e. managing all projects centrally in a portfolio to achieve strategic goals), with
firms looking to lower risk and cut costs by balancing innovative basic research and
more applied research. The more firms cut back on their own research capacity, the
more leeway there was for university groups to address specific research questions
through contract research.

Academic research of relevance to society
It was in the same period that the Dutch government launched its own research
policy. The national budget could not keep pace with the growth of the universities,
forcing the government to make choices. In 1974 it drew up its first Science Policy
document. One of the four main points that it addressed was closer coordination
between academic research and the priorities and knowledge requirements of
society. From the 1970s onwards, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
used various measures to coordinate scientific research and the needs of society,
including sector councils, foresight committees and national research programmes
(Faasse, 2018).

University researchers seeking funding
By the end of the 1970s, university research groups were actively seeking
additional sources of funding. The growing scarcity of government funding made
industry more attractive as a paying knowledge user. At the same time, universities
increasingly emphasised their research tasks.

Industrial research in product development
In the 1980s, industrial research came to be dominated by such notions as
integrated product development and became an integral part of new product
design. Researchers joined cross-functional teams, working with engineers,
designers, production experts, marketing professionals and regulatory and public
affairs specialists. It became attractive for firms to cooperate with universities (and
other firms with similar knowledge needs) on maintaining their strategic knowledge
base for the longer term.

Encouraging demand-driven research
It was during this period that the national government developed its innovation
policy. It issued its first innovation policy document in 1979, part of efforts to
address the Netherlands’ lengthy economic recession and high unemployment rate.
Two key aims were to boost the innovativeness of industry and to support efforts by
research institutions to integrate technological innovation into society and industry
(Hessels & Deuten, 2013).

An analysis had revealed that publicly funded research was not sufficiently
responsive to the needs of industry and society. The government’s innovation policy
therefore introduced a new measure to stimulate demand-driven research:

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Industry seeking university 28

Innovation-oriented Research Programmes (IOPs) The IOPs were meant as a
mechanism through which the research community, industry and government would
jointly define research topics that could lead to industrial applications. In an IOP,
firms would be actively involved in setting the research agenda and programme and
in supervising PhD research in areas relevant to industry. These broad PPP
consortia were meant to better align academic research agendas with the
knowledge requirements of innovative firms, particularly in emerging technologies.

Exchange of knowledge between engineering sciences and industry
From 1981 onwards, Technology Foundation STW encouraged close cooperation
between the engineering sciences and industry. STW (which became the NWO
Domain Applied and Engineering Sciences or AES in 2017) received funding from
the Ministry of Economic Affairs and NWO. Research proposals were assessed
both for their scientific quality and for the likelihood of results being applied.
Projects were assigned a user committee with seats held by potential users
(representatives of firms and other organisations), ensuring that knowledge was
exchanged and allowing some researchers to make use of facilities in industry and
vice versa (Veen, Boots, & Boontje, 1990).

Sharing the costs and risks of knowledge generation
After the fall of the Berlin Wall and the opening up of China in the 1990s, markets
and suppliers began to globalise. At the same time, the rise of the Asian tigers
(Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong) intensified worldwide competition.
To survive, firms needed to quicken the pace and lower the cost of innovation.
Many large firms adopted ‘open innovation’ strategies in which they deployed
external sources of knowledge and expertise to achieve innovation. Research PPPs
complemented the open innovation approach. The 1990s saw steady growth in the
number of public-private research consortia, whose aim was to boost the
international innovativeness of industry. Dutch examples included the Top
Technology Institutes and ICES/KIS consortia. In the new forms of PPP, the
purpose was not merely to better align public knowledge agendas with private
innovation goals but also to share the costs and risks of pre-competitive knowledge
generation with knowledge institutions, governments and other firms.

Firms seeking proximity to universities
This trend continued in the 2000s, with firms organising (or reorganising) their
research and innovation activities to optimise cooperation with external knowledge
partners.

R&D-intensive multinationals were especially keen to seek proximity to public and
private knowledge partners and increasingly clustered their activities in one or a few
R&D centres, many of them close to carefully vetted university or technology
campuses. In addition, they often had multiple small R&D centres around the world
or in nearby knowledge ecosystems to support interesting developments. Firms

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Industry seeking university 29

developed a global R&D footprint in this way that included one or more strategic
global R&D hubs embedded in local knowledge and innovation ecosystems,
supplemented by smaller R&D centres that could be used to gain (temporary)
access to other knowledge ecosystems offering special expertise on specific
subjects (Deuten, 2015). Strategic partnerships with select groups of universities
suited this approach.

Universities expanding relationships
In the same period, universities were looking for new sources of research funding
and new ways to perform their valorisation task (for social impact of knowledge).
Public-private research partnerships were a good fit because they offered both
substantial co-financing from firms (and other partners) and interesting research
programmes. Before the millennium, universities mainly used PPPs as a new way
to set the research agenda and fund their research. Gradually, PPPs also offered
universities a new way of organising research, for example within multidisciplinary
research projects or in interfaculty (or even interuniversity) research groups.
Universities also began promoting themselves as entrepreneurial institutions and
members of regional innovation systems.

Use-inspired basic research
Parallel to the universities’ growing interest in PPPs, Dutch national research policy
increasingly came to focus on strategic PPPs in which a select group of firms and
universities cooperated on research, such as the Industrial Partnership
Programmes (IPPs) run by the Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter
(FOM) (now part of NWO) (de Witte, 2012). The introduction of IPPs in 2004
illustrates the change in the scientific community’s attitude towards cooperating with
industry. In FOM’s analysis, the worlds of industrial R&D and academic research
had grown too far apart; both sides had lost interest in each other. In its strategic
plan, its stated aim was to turn the culture around towards innovation.14 In an effort
to bridge the gap, it rejected the disparity between basic research (interesting for
universities) and applied research (interesting for industry) as unproductive and
instead proposed the notion of use-inspired basic research. Viewing things from this
perspective would create new opportunities for cooperation in strategic public-
private partnerships.

Regional expectations of strategic partnerships

14 FOM was a forerunner in this way. From 2012 on, NWO has also sought closer cooperation with industry after
part of its budget was earmarked for research in the ‘top sectors’ of Dutch industry, as part of the
government’s innovation policy. This new focus was further embedded in NWO’s 2015-2018 strategy, with the
organisation aiming to encourage collaboration and interconnectivity in research ‘even more than in previous
years’, and with public-private partnerships being given an important role in this regard (NWO, 2015). In its
new strategy for 2019-2022, which bears the revealing title Connecting Science and Society, NWO writes that
it ‘will continue to make public-private and public-public partnerships in research possible. Various possibilities
will be made available to participate with money, expertise or knowledge. (…) In recent years, several
institutional forms of collaboration have been started in which NWO collaborates with other parties over a
period of many years. [Examples include the strategic partnerships ARCNL, ARC CBBC and QuTech.] In the
next strategy period, NWO will evaluate these relatively new forms of collaboration so that the experiences
acquired can be used to further improve the concepts.’ (p. 75).

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Industry seeking university 30

Regional governments became more aware of the contribution that knowledge
institutions and ecosystems could make to regional economic development.
Municipal and provincial authorities began to co-finance PPPs because they
expected them to boost the local or regional economy. Strategic partnerships
complemented local and regional development strategies because they took the
form of multi-year agreements in which firms committed themselves to local
knowledge institutions.

Emergence of strategic partnerships
From the 2010s on, a growing number of strategic university-industry partnerships
have emerged as a new form of PPP alongside the existing forms. Universities,
industry and governments each have their own reasons for participating in or
supporting these partnerships. Strategic partnerships offer universities a way to
(continue to) conduct leading research in emerging and fast-growing fields, such as
artificial intelligence, with sufficient critical mass to benefit from the knowledge,
expertise, data, investments and other advantages of private partners. Strategic
partnerships give firms a new way to use external sources of knowledge for
research that has so much strategic value that they do not want to organise it in
broad, open public-private consortia. Strategic partnerships are also suitable for
knowledge requirements that are too complex and multidisciplinary to be organised
through bilateral contract research. Firms have a major say in determining the
research programmes undertaken by strategic partnerships.

Partnerships suit policy
Strategic partnerships are well suited to the current policy context, both in industry
(where the aim is to make better use of public knowledge institutions) and at
universities (where researchers are urged to actively pursue knowledge
valorisation). The Dutch government encourages strategic partnerships mainly
through the PPP allowance and in some cases by means of direct funding.
Depending on their financial robustness, regional governments make smaller or
larger investments in such partnerships with a view to boosting the regional
economy.

Industry increasingly funding university research
The emergence of PPPs is part of a trend that sees firms and universities in the
Netherlands increasingly cooperating in research. Figure 3 shows that firms began
contributing significantly to university research in the 1990s, when PPPs started to
emerge. While their contribution was still very modest in the 1980s, in recent years
it has fluctuated at around 8% of the total R&D expenditure of universities and other
higher education institutions. This increase has coincided with a changing set of
policy measures in the Netherlands that through IOPs and TTIs increasingly
channel universities towards PPPs and private co-funding of research.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Industry seeking university 31

Figure 3 R&D expenditure by Dutch institutions of higher education funded by
industry (in millions of € and %)

Source: Eurostat and OECD
2.4 In summary
We began this chapter by asking how strategic research partnerships between
universities and industry differ from existing forms of public-private partnerships in
research. We also asked why these strategic partnerships have emerged in recent
years. How can we explain their emergence?
Strategic partnerships are a new type of PPP
Based on our conceptual analysis, we can conclude that strategic partnerships are
a new type of PPP. The cooperation in strategic partnerships is lengthier, more
intimate and more selective than in other types of PPP, and it is aimed at building a
close relationship that nurtures the mutual trust required for intensive cooperation.
A continuum, from ‘networking’ to ‘strategic partnership’
We can position strategic partnerships on one end of a PPP continuum that runs
from ‘networking’ to ‘coordination’ and from ‘collaboration’ to ‘strategic partnership’.

In the ‘loosest’ configuration, cooperation is about maintaining networks between
university and industry researchers, offering benefits to both parties. These are
small-scale, often ad hoc research projects by students or PhD candidates where
firms offer ideas, provide guidance, arrange internships and so on. The second type
of PPP prioritises coordination. The primary goal is to better align academic
research agendas with industry innovation agendas in broad public-private

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Industry seeking university 32

consortia. The third type of PPP, collaboration, sets the bar higher; industry no
longer merely offers programme guidance but becomes actively involved in specific
projects. In the fourth type of PPP, cooperation is transformed into a strategic
partnership. It is not only more selective but also more intense.
Three theories to explain strategic partnerships
We can explain the emergence of strategic partnerships by combining three
theories: transaction cost theory, innovation economics and economic geography.
Transaction cost theory demonstrates that strategic partnerships allow firms to
reduce their transaction costs. Strategic partnerships come about when it is more
cost-effective to build a close relationship with a well-chosen strategic partner than
to find new project partners time and again. Innovation economics emphasises that
innovations come about by combining differing public and private parties. PPPs
allow firms to coordinate and organise the interaction; strategic partnerships arise
when the challenge of coordination becomes complex. Economic geography
emphasises the importance of ‘proximity’ in cooperation. Strategic partnerships
allow firms to increase the various dimensions of proximity (geographical, cognitive,
organisational and social) so that they can cooperate effectively in research.
Strategic partnership as a response to changing strategies
The emergence of strategic partnerships may also be a response to the changing
strategies of industry, universities and governments. Large R&D-intensive firms
increasingly favour ‘open innovation’, bidding farewell to their large-scale in-house
research labs and relying more heavily on cooperation with external knowledge
partners. Influenced in part by the globalisation of R&D, they are changing the locus
of their R&D as well as their partners and method of cooperation. The growing
focus on strategic partnerships complements the rationalisation they have pursued
in their alliances with external partners and the rearrangement of their global R&D
footprints into one or more large-scale strategic R&D centres (‘global hubs’) that are
firmly embedded in the surrounding knowledge and innovation ecosystems,
supplemented by smaller R&D teams that are able to tap into interesting knowledge
ecosystems (‘knowledge hotspots’) worldwide.

Universities have come to rely increasingly on the third funding stream in recent
decades, and government policy has also challenged and encouraged them to
cooperate with industry. After several decades of PPP, university research groups
are much better able to find partners in industry with which to cooperate on
research questions. Regional governments have also become more involved in
research and innovation PPPs in recent years in a bid to boost their regional
economies. Because strategic partnerships support longer-term cooperation, they
appear to offer additional opportunities for regional development, especially when
firms locate their R&D centres near universities.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Industry seeking university 33

3 An empirical study of strategic
partnerships
After our conceptual study in the previous chapter, in this chapter we describe the
results of our empirical study of strategic public-private research partnerships. We
look at three different strategic partnerships between universities and firms:
Chemelot InSciTe, DELTA Lab and ARCNL. In our review of each case study, we
examine (a) what motives the partners have to engage in a strategic partnership,
(b) what agreements the partners make with each other, and (c) how the partners
have experienced the reality of their strategic partnership.15 In the next chapter, we
combine the findings of our conceptual and empirical studies to create a typology of
strategic public-private research partnerships.
3.1 Chemelot InSciTe
The Chemelot Institute for Science and Technology (InSciTe) was founded in 2014
by the Province of Limburg, chemicals giant DSM, Eindhoven University of
Technology (TU/e), Maastricht University (UM) and Maastricht University Medical
Centre+ (MUMC+). The institute brings the universities and DSM together to
cooperate on research and innovations in two areas: biomedical materials and
biobased materials.

InSciTe’s activities cover about 80 FTEs with a budget of € 60 million over a six-
year period. The Province of Limburg contributes € 30 million through its subsidiary
Chemelot Scientific Participations, while the other founding partners each contribute
€ 10 million.16 The province has also made a further € 20 million available through
another subsidiary, Chemelot Research Facilities, to finance facilities on the host
campus. InSciTe also makes use of the PPP allowance scheme run by the Ministry
of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy.17 InSciTe is located on the Brightlands
Chemelot Campus, a former DSM location in Sittard-Geleen. In addition to its own
facilities, InSciTe uses other laboratory and cleanroom facilities on the Chemelot
campus as well as its partners’ facilities.18 The Chemelot facilities are managed by

15 For more information on the research approach, see Appendix 2.
16 Chemelot Scientific Participations and Chemelot Research Facilities are investment organisations that are
wholly owned by the Province of Limburg. UM and MUMC+ have joined forces and participate as one partner.
17 For every euro of private R&D funding that a firm gives a research organisation, the Dutch Ministry of
Economic Affairs and Climate Change adds € 0.25 to the PPP allowance. The allowance was increased to €
0,30 in 2018. Source: https://www.rvo.nl/subsidies-regelingen/pps-toeslag-onderzoek-en-innovatie,
Staatscourant 11 May 2018.
18 InSciTe has founding partners and partners (other participating companies, knowledge institutions). To avoid
confusion with the other case studies that have only one type of partner, we use the terms founding partners
and participants (or project partners) as much as possible.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Industry seeking university 34

the campus organisation and can also accommodate projects undertaken by
external firms and knowledge institutions.
3.1.1 History
DSM’s Central Laboratory began its transformation into the Chemelot campus in
2005. From that point on, a number of parties, including DSM, UM and the Province
of Limburg, promoted the idea of expanding the campus into an open innovation
campus, similar to Philips NatLab’s transformation into the High Tech Campus. The
idea complemented the Province of Limburg’s evolving clustering and campus
development policy, meant to boost the knowledge-intensity of the regional
economy to drive future job growth. It was against this background that UM and
MUMC+ joined forces with Zuyd University in 2013 to form the Limburg Knowledge
Axis. The Knowledge Axis is a decade-long strategic programme geared towards
enhancing the socio-economic structure of the province. The plan encompasses
four campuses, the Brightlands Chemelot campus in Sittard-Geleen being one of
them.19 The Chemelot campus organisation, set up to make strategic investments
on the campus appealing, noted a gap in the knowledge component of the
Chemelot campus. That gap could be filled by establishing several research
institutes, and InSciTe was suggested as one of them.

InSciTe was founded in 2014 for a six-year period by the Province of Limburg,
DSM, TU/e, UM and MUMC+. Its purpose is to translate academic knowledge into
innovative biomedical and biobased applications.

Each of the founding partners has its own motives for participating in InSciTe. The
Province of Limburg wants InSciTe to support the Chemelot campus in its efforts to
boost the knowledge intensity of the regional economy and Limburg’s business
climate. Job preservation and job creation play an important role. DSM’s
participation is important to the province because it allows the open innovation
campus to build on DSM’s experience in scaling up and commercialising
technologies.

Participating in InSciTe appeals to DSM because it can work with universities and
MUMC+ on research and innovation in domains that it considers strategically
important. InSciTe can also spur the growth of the campus ecosystem, leading to a
broader regional labour market that will attract talented employees. Thanks to
InSciTe, DSM can easily keep track of interesting spin-offs and start-ups. This
model, in which firms closely monitor, nurture and in some cases participate in
start-ups, follows a trend pioneered in the pharmaceutical industry, where large

19 There are now four Brightlands campuses: the Chemelot Campus in Sittard-Geleen, the Maastricht Health
Campus, the Greenport Venlo Campus and the Smart Services Campus in Heerlen. Source:
https://www.brightlands.com/.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Industry seeking university 35

firms outsourcing some of their R&D to smaller firms and then absorb successful
ones through participations or acquisitions. DSM and the Province of Limburg share
a strategic interest in supporting a thriving ecosystem on the Chemelot campus.

InSciTe appeals to MUMC+ because it supports the practical usefulness of new
findings; by participating in projects, it can scale up research and shorten the time
to clinical use. InSciTe gives UM and TU/e an interesting and attractive way to
perform their valorisation task.

The facilities make it possible to scale up research from small laboratory set-ups
investigating materials measuring only a few grams to testing and demonstration
facilities that can handle a few kilograms’ worth. InSciTe is therefore attractive to
the universities because it helps (future) application of the results of their research.
InSciTe also functions as a network organisation for universities in linking the
dispersed facilities and knowledge required for valorisation.

At the outset, InSciTe focused on two topics: biomedical materials and biobased
materials. These topics parallel DSM’s strategic investment domains and also
reflect the interests of research groups active at the universities and MUMC+. The
two topics were also identified in the Limburg Knowledge Axis programme. In terms
of biomedical materials, the partners were able to build on a long-standing
partnership in the Top Technology Institute for Biomedical Materials (TTI BMM)
(which was winding down at the time).20 There was no such history for biobased
materials, and so the partnership still had to get off the ground. The focus was on
close cooperation between TU/e and DSM.
3.1.2 Agreements
The founding partners of InSciTe have made various working arrangements about
governance and decision-making, how projects will fit into the programmes, how
much authority the participants will have, and how IP rights and scientific
publications are to be handled.

InSciTe has a board whose members represent the founding partners. The number
of votes are keyed to each partner’s financial contribution, which means that
Chemelot Scientific Participations has a major say in any decisions about the
institute and the projects that it undertakes. The researchers select the PhD
candidates and engineers-in-training to work on the projects.21

20 The managing director of BMM at the time has now become the managing director of InSciTe.
21 Research at InSciTe is closely aligned with university engineering programmes (leading to the degree PDEng
or ‘professional doctorate in engineering’). Students must complete a two-year, paid programme in which they
train to become engineers. During training, they improve their knowledge of technology and learn to apply that
knowledge in practice. They also develop their professional skills to improve their career opportunities in
industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Industry seeking university 36

The two research domains, biomedical materials and biobased materials, are each
headed by a programme director seconded from DSM. The programme directors
propose new projects to the board and report to the board on the progress of
current projects. Projects must be initiated by one of the founding partners. If at
least three of the four founding partners are interested in the project, it can be
undertaken as an InSciTe project. The three founding partners then become project
partners. Other parties may also join projects. Firms and knowledge institutions
participating in projects may use the InSciTe facilities.22

The founding partners put the available funds into a single ‘InSciTe piggy bank’ that
is managed by the InSciTe board. That means that the founding partners cannot
decide for themselves how their share of the funding will be spent. The board
assesses and selects projects on predefined criteria. Because of the way the votes
are distributed, Chemelot Scientific Participations casts the decisive vote in this
form of shared agenda-setting. At the same time, the province’s subsidiary relies on
the expertise of the other board members when it comes to research-related
decisions.

One of InSciTe’s aims is to attract additional funding. It has therefore been agreed
that InSciTe and its partners will also participate in EU programmes (such as
Horizon 2020, ERDF and Interreg) and national programmes. That means that
other – external – organisations such as TNO may act as project managers.

In addition to a project partner that coordinates the project, another project partner
is responsible for valorisation. That project partner can be a public or a private
party. This role, which is more commercial and entrepreneurial in nature, requires
an extra financial investment, with the valorisation partner shouldering the task of
filing for patents and covering the associated costs. There are therefore certain
obligations associated with starting up a project, since one of the project partners
must be prepared to take on this role and make the necessary investment. If there
are any proceeds, however, they will go to that project partner first, to reimburse the
cost of filing and maintaining the patent.

To safeguard the interests of all participants, InSciTe has an IP framework
agreement that covers all projects.23 The guiding principle is that in the event of
publication, the knowledge institutions must allow for the patent application
timeframe and the interests of industry. The IP rights are held by the project partner
that employs the inventor(s)/researcher(s).

The valorisation partner is responsible for the patent filing process and the related
costs. This partner also issues licences and is authorised by the other project

22 Alongside projects undertaken with UM, MUMC+ and TU/e.
23 See Appendix 3 for an explanation of IP rights and publications arrangements.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Industry seeking university 37

partners to negotiate with interested parties about the type of licence and the
relevant terms and conditions. If the valorisation partner is interested in taking out a
licence itself, then another project partner assumes this role.

After the valorisation partner’s costs are reimbursed, the proceeds from patents are
distributed among the project partners in proportion to each one’s contribution. The
founding partners deposit their share of the proceeds in the ‘InSciTe piggy bank’.
This system means that the benefits of what are ultimately commercially successful
innovations also accrue to the Province of Limburg through its subsidiary Chemelot
Scientific Participations.
3.1.3 Experiences
With respect to biomedical materials, the university and industry researchers have
been able to build on prior partnership projects, specifically within the Top
Technology Institute for Biomedical Materials (TTI BMM), which had been located
on the Chemelot campus some years previously.24 Many of them got to know one
another through previous alliances and have learned how best to work together
building mutual trust and organisational capacity in the process. According to the
stakeholders, that is largely why new projects are able to get off the ground quickly.
That ability has already led to a start-up and the development of several new
products. Another contributing factor is that biomedical materials are an important
growth market for DSM. Thanks to InSciTe, DSM researchers and staff are in close
contact with doctors and academic researchers, allowing them to improve their
knowledge of the market and immediately roll out experiments to see what works.
Conversely, the physician researchers at MUMC+ benefit from DSM’s efforts and
experience, for example when filing for patents, ensuring quick and effective
protection of IP. InSciTe’s internal IP agreements are also helpful because they
offer clarity in advance, with no need for discussion among project partners.

InSciTe helps researchers learn what is important for commercialisation (at a later
stage). For example, medical applications require accurate experiments based on
generally accepted and accredited methods. Academics, however, are more
interested in the science and therefore prefer to work with cutting-edge methods.
That can lead to tension between their academic curiosity and the need to comply
with the customary testing methods for future certification. What the project teams
do, for example, is to apply the generally accepted testing method first and try the
newer method later. Researchers also learn how DSM markets a new product and
attempts to meet market demand.

24 The Top Technology Institute for Biomedical Materials (TTI BMM) was founded in 2007. In 2010, it merged
with the Center for Translational Molecular Medicine (CTMM) and in 2014, CTMM merged with Top Pharma
Institute, now called Lygature (van der Zee et al., 2016). TTI BMM was originally located on the Chemelot
campus. CTMM was in Leiden and moved to Utrecht after the merger. Source:
https://www.tipharma.com/about-our-institute/history/# and https://www.lygature.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Industry seeking university 38

Examples of InSciTe projects

InSciTe works on projects in two domains that parallel DSM’s strategic
technology priorities: biomedical materials and biobased materials.

Biomedical materials
Projects focusing on biomedical materials include research on materials for
vascular prostheses, materials that support self-repair in cartilage and
stimulate its ingrowth, and the development of an ocular coil that serves as a
drug-delivery system for the eye. One project team made up of TU/e, UM and
MUMC+, DSM and Xilloc Medical are working on a new treatment for severe
scoliosis (Patient Specific Scoliosis Treatment or PoSTuRe). Scoliosis patients
have a deformed spinal column. In severe cases, surgery is required to
straighten the spine with metal wires and rods. Young patients must undergo
the procedure several times to allow for growth. In the elderly, who often have
less bone strength, the procedure may cause bone fractures, necessitating
more surgery. The project team is developing a new procedure in which the
metal wires are replaced by broad, woven polyethylene cables that slide over
bars. Screws are no longer needed because the cables are wound around the
bone, preventing fractures of the vertebrae. The project consists of clinical
trials of the procedure. The expectation is that the new procedure will lead to a
dramatic reduction in the number of repeat operations.

Biobased materials
The projects exploring biobased materials focus on sustainable processes and
materials that support the circular economy. Researchers are developing new
chemical feedstock made of biomass that can replace fossil feedstock in
industrial materials and chemicals production processes. The feedstock
consists of second-generation biomass that does not compete with the food
chain. As yet, the processes are still too energy-intensive and their yields do
not always make them marketable.

Lignin refinery for marine fuel
In one of InSciTe’s biobased projects, TU/e researchers are working to scale
up a chemical biobased process that transforms lignin into lignin crude oil on a
commercial scale. Lignin is a by-product of second-generation bio-ethanol.
Lignin crude oil is more sustainable and environmentally friendlier than current
marine fuels. The researchers are cooperating with a shipping company and a
marine engine manufacturer. A multifunctional pilot plant has now been set up
that can produce approximately 160 litres a day, allowing the partners to test
the fuel samples. In 2017, the TU/e spin-off Vertoro was founded to
commercialise the process.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Industry seeking university 39

The partners working on biobased materials had to get to know one another and
figure out how to leverage their competences and interests to mutual advantage. In
addition, shortly after the start of InSciTe, the market for biobased materials
collapsed in response to falling oil prices. That made it much less interesting to
DSM to involve itself in this area. In the ensuing discussion, it became clear that the
other partners could offer limited support for a shift in research focus, so that
research could proceed. Since then, there is more emphasis on sustainable
process technology.

In practical terms, the founding partners of InSciTe always weigh up the various
interests – academic, commercial, and public – as a group. For example, they do so
when distributing the project funding and if one partner turns out to be contributing
bigger projects than the other partners. Although they have agreed to put all the
funding into a single piggy bank, it seems that they also consider whether an
investment is sufficiently advantageous for their own organisations. In addition, they
look at how InSciTe’s facilities complement their own. For example, because
MUMC+ has excellent facilities in Maastricht for preclinical trials and evaluations,
they are performed there and not on the Chemelot campus. On the other hand, the
campus has a pilot plant for biobased materials that offers many more options than
the TU/e’s campus facilities.

DSM is finding that long-term partnerships have both advantages and
disadvantages. Close cooperation on biomedical materials is producing rapid
results, but the long-term commitment in the area of biobased materials is making it
difficult for the company to respond quickly to changing market circumstances.
DSM believes that the solution may lie in its being one of the participating firms
rather than a founding partner. It will then have the flexibility that the founding
partners of InSciTe sometimes lack.

InSciTe offers university researchers new opportunities to work on valorisation. As
a result, they spend a lot of time during InSciTe projects on research leading to new
knowledge that accelerates product development. This type of research is less
suited to producing scientific publications in prestigious journals, however. The
faculties and board of MUMC+ recognise the importance of InSciTe’s activities and
they are therefore experimenting with a new researcher assessment method that
will consider more than number of publications and impact scores. At the same
time, MUMC+ has noted that not everyone is suited to working with industry, nor is
that a requirement. MUMC+ wants to differentiate researcher assessment and in
that way come up with an appropriate method for encouraging achievements in
both applied and basic research.

The Province of Limburg has a vested interest in a regional economy that creates
and can offer employees knowledge-intensive jobs. In the province’s view, InSciTe

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Industry seeking university 40

should support an open innovation campus that will drive the knowledge-intensive
economy that it has envisaged. The province regards the Chemelot campus (along
with the other Brightlands campuses) as ‘an economic and spatial driver’ for the
South Limburg region, but considers it too soon to judge whether InSciTe will have
the desired impact.

Although DSM is now only one of many firms with a presence on the campus, the
chemicals giant is also a defining factor in InSciTe’s image and therefore influences
which new firms the partnership can attract. Formally, InSciTe welcomes all and
sundry (as project participants), even DSM’s competitors and counterparts in the
industry, provided one of the founding partners sponsors the project. In reality,
however, it has turned out to be difficult to attract new partners because InSciTe is
viewed as a partnership between DSM, knowledge institutions and the Province of
Limburg. That is why in the next phase, InSciTe is considering making DSM one of
the participating firms rather than a founding partner with a seat on the board that
decides on projects. At the same time, all the partners acknowledge that DSM’s
participation as founding partner has been a key success factor. It would have been
difficult if not impossible to get InSciTe off the ground without the firm’s commercial
experience and familiarity with the scaling-up process. None of the other founding
partners had expertise in these areas.
3.2 DELTA Lab
The Deep Learning Technologies Amsterdam (DELTA) Lab was founded in April
2017 by Bosch and the University of Amsterdam (UvA).25 DELTA Lab conducts use-
inspired basic research: it develops models and algorithms that enable machines to
learn from data and experience. The research laboratory is integrated into the
Informatics Institute (IvI) at Amsterdam Science Park.

Nine PhD students and one postdoc work in DELTA Lab. Bosch is contributing € 3
million over its four-year term. The lab has been awarded a PPP allowance (€ 0.75
million) by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy. The IvI contributes
in kind by supervising PhD students. It also houses the QUVA Lab (14 FTEs), a
strategic partnership with chip manufacturer Qualcomm.

25 The German multinational Bosch is best known in the Netherlands as a manufacturer of refrigerators, washing
machines and drills, which it started producing in the 1930s to cope with a downward trend in the automotive
industry. Founded in 1886, the firm has nevertheless become well known as a manufacturer of electrical
components and systems for cars, including drive systems, starter motors and generators, and steering and
braking systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Industry seeking university 41

3.2.1 History
DELTA Lab came about because Bosch needed expertise in artificial intelligence
(AI) and talented AI researchers and wanted access to the crème de la crème of
the scientific community in this field. An automotive industry supplier, Bosch was
aiming to deliver intelligent software systems for self-driving cars. More generally, it
wanted to transform itself from a hardware manufacturer into a supplier of software,
plant data-gathering services, and software services. It was also keen to use AI in
products other than cars and in its own production and testing facilities. AI therefore
had to become one of its core technologies.

To effectuate this transformation, Bosch sought to cooperate with several different
public knowledge institutions and firms. In 2016, it established the Cyber Valley
consortium with its partners the German federal state of Baden-Württemberg, the
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems (Tübingen and Stuttgart), the University
of Tübingen, the University of Stuttgart, BMW, Facebook, IAV, Daimler, Porsche
and ZF Friedrichshaven. Amazon joined the consortium in October 2017. The
consortium aims to create an ‘ecosystem for technology transfer in the field of
Artificial Intelligence through a new model of cooperation between science and
industry’. It consists of five Max-Planck research groups, four university research
groups, about ten new chairs, and a research school that will train one hundred
PhD students in six years’ time.

Deep Learning

DELTA Lab performs research on deep learning. Raw data (e.g. texts, medical
scans) are used to attain a ‘digital target’ (e.g. a diagnosis advising a particular
therapy). Using large amounts of raw data, a deep learning model can itself
derive the best estimate of the digital target. That estimate is not based on
predetermined hypotheses or facts (e.g. certain physical traits) but on the
model’s ability to recognise patterns. The focus of research is the development
of effective, fast and reliable models. Computer labelling of data, possibly with
external assistance, plays an important role. Not all models are equally
successful across all applications: in medical applications, what matters is the
ability to distinguish between details; in traffic applications, image contrast is
important. Deep learning applications include speech recognition in
smartphones and recognition of road signs by automobiles.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Industry seeking university 42

To build its internal knowledge and knowledge absorption capacity, Bosch
established the Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI) in 2017. BCAI
employs about 100 FTEs divided between an academic research group in
Renningen (Germany) and two applied research groups in Bangalore (India) and
Palo Alto (USA). The externally recruited BCAI director brought Bosch special
knowledge of and experience working with AI. Bosch also used BCAI to gain
access to the academic world; its aim was to boost its knowledge base in AI by
collaborating with leading research groups.

It was in that context that Bosch approached UvA professors Max Welling and
Arnold Smeulders. Welling’s machine learning research group and Smeulder’s
computer vision group work on the cutting edge of science. Bosch proposed
funding a joint laboratory in deep learning with UvA. Its reasoning was that basic
research on deep learning would ultimately produce answers to a number of
questions in which it had a critical interest, such as how deep learning works and
how reliable it is. The professors would select the research topics. The proposal
was an appealing one for Welling and Smeulders because it allowed them to attract
large numbers of PhD students to work on their research agendas. They would no
longer have to seek project funding by competing for public research grants. A
further factor was that public funding of AI research had not kept pace with the
enormous growth and progress in AI in recent years.26 The private sector had
therefore become an important source of funding for the researchers.

The university takes a positive view of public-private partnerships, provided that
both the university and industry benefit; partnerships have little chance of success
otherwise. The university feels it is important for the proposed research programme
to be compatible with the research group’s existing programme. A partnership
makes additional industry funding available and helps to build research capacity. It
also helps the university fulfil its knowledge valorisation task. Because university
research is generally not suited to solving short-term problems, the university board
wants to be sure that the suggested research programme addresses longer-term
business interests, for example its strategic business plans. The board also reviews
the proposed arrangements, which it insists must comply with requirements
imposed by the academic world and government, such as publication rights.

26 In April 2018, the EU urged public and private sectors to increase their research and innovation budgets in the
field of artificial intelligence by at least € 20 billion between April 2018 and the end of 2020. The European
Commission has raised the amount earmarked for artificial intelligence in the Horizon 2020 programme to €
1.5 billion (https://ec. uropa.eu/growth/content/commission-outlines-european-approach-artificial-
intelligence_en).The International Center for Artificial Intelligence (ICAI), established in April 2018 by UvA and
VU (see the report text below), has joined five other institutes in the European Lab for Learning and Intelligent
Systems (ELLIS). Source://www.theguardian.com/science/2018/apr/23/scientists-plan-huge-european-ai-hub-
to-compete-with-us

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Industry seeking university 43

There were no other parties or public partners involving in establishing DELTA Lab.
The lab would welcome other partners subject to the approval of both UvA and
Bosch.

IvI – the institute that houses DELTA Lab – had already established a similar public-
private partnership in 2015 when an academic spin-off (EUVision) was sold to US
chip manufacturer Qualcomm.27 When Qualcomm wanted to work with UvA
researchers on basic research projects, it joined forces with IvI in setting up the
QUVA Lab, whose research programme is determined in the same way as that of
DELTA Lab. Qualcomm has a vested interest in the patents produced by QUVA
Lab, and the lab also gives the firm access to the academic world, knowledge and
talent.

3.2.2 Agreements
Bosch and the UvA negotiated the research programme, the duration of the
partnership, the financing, the working arrangements, and the intellectual property
and publication rights. DELTA Lab’s research programme was the focal point of
their cooperation. Bosch asked professors Welling and Smeulders to draw up a
proposal describing the overall research topics. After a brief discussion, Bosch
approved the proposal, making minimal changes. The professors then got to work
defining the specific projects that would be carried out under each topic and
recruiting and selecting researchers (most of them PhD candidates).

DELTA Lab was established for a four-year period (the length of time a PhD
candidate needs to complete his or her doctoral research). The contract does not
include a renewal option. When the time comes, the partners will decide whether or
not to continue their partnership, depending on their experiences, options and
plans. The DELTA Lab partners (the professors and BCAI director) have a
management meeting once every six months. The lab draws up quarterly updates
and an annual financial report.

The partners make work arrangements to facilitate efficient knowledge exchange.
Each research project is assigned to a Bosch employee from BCAI who is in regular
touch with the DELTA Lab researchers. BCAI staff members are researchers
themselves who publish in the same journals as the UvA group. Frequent meetings
allow them to track the progress and substance of the research. The employees of
DELTA Lab’s partner organisations are also getting to know one another better in

27 15% of EUVision’s shares were held by UvA (part of the proceeds went to the faculty), and the other shares
(approximately 20%) were held by the spin-off’s employees and owners. Smeulders was one of its co-
founders. The value of the acquisition has not been disclosed. An NRC article refers to ‘millions’. Source:
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2014/10/10/hoe-het-grote-qualcomm-een-kleine-universitaire-startup-uit-
amsterdam-kocht-a1499572

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Industry seeking university 44

other ways. The PhD students spend about a month at Bosch in Renningen every
year while BCAI staff work in the DELTA Lab for short periods. These exchanges
have benefits on both sides: PhD students gain business experience and expertise,
while BCAI staff brush up their research skills.

The partners have agreed that the IP rights to the research results will be
transferred from DELTA Lab to Bosch. This agreement follows the rules drawn up
in the Netherlands for PPPs (see Appendix 3), which state that if a firm finances
(almost) all of a lab’s work, it is entitled to the IP rights – and that is certainly the
arrangement in the case of DELTA Lab. This agreement allows Bosch to protect its
commercial interests.28

It is important to the university researchers to be able to publish their results. The
agreement with Bosch stipulates that they may do so. Bosch does check the
articles beforehand for any patentable information and to ensure that they do not
inadvertently disclose confidential information.

The partners have also agreed on the open-source software used by DELTA Lab.
The software is available to non-profit organisations (such as universities) free of
charge, but not always to commercial parties. In some instances firms must pay to
use this software or are obliged to disclose any programmes and applications that
they have developed with it. The agreement makes it easier for Bosch to continue
developing DELTA Lab’s results later.
3.2.3 Experiences
DELTA Lab was still in its start-up phase in late 2017. Both UvA and Bosch regard
the initial experiences as positive. BCAI is happy about the quality of the research
and the expertise available in Amsterdam.

The UvA’s lab directors appreciate the involvement of the BCAI directors and staff
and the freedom that they are given to set the research programme and select
projects. BCAI staff are involved in the research projects (meetings) but do not
interfere in their management. According to the lab’s directors, they are very
knowledgeable about the science itself, and because they limit themselves to
asking interesting questions and making suggestions, the lab directors feel that they
respect their academic freedom.

Cooperation between the university and Bosch is smooth in part because the latter
has allowed its research staff at BCAI the necessary discretion to do basic
research. The firm’s corporate culture supports taking a longer view by investing in

28 Bosch has already filed for patents.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Industry seeking university 45

staff and knowledge. One plus point is that Bosch is not a listed company and is
therefore not subject to share price fluctuations and shareholders who want to see
a short-term return on their investment. Even so, Bosch does expect short-term
results from its investment in AI research. The purpose of BCAI is to see that a
certain percentage of Bosch’s revenue and cost savings are derived from AI-related
applications by 2021. BCAI has established applied research groups to work
towards meeting that aim. Its academic research group functions as a bridge
between basic and applied research.

For the lab directors, close cooperation with Bosch means that PhD researchers
can take on teaching tasks as part of their academic training, helping the staff bear
some of the teaching load. That load has become considerable thanks to the
popularity of AI, which attracts 160 Bachelor’s students and 100 Master’s students
to the programme every year.

The lab directors have also noted the enormous popularity of research places in the
DELTA Lab.29 The lab received more than 450 applications from around the world
for ten places. The candidates, both Dutch and foreign, are of exceptional quality.
Many of them previously studied at prestigious universities or were working for
leading high-tech firms. Candidates find the laboratory attractive because it is
partnered with a renowned firm, Bosch, and gives them access to leading
scientists.

Professors Welling and Smeulders have also positioned the DELTA Lab as part of
the Amsterdam AI Ecosystem. They have two reasons for doing so. First of all, they
want to attract and retain talent in the face of global competition for talented
researchers and research investment in AI. High-tech firms such as Google (which
acquired Deepmind in 2014) can recruit AI researchers by offering them high
salaries and allowing them to continue their research work in-house. That makes it
challenging for the UvA to hang on to AI research staff. Welling and Smeulders and
other AI professors working in Amsterdam are therefore promoting the use of AI in
local companies – including start-ups. Sometimes the UvA is involved in founding
spin-offs, either by providing co-financing (UvA Holding) or because its own staff
members work there.30

AI researchers find it appealing to work in an environment where business activities
take place alongside scientific research. Local businesses retain research staff but
also graduates for the region. The majority of PhD candidates come from abroad.
About half will remain in the Netherlands after receiving their doctorates to work for

29 The lab directors refers to the two directors (professors Welling and Smeulders) and the scientific manager
Zeynep Akata.
30 UvA researchers can also set up their own start-up or spin-off, albeit subject to certain rules. For example, the
business activities must be appropriate and not compete with the UvA’s other activities. If permission is
granted, limits are set on the amount of time that the researcher may spend on the spin-off, the amount of time
that he or she may devote to it outside working hours, and the facilities or knowledge that he or she may use.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Industry seeking university 46

spin-offs specialising in image recognition, giving rise to a local network of
specialists in these firms. The professors believe that this concentration of
knowledge will attract even more talent, fuelling the growth of the Amsterdam AI
Ecosystem.

Another reason for developing an Amsterdam AI Ecosystem is that the professors
want to help embed an advanced knowledge of AI in the Dutch economy. Together
with other UvA and VU colleagues, they invited the CEOs of Dutch companies for a
meeting to persuade them of the importance of partnerships such as those with
Qualcomm and Bosch. Their message was that, if Dutch industry is to remain
competitive, it needs AI-related knowledge generated in the Netherlands and based
on Dutch data. One recent development is the International Center for Artificial
Intelligence (ICAI), launched by the UvA and the VU in April 2018 and dedicated to
driving innovation in AI public-private partnerships. After the joint labs with
Qualcomm and Bosch, this is the third university-industry lab, this time involving a
PPP with Ahold-Delhaize (AIRLAB); its researchers focus on studying AI for retail
applications. The UvA and the City of Amsterdam are planning to build a new AI
facility in the Amsterdam Science Park to house new and existing ICAI Labs, for
teaching purposes, and to support cooperation with other faculties, SMEs and civil
society partners.

The UvA and DELTA Lab researchers do not feel that their academic freedom has
been restricted. They can share all their discoveries and ideas openly within the IvI,
the organisation to which they officially belong. They can also interact normally with
the wider academic community. There is one proviso, however: researchers must
not obstruct patent applications and must therefore observe secrecy prior to
publishing their results.
3.3 ARCNL
The Advanced Research Center for Nanolithography (ARCNL) was founded in
2014 by the Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter or FOM (which
became part of NWO in 2017), the University of Amsterdam (UvA), VU Amsterdam
(VU) and ASML, the world leader in the production of lithography machines that
define the structures of processor and memory chips. The Province of Noord-
Holland and the City of Amsterdam supported the initiative by providing joint start-
up funding. ARCNL conducts basic research in the fields of physics and chemistry,
inspired by current and future key technologies in nanolithography; the current
focus of research is the production and use of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) light.

ARCNL currently has about 70 FTEs on staff, with plans to expand to 100 FTEs. Its
ten-year budget amounts to € 100 million, with NWO providing € 22.5 million, the
universities € 12.5 million each, ASML € 35 million and the Province of Noord-

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Industry seeking university 47

Holland and the City of Amsterdam € 5 million in start-up funding. The Ministry of
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy has awarded ARCNL a PPP project allowance
tied to ASML’s contribution. The remainder of the budget is derived from research
grants and projects undertaken with other partners. The institute has its own
building in Amsterdam Science Park, next door to AMOLF, a Dutch research
institute that studies the physics of complex matter.31 ARCNL shares a number of
research activities, advanced facilities and support staff with AMOLF. In
organisational terms, ARCNL is one of NWO’s research institutes.
3.3.1 History
ARCNL came about because ASML wanted to find a new way to mobilise academic
knowledge for the development of a new generation of machines to manufacture
microchips. Until then, it had mainly done so by funding PhD researchers at various
universities and research institutes. There were limits to this approach, however,
because individual PhD researchers could only work on a small part of a problem,
whereas the complex technological challenges that the firm was facing required
answers to larger, multidisciplinary questions. It also proved difficult to retain the
knowledge it had acquired from the academic world, and to ensure continuity in its
research. ASML therefore needed to set up its own research institute in which a
large number of researchers would investigate several interrelated topics over a
longer period.

To achieve this, ASML issued a call for the founding of a research institute that
would undertake large-scale basic research into the physics and chemistry of
nanolithography, starting with EUV nanolithography. ASML wanted to use EUV in
the latest generation of lithography machines to produce microchips that would offer
more functionality for computers and electronic equipment. The firm invited four
parties to submit proposals (giving them only six weeks to do so): FOM Institute
AMOLF, Radboud Universiteit, Eindhoven University of Technology, and Rheinisch-
Westfalische Technische Hochschule in Aachen, Germany. ASML asked the
parties to come up with a proposal that addressed not only the science but also the
funding and governance aspects of the new institute.

FOM indicated its interest in participation by promising equal support for the three
Dutch proposals. ASML’s call fit in well with FOM’s own Industrial Partnership
Programme (IPP), set up in 2004 to encourage research alliances between science
and industry. The IPP promotes advanced physics research to drive innovation in

31 AMOLF scientists are continuously searching for the fundamental relationship between the architecture and
interactions of complex matter and material systems and their purpose and function. Such a ‘system’ can be a
complex of biomolecules with properties that make life possible. It can be a nanostructure of a semiconductor
with metal particles that capture light. Or a newly designed material with very different mechanical properties
than you might expect. What exactly is happening at the macro-, micro- or nanoscales and how can this be
explained?’ (https://amolf.nl/about/about-amolf)

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Industry seeking university 48

firms; it not only supports the generation of new knowledge but also helps build
relationships between academic researchers and industry. Between 2009 and
2014, ASML had itself been involved in a FOM IPP with Twente University and
printing and copying equipment manufacturer Océ.

ASML ultimately selected the proposal that AMOLF, the UvA and the VU had put
together, and that would eventually be known as ARCNL. As a team, they offered
wide-ranging expertise. The Amsterdam proposal convincingly linked ASML’s
questions to existing scientific expertise at universities and institutes by indicating
which professors and researchers would be appointed as group leaders. This made
for a very solid proposal. In addition, ARCNL’s proposed research groups lined up
with ASML’s own research topics. The ARCNL organisation could be set up without
delay with AMOLF’s technical and administrative support and taking AMOLF’s
structure as its basis. The siting of the research centre also made the proposal
appealing. ASML had relatively little experience working with researchers in
Amsterdam, and ARCNL gave it access to an entirely new group. That would allow
ASML to acquaint itself with talented young researchers who might later work for
the firm.

Once the Amsterdam proposal was selected, the stage was set for FOM, UvA, VU
and ASML to establish ARCNL in 2013. The institute began operating officially on 1
January 2014, initially as an AMOLF unit. During the start-up phase, it hired some
50 staff members. In September 2015, it became an independent NWO institute.

The new institute appealed to the research group leaders invited to join for different
reasons. They would be able to concentrate entirely on research within the context
of a large, coherent programme, a more attractive proposition than combining
various small projects under different programmes. Also appealing was the fixed
nature of much of the funding, as it guaranteed a basic budget for PhD researchers
and postdocs (approximately two per research group). In addition, the institute
made it possible to gain experience in basic research in an area in which an
industrial user had expressed interest.

The Amsterdam proposal also had the support of the City of Amsterdam and the
Province of Noord-Holland. In addition to the funding provided by FOM, the
universities and ASML, the new institute also received € 5 million worth of start-up
funding from the province and the city jointly. Their purpose was to support
Amsterdam Science Park and the Amsterdam region as a high-tech hub in a
broader sense. ARCNL would connect Amsterdam more solidly to the Brainport
region around Eindhoven. It was also expected to lead to spin-offs and new
business in the Amsterdam region. The other parties looked favourably upon the
involvement of the provincial and the municipal authorities not only because they
offered financial support but also because they would cooperate on or facilitate
permits and other official matters.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Industry seeking university 49

3.3.2 Agreements
ARCNL’s partnership agreement sets out arrangements regarding a number of
different subjects. Below, we review the usual items: the term of the agreement,
provisions regarding parties that wish to withdraw, decision-making about the
research programme, intellectual property and publications, support for
researchers’ careers, and location.

The institute is to operate for a minimum period of ten years. The partnership
agreement stipulates how the partnership can be renewed or terminated. As of the
end of 2018, each party can decide, at a given moment, whether or not it wishes to
proceed. Parties may withdraw with due observance of a five-year notice period.
This allows PhD candidates to complete their research and gives the other partners
time to find replacements and to reorganise the institute.

The board of the ARCNL is the most important joint decision-making body for the
partners (NWO, the universities and ASML). One of its tasks is to make changes in
the focus of research where necessary. ARCNL’s initial research topics and choices
were based on the original proposal. To ensure that the research programmes
reflect the changing interests of the stakeholders, the board decided to make
changes, at the director’s proposal. As a result, the new strategic plan (2017-2022),
sets out plans to expand ARCNL by adding a number of new research groups. In
addition, one of the present lines of research will be wound down over the next few
years. The board must approve the appointment of research group leaders. It has
no say over appointments and other research-related matters within the groups.
That responsibility lies with the research group leaders. To ensure the quality of the
research, a scientific advisory committee has been appointed and meets once a
year.

In terms of IP rights, the partners have agreed that all research results generated
by ARCNL may be published and presented, but that ASML is entitled to file
patents (a ‘right of first refusal’); in return, it will pay a pre-determined, market-
compliant fee (see Appendix 3). Draft publications must be submitted to ASML first
so that it can check for confidential or patentable information. Publication may be
held up for a maximum of thirty days (researchers in fact usually receive an answer
within two weeks and the total delay is not more than about four weeks). Under
certain circumstances, publication may be postponed twice more for a maximum of
two months. In reality, a postponement need not be an obstacle, since the route to
publication in an academic journal generally takes longer than the initial stages of
the patent filing procedure.

ARCNL wants to attract researchers who aspire to a scientific career. That is why it
was set up as an NWO research institute and why most of its research staff are
seconded from the universities. In addition, it has been agreed that individual

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Industry seeking university 50

researchers may apply for funding and personal grants for their ARCN work from
such sources as NWO and the European Research Council. Funding of this kind is
of huge importance for their research careers.

To help ARCNL attain its scientific aims, the partners decided to house all
researchers in the same building. Occupying temporary premises close to its final
location has allowed the institute to make a quick start. It will move into the new
Matrix VlI Building as soon as it is ready. Several different organisations will use the
new building’s laboratories and offices, with ARCNL leasing approximately a third of
the available space.
3.3.3 Experiences
ARCNL was able to get off the ground fairly quickly in 2014 thanks to its close
organisational relationship with and proximity to AMOLF. Initially, ARCNL was an
AMOLF unit, which allowed it to use the research institute’s facilities and support
staff. The cooperation between the two organisations continued even after ARCNL
became an independent entity. ARCNL pays prearranged fees to borrow AMOLF’s
support staff (technical, human resources, financial). AMOLF and ARCNL also
engage in several joint research activities. AMOLF has influenced ARCNL in other
ways; for example, ARCNL has adopted a number of its customs, including a daily
coffee break attended by the entire staff, as at AMOLF, that is an effective and
informal way of sharing information.

ARCNL research group: atomic and plasma physics

The tinier the circuit elements on a silicon chip, the more functionalities can be
crammed on it and the more smartphones can do. The latest microchip-
making machines (known as wafer steppers) therefore use light of increasingly
narrower wavelengths to ‘etch’ even more lines on chips. ASML’s latest
generation of wafer steppers uses extreme ultraviolet (EUV) light with a
wavelength of 13.5 nanometres, a factor of fourteen times narrower than in the
previous generation of devices. EUV light is generated by firing two rounds of
microscopic laser pulses at a droplet of tin. The first pulse accelerates and
deforms the droplet into a pancake shape. The second, more powerful pulse
turns the droplet into a plasma that emits EUV light.

Although ASML is already building machines using EUV light sources, ARCNL
researchers in the EUV Plasma Processes research group focus on answering
fundamental questions about this process. How do the droplets of tin become

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Industry seeking university 51

deformed? How does the plasma emit light? How do the atoms behave in the
plasma? Their research provides a better understanding of why atoms emit
light at certain wavelengths and the conditions that can alter this spectrum.
The research makes a contribution to atomic and plasma physics. Research
on plasma light sources is also useful in microscopy, for example. For ASML,
the research can help improve the efficiency of EUV light sources.

ARCNL’s EUV Plasma Processes group often collaborates with its EUV
Generation and Imaging group, which studies laser systems. Besides being in
frequent touch with ASML in Veldhoven, the group’s PhD candidates spend a
number of weeks at the firm’s manufacturing plant in San Diego to get better
acquainted with the practical side of the business. The research group also
shares its results and experiences with other science institutes, for example
the Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear
Physics in Heidelberg.

The ARCNL partners are learning to deal with the differences in one another’s time
scales. ASML tends to scale up, make changes or terminate projects quickly. The
academic world is used to the notion that research takes time to get started and
that it can take a year to deliver initial results. These differences can be attributed to
the different priorities of the two worlds. At ASML, commercial interests take
precedence, whereas at the university, the researchers’ academic interests and
their reputations are a priority.

When it comes to the research programme and how they carry out their research,
ARCNL researchers face the challenge of combining their academic interests and
working methods with the firm’s commercial interests and practices. If ASML sees
an opportunity to valorise anticipated results in the short term, it immediately
assigns its own researchers to the task and carries out the research itself. In reality,
the combination works best when research projects are defined such that the
anticipated results match ASML’s interests but are only of interest to the firm in the
longer term.

ASML’s challenge is to bear in mind the academic time scale and culture when
dealing with ARCNL researchers. It also needs to be more patient than it usually is
about potential results. ARCNL is interesting to ASML because it represents a new
way to acquire knowledge and because it focuses on basic research and the longer
term.

Research planning at ARCNL complements both worlds. The research is performed
primarily by PhD candidates and postdocs, so that the subjects of individual

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Industry seeking university 52

research projects are fixed for a period of approximately four years (two years for
postdocs). By setting up subsidiary projects that take about a year to complete (a
single chapter or publication), the research satisfies both the academic
requirements and the firm’s need for shorter-term results.

Recently, the institute introduced an annual ‘ARCNL Strategy Day’. ASML, NWO,
UvA and VU representatives meet to hammer out the research plans. In the run-up
to the meeting, each of the ARCNL research groups goes through a rigorous
coordination phase. Researchers discuss every aspect of their research with the
partners involved so that they can arrive at detailed plans for the coming year as
well as longer-term prospects.

ARCNL researchers are actively involved in the process related to ASML’s
intellectual property. If they come up with ideas during their research that might be
interesting to ASML, they fill in an ‘Invention Disclosure Form’ that closely
resembles a form used at ASML. The firm then scans the forms for patentable
concepts.

It is crucial for the partners to build mutual trust and understanding so that they can
allow for one another’s differences. That is why ARCNL researchers and research
group leaders are regularly in touch with their contact persons at ASML. In addition
to telephone calls and e-mail exchanges, they also have scheduled face-to-face
meetings. ARCNL encourages this by coordinating its main research topics with the
research categories at ASML itself.

How much contact there is depends on the line of research and also on the extent
to which the ‘academic’ part of the research is user-relevant. Other methods of
promoting cooperation are co-location (temporary) and staff exchanges. ASML’s
director of physics and chemistry research spends a day at ARCNL every other
week. ASML has also seconded one of its working group leaders to ARCNL. ASML
researchers can also work at ARCNL for a period of time (and vice versa), although
so far this has been a fairly rare event.

ASML staff are closely involved in the research, not only to monitor progress but
also to share knowledge. Thanks to this relationship, ASML staff can internalise
new information more rapidly, ensuring that ARCNL’s research results help ASML
more forward with the technology. On the other hand, ARCNL researchers are
discovering just how advanced and deep the firm’s knowledge base is. The
company’s experience, test results and any new questions that it is addressing all
serve as input for ARCNL’s research.

ARCNL has impacted its environment in a number of ways. One effect relates to
the way that university funding is arranged. The relevant faculties mainly contribute
in kind by seconding researchers to ARCNL. This makes the institute something of

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Industry seeking university 53

an oddity within the faculties: although it puts long-term pressure on the budget, the
faculty has limited control over it. In addition, faculty researchers who are seconded
to the institute have less time for normal faculty activities, such as general teaching.
On the other hand, ARCNL researchers give lectures on the science & technology
of nanolithography to physics students, introducing them to the possibility of
combining research and business applications.

The partners have had to set aside time and effort to get to know and understand
one another. A recent evaluation of ARCNL and other NWO institutes has revealed
that ARCNL initially experienced some ‘growing pains’. As a result, progress was
uneven and stresses arose, mainly in terms of burdens on the scientific staff and
interactions between ARCNL and its partner organisations. The Evaluation
Committee concluded that ARCNL ‘will need several more years of focused effort to
bring all its research areas up to their full potential, [and to] fully realise the mutual
benefits of its relationship with ASML’ (Evaluation Committee, 2017).
3.4 In summary
The three case studies offer us a multifaceted picture of strategic public-private
research partnerships. In the next chapter, we combine our empirical and
conceptual studies to identify a number of features typical of strategic partnerships.
We conclude this chapter with several observations about the case studies.

In the Chemelot InSciTe case, the founding partners share the same aim: to use
the research institute to help build the Province of Limburg’s regional innovation
system. The public-private institute stimulates the mobilisation of scientific
knowledge to attain innovation targets and to drive new business activity by DSM
and other firms. Notable in this case study is the major role that the Province of
Limburg is playing, making regional development a priority. InSciTe is therefore
structured to enable the original founding partners to actively recruit new partners
as project participants. The case study reveals the inherent tension that arises in
multi-year partnerships between commitment (necessary for building trust and close
cooperation) and flexibility (necessary for responding to changing market and other
circumstances). The case study also illustrates that the exclusiveness or
selectiveness of a strategic partnership does not always combine well with a desire
to work with all sorts of other partners too.

In the DELTA Lab case study, academic and industrial partners have joined forces
in use-inspired basic research that addresses a topic of strategic importance to both
sides. Bilateral programme-based cooperation offers opportunities for extensive
public-private ‘border crossings’, allowing PhD researchers to gain business
experience and Bosch to build its knowledge base. The professors involved believe
that this is how to get commitments from differing business partners in a bid to

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Industry seeking university 54

promote Amsterdam (Science Park) as a knowledge and innovation hotspot in the
field of artificial intelligence. Bosch sees this as a way to tap into precisely this type
of hotspot worldwide, in addition to its own R&D activities and the public-private
Cyber Valley consortium in Germany. The case study shows that this type of PPP
gives both partners new opportunities to pursue their academic and industrial
research agendas. A requirement for an effective partnership is that the firm must
invest in enough knowledge absorption capacity to allow for close cooperation with
university researchers.

In the ARCNL case study, the partners share the aim of building a fundamental
knowledge base for nanolithography technologies. ARCNL makes it possible for
researchers from multiple disciplines to work together on a joint research
programme under one roof. Programme-based cooperation provides critical mass
and facilitates extensive ‘border crossings’ between scientific disciplines and
between academic research and industrial R&D. The Province of Noord-Holland
and the City of Amsterdam want to boost the knowledge economy in Amsterdam
and solidify its connection with the Eindhoven region, where ASML is located. By
supporting the establishment of ARCNL, they are driving the growth of an urban
network that will help them attract foreign investment and talent. This case study
clearly shows that the parties in a strategic partnership must learn to deal with the
inherent differences between academic and commercial interests and cultures.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Industry seeking university 55

4 Typology of strategic partnerships
What do our conceptual and empirical studies tell us about strategic public-private
research partnerships as a new phenomenon? This chapter reveals how strategic
partnerships differ from other PPP types. We start with a general description of
strategic partnerships in section 4.1. Section 4.2 then describes typical motives of
firms and universities for choosing this new type of relationship. Section 4.3
discusses typical agreements made by the partners to facilitate close and lasting
cooperation. As a relationship type, strategic partnerships are still evolving and
partners are gradually learning what that relationship requires to be and remain
effective. Section 4.4 shows that the partners maintain their relationship by
deliberately investing time and energy in maximising various dimensions of
proximity. We conclude this chapter in section 4.5 by summarising the most
important features of strategic partnerships.
4.1 What are strategic public-private research
partnerships?
In general terms, strategic research partnerships between universities and industry
are arrangements in which a select group of partners work together on a scientific
research programme aligned with strategic corporate interests. The partners
cooperate closely in programmes and on projects under a multi-annual, exclusive
agreement.

Strategic partnerships are bespoke affairs. The specific format chosen by the
partners depends on their precise intentions and what they can offer each other.
Another important factor is how national (or regional) government is involved in the
partnership, i.e. as a funding body or as a partner. Model PPP contracts offer a
basis for the legal substance of the agreement. Subjects such as the term and
scope of the research programme depend on what the parties are willing and able
to contribute. The partners may make significant investments in the relationship, for
example by making their own facilities or a building available or by establishing an
industry research centre on a university campus. They make agreements specifying
topics for joint decision-making, associated procedures, and the latitude for change.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Industry seeking university 56

4.2 Typical motives for entering into strategic
partnerships
Public and private parties each have their own reasons for choosing a strategic
partnership rather than a ‘lighter’ form of PPP or contract research. Below we
describe typical motives that we have observed at firms and universities. In the
case of universities, we distinguish between the motives of researchers and those
of the university as an organisation. Universities are less hierarchical than firms,
and the motives of professors and their research groups do not always coincide
with the motives of the faculty or university board. We also show why governments
support strategic partnerships and (sometimes) actively participate in them.
Firms’ motives
Firms use a range of PPP arrangements (and contract research) to ‘tap into’
knowledge, ideas, networks, talent and spin-offs from universities. The strategic
partnership is another step in an historical evolution that sees firms continuously
seeking effective (and cost-effective) ways to align external knowledge sources with
their innovation strategies. Establishing a close relationship with universities is
consistent with industry’s current open innovation strategies, in which it seeks to
exploit various external sources of knowledge, including university research groups,
to achieve its innovation goals. One example is DSM, which casts its net far and
wide ‘to capture the best science has to offer’.32 Cooperation with external partners
is attractive because it can share costs, risks and the investment in expertise and
facilities. Firms are seeking to ‘leverage’ their investments. Those that operate in
knowledge-intensive science-based sectors view universities as key sources of
knowledge. A strategic partnership with one or multiple university research groups
is the most far-reaching type of PPP. Why do firms choose to enter into these
partnerships? The case studies and our conceptual study have led us to identify the
following motives.

To build a strategic knowledge base with a university partner
A strategic partnership is suitable for firms with a complex knowledge requirement
that they cannot meet through individual and changing (contract) relationships.
They need a select group of university partners with whom they can carry out
innovation-oriented (often multidisciplinary) research programmes over a period of
several years. Through a strategic partnership, the firm can involve itself directly in
the research programme and in specific research projects. The alternative, which
involves concluding a series of individual contracts or undertaking individual PPP
projects with different partners in different locations, requires a considerable degree

32 DSM participates in more than fifty PPP programmes that allow it to ‘plug in’ to more than forty academic
research groups. Such a multitude of alliances also requires a certain corporate strategy and organisation and
a certain level of absorption capacity to benefit from the knowledge. Source:
https://www.dsm.com/corporate/science/collaboration.html

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Industry seeking university 57

of coordination and make it difficult to work consistently on building the necessary
strategic knowledge base.

Combining individual projects with various partners into a single integrated
programme involving a select group of strategic partners is consistent with a trend
in which firms are starting to think more strategically about the way in which they
involve external knowledge parties in their own innovation strategy (Deuten, 2015).
The firm wants to build a close relationship with a select group of universities (or
university research groups). The partners are strategically selected with approval
from senior management. The ARCNL case study is an example of strategic
knowledge-building as motive. In addition to research in strategic partnerships,
firms continue to conduct research in individual PPP projects with university
research groups that do not have the status of strategic partners.

University partners on three levels

Philips’ innovation strategy differentiates between three levels of cooperation
with universities. The first level consists of a large number of universities that
perform contract research and also deliver the associated intellectual property
rights. The second level involves Philips having relationships with various
partner universities and jointly executing programmes or projects with them on
specific topics. On the third level, Philips has a limited number of strategic
partners with which it builds close relationships to implement multiple broad
research programmes. One example of a relationship on the third level is the
Eindhoven MedTech Innovation Center (e/MTIC), in which Philips conducts
research into healthcare innovations with the TU/e and three regional
hospitals. Source: Overview of flagship collaboration, Regional Eindhoven
Ecosystem, November 2017.

Rapid and productive knowledge absorption
A strategic partnership offers the firm excellent opportunities to quickly and
effectively absorb researchers’ knowledge and (interim) research results. Building a
close relationship with a strategic partner is beneficial to this process. More than
other PPP types, strategic partnerships allow the partners to become well
acquainted with each other and to build mutual trust. Close personal contact
between university and industry researchers and developers improves knowledge
sharing, especially when it comes to new and tacit knowledge. Wherever possible,
firms seek to establish a co-location, bringing together academic and industry
researchers in one building or on a campus to encourage researcher exchanges
and interactions. In all three case studies, knowledge absorption is a key motive for

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Industry seeking university 58

choosing to enter into a strategic partnership rather than a regular PPP
arrangement.

To develop an innovation ecosystem
Strategic partnerships allow large enterprises to integrate universities into the
innovation ecosystem that is important to them. Strategic partnerships function as
building blocks in the innovation ecosystems they need to implement their long-term
innovation strategy. Multinational enterprises build their ecosystems in two ways. In
the first place, they seek to embed their strategic research centres firmly into a
surrounding innovation ecosystem, often on or near a (university) campus. They are
not only interested in building knowledge with a university, but also in gaining
access to other firms that they can work with, to start-ups that they can invest in, to
talented researchers that they can recruit, and so on. In addition, they use strategic
partnerships to connect with hotspots worldwide where they themselves do not
have a research centre. If this long-distance relationship is to work, they need to
have their own researchers on the spot. The desire to develop an innovation
ecosystem is particularly relevant in the InSciTe case study, in which DSM is
working actively to establish an open innovation campus around its strategic R&D
centre in the province of Limburg. The same motive plays a role in the ARCNL case
study, in which ASML is looking to expand its innovation ecosystem, which is
clustered around Veldhoven. In the DELTA Lab case study, the firm is using a
partnership to gain access to leading scientists and research groups outside its own
Bosch research campus in Renningen.
Universities’ motives
Universities can use various PPP arrangements (and contract research) to involve
firms in their research. What makes a strategic partnership more attractive to them
than other PPP types? Why is it so interesting to undertake research with a firm as
a strategic partner?

Research funding
A strategic partnership often consists of an extensive research programme
involving several PhD students who are funded largely by the private partner.
Attracting this form of research funding is naturally an important reason for
university researchers to enter into a partnership. Nowadays, having a (financial)
commitment from a private party is often one of the prerequisites to qualify for
public research grants. A research group that receives corporate funding will, for
example, also receive a PPP allowance under the Dutch government’s ‘top sectors’
strategy. It is important for the faculty and university boards to ensure that this
funding stream does not have (unintended) adverse consequences for the rest of
the faculty or university, for example through their internal distribution models.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Industry seeking university 59

An appealing research programme
A strategic partnership offers university researchers the opportunity to do
interesting research within the scope of a multi-year research programme. This may
involve high-quality use-inspired basic research, or translational research in which
the results of basic research are translated into practical applications. In the first
case, the research is in line with academic incentives meant to promote ‘excellent’
research suitable for publication in high-impact scientific journals. In the latter case,
the research is aligned with the valorisation aims of the researchers and the faculty
or university as a whole.

Besides focusing efforts on a particular research question, a strategic partnership
also creates critical mass because it has several PhD students, postdocs and other
researchers working together for several years in a large-scale (multidisciplinary)
programme. In addition, the very scale of the programme offers more opportunities
for cross-fertilisation and synergy than a series of individual PPP projects with
different private partners. DELTA Lab and ARCNL are examples of this.

Extensive interaction with knowledge-intensive firm
In a strategic partnership, academic and industry researchers cooperate closely,
with bi-directional knowledge-sharing and cross-fertilisation. Academic researchers
gain access to corporate facilities and corporate knowledge of technological
applications and market trends.

It is helpful and sometimes even crucial for academic researchers to gain access to
firms’ (real-world) knowledge, data and systems as input for their own research.
The same is true when it comes to the insights that academic researchers can gain
into the way industry researchers and developers think and work. Academic
researchers in emerging fields such as nanotechnology and quantum computing
may require access to high-cost (corporate) facilities to be able to do their research.
In addition, interacting with firms helps university research groups to make
decisions about their research agendas. Bi-directional knowledge-sharing and
cross-fertilisation play a role in all three case studies.

Relevance to society
Strategic partnerships are also attractive to university research groups because
extensive interaction with industry during all phases of research contributes to
knowledge valorisation and the societal impact of the research. Societal impact is
becoming an increasingly important factor in assessments of research proposals
and research groups. When competing for public funding in which ‘relevance’ is one
of the selection criteria, research groups can point to a good track record in
knowledge valorisation as evidence that they are capable of conducting research of
relevance to society. Participating in a strategic partnership can enhance the status
and positioning not only of the research group (and faculty) within the university and
the academic world, but also of the university in society. Societal relevance made

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Industry seeking university 60

manifest in a university-industry partnership and visibility drawn from the firm’s
reputation play a role in all three case studies.

Human capital
Strategic partnerships can help a research group recruit students and researchers,
as evidenced by the large number of applicants for research positions in the DELTA
Lab. Many young researchers find it appealing to cooperate closely on research
with a large, technologically advanced firm and to gain a realistic perspective on
possible applications. A glimpse of the business world can be instructive, which is
why strategic partnerships also help to broaden the horizons of PhD students
during their training. Their employment opportunities improve, especially outside the
academic community, where most PhD students end up finding jobs. Strategic
partnerships are interesting to research groups, faculties and universities as a
whole because they boost their ability to recruit students and researchers at home
and abroad and broaden the scope of training.

Developing a campus and knowledge ecosystem
Strategic partnerships are attractive to a university because they can drive the
development of the university’s campus and/or the local innovation ecosystem in
which the university wants to play a pivotal role. Universities are investing heavily in
their campuses and science parks. Strategic partnerships can help them to do this,
not least because they gain status by partnering with a leading firm. Amsterdam
Science Park is planning a new co-creation building for DELTA Lab and other
public-private research laboratories. ARCNL is housed in temporary premises on
the same site until the new Matrix VII building is ready for occupation.
Governments’ motives
Governments do not participate in strategic partnerships as an actual knowledge
partner themselves because they are not the intended users of the research results.
They have only limited input into the subject matter of the research programme.33

Strategic partnerships receive support in different policy areas for different reasons.
We list three motives below. They apply not only to government ministries at
national level but also to regional and local authorities.

Governments are involved in strategic partnerships in different ways. The Province
of Limburg was an active party when InSciTe was established. FOM (now part of
NWO) was one of the founding partners of ARCNL.34 In addition, governments may
be asked to provide financial or other support while the strategic partnership is
being established and afterwards, for example because it is in the national or
regional interest to accommodate a large multinational’s strategic R&D site.

33 In fact we are now seeing the emergence of strategic public-public partnerships in which governments do act
as knowledge partners, for example the Amsterdam Institute for Advanced Metropolitan Solutions.
34 Formally, NWO is an Autonomous Administrative Body (‘ZBO’) with a statutory mission and tasks. It is the
responsibility of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Industry seeking university 61

Government can also be involved in a strategic partnership more remotely, through
a grant scheme.

High-value research with societal impact
In its science policy, the national government uses strategic partnerships as a tool
for boosting both ‘excellent’ research and the societal impact of publicly funded
research. This is NWO’s main motive as a public research funding body that
supports strategic partnerships.35 ARCNL is important to NWO because it connects
basic research to innovation in the Netherlands.

Innovativeness of firms
The government’s innovation policy encourages strategic partnerships because
they improve the innovativeness of firms, particularly in priority areas such as the
country’s top economic sectors. This is an important motive in the national
government’s ‘top sectors’ strategy. The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate
Policy pays a PPP allowance over the financial contribution of corporate partners to
encourage public-private research partnerships in top sectors. InSciTe, DELTA Lab
and ARCNL all make use of this scheme.

Improving the economic structure
Economic and spatial economic policy promotes strategic partnerships to improve
the regional (and national) economic structure. The underlying idea is that strategic
partnerships can help to attract multinationals and connect them to local
universities. They can be important building blocks in regional innovation
ecosystems, especially if the strategic partnership leads to the co-location of
industrial research activities on a campus or science park. Because strategic
partnerships are long-term, large-scale arrangements involving large multinationals,
governments see them as an opportunity to drive the development of innovation
campuses, science parks and the like. The Province of Limburg sees InSciTe on
the Chemelot campus as a means of promoting regional economic growth. The
same is true for the City of Amsterdam and the Province of Noord-Holland with
respect to ARCNL at Amsterdam Science Park.
4.3 Typical agreements in strategic partnerships
A strategic partnership is established under a formal partnership agreement in
which the partners make various arrangements in advance, for example concerning
the governance (management and supervision) and organisation of the partnership,
the budget and method of financing, rights and obligations with regard to knowledge

35 NWO’s mission is to advance ‘world-class scientific research. This research has scientific and societal impact’
(NWO, 2018, p. 19). ‘Connecting science and society is one of the focal points in the vision of NWO.
Knowledge from scientific research forms the breeding ground for the societal and economic innovation that is
necessary for the well-being of Dutch society’ (NWO, 2018, p. 3).

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Industry seeking university 62

delivery and intellectual property, liability, compensation and confidentiality, as well
as the term of the partnership, its termination, communication, applicable law and
settlement of internal disputes.

A public-private partnership is inherently difficult because universities and firms
differ in their missions, organisational objectives, management styles, decision-
making processes, organisational cultures, incentive structures, and so on. They
must find a way that is workable for both sides. What typical agreements do the
partners in a strategic partnership make?
Commitment and exclusiveness
The time horizon of a strategic partnership is often longer than that of other PPP
types. The aim is to build and maintain a close relationship and that is why the
partners often do not want to limit themselves to the customary four or five years
needed to complete a PhD research project. Since many things can change during
the term of the agreement, it is all the more important for the partners to make
arrangements about (interim) accession and withdrawal.

Under what conditions can a partner withdraw from the agreement? The changing
market environment in which firms operate requires a type of relationship that
leaves room for adjustments and modifications. Changes in the market can lead to
changes in strategy that emphasise other aspects of research or chart an entirely
new course. Transitional provisions are needed to cover situations in which a firm
wants to leave the partnership, for example to allow the remaining partners to find
replacements or to reorganise the public-private lab. Provisions are also needed to
guarantee that PhD students can complete their research, for example if the firm
loses interest in the subject matter due to major market changes.

It is also important to make arrangements about the accession of new partners.
Clear-cut agreements are needed about the conditions under which other parties
may participate in the research programme.
Joint choices regarding subject matter
Both public and private partners in a strategic partnership make a substantial
contribution to the actual research and the funding. This means that all partners
have a say when it comes to the research programme and the composition of the
project portfolio. Partners must agree on the choice of subject matter, with due
regard for each other’s interests. It is particularly important to make explicit
agreements about this in a strategic partnership because the private partners may
have a major strategic (commercial) interest in the research results. The partners
need firm agreements to fall back on if commercial and academic interests conflict
or if one interest threatens to overrule the other, for example, if the firm wants to
shift the research focus to questions that are less interesting from an academic
viewpoint.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Industry seeking university 63

Intellectual property and scientific publications
In view of their differing requirements and goals, the partners need to make
transparent agreements about their rights and obligations in respect of the
intellectual property (IP) that they contribute and develop (jointly). To do so, they
must reconcile a commercial interest in protecting IP with an academic interest in
sharing and disseminating knowledge. Industry is eager to work with leading
researchers. Without the prospect of publication or a doctorate, however, top
researchers are not likely to be tempted to work with a firm. Industry partners
therefore understand that it is in their own interest to offer academic partners
opportunities to publish and award doctorates, as well as the necessary academic
freedom. At the same time, the agreements must also anticipate situations in which
private and public interests might clash. There are now standard models that serve
as templates for arranging IP rights in specific cases.36

The general principle underpinning these models is that private partners in PPPs
should be licensed to use research results on a non-exclusive basis, as this
increases the likelihood of valorisation and innovation. As a rule of thumb, the more
a firm contributes to a PPP as a percentage of the whole (in money, background
knowledge, human and other resources), and the fewer other private partners
participate, the more likely it is that the firm will acquire (exclusive) ownership of the
intellectual property. The public knowledge institution transfers the IP rights to the
private partner in that case. If the public party or parties contribute (as well), then
there are two options under EU rules. The first is that IP rights are assigned in a
way that appropriately reflects the private partner’s contributions to the partnership.
The second is for the private partner to pay the public partner or partners a market-
compliant fee for the IP rights, deducting its own contributions to the research from
this amount. In addition, publication of (unprotected) results must always remain
possible, even if IP rights are transferred.37

A typical option well suited to strategic partnerships is to agree that the private
partner will own the IP and that the knowledge institution will retain the right to use
the results for purposes of academic teaching and research. The basic premise
here is that university researchers must be able to publish all their research results
and also use them to obtain a doctorate. If the firm provides commercially sensitive
background material, the partners will also make agreements governing
confidentiality.

36 For the Netherlands, see Appendix 3 with relevant information provided by Regiegroep Spelregels (2013). For
the United Kingdom, see https://www.gov.uk/guidance/university-and-business-collaboration-agreements-
lambert-toolkit.
37 The transfer of IP to the private party is standard in contract research. Where this is the case, the knowledge
institution is also not entitled to use the results for other academic or research purposes. Scientific publications
are also not permitted, unless the firm has granted its consent.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Industry seeking university 64

Close cooperation
The partners state their expectations regarding effective methods of cooperation,
bearing in mind each other’s differences. A distinctive feature of strategic
partnerships is that partners expect to invest time, money and energy in narrowing
or bridging the gap between industry and university, thereby encouraging ‘border
crossings’. That is why they make agreements about their cooperation and prepare
their own organisations to facilitate an effective partnership, making it possible to
maximise the ‘proximity’ between them, both geographically (co-location and mutual
visits) and cognitively (knowledge and expertise), organisationally (organisational
goals and research cultures) and socially (networks and relationships). This allows
the partners to genuinely get closer to each other and work on building the mutual
trust necessary for effective knowledge-sharing.

To maximise proximity, the partners make agreements about how, where, how
often and for how long academic and industry researchers (and their group leaders
or managers) will meet. They can agree on the amount of time that researchers
spend at each other’s locations or in shared facilities. For example, researchers at
one partner organisation may be seconded temporarily to the other partner. In
some cases, researchers are employed by both the university and the firm.
4.4 Maintaining the relationship
In strategic partnerships, parties typically commit to actively managing and
maintaining mutual exchanges or ‘border crossings’ between university and
industry. They do this to build and maintain a close relationship that promotes the
effective (and cost-effective) generation and exchange of knowledge based on
mutual trust. The challenge is to keep the relationship interesting and workable for
all the partners, even in changing circumstances.
Working on geographical proximity
For a strategic partnership to function properly, it is important for researchers from
both partners to meet and talk to each other regularly on location. That is why the
partners invest in geographical proximity by offering researchers time and leeway
for mutual visits and/or by investing in a shared physical location. Co-locations on a
campus or science park are often the most visible signs of a strategic partnership.
Working on cognitive proximity
There is often a considerable cognitive gap between the partners in a strategic
partnership. For the relationship to function properly, it is important for both partners
to work on narrowing that gap. Both partners need sufficient absorption capacity to
appreciate and master each other’s knowledge. A firm cannot simply ‘tap into’
knowledge but needs its own research capacity to appreciate and utilise the
research results of its university partner. Bosch, for example, is investing in its own

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Industry seeking university 65

research group so that it can work strategically with academic researchers. Bosch
has also invited a DELTA Lab professor to give a presentation at a corporate
conference. ASML and DSM employ R&D managers and researchers who are also
professors and are therefore familiar with both worlds. Researchers at ARCNL give
and take courses at ASML. We see that universities also contribute to narrowing
the cognitive gap, for example by structuring and organising the research
programme in such a way that it corresponds as closely as possible to the firm’s
organisational structures and innovation needs.
Working on organisational proximity
A university and a multinational enterprise are completely different organisations in
many ways. They differ, for example, in the way decisions are taken, in their
organisational culture, in their management philosophy, and so forth. In an
academic culture, researchers are accustomed to open exchanges of ideas and
research results. In a commercial culture, the appropriation and use of research
results are important. To ensure that a strategic partnership functions properly, the
partners must be willing to familiarise themselves with each other’s organisations,
whether they be researchers, board members or managers. This helps them to
develop a collaborative approach that does justice to both organisational worlds.

Firms cannot manage a public-private lab in the same way as they manage their
own industrial laboratories. For example, a line of research cannot be discontinued
suddenly when market conditions change, because this would put PhD research
projects at risk. Firms must therefore learn to deal with the time horizons and
interests of the academic world. ARCNL has found a practical solution by
organising PhD research into shorter sub-studies instead of one four-year PhD
project. In defining their projects, ARCNL researchers consider the time horizons of
both academia and ASML.

Universities cannot manage a public-private lab as if it were a regular university lab.
As a strategic partner, for example, the firm wants regular and detailed progress
updates. This means that university researchers may have to prepare formal,
written progress reports more often than they are accustomed to doing.

If the partners succeed in maximising their organisational proximity, the academic
partner will become more entrepreneurial and flexible in certain respects, while the
commercial partner will be (more) aware of the importance of maintaining a long-
term outlook in research. Academic researchers will be more inclined to view their
studies in the light of later stages of research, development and commercialisation
(and the associated requirements). A good example is how researchers at InSciTe
bear in mind the test requirements for drug authorisation in the medical sector when
choosing their testing methods, and how they take pains to carry out those tests
consistently.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Industry seeking university 66

Close cooperation with industry partners also affects the relevant faculty and
university boards. For example, MUMC+ is now considering a method of assessing
researchers that not only factors in their scientific publications and impact but also
recognises the type of research activities undertaken at InSciTe. Inspired by DELTA
Lab and others, the UvA is now planning a new building in Amsterdam Science
Park that will house new public-private artificial intelligence research labs.
Working on social proximity
Strategic partnerships that function properly maximise the social proximity of
academic and industry researchers. The same can be said of the relevant board
members and managers. They start moving in the same circles, meet in the same
places, learn what they can offer each other, and so on. Conversely, partnerships
are also more likely to emerge if the social gap between the partners is relatively
narrow, for example because they have a history of public-private partnerships that
have built mutual trust.

One striking difference with the ‘lighter’ types of PPP is that social proximity plays a
role not only for the researchers, but also for the board members and managers.
After all, the parties in strategic partnerships have strategic reasons for choosing
the partners with which they will enter into a multi-year commitment.

The InSciTe case study illustrates that social proximity facilitates and accelerates
further and subsequent cooperation. The partners in one InSciTe programme are
building on previous networks (e.g. in a Top Technology Institute), while the
partners in another InSciTe programme are starting to become acquainted. A large
social gap means that it takes longer to get cooperation up and running.
Strategic partnerships change
A typical feature of strategic partnerships is that partners must devote sufficient
time and energy to maintaining their cooperative relationship. It is a challenge to
keep the partnership interesting for all partners, especially if market or other
circumstances change or a partner sees new opportunities elsewhere. An
illustrative example is the InSciTe case study, in which the commercial outlook for
biobased materials collapsed and the partners had to adapt their partnership. After
some consultation, the focus shifted to more generic technology for sustainable
processes. The ARCNL case study is an example of how a partner’s changing
interests can lead to changes in the research programme.
4.5 In summary
Strategic public-private research partnerships are bespoke affairs. The specific
format chosen by the partners depends on their precise intentions and what they
can offer each other. Another important factor is how national or regional

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Industry seeking university 67

government is involved in the partnership, as a funding body or even as a partner.
Model PPP contracts offer a basis for the legal substance of the agreement.

Strategic partnerships differ from other PPP types with regard to the partners’
motives. Typically, both academic and industry partners are mainly interested in the
actual results of the joint research programme. Industry partners are also more
interested in building their knowledge of the subject matter than is the case in other
types of PPP. Both partners therefore attach great importance to extensive ‘border
crossings’ and to investing in a close, long-term relationship. A partnership offers
excellent opportunities for academic and industry researchers to engage with one
another extensively and to share (interim) research results.

Partnerships offer large enterprises a platform for boosting the innovation
ecosystems that surround their strategic R&D centres. They also offer them a
means of gaining access to relevant knowledge ecosystems worldwide.

Partnerships offer university researchers the opportunity to undertake an attractive
research programme in close cooperation with a knowledge-intensive firm. Their
involvement gives them access to the knowledge and expertise, data and facilities
of their industry partner. Partnerships are also interesting because they appeal to
talented researchers and broaden the scope of PhD training. They furthermore help
the research groups and the university as a whole to fulfil their valorisation mission.
An underlying strategic motive is the development of the campus or science park
into an attractive site for research and innovation.

Governments have a variety of motives for supporting strategic partnerships.
Spatial economic development is an important motive for local and regional
authorities. They see strategic partnerships as a way to boost the regional
economy. In some cases, they even involve themselves in the partnership as an
active partner. Strategic partnerships are promoted in both innovation and science
policy, the former because they contribute to innovativeness in firms and the latter
in the interests of high-value research with impact.

What sets strategic partnerships apart from other PPP types is that the partners
must be prepared to invest in the relationship and to narrow and bridge the
inevitable gap between the world of academia and the commercial world. This not
only means maximising geographical proximity (co-location, frequent visits), but
also cognitive proximity (shared knowledge base), organisational proximity (hybrid
organisational culture) and social proximity (good relationships and shared
networks). The partners cannot remove the inherent differences between their
worlds, but they can learn to understand and trust each other better by cooperating
closely, so that their strategic partnership remains effective and interesting. For
example, it may be necessary to change the research programme midway through
in response to unforeseen developments in the ecosystem or at one of the partner

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Industry seeking university 68

organisations. Extensive ‘border crossings’ also allow the partners to get to know
each other’s boundaries so that they can maintain an appropriate distance where
necessary.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
Industry seeking university 69

5 New options and trade-offs
Strategic public-private research partnerships are a relatively new phenomenon.
The previous chapters have shown how these partnerships differ from other types
of PPPs. A key factor is that academic and industry partners commit to
collaborating for a longer period in order to research a topic relevant to all partners.
They deliberately seek to enhance their cooperation by narrowing or bridging the
geographical, cognitive, organisational and social gaps between them. In doing so,
strategic partnerships in fact create a new research practice that combines
elements of academia and industry.

It is precisely because a strategic partnership facilitates intensive ‘border crossings’
between academia and industry that the partners can and indeed must become
more familiar with each other’s boundaries. Strategic research partnerships are also
interesting to various public authorities for a variety of reasons, particularly at
regional and local level –so much so that governments sometimes actively
participate in them.

In this chapter, we explore the impact of strategic partnerships – as a new practice
of joint knowledge generation – on the functioning of knowledge ecosystems and its
dynamism. How do strategic partnerships influence the options and choices
available to firms, universities and governments to develop and implement their
strategies? And what new questions and trade-offs do these options and choices
entail? Which aspects of society are at stake? Figure 4 visualises strategic
partnerships and actors in society. In addition to the strategic partners themselves,
these are actors in industry and science, NWO, the Ministry of Economic Affairs
and Climate Policy, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, and regional
and local authorities. We asked stakeholders attending one of our meetings to
comment on our interim results and we reflect on their responses in this chapter.38

The aim of this chapter is to take the first step towards creating an assessment
framework that allows universities, firms, governments, politicians and civil society
organisations to make a balanced appraisal of strategic partnerships.

38 See Appendix 2 for more information on the research approach.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
Industry seeking university 70

Figure 4 Strategic partnerships and actors in society

Notes: Ministry EZK refers to Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Ministry OCW: Ministry of Education,
Culture and Science, NWO: Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Resarch
5.1 Industry: options and trade-offs
Strategic partnerships offer industry a new way of working with universities. What
new opportunities does this create for firms, and what do they need to consider in
this context?
New opportunities
Strategic partnerships give firms the opportunity to be closely involved in innovative
scientific research allowing them to carve out a new position for themselves in a
knowledge ecosystem that is important for their R&D strategy.

From the firm’s perspective, this means connecting the public world of academic
research more closely to the private world of industrial R&D. As a university’s
strategic partner, the firm has direct access to scientific knowledge and university
researchers, and can play an active role in setting the research agenda, defining
the research programme and executing the research. Industry researchers can

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
Industry seeking university 71

work side by side with university researchers. Personal and frequent interaction
between them is the most effective and efficient way to transfer and share
knowledge. A strategic partnership differs from a client-contractor relationship in
critical respects. In contract research, cooperation is based on transactions. In a
strategic partnership, it is the relationship itself that is important. The firm wants to
build a relationship with university researchers (and their directors or board) that
fosters the mutual trust needed to cooperate closely.

A partnership also offers the firm ample opportunities to scout, recruit and retain
talented university researchers. The firm is first in line, so to speak, when it comes
to leveraging research results and attracting talented researchers. This gives it an
advantage over competitors who do not have such privileged access.
Considerations and trade-offs
Being a university’s strategic partner means that the firm shares responsibility for
the joint programme and the researchers involved. But the firm also bears joint
responsibility for the university and the knowledge ecosystem in which it operates.
This is in keeping with the principles of responsible business conduct, in which firms
are partly responsible for the impact of their actions on their environment.39

This means that the firm must know what to do to play the role of strategic partner
properly. First of all, it must take its role as a co-producer of scientific knowledge
seriously, and be capable of understanding and absorbing such knowledge. To take
effective advantage of a strategic partnership, the firm must itself devote sufficient
time and energy to exchanges and interactions with academic researchers. Industry
researchers must be able to talk to university researchers as equals. The firm
therefore requires sufficient absorption capacity to pose relevant knowledge
questions and to assess the value of scientific knowledge. Stated in practical terms,
it needs a research department that can absorb scientific knowledge and use it for
commercial purposes.

Second, entering into a strategic partnership requires the firm’s senior management
to be involved in the decision-making process. A strategic partnership entails a
substantial and long-term investment in which the firm aims to build a good
relationship with a carefully selected knowledge partner. The partnership is most
useful if it is part of a long-term strategy setting out how the firm intends to operate
in knowledge ecosystems. The firm must also have some idea of how the
partnership will help it to develop the ecosystems for knowledge valorisation that it
needs to innovate. A strategic partnership with a university is one of the factors that

39 The OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises recommend that enterprises ‘should develop ties with local
universities, public research institutes, and participate in co-operative research projects with local industry or
industry associations.’ The underlying aim is to ‘to promote…the diffusion by multinational enterprises of the
fruits of research and development activities among the countries where they operate, contributing thereby to
the innovative capacities of host countries’. This can include ‘development of R&D co-operative ventures.’
Source: http://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/mne/48004323.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
Industry seeking university 72

establishes a firm’s global R&D footprint: in which university towns and regions will
it have a presence, and with which R&D centres? Senior management must
therefore devote the necessary attention to R&D when entering into a strategic
partnership.

A third consideration is that the firm cannot manage a strategic partnership as it
would a business-to-business relationship or a contract research arrangement. To
cooperate successfully with a university, it must respect university researchers’
academic freedom and help to protect them from improper influences due to
conflicts of interest. Building a strategic relationship between a for-profit partner and
a not-for-profit partner requires both sides to make adjustments. The firm cannot
manage a joint lab as if it were an industry laboratory, where projects can be
modified or discontinued at a stroke if market conditions so dictate. The partnership
requires mutual understanding to accommodate differences in mission, culture and
decision-making processes. The challenge is to balance the commercial and
academic aspects in order to arrive at a research (and management) practice that
serves both partners. For example, firms may require regular progress reports, but
they must also give PhD students enough time and opportunity to work on scientific
publications and to attend conferences.

A fourth consideration is that the firm should not have unrealistic expectations of
what a university can offer in a strategic research partnership. Universities deliver
scientific knowledge, not knowledge that can be applied immediately. Universities
are not applied research institutes such as TNO. Scientific research is a lengthy
process, whereas the market is extremely dynamic and can change very quickly.
Universities have a public mission. They must be able to conduct research
independently and share their results with the wider academic community. The firm,
on the other hand, has a commercial mission and wants to innovate at high speed.
The challenge is to work together in a way that allows both commercial and
academic objectives to be attained.
Societal aspects
What does it mean for our economy and society when firms commit to a university
as a strategic partner? That depends on the role that the relevant firm is willing and
able to play in the Dutch economy and society, and where and by whom the
knowledge will be commercialised.

The economic significance of the partnership is all the greater if the firm not only
wants to tap into and extract knowledge from the Netherlands, but also aims to
establish a permanent presence in the country. For example, the economic added
value of the partnership will increase if it involves multinationals establishing or
expanding their research and/or innovation centres in the Netherlands. Its added
value will also increase if it makes university campuses or science parks more
attractive to international companies, investors and highly educated employees.

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
Industry seeking university 73

The emergence of strategic partnerships cannot be seen in isolation from the
globalisation of R&D by multinational firms. Nowadays, multinationals search the
world over for co-locations and research partners. The opportunity to work closely
with public knowledge institutions is an important factor in this context and drives
the creation of regions that specialise in research and innovation. The significance
for society of a multinational enterprise choosing to enter into a strategic
partnership with a Dutch university therefore also lies in its contribution to creating
regional knowledge and innovation hotspots.

The geopolitical context has changed dramatically in recent years, for example
under the influence of trade protectionism and the arrival of China as a world power
and innovation leader. Scientific knowledge is increasingly seen as a strategic tool
for amassing national economic and military power. For example, China wants to
gain a leading edge in artificial intelligence so as to consolidate its economic and
military position on the world stage. This has implications for strategic partnerships
between foreign firms and Dutch universities. They not only offer opportunities; if
Dutch universities are mobilised to boost the innovativeness of large foreign
enterprises, they also pose risks. That is, in part, why an assessment framework is
needed to appraise the opportunities and risks of strategic partnerships for the
Netherlands’ status as a knowledge hub.

Strategic partnerships are especially useful for large R&D-intensive enterprises.
After all, the firm must not only have the necessary financial clout but also sufficient
knowledge absorption capacity. The question is what this means for smaller or
start-up firms that do not have large R&D budgets. Does the advantage that large
enterprises have in a strategic partnership come at the expense of smaller firms?
Or do smaller firms benefit too? The underlying question is whether it is large
established enterprises or small start-ups that are more likely to generate socially
relevant innovation, or whether it is interaction between the two patterns of
innovation that delivers the goods. For example, how much scope do strategic
partnerships offer for creating spin-offs that can challenge the established order?
5.2 Universities: options and trade-offs
Strategic partnerships offer universities a new way of working with firms. What new
opportunities do such partnerships create for them, and what do they need to
consider in that context?
New opportunities
Universities have three core tasks: teaching students and training PhD candidates,
conducting scientific research, and disseminating and transmitting knowledge in
support of a vibrant knowledge-driven society. Strategic partnerships give

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
Industry seeking university 74

universities new opportunities to fulfil these tasks, subject to public-private
partnership rules and guidelines designed to ensure academic freedom and
research integrity.40

Universities can offer their PhD students a broader education in strategic
partnerships. As they carry out their research, PhD students are exposed to the
world of industrial research and R&D in a commercial context. They experience at
first hand how firms conduct research and how they handle R&D. They also
broaden their career prospects in this way and become more interesting job
candidates for industry.41

Strategic partnership projects are also a good fit for students at universities of
technology who are enrolled in the two-year post-graduate programme in
engineering.42 They promote cross-sector mobility for researchers and engineers,
which in turn contributes to the university’s third core task: knowledge transfer to
society.

Strategic partnerships also give universities excellent opportunities to recruit
talented researchers. The global competition for talent is fierce in many fields. A
strategic partnership enhances the ability of university research groups to recruit
young researchers, who are often attracted to academic-industrial research
environments precisely they have ties with industry and focus on potential
applications based on scientific evidence.

Conducting scientific research.
A strategic partnership gives university researchers the opportunity to set up and
implement a consistent, long-term research programme that is funded largely by
private means. It offers them a new way of obtaining private co-funding for scientific
research at a time when the pressure on funding bodies has increased and
applications for public research funding are not always successful.43

40 The Netherlands Code of Conduct for Research Integrity is based on five principles of integrity in research:
honesty; scrupulousness; transparency; independence; and responsibility (see
http://www.vsnu.nl/files/documents/Netherlands%20Code%20of%20Conduct%20for%20Research%20Integrit
y%202018.pdf). In its report Wetenschap op Bestelling (2005), the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences advises researchers and clients to state their commitment to a ‘Declaration of Scientific
Independence’. In that statement, they agree that the client will not exercise an improper influence on the set-
up and execution of the research or on the interpretation and publication of the research results. Source:
https://www.knaw.nl/nl/actueel/publicaties/wetenschap-op-bestelling
41 Talent development and close bilateral cooperation are also focal points of NWO’s Industrial Doctorates pilot,
in which a PhD candidate carries out his or her research at both the knowledge institution and the participating
firm. As part of the broader NWO policy of encouraging PPPs, the Industrial Doctorates call ‘offers the
opportunity for a different approach that is even more focused on talent development and that assumes further
deepening through more intensive bilateral collaboration with a single company (even if a knowledge
institution and company are embedded in a larger PPP or several PPPs). Furthermore, it is a collaboration in
which the candidate PhD student takes centre stage as a talent’. Source: https://www.nwo.nl/en/news-and-
events/news/2017/start-pilot-industrial-doctorates-to-facilitate-doing-a-phd-in-industry.html
42 Students enrolled in this programme gain a broader, deeper knowledge of technology and improve their
design skills and their professional competences. Graduates may use the academic title PDEng: Professional
Doctorate in Engineering.
43 In addition, strategic partnerships can be used to mobilise co-funding. For example, the private partner’s cash
contribution can provide the basis for a PPP allowance under the Dutch government’s ‘top sectors’ policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
Industry seeking university 75

In addition to new funding opportunities, strategic partnerships offer researchers the
chance to develop a new research practice and culture in which they can work
closely with industry researchers and developers. After all, the private partner not
only co-funds the research but also helps to generate knowledge. Firms use
strategic partnerships to address knowledge requirements that call for
interdisciplinary research. As a result, strategic partnerships also demand (new)
combinations of scientific disciplines and therefore facilitate interfaculty cooperation
and new ways of organising and managing scientific research (strategically and
otherwise) at universities.

Cooperating with firms on research need not be at the expense of scientific quality
and productivity. In fact, in certain areas of expertise, working with an industry
partner is an advantage precisely because it allows researchers to carry out
pioneering research, for example because they have access to corporate data and
systems.44 Strategic partnerships furthermore give researchers and universities new
opportunities to build their reputation in the scientific community. The fact that a
reputable international (high-tech) firm wants to enter into a strategic partnership
with a specific university research group is a sign of scientific quality – and that, in
turn, helps the group and the university recruit and retain talented students and
researchers.

Transferring knowledge to society
Strategic partnerships give universities and researchers new opportunities to fulfil
their valorisation task. Having a firm closely involved as a knowledge partner leads
to all kinds of ‘productive interactions’ at every stage of research, particularly in the
form of direct or personal interactions (Spaapen & van Drooge, 2011). Interacting
directly in this way, for example by sharing data, equipment and facilities and by
setting up experiments together, increases the likelihood of knowledge absorption
and valorisation.

Strategic partnerships allow universities to position themselves as building blocks in
national and regional R&D ecosystems. This is particularly true if the partnership
draws private-sector activity into the university’s environs. The basic idea is that
firms interested in strategic partnerships see the advantage of co-locating industry
researchers and developers on or near the partner university’s campus. The
university board can capitalise on this by pursuing an active campus development
policy or by promoting itself as an enterprising university or as a university that is
helping to drive regional economic growth. Universities thus become stakeholders

44 Analysis of data gathered by the University of California suggests that the results of research funded by
industry lead to licences more often and are cited more often than those of publicly funded research (Wright,
Drivas, Lei, & Merrill, 2014). UK and US analysts have found that researchers who cooperate with industry are
more productive after making a discovery (i.e. they publish more than researchers who do not cooperate with
industry). Other analysts have suggested that such partnershps produce more patents and generate more
publicity (Savage, 2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
Industry seeking university 76

in attracting foreign investment in R&D. They also gain new opportunities to access
funding from parties that are more interested in R&D ecosystems than in scientific
research, for example municipal authorities, economy boards, metropolitan regions,
regional development companies, provincial authorities, and so on.
Considerations and trade-offs
The close involvement of industry offers research groups and university boards new
opportunities in all three core tasks. Like its private-sector counterpart, the public
partner must also be aware of what it needs to do to play the role of strategic
partner properly. The recent controversy about a partnership between Erasmus
University’s Rotterdam School of Management (RSM) and Shell illustrates the
importance of making firm agreements about the involvement of industry in
university education and research.45

First of all, the university must guarantee that industry will not have an undue
influence on its teaching, its research or on the transfer of knowledge to society.
Academic freedom must be protected. Public-private partnerships must not be at
the expense of scientific integrity. The university must make appropriate
agreements with the firm that co-funds the research about the influence that it can
exert on the choice of subject matter, the methods used, the results of the research
and the way in which they are shared with the scientific community.

Under the Dutch system, universities are themselves largely responsible for
upholding the principles of research integrity. As universities forge closer ties with
industry, this task is becoming all the more important, not only to avoid the
semblance of a conflict of interest, but also to give young researchers (and their
supervisors) a well-defined framework in the event that academic and commercial
interests conflict.

Entering into a strategic partnership requires the faculty and university board to be
involved in the decision-making process. After all, close cooperation with a large
enterprise has consequences for the entire faculty and for the university as a public
institution. Not everyone favours the involvement of large enterprises in universities.
The university must therefore develop a strategic perspective on the type of
university it wants to be and for which stakeholders, and how strategic partnerships
fit into that picture. On that basis, the faculty and university boards can consider
whether a strategic partnership is in fact desirable and whether the university will
not come to rely too much on the enterprise. As part of this assessment, they
should also consider whether there is sufficient scope to carry out scientific
research for which they are unable to find a co-funding partner in the private sector.

45 See the debate in the Dutch House of Representatives on links between the fossil fuel industry and
universities, 7 September 2017, in: Handelingen II, 2016/2017.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
Industry seeking university 77

A third consideration is that a university cannot manage a joint lab as it would a
traditional academic lab. Participating in strategic partnerships requires the
university to make necessary changes in its management and decision-making
processes. The requirements and expectations of the private partner must be taken
into account. The university will have to become more pragmatic or enterprising.
The challenge lies in combining academic and commercial interests in a way that is
workable for both partners.
Societal aspects
The new opportunities open to universities have a ripple effect on society. What
these broader implications are depends on how strategic partnerships affect
university policy, organisation and culture. Which trends are they accelerating, and
which are they curtailing?

In a bid to explore a number of different scenarios, we have borrowed from a
previous Rathenau Instituut publication, Future knowledge (Faasse, Van der
Meulen & Heerekop, 2014). The authors of this publication took two fundamental
uncertainties as a basis for extrapolating four scenarios for universities. The first
uncertainty is: who owns the university and who are its stakeholders? Who actually
pays for teaching and research? What is the dominant value network in which the
university operates? Who are the most important public and private stakeholders
and what value do they attach to the university’s achievements?

Strategic partnerships do well in scenarios in which domestic and international firms
play an important role in teaching and research, and in the valorisation of research
results. They also do well in scenarios in which enterprising universities actively
seek out new (specifically private) sources of funding and make efforts to improve
the knowledge economy. In these scenarios, universities are of value to society
largely because they function as building blocks in regional hotspots of knowledge
and innovation, and because they attract domestic and international firms and
talented researchers.

The second uncertainty is the degree of competition between universities and the
scale at which this competition takes place. Depending on how strategic
partnerships are set up, they do well in two different scenarios, one in which
universities compete internationally for the ‘best’ R&D investors and most talented
researchers worldwide, and another in which universities seek strategic
partnerships with firms that are important to the region.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
Industry seeking university 78

5.3 Government: options and trade-offs
The emergence of strategic research partnerships creates new policy options for
different tiers of government. Strategic partnerships are particularly relevant to
national government’s enterprise and R&D policy and to its science policy. In
addition, strategic partnerships offer regional authorities new opportunities to boost
the economy. Their relationship with various policy fields and tiers of government
poses a coordination challenge, both ‘horizontally’ between policy fields and
‘vertically’ between tiers of government.
5.3.1 Enterprise and innovation policy
The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy promotes innovation in industry
by encouraging universities and firms to work together. The aim of its policy is to
improve the Netherlands’ economic structure. That is why it pursues policy
measures aimed at creating an entrepreneurial climate that will stimulate firms to
pursue sustainability and innovation in their business. One of the ways it envisages
achieving this aim is by encouraging coordination between publicly funded research
and R&D agendas in industry.

Enterprise policy

The general aim of the Ministry’s enterprise policy is to support an outstanding
business climate that encourages firms to pursue sustainability and innovation
in their business. One of its four strategic goals is ‘to develop and exploit high-
quality (internationally) publicly funded research and technology, including
public-private programmes for research, innovation and human capital’.

In its enterprise policy, the Ministry regards the generation, the quality and the
valorisation of scientific and applied knowledge as one of the most important
drivers of innovation and innovative entrepreneurship. That policy is meant to
increase the ‘yield accruing to society of investing in publicly funded research
institutions’ by making these institutions more responsive to society and by
encouraging them to cooperate with industry, in the hope that this will induce
industry to invest in public-private research partnerships and thus increase the
financial resources available for research.
Source: Budget, Ministry of Economic Affairs, 2018 (Kst-34775-XIII-2)

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
Industry seeking university 79

New opportunities
Strategic public-private research partnerships offer the Ministry of Economic Affairs
and Climate Policy the opportunity to work specifically on creating an attractive
business climate that inspires firms to be sustainable and innovative. Close
cooperation leads to knowledge valorisation. The Ministry sees strategic
partnerships as a means to increase the ‘yield accruing to society’ of investing in
publicly funded research institutions and to help boost the Dutch knowledge
economy.

Strategic partnerships can also serve to improve the business climate for R&D-
intensive firms. In that context, the Ministry could encourage universities to be
willing and able to enter into strategic partnerships with firms. Strategic partnerships
are a means of attracting research investments from multinational enterprises and
forging links between these enterprises and the Dutch economy.
Considerations and trade-offs
One of the focal points of innovation policy is to ensure that strategic partnerships
not only benefit the participating partners but also boost the vitality of the relevant
ecosystems for knowledge generation and innovation. Questions for policymakers
include: what do strategic partnerships mean for the position of smaller firms and
start-ups that cannot afford such partnerships with universities? Do they end up in
second place, or do they in fact benefit from the active involvement of a large
enterprise in the relevant knowledge and innovation ecosystems? To what extent is
the involvement of large established enterprises in the research agendas of leading
research groups detrimental to investment in the innovation agendas of other
private and public parties in society?

One important goal of the Ministry’s innovation policy is to achieve a significant
increase in R&D intensity, to 2.5% of GDP by 2020. In that respect, it is worth
asking whether strategic partnerships lead to more or to less private investment in
R&D. This study shows that strategic partnerships have emerged at a time when
firms are changing their R&D and innovation strategies. As part of that change, they
are reallocating their R&D budgets between R&D in their own labs, contract
research by external parties, and co-funding through PPPs, including strategic
partnerships. It is not yet clear whether their R&D budgets are increasing or
decreasing as a result. What we do know, however, is that strategic partnerships
lead to new ‘hybrid’ research practices and a different division of labour in
knowledge ecosystems. The emergence of strategic partnerships therefore says
more about the way firms invest in research and where they make their investments
than about the scale of private R&D investment. As we noted above, strategic
partnerships should primarily be understood as part of the globalisation of R&D and
the location choices that firms are making for their research investments.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
Industry seeking university 80

Another relevant question for policymakers is how strategic partnerships fit into a
rapidly changing geopolitical context. Some are now arguing that EU rules should
be applied when foreign enterprises acquire Dutch firms, and that a level playing
field must be created.46 Such rules and assessment frameworks may also be
needed for strategic partnerships. For example, should American, Chinese and
Indian enterprises be allowed to enter into strategic partnerships with Dutch
universities in the same way as European firms? This question is especially
pertinent when the partnership involves knowledge that can be used to generate
strategic advantages and consolidate a country’s economic and military clout.

When a firm wants to cooperate strategically with a Dutch university, it should not
be left to the university or research group to decide whether its country or continent
of origin matters. An assessment framework is needed that can help it decide
whether or not to enter into a strategic partnership with a specific firm.
5.3.2 Science policy
The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science uses its research and science
policy to intervene in knowledge ecosystems with a view to creating an
internationally competitive research environment that challenges researchers to
perform well. In addition to high-quality scientific research, important policy
objectives are: fostering close ties between science and society (including industry)
and encouraging researchers to develop their talent. Strategic partnerships offer the
Ministry (and NWO) new opportunities to pursue these three main objectives, but
they also raise questions.

Research and science policy

The overall objective of the Ministry’s research and science policy is to create
an internationally competitive research environment that challenges
researchers to deliver the best possible scientific achievements and that
meets society’s needs.

In its policy, the Ministry promotes not only quality and excellence in scientific
research but also unique areas of focus and specialisation at universities, as
well as cooperation between industry, knowledge institutions and government
(particularly by means of the ‘top sector’ strategy). The Ministry sees that

46 See, e.g., the NRC article ‘Europese aanpak nodig tegen buitenlandse overnames’,
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2018/01/18/hoogste-ambtenaar-ez-bescherm-tegen-buitenlandse-overnames-
a1588785

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
Industry seeking university 81

public funds are well spent and that knowledge is properly disseminated to
society. Source: Budget, Ministry of Education, Culture and Science 2018
(Kst-34775-VIII-2)

2025: Vision for Science, Choices for the Future

The policy document 2025: Vision for Science, Choices for the Future
identifies three main aims for Dutch science:
1. To be of worldwide significance.
2. To have even closer ties with society and the private sector;
it has maximum impact.
3. To continue to be a breeding ground for top talent.

In a recent letter (16 June 2017) to the House of Representatives, the Science
Minister stated that cooperation between industry and universities generally
leads to positive outcomes. The Minister sees such partnerships as one of the
strategies that will help achieve the three main aims for Dutch science
identified in the policy document 2025: Vision for Science, Choices for the
Future. The basic principle is that universities can decide for themselves what
they wish to research, what they wish to teach and also with whom they wish
to cooperate. Universities are therefore free to cooperate with industry. They
nevertheless have an obligation to comply with the principles of research
integrity (honesty, scrupulousness, transparency, independence, and
responsibility), as enshrined in the Netherlands Code of Conduct for Research
Integrity.

New opportunities
i) Science of worldwide significance
Strategic partnerships offer policymakers an opportunity to promote high-quality
science, specifically when it takes the form of use-inspired basic research. Close
cooperation with knowledge-intensive (high-tech) firms allows scientists to
capitalise on that firm’s resources, knowledge, expertise and data, thereby boosting
the quality of the research.47 They can also involve knowledge-intensive firms in
evaluating that quality.

The above is a useful counterweight to current practice, which places a great deal
of emphasis (perhaps too much) on publications in top journals and impact scores.
Large multinational enterprises that enter into a strategic research partnership
spend the necessary time and energy scouting the best knowledge partners

47 The evaluation of FOM’s Industrial Partnership Programmes, for example, has shown that research quality
and industrial relevance can go hand in hand, provided that the participating firms are themselves also
interested in pioneering basic research that has no practical application as yet.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
Industry seeking university 82

(worldwide). When they choose a strategic partner, it is a sign of that research
group’s quality.

For some time now, NWO has focused on supporting new forms of public-private
cooperation in research. It recognises the added value of strategic partnerships in
promoting high-quality science and in helping to connect science and society. NWO
has, for example, co-founded several strategic partnerships (ARCNL and ARC
CBBC) and sits on their boards. FOM (now part of NWO) broke new ground in this
regard with its Industrial Partnership Programmes. NWO intends to evaluate the
strategic partnerships in which it is involved with a view to improving the concept.48

ii) Science has close ties with society and the private sector
Strategic partnerships offer policymakers a new way to encourage universities to
engage with industry. Even more so than in other PPP arrangements, both parties
make every effort to share knowledge and expertise. Exchanges between the two
sides extend to all stages of the research process, from agenda-setting to
dissemination of research results. It is precisely the close involvement of industry in
conducting the research that is typical of strategic partnerships and offers added
value compared to alliances that focus on cooperating at the ‘front end’ (joint
agenda-setting) and/or ‘back end’ of research (sharing of results). Moreover, the
alliance is long-term and programme-driven and not based only on individual
projects.

iii) Science as a breeding ground for talent
Strategic partnerships give policymakers a new way to broaden the scope of PhD
training. Thanks to close cooperation with industry, universities can give young
researchers a much broader education than that offered in mainstream academic
PhD programmes. Some strategic partnerships dovetail well with post-graduate
engineering programmes. Strategic partnerships thus offer new ways to promote
talent development and knowledge transfer (for example through cross-sector
mobility). They also help to make an appointment at a Dutch university appealing to
talented foreign researchers.
Considerations and trade-offs
Strategic partnerships also raise a number of questions for policymakers.

The first is how to ensure that the public and private partners maintain an
appropriate distance from each other. While their intention is to cooperate closely,
this must not lead to conflicts of interests, restrictions on academic freedom, or the
impairment of research integrity. The Minister should be able to rely on universities
to carry out proper ‘border surveillance’.

48 In its new strategic plan for 2019-2022, NWO has announced that it will be evaluating ‘relatively new forms of
collaboration’ such as ARCNL, in which NWO is collaborating with other parties over a period of many years
so that the experiences acquired can be used to further improve the concepts (NWO, 2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
Industry seeking university 83

Strategic partnerships are suitable for connecting the commercial R&D agendas of
large enterprises to public research agendas. Policymakers should consider
whether there is sufficient scope and interest to mobilise public science for other
innovation agendas (relevant to society). With their vast financial resources and
knowledge-intensive activities, large multinationals are extremely attractive
partners. They can therefore easily recruit top researchers. It is in the public interest
to ensure that outstanding scientists are also mobilised to work on other knowledge
and R&D agendas, including agendas addressing the challenges facing society.
Policymakers must strike the right balance between the various agendas
(academic, commercial and societal) for which public research is mobilised.

Another point that policymakers must consider is how strategic partnerships
between Dutch universities and large multinationals affect the Netherlands’ ability to
attract and retain talented researchers. On the one hand, such partnerships do help
to bring international talent to the Netherlands. On the other, multinationals are first
in line to scout and recruit talented researchers. For policy purposes, it is important
to understand the net effect of strategic partnerships. Are knowledge and talent in
fact exiting the Netherlands? There is also the geopolitical context: where are
knowledge and talent going when they leave the Netherlands? Are they remaining
in Europe, or are they benefiting (firms in) the US or China, for example?

The way that policymakers evaluate strategic partnerships depends on how they
conceive of the university’s future in the longer term. What role do they expect
universities to play in society? Who owns the universities, and whose interests do
they serve? How much discretion or incentive do universities have to differentiate
and specialise? Some universities could very well position themselves as strategic
partners for industry, for example, while others could focus on different
stakeholders.

In the Netherlands’ current science system, universities are basically free to enter
into strategic partnerships, provided that they adhere to codes of research integrity.
As a practice, strategic partnerships are still in their infancy at most universities.
The science system as a whole would benefit from mutual learning in the interests
of informed decision-making and responsible partnerships.

It is in the public interest to draw up a common assessment framework that offers a
basis for determining which partnerships are or are not desirable and which terms
and conditions are appropriate. The national government can play a coordinating
role in this context, for example through NWO.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
Industry seeking university 84

5.3.3 Regional government policy
Strategic partnerships give regional and local governments an opportunity to boost
the regional or local economy. Such partnerships may help to attract new
(knowledge-intensive) activities to the region and to consolidate the regional
economic structure. In policy terms, a strategic partnership helps the region to
attract knowledge-intensive investment and well-trained workers. It can, for
example, put a local campus on the map as an interesting location for innovative
companies.

To make informed choices with respect to strategic partnerships, regional
policymakers must have a clear idea of the direction in which they want to see the
regional economy developing, for example in the form of a strategy for regional
specialisation.

Typical considerations in this context are whether policymakers choose to support
strategic partnerships with existing (large) enterprises in the region, or whether they
opt to attract new, international firms that do not yet have a presence there.
Strategic partnerships enable regional and local authorities to involve local
universities and industry more closely in economic development policy and in
attracting knowledge-intensive investment.

What a regional government contributes to a strategic partnership varies from a
one-off start-up grant to a significant multi-year financial package. In the case of
large-scale public funding, the authorities will want to be more closely involved in
the partnership, for example by participating in its governing body, so that it can
monitor and evaluate the economic and societal impact of public funding.
5.3.4 Policy coordination
Strategic partnerships create new options for taking action and raise new concerns
in different policy domains at different tiers of government. It is in everyone’s
interest for municipal, regional and national authorities to coordinate their policies
and interventions closely, not only ‘vertically’ between the different tiers of
government but also ‘horizontally’ between the policy areas concerned. One
possible route towards a coordinated approach is to establish a common
assessment framework for deciding whether or not to support a strategic
partnership. Such a framework should clarify the criteria and conditions that
strategic partnerships between universities and industry must meet to qualify for
(certain) public co-funding schemes.

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
Industry seeking university 85

6 Conclusions
Public-private research partnerships (PPP) between universities and industry have
become commonplace in the Netherlands in recent decades. Since the 1980s, the
Dutch government has also explicitly encouraged cooperation across successive
generations of innovation policy, currently in the form of a public-private partnership
allowance (the PPP allowance).49 Public-private research consortia, virtual research
institutes and separate collaborative projects illustrate the wide variety of PPP
arrangements. In recent years, however, there has been a new trend in PPPs in
which large firms and universities enter into strategic research partnerships. Their
purpose is to build a solid relationship that has advantages for both parties. That
relationship appears to be closer, more comprehensive, and more exclusive than in
other PPP customary types so far. It is important for science and innovation
policymakers to understand this trend, not only because it appears to offer all sorts
of opportunities to support Dutch science and boost the Netherlands’ knowledge
economy in a global context, but also because the new options raise new
questions.

The purpose of this study is to gain a better understanding of the phenomenon of
strategic public-private research partnerships and what their emergence means for
the dynamism and functioning of ecosystems in which knowledge is generated.
This study answers four main research questions:
 How does a strategic partnership differ from other types of research PPPs?
 How can we understand the emergence of strategic partnerships?
 What new opportunities become available to firms and universities that enter
into a strategic partnership?
 What new questions and trade-offs do such partnerships entail, both for the
stakeholders themselves and for government science, innovation and regional
policy?
Our research approach consisted of a conceptual study of the literature on strategic
partnerships, an empirical study based on three case studies of strategic
partnerships (Chemelot InSciTe, DELTA Lab and ARCNL), and two meetings with
experts and stakeholders at universities, in industry and in policymaking.
Strategic partnerships as a new type of research PPP
Research cooperation in a strategic partnership is more selective, more exclusive,
more intense and lengthier than has so far been customary in other forms of PPP.
The partners wish to build a relationship that will generate the mutual trust

49 The Ministry of Economic Affairs’ ‘Top Sector’ policy supported more than a thousand public-private
partnership projects between 2013 and 2016. (See the factsheet Stimulering publiek-private samenwerking via
de PPS-toeslag. Onderzoek en Innovatie by the Rathenau Instituut, 11 February 2018,
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/het-geld/stimulering-publiek-private-samenwerking-de-pps-
toeslag-onderzoek-en

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
Industry seeking university 86

necessary for close collaboration and for sharing knowledge, data, systems and
facilities. Another typical feature is that the cooperation extends beyond the work of
the research groups and R&D departments; senior management at both the
university and the firm are also involved in decision-making.

We can position strategic partnerships on one end of a PPP continuum that runs
from ‘networking’ to ‘coordination’ and from ‘collaboration’ to ‘strategic partnership’.
At the ‘light’ end of the continuum (networking), cooperation in research mainly
allows scientists to maintain mutually advantageous relationships with firms and
their R&D departments (and vice versa). These are small-scale, often ad hoc
research projects by students or PhD candidates where firms offer ideas, provide
guidance, arrange internships and so on. In the second type of PPP (coordination),
the primary goal is to better align academic research agendas with industry
innovation agendas in broad public-private consortia. The third type of PPP
(collaboration) sets the bar higher; industry no longer merely offers programme
guidance but becomes actively involved in specific research projects within the
programme. In the fourth PPP type (strategic partnership), a select group of
partners aims to cooperate closely and for a lengthy period of time on research that
is important to them all. The relationship is mutually advantageous, with bi-
directional sharing of knowledge, data, systems and facilities.

Strategic partnerships differ from other types of PPP in that the partners are
deliberately investing in building a relationship with each other. The relationship that
they envisage is essentially very different from a client-contractor relationship in
which transactions are central. The partners want to narrow or bridge the gap
between their academic and industrial organisations in all sorts of ways. For
example, they narrow the geographical gap by housing industry and academic
researchers in a single lab (co-location), preferably on the university campus or
science park. To narrow the cognitive gap (understanding each other’s work), the
firm ensures that it has enough knowledge in-house (absorption capacity) and the
partners see that academic and industry researchers share their knowledge with
one another. Finally, to narrow the organisational gap, the partners get to know
each other’s organisational cultures and together develop a research practice that
combines academic and commercial elements.
Emergence of strategic partnerships
We can view the emergence of strategic partnerships as a response to the interplay
between the changing strategies of industry, universities and government. Strategic
partnerships are part of a new generation of open innovation strategies pursued by
large enterprises in which cooperation with universities is meant to reinforce their
research and innovation ecosystems in the longer term – including in their own
facilities clustered around their strategic R&D centres.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
Industry seeking university 87

Influenced in part by the globalisation of R&D, firms are taking a more strategic
approach to the locus of their R&D as well as their partners and method of
cooperation. Nowadays, their global R&D footprint consists of one or more key
research centres that – thanks to the firm’s partnerships – are closely connected to
and firmly embedded in a local knowledge ecosystem made up of universities,
research institutes, engineering firms, specialist suppliers and others. The research
centres are supplemented by smaller research units elsewhere whose partnerships
give them access to relevant knowledge ecosystems worldwide.

Universities have also altered their strategies in the past few decades. They are
more open to the idea of cooperating strategically with large enterprises. They have
come to rely more on industry to help fund their research. Universities have become
more enterprising and are more intent on positioning themselves as part of a
regional ecosystem for research and innovation. They use their campuses and
science parks to engage with firms. Before the millennium, universities mainly used
PPPs as a new way to set the research agenda and fund their research. Gradually,
PPPs also offered universities a new way of organising research, for example within
multidisciplinary research projects or in interfaculty (or even interuniversity)
research groups.

Within the context of science policy, policymakers are increasingly aware that
partnerships between universities and firms heighten the quality and societal
relevance of scientific research. In terms of innovation policy, PPPs have been an
important means of triggering innovativeness in industry since the 1980s. Such
policy support has made PPPs in research standard practice. Strategic partnerships
between universities and industry appear to be the next logical step. It is notable
that regional governments are also becoming more closely involved in research and
innovation PPPs with a view to stimulating the regional economy. They see
strategic partnerships as a way to get large enterprises to commit to their region.
New opportunities and considerations for industry and universities
Strategic partnerships give firms the opportunity to be closely involved in innovative
scientific research and to work with prominent researchers. When it comes to their
more fundamental knowledge requirements, a strategic partnership is an attractive
alternative to in-house research (too expensive and risky), contract research (too
specific) and to a series of separate PPP projects with varying partners (too
piecemeal). Firms also use their partnership to gain access to the knowledge
ecosystems that they need to innovative effectively.

For universities, strategic partnerships offer new opportunities in each of their three
core tasks by allowing them to broaden the scope of training for students and PhD
candidates, set up appealing research programmes on subjects of economic
interest, and boost regional knowledge and innovation ecosystems by attracting
innovative firms to the campus or science park and gaining their commitment.

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
Industry seeking university 88

Firms and universities that enter into a strategic partnership seek proximity and
extensive ‘border crossings’ because they generate knowledge for two worlds. At
the same time, they must keep an appropriate distance from each other and avoid
conflicts of interest. It is challenging on both sides to get to know each other’s
boundaries and strike the right balance between proximity and distance. The new
research practices that this demands are still under development.

A public-private lab cannot be managed in the same way as an industrial lab or a
purely academic lab. For example, firms cannot simply alter or discontinue research
projects if market circumstances change. They must allow for the fact that
academic (PhD) research takes longer, that researchers need to publish their
research results, and so on. In turn, researchers must take the firm’s commercial
interests and business practices into account and be more pragmatic in the way
they manage projects and report on the research. To manage the extensive ‘border
crossings’, the partners need more than firm agreements and rules that guarantee
academic freedom and research integrity; they also need to create a new research
culture that combines academic and commercial elements in a manner acceptable
to both sides.

For firms, strategic partnerships with universities offer important new opportunities
to gain access to research and researchers. Such partnerships do make a number
of demands on firms, however. The firm must invest in sufficient knowledge
absorption capacity. Senior management must be involved. The firm must not treat
the joint lab as it would an industrial lab. And it must not have unrealistic
expectations of its academic partner. The relevance to society of a multinational
enterprise that partners with a Dutch university depends on the role that the
enterprise aims to play in the Netherlands. For example, will it apply that knowledge
in the Netherlands or through its branches elsewhere? The firm’s origins and its
market position also play a role.

For universities, strategic partnerships open up new opportunities in teaching,
research and valorisation. Universities must ensure that the partnership does not
impinge on its academic interests, however. To enter into informed strategic
relationships with large multinationals, university boards must have a clear-cut
notion of the type of university they want to be and who their stakeholders are. For
example, strategic partnerships go well with scenarios in which the university
regards the results of teaching and research as a private good (as well) and in
which the university competes globally for money and talent. As part of these
efforts, the university board must also decide to what extent the university will be
selective about the firms that it considers suitable and, more to the point, unsuitable
as a strategic partner.

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
Industry seeking university 89

Universities should consider the following points:
 The firm’s strategy. Does it want to use the partnership to ‘tap into’ knowledge,
or is it planning to maintain a long-term presence on the campus or in the
Netherlands?
 The firm’s origins. Should Chinese or US firms gain access to the university in
the same way as Dutch or European firms? This is a relevant issue in strategic
knowledge domains, such as artificial intelligence.
 The firm’s position on markets and societal innovation routes. Will the
partnership inadvertently help the firm maintain its dominance in the market, or
will it contribute to preserving an undesirable status quo?
Options and issues for policymakers
The emergence of strategic partnerships is a relevant phenomenon in various
policy domains, specifically in the national government’s enterprise policy and
science policy and in regional innovation policy.

In its enterprise and innovation policy, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Climate Policy has identified an attractive business climate as a public objective.
Strategic partnerships can contribute to creating such a climate because they offer
firms solid opportunities to mobilise research and researchers in the pursuit of their
innovation targets. They can furthermore play a role in attracting foreign investment
in R&D and in making the business location climate in the Netherlands more
welcoming to knowledge-intensive activity.

Policymakers active in these domains should consider the following points:
 The impact of strategic partnerships on the ‘level playing field’ for other parties
(SMEs or public-sector organisations), i.e. on their ability to work with top
researchers at universities, to provide input into research agendas, or to scout
and recruit talented scientists. Strategic partners have direct access to
knowledge and scientists that others do not have.
 Strategic partnerships in a changing geopolitical context in which knowledge
generation and technological advances are tools in an economic and military
battle for power. Similar to foreign take-overs of Dutch firms, the Netherlands
needs an assessment framework and a set of requirements that non-EU
enterprises must satisfy before they are permitted to enter into strategic
partnerships with Dutch universities. To what extent should universities be free
to choose their own strategic partners?

The three stated aims of the Netherlands’ science policy are for Dutch science to
be of worldwide significance, to have maximum impact, and to be a breeding
ground for talent. Strategic partnerships offer new opportunities to pursue all three
of these aims. Specifically, the research programmes undertaken in strategic
partnerships combine quality academic research with prospects of valorisation. This

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
Industry seeking university 90

combination also adds a new dimension: academia as an appealing incubator for
talent.

Policymakers active in this domain should consider the following points:
 Whether universities can represent the public interest properly in strategic
partnerships and take informed decisions about entering into and managing
them.
 The implications of strategic partnerships for diversity in – and coordination
between – the various academic, economic and societal agendas that mobilise
public research.
 The implications of strategic partnerships for the outflow of knowledge and
researchers abroad and the influx of knowledge and talent into the
Netherlands.
 The role of strategic partnerships in the long-term prospects of the university
system. What is expected of (which) universities in their strategic cooperation
with (which) firms?
 Whether universities do enough to learn from one another about managing
strategic partnerships properly as a new research practice, and whether NWO
should play a coordinating role in this context.

Regional and local governments focus on stimulating the regional or local
economy. They view strategic partnerships as a route to getting large R&D-
intensive firms to commit to their region or city, and to create distinctive regional
knowledge and innovation hotspots.

Regional policymakers should consider the following points:
 The effect of a major market party on the dynamism of regional innovation
ecosystems. Has the region set its sights on revamping ecosystems or on
reinforcing existing ones? A strategic partnership between an existing party
and a local university may block any partnership with a new party from outside
the region.
 Involving universities in regional development policy and in acquiring
knowledge-intensive investment.
 The form in which and the extent to which the regional government should
support a strategic partnership. Is a one-off start-up grant enough, or is a multi-
year financial commitment necessary?
Towards an assessment framework
All sorts of public and private interests converge in strategic partnerships. They not
only bring together the interests of public and private researchers and the
organisations they work for, but also those of public policymakers in different
domains and tiers of government. Strategic partnerships are still in the throes of
development. Now is a good time to devise an integrated assessment framework
that will allow stakeholders to weigh up the various public and private interests,

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
Industry seeking university 91

opportunities and risks involved. That will help them take an informed decision as to
whether they want to enter into or support a strategic partnership, and on which
conditions. A sound assessment framework should in any event address the
following issues:
 How does a strategic partnership impact the access to public knowledge and
researchers of firms outside the partnership?
 How does a strategic partnership impact research agendas and the balance
between the various academic, social and economic agendas that mobilise
science?
 Geopolitical considerations. Knowledge generation and technological advances
are pawns in the battle for economic and military power. Does a strategic
partnership help to strengthen the regional / Dutch / European economy or
does it boost the economy of global competitors? Is it contributing to the
outflow of knowledge and (top-class) researchers to other countries, or is it in
fact bringing about an influx of knowledge and talent?
 How does a strategic partnership fit in with the university’s long-term
perspective on the knowledge institution that it wants to be for stakeholders
(and which ones)? How does it fit in with the government’s long-term outlook
on the Dutch research and science system?
 How does a strategic partnership tie in with regional development strategy?
How does a strategic partnership impact the dynamism and vitality of regional
ecosystems for R&D and innovation?

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
Industry seeking university 92

Bibliography
ARC CBBC (2017). Annual report 2016. Utrecht.
Archibugi, D. & A. Filippetti (2016). The retreat of public research and its adverse
consequences on innovation (Vol. 31). London: Birkbeck University of
London.
Bikard, M., K. Vakili & F. Theoridis (2016). ‘When collaboration bridges institutions:
the impact of industry collaboration on academic productivity’. In: SSRN.
doi:https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2883365
Bodas Freitas, I. M. & B. Verspagen (2017). ‘The motivations, institutions and
organization of university-industry collaborations in the Netherlands’. In:
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 27(3), 379-412.
Boschma, R. A. (2005). ‘Proximity and innovation: A critical assessment’. In:
Regional Studies, 39(1), 61-74.
Broek-Honingh, N. van den & J. de Jonge (2018). Trust in science in the
Netherlands – Survey monitor 2018. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Coates Ulrichsen, T. & E. O’Sullivan (2014). Building long term strategic university-
industry partnerships. Lessons and effective practices from UK and US
experiences. Cambridge: Center for Science, Technology & Innovation
Policy, University of Cambridge.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). Open innovation : the new imperative for creating and
profiting from technology Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.
Curley, M. & B. Salmelin (2018). Open innovation 2.0: the new mode of digital
innovation for prosperity and sustainability. Cham: Springer.
Davey, T. et al. (2011). Final report - Study on the cooperation between Higher
Education Institutions and public and private organisations in Europe.
Münster: Science-to-Business Marketing Research Centre.
Davids, M., H. Lintsen & A. van Rooij (2013). Innovatie en kennisinfrastructuur.
Vele wegen naar vernieuwing. Amsterdam: Boom.
Deuten, J. (2015). R&D goes global: Policy implications for the Netherlands as a
knowledge region in a global perspective. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Dorsman, L. J. & P. J. Knegtmans (2007). Onderzoek in opdracht: de publieke
functie van het universitaire onderzoek in Nederland sedert 1876.
Hilversum: Verloren.
Dorsman, L. & P. J. Knegtmans (2010). Het universitaire bedrijf: over
professionalisering van onderzoek, bestuur en beheer. Hilversum: Verloren.

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
Industry seeking university 93

Evaluation committee (2017). Evaluation 2014-2016. ARCNL - Advanced Research
Center for Nanolithography. Den Haag: NWO/Dialogic/Birch.
Faasse, P. (2018). ‘Over mogelijkheden, wensen en ‘onvermijdelijke keuzen’. Een
eeuw wetenschapsbeleid in Nederland’. In: P. Slaman (Ed.), In de regel vrij.
100 jaar politiek rond onderwijs, cultuur en wetenschap. Den Haag:
Ministerie van OCW, pp. 277-297.
Faasse, P., B. van der Meulen & P. Heerekop (2014). Future knowledge. 4
scenarios fort he future of Dutch universities. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut
and VSNU.
Faber, J. (2001). Kennisverwerving in de Nederlandse industrie 1870-1970.
Amsterdam: Aksant.
Frolund, L., F. E. S. Murray & M. Riedel. (2017). Developing successful strategic
partnerships with universities. MIT Sloan management review, 59(2).
Retrieved from http://proquest.safaribooksonline.com/?fpi=53863mit59205
Hagedoorn, J., A. N. Link & N. S. Vonortas (2000). ‘Research partnerships’. In:
Research Policy, 29(4-5), 567-586.
Handelingen II. (2016/2017). 100, item 7.
Heringa, P. W. (2014). Proximity and collaborative knowledge production in the
water sector. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Hessels, L. & J. Deuten (2013). Coördinatie van publiek-privaat onderzoek. Van
variëteit naar maatwerk. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Homburg, E. (2003). Speuren op de tast. Een historische kijk op industriële en
universitaire research. Maastricht: Universiteit Maastricht.
Homburg, E. & L. Palm (2004). ‘Grenzen aan de groei - groei aan de grenzen:
enkele ontwikkelingslijnen van de na-oorlogse chemie’. In: E. Homburg & L.
Palm (Eds.), De geschiedenis van de scheikunde in Nederland. 3, De
ontwikkeling van de chemie van 1945 tot het begin van de jaren tachtig.
Delft: Delft University Press, pp. 3-18.
Järvi, K., A. Almpanopoulou & P. Ritala (2018). ‘Organization of knowledge
ecosystems: Prefigurative and partial forms’. In: Research Policy, 47(8),
1523-1537.
Jong, S. (2008). ‘Academic organizations and new industrial fields: Berkeley and
Stanford after the rise of biotechnology’. In: Research Policy, 37(8),
12671282.
KNAW-werkgroep opdrachtonderzoek (2005). Wetenschap op bestelling. Over de
omgang tussen wetenschappelijk onderzoekers en hun opdrachtgevers.
Amsterdam: KNAW.
Knegtmans, P. J. (2000). ‘Onderwijs, wetenschap en particulier initiatief aan de
Universiteit van Amsterdam, 1920-1950’. In: P. J. Knegtmans & A. J. Kox
(Eds.), Tot nut en eer van de stad: wetenschappelijk onderzoek aan de

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
Industry seeking university 94

Universiteit van Amsterdam. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, pp.
79-105.
Koschatzky, K. (2017). A theoretical view on public-private partnerships in research
and innovation in Germany. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and
Innovation Research ISI.
Lacetera, N. (2009). ‘Different missions and commitment power in R&D
organizations: theory and evidence on industry-university alliances’. In:
Organization Science, 20(3), 565-582.
Laursen, K., T. Reichstein & A. Salter (2011). ‘Exploring the effect of geographical
proximity and university quality on university-industry collaboration in the
United Kingdom’. In: Regional Studies, 45(4), 507-523.
Link, A. N. & G. Tassey (1989). Cooperative research and development: the
industry, university, government relationship. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Lintsen, H. & E.-J. Velzing (2012). Onderzoekscoördinatie in de gouden driehoek -
Een geschiedenis. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Lintsen, H. et al. (2014). De kracht van de katalysator: de magie van het onderzoek.
Eindhoven: Stichting Historie der Techniek.
Mowery, D. C. (1998). ‘Collaborative R&D: How effective is it?’. In: Issues in
Science and Technology, 15(1), 37-44.
Mowery, D. C. (1999). The evolving structure of university-industry collaboration in
the United States: Three cases. In: National Research Council (US)
Chemical Sciences Roundtable (Ed.), Research teams and partnerships:
Trends in the chemical sciences: Report of a workshop. Washington (DC):
National Academic Press (US).
Mowery, D. C. & B. N. Sampat (2005). ‘Universities in national innovation systems’.
In: J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 209-239.
Niosi, J. (1999). ‘Fourth-generation R&D’. In: Journal of Business Research, 45(2),
111-117.
Nobelius, D. (2004). ‘Towards the sixth generation of R&D management’. In:
International Journal of Project Management International Journal of Project
Management, 22(5), 369-375.
NWO (2014). NWO-beleid inzake intellectueel eigendom. Externe tekst, 27
november 2014. Den Haag: NWO.
NWO (2015). Strategienota 2015-2018. Den Haag: NWO.
NWO (2018). NWO-strategie 2019-2022. Verbinden van wetenschap en
samenleving. Den Haag: NWO.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
Industry seeking university 95

OECD (2005). ‘Public/private partnerships for innovations’. In: OECD (Ed.), OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2004. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2014). Strategic public/private partnerships in science, technology and
innovation. Final report, 2 December 2014. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2016). ‘STI Outlook 2016 Policy Profile: Strategic public/private
partnerships in science, technology and innovation’. In: OECD (Ed.), OECD
science, technology and innovation outlook 2016. Paris: OECD.
Okamuro, H. & J. Nishimura (2015). ‘Not just financial support? Another role of
public subsidy in university-industry research collaborations’. In: Economics
of Innovation and New Technology, 24(7), 633-659.
Okubo, Y. & C. Sjoberg (2000). ‘The changing pattern of industrial scientific
research collaboration in Sweden’. In: Research Policy, 29(1), 81-98.
Pinto, P. E., D. Hine & P. Knights (2011). Types and traps: R&D consortia and
developmentalpittfals. Paper presented at the DRUID, Copenhagen.
Poyago-Theotoky, J., J. Beath & D. S. Siegel (2002). ‘Universities and fundamental
research: Reflections on the growth of university-industry partnerships’. In:
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18(1), 10.
Pulkka, L. (2017). Tensions between slow large-scale research joint ventures and
fast-paced innnovation. Paper presented at the 12th European Conference
on Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 21-22 Sept 2017, Paris.
Radder, H. (2010). The commodification of academic research: science and the
modern university. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Regiegroep Spelregels (2013). Spelregels voor privaat-publieke samenwerking bij
programmering en uitvoering van fundamenteel en toegepast onderzoek.
Rosenberg, N. & R. R. Nelson (1994). ‘American universities and technical advance
in industry’. In: Research Policy, 23(3), 323-348.
Savage, N. (2017). ‘Industry links boost research output. New findings suggest
corporate collaboration encourages academic productivity’. In: Nature,
552(7683), S11-S13.
Schulze-Krogh, A. C. (2017). ‘Firms’ absorptive capacity for research-based
collaboration—an analysis of a Norwegian R&D brokering policy program’.
In: Science and Public Policy, 45(4), 533-542.
Shapin, S. (2010). The scientific life : a moral history of a late modern vocation.
Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.
Spaapen, J. & L. van Drooge (2011). ‘Introducing ‘productive interactions’ in social
impact assessment’. In: Research Evaluation, 20(3), 211-218.
Stokes, D. E. (1997). Pasteur’s quadrant. Basic science and technological
innovation. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
Industry seeking university 96

Theunissen, B. (2000). ‘Nut en nog eens nut’: wetenschapsbeelden van
Nederlandse natuuronderzoekers, 1800-1900. Hilversum: Verloren.
University-Industry Demonstration Partnership (2012). Partnership continuum:
Understanding & developing the pathways for beneficial university-industry
engagement. Washington D.C.: UIDP.
Veen, J. P., N. Boots & W. Boontje (1990). Netwerken. Interactie tussen bedrijven,
universitaire groepen, TNO, Grote Technologische Instituten en
overheidsdiensten in het kader van STW-onderzoeksprojecten. Den Haag:
STW.
Waardenburg, I., ‘R&D top 30 van Technisch Weekblad’. In: Technisch Weekblad
12 mei 2017.
Wettenhall, R. (2003). ‘The rhetoric and reality of public-private partnerships’. In:
Public Organization Review Public Organization Review: A Global Journal,
3(1), 77-107.
Witte, P. de (2012). ‘Public-private partnerships - an example from the Netherlands:
The Industrial Partnership Programme’. In: W. Helwegen & L. Escoffier
(Eds.), Nanotechnology commercialization for managers and scientists.
Singapore: Pan Stanford Publishing, pp. 263-290.
Wright, B. D. et al. (2014). ‘Technology transfer: Industry-funded academic
inventions boost innovation’. In: Nature, 507(7492), 297-299.
Zee, F. van der, A. Goetheer & G. Gijsbers (2016). De staat van Nederland
innovatieland 2016. Publiek-private samenwerking in onderzoek en
innovatie. Delft: TNO.
Zeller, C. (2009). ‘North Atlantic innovative relations of Swiss pharmaceuticals and
the proximities with regional biotech arenas’. In: Economic Geography,
80(1), 83-111.

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
Industry seeking university 97

Appendix 1: Individuals involved
Case study interviewees
Zeynep Akata University of Amsterdam, DELTA Lab
Ger Baron City of Amsterdam
Huib Daniels Province of Limburg
Pieter Emans Maastricht UMC+
Joost Frenken ARCNL
Emiel Hensen Eindhoven University of Technology
Michiel van den Hout NWO-I
Annabel Jansen Chemelot InSciTe
Bert Kip Brightlands Chemelot Campus
Bart van Leijen VU Amsterdam
Bart Noordam ASML
Christoph Peylo Bosch
Marcus Remmers DSM
Miriam Roelofs NWO-I
Albert Scherpbier Maastricht University, Maastricht UMC+
Guus Schreiber VU Amsterdam
Kalle van Seeters Province of Noord-Holland
Arnold Smeulders University of Amsterdam, DELTA Lab
Emiel Staring Chemelot InSciTe
Jens Thies DSM
Peter van Tienderen University of Amsterdam
Oscar Versolato ARCNL
Max Welling University of Amsterdam, DELTA Lab
Stefan Witte VU Amsterdam, ARCNL
Marcel Wubbolts Corbion

Other interviewees
Mirjam Bult University of Twente
Rutger Claassen Utrecht University
Hans Dröge Consultant
Kees Eijkel University of Twente
Katrin Hahn University of Twente
Peter Jan Knegtmans University of Amsterdam
Harry Lintsen Eindhoven University of Technology
Esther Smit Amsterdam Data Science
Frans van der Zee TNO

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
Industry seeking university 98

Liaison meeting, 30 November 2017
Jan van den Biesen Consultant
Hans Dröge Consultant
Kees Eijkel University of Twente
Thomas Grosfeld VNO-NCW
Bart van Leije VU Amsterdam

Stakeholders meeting, 25 January 2018
Jan van den Biesen Consultant
Bob van der Bijl RVO
Patries Boekholt Consultant
Daan Donkers City of Amsterdam
Ton Flaman Philips
Maarten Flinkenflögel Utrecht University
Thomas Grosfeld VNO-NCW
Annabel Jansen Chemelot InSciTe
Didier Manjoero City of Amsterdam
Maurice Mourad ARC CBBC
Karen Passier Ministry of Economic Affairs
Johan Vos University of Amsterdam
Pieter de Witte NWO
Wim van der Zande ASML

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
Industry seeking university 99

Appendix 2: Additional information on
the research approach
Case studies
We selected the case studies by seeking out partnerships in the Netherlands that
are of strategic importance to the firm involved and in which a university is one of
the lead partners. We performed desk research to identify (long-term) partnerships
involving firms that number among the top 30 R&D enterprises in the Netherlands
(Waardenburg, 12 May 2017).

We assessed the partnerships matching this description against criteria based on
the OECD’s definition of strategic partnerships (2016). The criteria were: use-
inspired basic research, a joint research programme, all the partners made a
substantial contribution, both the university and the firm played an active role, and
the partnership had a term of at least five years.

Finally, we selected three cases that largely met the criteria described above but
varied in terms of research domain and design: Chemelot InSciTe, DELTA Lab and
ARCNL. We examined each case using a case study protocol, desk research and
interviews.

During the interviews, we asked questions about:
 the history of the partnership
 how the interviewees got involved and what role they had or still played
 what made the cooperation strategic
 what made the cooperation a partnership
 what considerations had played a role in choosing to cooperate
 how the parties dealt with differences between their organisations (university
and firm).
Other interviews
We also asked a number of people their views on the foregoing interview questions,
based on their role and expertise (in a general sense).
Meetings
On 30 November 2017, we discussed our initial research findings with five
individuals who had been invited to a liaison meeting.
On 25 January 2018, we discussed our interim report with a group of fourteen
stakeholders and experts. Those invited commented on various matters, including
the potential impact of strategic partnerships and possible policy implications.

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
Industry seeking university 100

Appendix 3: Agreements on
intellectual property and scientific
publications
The agreements that the partners in public-private research partnerships make
about intellectual property rights (IP rights) and scientific publications are of crucial
importance. A further factor is that the timing of the two activities differs with regard
to confidentiality and disclosure. In the case of patents, confidentiality is required
until the application has been filed, whereas in the case of publications, rapid
disclosure is important to gain recognition in the academic world. To facilitate
negotiations on such agreements, parties can turn to the report Spelregels voor
privaat-publieke samenwerking bij programmering en uitvoering van fundamenteel
en toegepast onderzoek [Rules for setting up and implementing programmes of
basic and applied research in private-public partnerships] (Regiegroep Spelregels,
2013). The rules were developed in 2013 at the request of the Dutch Government
by the Regiegroep Spelregels, consisting of representatives of the Royal Academy,
the Association of Universities in the Netherlands, the Association of Dutch
Universities of Applied Sciences, NWO, the Chemicals, Horticulture & Propagation
Materials, and Logistics ‘top sectors’, TO2 (organisation of applied research
institutes) and VNO-NCW employers’ federation. Their purpose is to support
successful research alliances in the Netherlands’ top economic sectors and in the
Top Consortia for Knowledge and Innovation (TKIs). The report makes
recommendations concerning IP rights and publications as drawn up by the IP
expert group, part of the Regiegroep.50 NWO has incorporated the
recommendations into its PPP research policy (NWO, 2014).

In this appendix, we summarise the recommendations relevant to strategic public-
private research partnerships.51 The report notes that flexibility is necessary to
implement agreements in practical terms because there are major differences
between sectors in the importance they attach to IP rights and how they use them.
Pharmaceuticals firms must have exclusive patents, whereas in the electronics
industry it is customary to draft general standards, with other parties being required
to take out licences.

50 The Intellectual Property expert group consisted of representatives of STW, NWO, TU/e, WUR/DLO, VU, VSNU,
TKI Watertechnologie, TTI Groene Genetica, TNO, Holst, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Science,
Unilever, Philips, Tata, Tempress and TTO-Netwerk.
51 The Regiegroep distinguishes three types of PPP: broad, specific and intensive. These types largely coincide
with three of the four PPP types in the continuum described in Chapter 2, namely ‘coordination’, ‘collaboration’
and ‘strategic partnership’.

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
Industry seeking university 101

Intellectual property
One typical feature of PPPs is that the IP rights are often transferred from the
researcher to the firm. The inventor (researcher) usually owns the rights first,
although the rights (subsequently) accrue to the research organisation (as the
researcher’s employer).

The PPP partners agree on how property rights and rights of use will then be
transferred to the firm. A third party (e.g. a research funding body such as NWO)
may also claim joint ownership. In determining the rights accruing to the firm, the
parties will consider the percentage of the PPP’s expenses covered through private
funds. If the firm covers only 5% of the expenses, it will acquire fewer rights than if it
covers 50%. NWO therefore breaks down private funding of PPP research into
three categories: 0% to 10%, 11% to 30% and 31% to 50% (NWO, 2014).52

In strategic partnerships, private funding falls into the second category or higher.
Ultimately, the IP rights usually end up belonging to the firm. The preferred
agreement is that the firm is given a ‘right of first refusal’ on patents. If it is the
government providing funding, then the EU framework for state aid offers two
options if the firm wishes to acquire the IP rights. The first is that IP rights are
assigned in a way that appropriately reflects the private partner’s contributions to
the partnership. The second is that the private partner pays a market-compliant fee
for the IP rights. The size of the fee can be determined in three different ways: it
can be based on expenses incurred, on market value (comparison with similar IP
transactions) or on (projected) revenues. For practical reasons, the firm can agree
to pay a fee based on expenses incurred. To avoid a situation in which the firm
pays twice, it may deduct its contribution to the PPP research from the fee that it
pays.

If the public partner covers a sizeable share of the PPP’s expenses and the IP
rights are broadly applicable, then the recommendation is to grant the firm a licence
in a designated area of application. Licences can then also be granted in other
areas of application.

Public and private parties also generate knowledge in PPP research projects that is
not patentable, for example knowledge that is freely available and ‘trade secrets’.
The rules recommend allowing the parties to use this knowledge for their own
purposes free of charge once the project has ended.

52 In the first category, firms can use the resuls of the research internally and non-commercially. In the second
category, the firm is given an option on an exclusive right to make commercial use of the results (whether or
not they have been patented). To make use of this option, the firm must pay a market-compliant fee, minus its
own contribution to the research. In the third category, firms are granted a non-exclusive, royalty-free right to
make commercial use of the results (in addition to the aforementioned option).

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
Industry seeking university 102

Scientific publications
In PPPs, scientists time the disclosure of their research results to allow for the firm’s
commercial interests. It is important to firms that certain knowledge remains
confidential (temporarily) so that patents can be filed and trade secrets can be
documented. It is therefore customary for the firm and the research organisation to
screen scientific publications before they are submitted. This holds for all forms of
disclosure, including conference papers and presentations. The report advises
allowing no more than a month for screening. Trade secrets and confidential
background information can then be edited out of the publication. In exceptional
cases, the firm can ask for publication to be postponed for a maximum period of six
months. After this period has expired, publication may always take place.

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
Industry seeking university 103

© Rathenau Instituut 2018
This work or parts of it may be reproduced and/or published for creative,
personal or educational purposes, provided that no copies are made or used for
commercial objectives, and subject to the condition that copies always give the
full attribution above. In all other cases, no part of this publication may be
reproduced and/or published by means of print, photocopy, or any other medium
without prior written consent.

Open Access
The Rathenau Institute has an Open Access policy. Its reports, background
studies, research articles and software are all open access publications.
Research data are made available pursuant to statutory provisions and ethical
research standards concerning the rights of third parties, privacy and copyright.

Contact details
Rathenau Instituut
Anna van Saksenlaan 51
P.O. Box 95366
2509 CJ The Hague
The Netherlands
+31 70 342 15 42
info@ Rathenau.nl
www.Rathenau.nl
Publisher: Rathenau Instituut

Rathenau Instituut Board
Mw. G. A. Verbeet
Prof. dr. Ir. Wiebe Bijker
Prof. mr. dr. Madeleine de Cock Buning
Prof. dr. Roshan Cools
Dr. Hans Dröge
Dhr. Edwin van Huis
Prof. mr. dr. Erwin Muller
Prof. dr. ir. Peter-Paul Verbeek
Prof. dr. Marijk van der Wende
Dr. ir. Melanie Peters – official secretary

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
Industry seeking university 104

The Rathenau Instituut supports the formation of public and political opinion on
socially relevant aspects of science and technology. It conducts research on this
subject and organises debates on science, innovation and new technology.
