
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
1 Introduction
Public knowledge organisations constitute a separate group within the Dutch know-
ledge infrastructure, alongside the Netherlands’ universities and university medical
centres and the research organisations governed by the Royal Netherlands Academy
of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
(NWO). Although each organisation is unique in its role and mission, public know-
ledge organisations share a number of distinguishing features. The most significant of
these is that they combine subject-specific research with the provision of knowledge-
intensive services. Their main raison d’être is therefore not to contribute to the growth
of knowledge by means of research – as can be said of the universities – but rather to
provide these knowledge-intensive services.
Until now, there was no framework for describing and understanding the role and
position of these organisations. The Rathenau Institute is publishing this issue of its
Facts & Figures series to fill this gap and, in doing so, to draw attention to this vital
component of the Dutch knowledge infrastructure.
Public Knowledge
Organisations
in the Netherlands
Lionne Koens, Catherine Chiong Meza,
Patricia Faasse, Jos de Jonge
The Rathenau Institute promotes the
formation of public and political opinion
on science and technology. It does this
by studying the organisation and
development of science systems,
publishing about the impact on society
of new technologies, and organising
debates on issues and dilemmas in
science and technology.
WWW.RATHENAU.NL • 2016
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Public knowledge organisations
 as a group 5
3 Selection criteria and roles 6
4 Basic data; income and staffing 9
5 Policy-oriented organisations 13
6 Government laboratories 17
7 TO2 institutes 20
8 Sector-oriented organisations 26
9 Professional research and
 training organisations 30
This publication provides a factual overview of a group of
knowledge-based organisations that have so far received little
attention as part of the Dutch knowledge infrastructure. We call
them ‘public knowledge organisations’ (PKOs) because they play a
public role and have a wide-ranging set of knowledge-driven tasks.
Facts & Figures

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Within the context of the ‘evidence-based policy’ theme identified in its work programme, the
Rathenau Institute is studying public knowledge organisations and has decided to publish a series of
papers on this topic. The first, entitled Verstand op veilig, appeared in 2014. Two more publications
will follow in the course of 2016, one concerning the position and role of public knowledge organisa-
tions in health matters, and one concerning their position and role in the area of water and water
management. These papers will explore the qualitative importance of these organisations for their
various stakeholders and the changes that they are facing.
Public knowledge organisations provide five types of knowledge-intensive services: policy support,
policy implementation (including statutory tasks), knowledge generation for stakeholders in society
(enterprises and public-sector organisations), professional training, and the accumulation and manage-
ment of essential facilities, data and knowledge. By providing these services, public knowledge
organisations take on board tasks that are the responsibility of the national government, for example
inoculation against diseases (RIVM), food safety monitoring (DLO), and flood protection (Deltares).
While most of the public knowledge organisations are familiar enough individually, as a group they
rarely surface in policy discussions. That is due to their heterogeneous nature. They are not governed
by the Higher Education and Research Act [Wet op het hoger onderwijs en wetenschappelijk onder-
zoek, WHW], but do contribute to the knowledge base for science and research in the Netherlands.
Most of them are therefore not governed by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, but have
their own governing ministry. They are funded – in part – from the public purse, but their relationship
to the national government varies. In some cases, they are part of a ministry, but in other cases they
operate more autonomously. They are accountable to the national government, but also have many
other, equally heterogeneous stakeholders. For example, they must rely on their peers in science and
academia to judge the quality of their expertise, but they look to the judgement of the general public
and of enterprises to assess their impact on society. They safeguard public values, but also recognise
those values as changeable and subject to trends and developments in political discourse.
In this report, we provide some basic data about public knowledge organisations, specifically
concerning their funding and staffing. Based on this information, we can state the following.
 – In 2014, public knowledge organisations generated a total income of € 2,139 million and
employed more than 14,500 FTEs.
 – Of that amount, € 1,021 million1 was in the form of institutional funding, i.e. long-term funding by the
national government.2 This sum consisted of institutional payments and multi-year programme
funding. The organisations do not compete for this funding but have it allocated to them under
multi-year agreements that they have concluded with the ministries that support them financially.
The funding is intended to maintain the organisations and their facilities, but it is also tied to
specific tasks or to a research programme in support of policy that is adopted annually by the
relevant ministry in cooperation with the organisations concerned.
 – Alongside long-term funding by the national government, public knowledge organisations also
compete for funding. This takes the form of contracts with public and private parties, project
funding, and/or research funds. A number of organisations also generate income by providing
data, licences or other services – for example library memberships, courses, and the leasing out of
facilities – for payment.
1 This amount does not include the income of the Netherlands Institute for Transport Policy Analysis (KiM) or the Foundation for Scientific
Education and Research of the Netherlands Defence Academy (SWOON-NLDA). The KiM’s financial data is unavailable (part of the budget of
the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, I&M). The SWOON-NLDA’s data only became available in 2012, and inclusion would distort
the overall results when compared with the years before.
2 This long-term funding cannot be compared to total R&D expenditure as given in the TWIN (Total investment in Research and Innovation)
surveys because not all of the long-term funding these organisations receive is linked to research tasks. That means that TWIN figures do not
cover the entire amount received in funding.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Rathenau Instituut 3
 – Between 2010 and 2014, public knowledge organisations saw their total income drop by 8 per
cent (€ 191 million). Institutional funding fell by 7 per cent (€ 79 million). Other sources of income
declined by 8.4 per cent (€ 97 million).
 – The decline in institutional funding was steepest among public knowledge organisations that
combine training and research (19 per cent) and organisations for applied scientific research
(the ‘TO2’ institutes) (14 per cent). Only in the case of government laboratories did institutional
funding increase by 3.5 per cent. The exception in this category was Statistics Netherlands (CBS),
which saw institutional funding fall by 18 per cent.
Here is a list of the Netherlands’ 29 public knowledge organisations.
Name/acronym Full name
KNMI Royal Dutch Meteorological Institute
CBS Statistics Netherlands
RIVM National Institute for Public Health and the Environment
NLR Netherlands Aerospace Centre
MARIN Maritime Research Institute Netherlands
TNO Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research
DLO DLO Foundation
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis
ECN Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands
SWOV Institute for Road Safety Research
Boekman Foundation Study centre for arts, culture and related policy*
WODC Research and Documentation Centre
SCP The Netherlands Institute for Social Research
Clingendael Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael
NIVEL Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research
VeiligheidNL Foundation for the prevention of accidents*
Police Academy
Trimbos Institute Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction
NFI Netherlands Forensic Institute
Mulier Institute Centre for Research on Sports in Society
SWOON-NLDA Foundation for Scientific Education and Research - Netherlands
Defence Academy
KiM Netherlands Institute for Transport Policy Analysis
Geonovum National Spatial Data Infrastructure
Movisie Netherlands Centre for social development
NJi Netherlands Youth Institute
Vilans Centre of expertise for long-term care*
Deltares Institute for applied research in the field of water and subsurface*
PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency
(N) IFV Netherlands Institute for Safety
* Not a name, but a brief description.
Table 1 provides basic data on the 29 public knowledge organisations.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Table 1 Basic data on public knowledge organisations in the Netherlands
Name Founded
in**
Governing
ministry***/**** Legal status (2015) Revenue in 2014
(x 1,000)
Number of FTEs
(2014)******
KNMI 1854 I&M Administrative agency 58,953 354.2
CBS 1899 EZ ZBO*****/RWT 176,593 1,777.0
RIVM 1909 VWS (I&M, EZ) Administrative agency *******339,365 1,376.9
NLR 1919 EZ (I&M, Defence) Foundation 80,153 553.0
MARIN 1929 EZ (I&M, Defence) Foundation 42,720 366.0
TNO 1932 EZ (I&M, Defence, SZW) ZBO/RWT 424,192 2,736.0
DLO 1938 EZ Foundation/RWT 330,061 2,496.0
CPB 1945 EZ Policy assessment agency 14,846 140.7
ECN 1955 EZ (I&M) Foundation 76,164 450.0
SWOV 1962 I&M Foundation 5,684 42.4
Boekman Foundation 1963 OCW Foundation *******1,168 7.9
WODC 1973 V&J Ministerial 11,536 94
SCP 1973 VWS Policy assessment agency *******11,133 82.6
Clingendael 1983 BuZa Foundation 9,700 *69.7
NIVEL 1985 VWS Foundation 15,344 156.7
VeiligheidNL 1985 VWS Foundation 6,031 41.8
Police Academy 1992 V&J ZBO/RWT 179,735 1,485.4
Trimbos Institute 1996 VWS Foundation 17,895 164.0
NFI 1999 V&J Administrative agency 75,335 516.8
Mulier Institute 2002 VWS Foundation 1,946 18.9
SWOON-NLDA 2005 Defence Foundation/RWT 13,669 118.0
KiM 2006 I&M Ministerial - 25.5
Geonovum 2007 I&M (EZ) Foundation 4,150 13.4
Movisie 2007 VWS Foundation 14,441 121.3
NJi 2007 VWS Foundation 14,327 96.1
Vilans 2007 VWS Foundation 31,005 140.0
Deltares 2007 EZ Foundation 104,082 745.0
PBL 2008 I&M Policy assessment agency 30,200 218.0
(N)IFV (1996) 2013 V&J ZBO/RWT *******62,530 210.0
Rathenau Instituut
Sources: websites (all organisations); annual reports (CBS, Clingendael, DLO (WUR), ECN, Mulier
Institute, (N)IFV, NFI, NJi, RIVM, SCP , SWOV, TNO, VeiligheidNL, Vilans); annual accounts
(Boekman Foundation, NLR, Police Academy, Trimbos Institute, VeiligheidNL); financial reports
(Movisie); information requested (CPB, Deltares, MARIN, NIVEL, PBL, SWOON-NLDA, WODC);
annual report and Final Budget Act of the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment (KNMI),
Klein Haarhuis, Hagen & Scheepmaker, 2009; Klinkert, 2011, list of national administrative agencies;
Tops & Van der Wal, 2010; register of independent administrative bodies.
* The number of FTEs is based on data in previous years.
** The information in the column ‘Founded in’ indicates when the organisations were established in their present form.
 Some organisations are the outcome of a merger between older organisations.
 *** TIn parentheses and italicised: ministries that provide the organisation with long-term programme funding in addition to
the funding allocated by the governing ministry.
**** See Appendix C for a clarification of the acronyms.
***** The CBS (Statistics Netherlands) does not have the status of a ZBO (Independent administrative body); instead, this status
has been granted to the director-general of the CBS and the Central Commission for Statistics (CCS), which has oversight.
****** This is both permanent and temporary staff. The current data collection does not allow us to distinguish between the two.
******* A number of organisations manage money that is spent by or on behalf of others:
 - The RIVM (National Institute for Public Health and the Environment) uses a portion of its income for coordination (see
Appendix A), for example of the National Immunisation Programme and screening programmes. The RIVM does not spend
this money itself, but distributes it to the organisations that actually carry out the programmes.
 - The Boekman Foundation receives € 160,000 to organise and present the Johannes Vermeer Award. Of that amount,
€ 100,000 is award money.
 - From 2010 to 2014, the SCP (Netherlands Institute for Social Research) received funding for the RMO (Dutch Council for
Social Development), whose secretariat was administered by the SCP .
 - The (N)IFV (Netherlands Institute for Safety) uses some of its funding to procure and manage material, equipment and
telecommunications facilities for the police force and safety regions.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Rathenau Instituut 5
2 Public knowledge organisations as a group
Traditionally, government has been responsible for such public domains as public order and safety,
health care, housing, social security, education, and science. In order to perform satisfactorily in these
areas, it needs knowledge. In the course of time, that knowledge and the research on which it is based
have become institutionalised in specific organisations (see Table 1). These organisations constitute a
heterogeneous group within the Dutch knowledge infrastructure. They perform different roles: they
monitor trends in society, evaluate policy, make existing knowledge comprehensible and accessible,
raise the alarm in disasters, provide public information, and help businesses innovate. There is – as yet
– no overarching, generally accepted name for these organisations.3 We call them ‘public knowledge
organisations’ – ‘public’ because they are to some extent publicly funded and ‘knowledge organisa-
tions’ to acknowledge their broader knowledge-related tasks.
They differ from universities and the research institutes of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences (KNAW) and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) because they
combine scientific research with knowledge-intensive services4 that they offer to government, the
business community, the general public, and non-profit organisations. They contribute in this manner
to government policymaking, carry out traditional government tasks, or safeguard a number of public
values and services for which government is responsible.
Viewed from this vantage point, we can identify various reasons for their existence as public knowledge
organisations (see e.g. Blankesteijn et al., 2014).First of all, they play a role with regard to emergencies,
for example by monitoring food safety, preventing infectious diseases, and issuing extreme weather
warnings. Second, they compensate for the failure of the market by rendering services that would
otherwise not be available or only to a limited extent if government did not intervene. Third, these
organisations guarantee the continuity of a stable knowledge base that may help solve the problems
faced by society, both now and in the future.5
For example, they contribute to food safety and help solve crimes. They also see to it that the know-
ledge they have amassed is disseminated, so that, for example, new information about the effective-
ness of medical treatments gained in the Province of Zeeland is shared with medical practitioners at
the other ends of the country, in the Province of Friesland or the Province of Limburg. They also make
possible innovations whose development has not been undertaken by the commercial market, for
example because of their high-risk nature. And they ensure that policymakers have access to the most
recent scientific discoveries and societal trends, both in the short and the long term.
In recent decades, however, there has been mounting discussion of what a government task is, when
the market has failed, and when these organisations should be charged with the associated tasks. This
has led to changes in the way public knowledge organisations are organised and managed (see e.g.
OECD, 2011; Blankesteijn et al., 2014). The ‘new public management’ philosophy, for example, has
led to a rise in demand-driven research: government ministries present themselves as clients and a
growing share of the structural funding that public knowledge organisations receive is tied to specific
contracts. Public knowledge organisations are also encouraged to compete for funding more than in
the past, for example by focusing more of their efforts on the commercial market.
In addition, public knowledge organisations must also respond to changes in their environment. The
emergence of private organisations offering what were previously public services (for example in
meteorology), new issues facing society, changes in government policy, and the growing role of
valorisation at universities can all give rise to discussion about the role and position of public
knowledge organisations.
3 A recent development was the creation of the ‘network of government knowledge-based institutions and policy assessment agencies’–
a partnership between ‘eight government knowledge-based institutions and three policy assessment agencies, all working in the public service
on public tasks’. The organisations that make up this network overlap with our selection to some extent, but to some extent they do not. The aim
of this publication is therefore to contribute to the public discourse about the nature and role of this type of knowledge-based institution.
4 UNESCO differentiates between research and development, scientific and technological education, and training and scientific and technological
services (UNESCO, 1978; OECD, 2002, Frascati manual).
5 See e.g. Arnold, Barker & Slipersaeter, 2010; Ministerie van Economische Zaken, 2013; Blankesteijn et al., 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
These questions are complicated by the huge variety of tasks and the heterogeneity of the stake-
holders for which public knowledge organisations work. Can a public knowledge organisation focus
more on industry and still maintain the independence needed to carry out its public tasks? Will there
be enough leeway to carry out these public tasks at all? Does the emergence of private parties mean
that some tasks no longer need to be regarded as public tasks?
To answer these and many other questions, we need to understand the added value of this group of
organisations for society. Until now, however, the Netherlands has not had a transparent policy framework
that can be used to describe and understand how public knowledge organisations operate and why they
are important.6 To date, they have also been almost invisible in research policy. The Rathenau Instituut
wishes to help develop a framework of this kind. The current publication supports this aim by presen-
ting basic data on public knowledge organisations as a group, so that it becomes clear who they are
and what they do.

3 Selection criteria and roles
What all public knowledge organisations have in common is that they carry out research. Their research
efforts are not, however, driven primarily by scientific curiosity, but by specific missions. Curiosity is
therefore not the starting point of their research; their research results are always geared towards the
requirements of stakeholders in government, enterprise and society. To meet these requirements, they
publish reports (online), appear in the media, organise symposia and public events, and communicate
with their peers in academia, for example by publishing in peer-reviewed journals.
We have identified 29 public knowledge organisations7 (see Table 1) based on the following five
criteria:
1. It is a ‘brick and mortar’ organisation, i.e. an organisation that occupies an actual building, and not
a ‘virtual’ organisation.
2. The organisation is not part of the academic research world made up of universities and university
medical centres (UMCs) and the research institutes belonging to the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research (NWO) and the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW).
3. The organisation’s main task is to conduct research or amass knowledge. It combines that task with
knowledge-intensive services.
4. The organisation operates in the public domain and helps at least one government ministry meet its
demand for knowledge and/or shoulder its responsibilities.
5. The organisation hence has a systematic relationship with at least one ministry, in the sense that:
 a. it receives long-term funding from at least one ministry, and
 b. at least one ministry influences the organisation’s activities. That influence may be limited to
 the research programme tied to the funding, but it can also extend to the execution of statutory
 tasks and the associated accountability mechanisms.
Appendix B lists the organisations that we considered but ultimately did not include in our selection.
6 Note that a policy framework does exist for some subgroups of public knowledge organisations. For example, the policy assessment agencies
operate in accordance with the ‘Protocol for the Policy Assessment Agencies‘ [ Aanwijzingen voor de Planbureaus ], and the policy framework for
the TO2 institutes has been set out in the ‘Strategic Agenda for Applied Research’ [ Visie op het toegepast onderzoek ] (Ministerie van
Economische Zaken, 2013).
7 Earlier studies on the public, non-university knowledge infrastructure identified 110 non-university knowledge organisations (Speelman and
Angelino, 2006; Speelman and Maas, 2010). In 2006, Statistics Netherlands (CBS) collected data on a comparable group (Meinen and Meurink,
2006). In 2009, the Rathenau Institute published a Facts & Figures report about this group (Van Steen, 2009). In that publication, the group was
more narrowly defined and TNO and DLO were regarded as a single organisation.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Rathenau Instituut 7
The criterion that a public knowledge organisation must have research or knowledge accumulation as
one of their main tasks means that we must exclude a number of organisations that conduct research
but do so in addition to or in the service of their primary tasks. The biggest group excluded in this
manner consists of the advisory councils and inspectorates. Also excluded are museums, the National
Library of the Netherlands, and executive agencies (for example Rijkswaterstaat, the Dutch govern-
ment’s public works agency).
At the same time, however, we have broadened the field by referring to knowledge organisations,
rather than research organisations. This semantic distinction acknowledges that the research that these
organisations carry out is not always strictly scientific in nature. This allows us to include organisations
that do less (scientific) research themselves, but:
 – mainly use knowledge that is retrieved from external sources, such as Movisie;
 – compile and make statistics publicly available, such as Statistics Netherlands (CBS).
They combine research and knowledge-intensive services. We can divide such knowledge-intensive
services into five categories based on the role that they fulfil (see Table 2):
 – Policy support: research that delivers the information and knowledge needed to develop,
implement, and evaluate policy (note that implementation includes practical support and over-
sight).
 – Policy implementation: research that helps government perform its tasks, for example purchasing
vaccines and securing food safety. A number of these tasks have been established by law and are
thus defined as statutory research tasks.
 – Knowledge generation for stakeholders: research and knowledge used to support and improve
the work of stakeholders in trade and industry, in public organisations and in civil society. There
are two ways that this can happen:
• R&D/innovation support: helping enterprises and other organisations develop innovations.
• professional platform: providing a platform for knowledge-sharing and co-creation between
professionals.
 – Accumulation and management of facilities, data and knowledge: ensuring that knowledge, data
and/or large-scale research facilities are and remain available in the most efficient way possible.
 – Professional training: offering training and courses for professionals at different points in their
career, focusing on specific occupations.
Table 2 shows which of the five roles each of the 29 public knowledge organisations fulfils.8

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Table 2 Knowledge-intensive services provided by public knowledge organisations in the
Netherlands
  Role as knowledge-intensive service provider*
Name Policy
support
Policy
implemen-
tation
(including
statutory
tasks and
emergencies)
Knowledge generation for
stakeholders in society
Accumulation and mgt of
facilities (large-scale
facilities, data mgt,
collections) Professional
training
R&D/
innovation
Professional
platform Facilities
Collection
and/or data
manage-
ment
KiM*** X         X   
WODC X       X  
CPB X          
SCP X            
PBL X            
KNMI X X X  X  X X X 
NFI   X X     X X 
RIVM X X X X  X X  X 
CBS X X   X   X  
(N)IFV X X   X X X  X 
Deltares*** X   X X X   X
DLO X X X  X X    
ECN X   X X    
MARIN*** X   X   X   X
NLR X   X   X    
TNO X X X X X X   
Boekman
Foundation***       X   X  
X Geonovum*** X X X    
Movisie*** X    X X   X X 
Mulier Institute*** X       X  
NJi*** X   X X   X X 
NIVEL*** X     X   X  
SWOV X     X   X  
Trimbos Institute*** X   X X   X X
VeiligheidNL*** X   X X   X X
Vilans*** X   X X   X  
Clingendael*** X   X     X
Police Academy X      X   X X
SWOON-NLDA X           X
Rathenau Instituut
* Where possible, role identification has been based on tasks laid down in legislation or a
regulatory framework. In a number of cases where tasks are set out in legislation or a regulatory
framework, we decided to add other tasks based on information on the organisation’s website
(KNMI, RIVM, NFI, MARIN, Deltares, TNO and SWOV).
** In the case of the TO2 institutes (Deltares, DLO, ECN, MARIN, NLR, TNO), we not only looked
at their own regulatory context and website but also considered three tasks identified by the
Ministry of Economic Affairs in its Strategic Agenda for Applied Research [Visie op het
Toegepast Onderzoek] (see also p. 25 of this report).
*** No legislation or regulatory framework was available defining these organisations’ roles. We
have therefore based our description on the content of their websites. We did find references to
Movisie, NJi and Vilans in the 2006 Annual Report and Final Budget Act of the Ministry of
Health, Welfare and Sport, List of Questions and Answers (2007), but the description was
insufficient for our purposes.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Rathenau Instituut 9
4 Basic data: income and staffing
For the purposes of this publication, we have collected income data on all 29 public knowledge
organisations between 2010 and 2014, based on their own annual reports and annual accounts and
those of the national government. Where this information was unavailable, we contacted the organisa-
tion directly.
For the classification of income, we follow the method used in our TWIN reports (Total Investment in
Research and Innovation), which distinguishes between institutional funding and project or programme
funding (Van Steen, 2015). Institutional funding consists of funding that the national government
allocates to organisations without this being ‘earmarked for any specific projects or programmes’ or
obtained in competition with others.
Project or programme funding refers to funding tied to specific research projects and obtained in
competition with others. Such projects are ‘subject to scope, budget and time restrictions’.
A grey area is made up of demand-driven funding: funding associated with multi-year programmes,
but not obtained in competition with others. These sums have been categorised as institutional
funding.
By making this distinction, we were able to understand how much of the funding of public knowledge
organisations is recurring and how much is non-recurring. We also tried to understand the relationship
between their public and private clients. That turned out to be impossible with the available data,
mainly because many public knowledge organisations do not make this distinction in their reports. As
far as possible, we have differentiated between contract research for the national government and for
other parties. That allows us to group sources of income into the following three categories:

 – Institutional funding: structural funding provided by the national government. This includes the
budget allocated by the responsible ministry (for example a government contribution or an
institutional subsidy) and recurring annual programme funding not obtained in competition with
others., Which projects will be undertaken within this programme funding is determined in consul-
tation with the partners involved.
 – Project funding: income from contract research frequently obtained in competition with others. This
publication makes the following distinction:
 • Contract research for the national government: research commissioned by the national govern-
ment, whether or not obtained in competition with others.
 • Contract research: income generated from research carried out for public and private parties,
not including the national government, and obtained in competition with others. This includes
research funding awarded by the European Union obtained in competition with others.
 – Other income: income that is not associated directly with research or knowledge-intensive services,
for example licence-related income.
The public knowledge organisations do not all have the same legal status. They also differ with respect
to sources of funding and the way in which they report about their funding. delineate this funding. In
the present report, we have divided the public knowledge organisations into five groups based on
similarities in the roles that they fulfil (see Table 2). A quick glance at this table immediately shows that
these are not homogenous groups: even within the individual groups, the roles they have been
allocated and how they fulfil them differ from one organisation to the next (see Appendix A).
Nevertheless, our classification into five groups makes practical discussion of the 29 organisations
possible, because organisations with similar roles often occupy similar positions vis-à-vis the national
government (see Figure 1) and rely on the same sources of income. Table 3 lists their sources of income
and into which of the three aforementioned funding categories those sources fall.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Table 3 Income of public knowledge organisations by group
10 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Institutional funding Contract research for
national government
Contract research
Policy-
oriented
organisations
Policy assessment
agencies
Budgetary funding: sourced from
ministerial budgets, decentra-
lised government budgets, and
multi-year contract research.
These are budgets that scarcely
vary over the course of a longer
(multi-year) period.
SCP: basic budget from the
Ministry of VWS.
Project income (SCP).
Short-term contracts
(including contract
research): most clients
are part of national
government (see e.g.
Kamerbrief over de
motie-Koopmans/
Planbureaus, 2009).
-
WODC Budget from the Ministry of V&J. Other income. -
Government
laboratories
Administrative
agencies and
Statistics
Netherlands
Revenue from governing
ministry: this is a basic budget
(‘agency funding’ (KNMI),
funding as owner (RIVM)) and
research contracted by
governing ministry.*
Revenue from other
ministries (including
long-term funding for
RIVM from the
Ministries of I&M and
EZ).
Third-party revenue.
This includes contract
research financed externally
and payments made for
performing specific tasks,
including:
- RIVM: expense claims for
implementing the National
Immunisation Programme
- KNMI: aviation-related
income
- CBS and KNMI: income
from supply of data and
licences.
IFV Government contribution. - Funding/joint tasks (work
for safety regions), and
revenue from products
delivered (contract activities
for third parties).
TO2 institutes Deltares, DLO,
ECN, NLR and
TNO
Government contribution (for
knowledge base, statutory
research tasks and funding within
the Top Sectors/Societal Themes
programme) and programme
funding** from various ministries
(EZ, Defence and I&M).
DLO’s funding is in accordance
with its grant scheme.
Deltares does not receive
programme funding.
NLR receives programme funding
and maintenance funding (in
accordance with the grant
scheme).
Research contracted by
government (national
government) on a
project basis.
Other contract research,
including international.
MARIN Government contribution (for
knowledge base and funding
within the Top Sectors /Societal
Themes programme) and
programme funding** from the
Ministry of Defence.
- Contract research
(including for the national
government).

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Rathenau Instituut 11
Sector-
oriented
organisations
Boekman
Foundation,
Geonovum,
Movisie, Mulier
Institute, NJi,
Trimbos Institute
and Vilans
(Institutional) subsidy.**
Annual funding award from
governing ministry.
Geonovum: funding award from
Ministries of I&M, EZ, the Land
Registry and TNO.
Project funding from a
governance body8
Trimbos Institute and
the Boekman
Foundation: only
project funding sourced
from national
government (including
ZonMw).
Geonovum: ‘payment
for delivery of services’.
Mulier Institute: ‘other
contracts with VWS’.
Contract research for third
parties.
Trimbos Institute and the
Boekman Foundation:
including project funding
not sourced from
government bodies
NIVEL,
VeiligheidNL and
SWOV
(Institutional) subsidy.**
Annual funding award from
governing ministry.
- Contracts awarded by third
parties and project funding.
Professional
research and
training
organisations
Clingendael Police
Academy and
NLDA
Clingendael: basic budget and
multi-year programme.
NLDA: subsidy and funding from
the Ministry of Defence.
Police Academy: ‘general
funding’.
Police Academy:
‘special funding’ for
R&D.
Clingendael: project
income.
Police Academy ‘other
payments’, not necessarily
related to research.
NLDA: contract research.
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (CBS, Clingendael, DLO (WUR), ECN, Mulier Institute, (N)IFV, NFI, NJi, RIVM,
SCP , SWOV, TNO, VeiligheidNL, Vilans); annual accounts (Boekman Foundation, NLR, Police
Academy, Trimbos Institute, VeiligheidNL); financial report (Movisie); information requested
(CPB, Deltares, MARIN, NIVEL, PBL, SWOON-NLDA, WODC); Annual report and Final
Budget Act of the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment (KNMI).
* The reporting method prevents us from dividing funding into long-term and contract-related
funding by the governing ministry.
** All programme funding (TO2 institutes) and (institutional) subsidies (sector-related organisations)
are tied to a programme or specific tasks identified in consultation with the ministry.
 8 As defined in the Dutch General Administrative Law Act [ Algemene wet bestuursrecht ], Article 1:1 and rticle 4:21.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
The 29 public knowledge organisations had a joint income in 2014 of € 2,1399 (see Table 4). Of that
amount, € 1,021 million consisted of institutional funding provided by the national government. The
rest they obtained under contract to the national government and others. As Table 4 shows, total
income declined by 8 per cent (€ 191 million) between 2010 and 2014. Institutional funding provided
by the national government fell by 7 per cent (€ 79 million), and project funding by 8.4 per cent
(€ 97 million).
Table 4 Income of public knowledge organisations between 2010 and 2014 (in millions of euros)*
Year Total income Institutional funding Project funding Other
2010 2,330 1,101 1,143 86
2011 2,352 1,120 1,136 95
2012 2,321 1,110 1,118 92
2013 2,255 1,053 1,090 111
2014 2,139 1,021 1,047 71
More than 50 percent of this income belongs to the six organisations for applied research (the ‘TO2
institutes’). The largest group – the sector-oriented organisations – account for only 8 per cent of the
income. Figure 1 indicates the financial size of the five groups of public knowledge organisations, their
proximity to the governing ministry, and their primary role.
In 2014, the policy-oriented organisations employed 548 FTEs; the government laboratories employed
4,234 FTEs; the TO2 institutes employed 7,346 FTEs; the sector-oriented organisations employed 803
FTEs; and the professional research and training organisations employed 1,675 FTEs; together this
amounts to 14,606 FTEs.
9 Excluding KiM, for which financial data was unavailable, and excluding SWOON-NLDA, for which data for 2010 and 2011 was unavailable;
inclusion of the latter organisation would have distorted the results.
12 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Rathenau Instituut* Excluding KiM, for which financial data was unavailable, and excluding SWOON-NLDA, for which
data on 2010 and 2011 was unavailable; inclusion of the latter organisation would have distorted the
results.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Rathenau Instituut 13
Figure 1 Size of public knowledge organisations by role category
Policy support Policy implementation Professional
training
Knowledge generation for
stakeholders in society
Sector-oriented organisations
10 organisations
€ 125 million
Boekman Foundation, Geonovum, Movisie, Mulier,
NIVEL, NJi, SWOV, Trimbos, Vilans, VeiligheidNL
Professional research and training
 organisations
3 organisations
€ 189 million
Clingendael, Police Academy, SWOON-NLDA
Policy-oriented
organisations
5 organisations
€ 67 million
CPB, KiM, PBL, SCP, WODC
TO2 institutes
6 organisations
€ 1.057 million
Deltares, DLO, ECN, MARIN,
NLR, TNO
Formal Proximity to governing Ministry
Government
5 organisations
€ 712 million
CBS, (N)IFV, KNMI, NFI, RIVM
 laboratories
Primary role
5 Policy-oriented organisations
Of all the public knowledge organisations, the policy-oriented organisations (policy assessment
agencies and ministerial knowledge organisations) are in closest proximity to their governing ministry
in terms of organisational and operational matters. They are part of the relevant ministry’s organisation,
but have an independent status that guarantees their autonomy in scientific matters. Two arrange-
ments play a key role in that regard. In the first place, ministries are not permitted to interfere with the
research methods used or with the contents of the organisation’s research reports. Second, the views of
these organisations do not necessarily need to reflect those of the responsible minister or state
secretary.10
The Netherlands has three policy assessment agencies and two ministerial knowledge organisations
(see Table 5). In terms of their organisation and work, the policy assessment agencies are subject to the
‘Protocol for the Policy Assessment Agencies’ [Aanwijzingen voor de Planbureaus] (2012). Although
they are part of a specific ministry organisationally speaking, they work across sectors and ministries for
the entire national government. They use their particular expertise to analyse issues that have been
raised in different ministries and other parts of the national government. Their work programme is
therefore discussed by the entire Council of Ministers.
The WODC and the KiM, on the other hand, focus on one specific sector and, as a result, mainly
analyse issues that have arisen in their own governing ministry.Their work programme is adopted in
consultation with the governing ministry and the relevant minister and state secretary.
10 Aanwijzingen voor de Planbureaus , 2012, Section 3.1, 4; Visitatiecommissie WODC (2014); http://www.kimnet.nl/positionering -kim.

Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (CBS, Clingendael, DLO (WUR), ECN, Mulier Institute, (N)IFV, NFI, NJi, RIVM,
SCP , SWOV, TNO, VeiligheidNL, Vilans); annual accounts (Boekman Foundation, NLR, Police
Academy, VeiligheidNL); financial report (Movisie); information requested (CPB, Deltares,
MARIN, NIVEL, PBL, SWOON-NLDA, WODC); Annual report and Final Budget Act of the
Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment (KNMI).

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Table 5 Origin of policy-oriented organisations

Name Acronym Founded Background Governing ministry
Netherlands Bureau for
Economic Policy
Analysis
CPB 1945   EZ
Netherlands Institute
for Social Research
SCP 1973 VWS
Research and
Documentation Centre
WODC 1973 Successor to the Study and Documentation
Centre [Studie- en Documentatiecentrum] of
the Directorate of Prisons (founded in 1949)
V&J
Netherlands Institute
for Transport Policy
Analysis
KiM 2006   I&M
Netherlands
Environmental
Assessment Agency
PBL 2008 Merger between the Netherlands Institute for
Spatial Research (RPB)] (founded in 2002) and
the Environmental Assessment Agency [Milieu-
en Natuurplanbureau (MNP)] (founded in
2006)
I&M
What typifies all these organisations is their overriding focus on policymaking. They analyse and
propose new policy options, answer questions posed directly by ministries, and analyse and chart the
consequences of government policy. Their research is therefore meant to support and evaluate the
policy of the national government.
The three policy assessment agencies, for example, map out the consequences (real and potential) of
government policy, each in its own domain. They do this by analysing and estimating the effects of
policy and by monitoring and charting trends and developments in society, both in the shorter and the
longer term. They do this for ministries, but also for the Senate and House of Representatives, political
parties, and national and international public organisations.11 The Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency (PBL) covers the full spectrum of the physical living environment, from the natural
world to housing and from environmental issues to spatial planning; the Netherlands Bureau for
Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) looks at economic trends and budget analyses; the Netherlands
Institute for Social Research (SCP) concentrates on socio-economic trends, and therefore on care,
education, Dutch culture and work.
The Research and Documentation Centre (WODC) conducts and outsources research for the Ministry of
Security and Justice. Finally, the Netherlands Institute for Transport Policy Analysis (KiM) conducts
applied research and provides access to mobility-related knowledge generated elsewhere; in doing so,
it contributes directly to the policymaking process at the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment.
See Appendix A for more details about these five policy-oriented organisations.
The organisations differ considerably in size (see Table 6). The PBL is the largest of the policy assess-
ment agencies, for example, and more than eight times the size of the smallest organisation, the KiM.
In total, these organisations employ 548.5 FTEs. Total staff has decreased since 2010 by 21.9 FTEs.
Most of the decline has been at the WODC (-15 FTEs) and the SCP (-10 FTEs).
These organisations also constitute a separate group in terms of operational management. They are
subject to the national government’s budgetary rules and are therefore unable to build any reserves as
organisations. It is more difficult for them to distribute their income over multiple years. They must also
11 Aanwijzingen voor de Planbureaus (2012), 7 and 8.

14 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Rathenau InstituutSources: websites (CPB, KiM, PBL, SCP); Klein Haarhuis, Hagen & Scheepmaker, 2009.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
comply with the national government’s public procurement rules when outsourcing work to others, and
their permanent staffing is subject to a pre-determined staff complement. These figures are adjusted
annually, often downwards. The only way to ensure that the work gets done is to replace permanent
staff with temporary employees. If this situation goes on for years at a time, it affects management’s
ability to rejuvenate the permanent staff. We can best describe the situation of the policy assessment
agencies as independent in terms of content but dependent in terms of management.
Table 6 Size of policy-oriented organisations in 2014 (income in thousands of euros)
Name No. of FTE’s Income
PBL 218.0 30,200
CPB 140.7 14,846
SCP 82.6 *11,133
WODC 94 11,536
KiM 25.5 **-
Figure 2 shows the sources of income of the four policy-oriented organisations for which we have finan-
cial data. These organisations receive almost all their income from the national government. Even the
project funding is provided largely by organisations within the national government. In the case of the
policy assessment agencies, 80 per cent of their income must be financed from the budget,12 i.e. from
the ministerial budgets, decentralised government budgets or multi-year projects. We therefore
categorise that income as institutional funding. These arrangements apply across the board for two of
the three policy assessment agencies, but for the SCP only since 2015.13
Figure 2 Sources of income of policy-oriented organisations in 2014, as a percentage of total income
12 Aanwijzingen voor de Planbureaus (2012), §4, 10.
13 Kamerbrief betreffende de motie-Koopmans/planbureaus : 06-04-2009; Kenmerk: 2009-0000197162.
Rathenau Instituut 15
Rathenau Instituut
Rathenau Instituut
Sources: annual report (SCP); information requested (CPB, PBL and WODC).
* Income includes payment for the RMO, whose secretariat was administered by the SCP from 01-04-
2010 to 31-12-2014.
** No financial data available.
Sources: : annual report (SCP); information requested (CPB, PBL and WODC).
SCP
Institutional funding
0 20 40 60 80 100
CPB
PBL
WODC
Contract research for the national government

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Figure 3 shows trends in income for the policy-oriented organisations. Between 2010 and 2014, the
PBL’s income fell by 21.6 per cent (€ 8.3 million). Both institutional funding and income derived from
contract research for the national government declined in this period by respectively 16.4 per cent and
51.8 per cent. The increase in 2014 can be ascribed entirely to a rise in contract research for the
national government, after a fallow year in 2013.
Institutional funding fell at the other two policy assessment agencies (7.8 per cent at the CPB and
10.7 per cent at the SCP). The SCP’s total income dropped by 7.1 per cent owing to a parallel decline
in contract research for the national government. For the CPB, the fall in institutional funding was
compensated by a rise in contract research, bringing its income in 2014 up to 2010 levels.
Only the WODC saw a rise in its institutional funding in this period (by 21 per cent). The WODC was
assigned new tasks starting in 2011. A reshuffle among the ministries meant that research concerning
police work and security was allocated to the WODC. After 2012, its income once again declined.
Figure 3 Trends in income for policy-oriented organisations, 2010-2014 (income in thousands of
euros)
16 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
PBL
CPB
WODC
SCP
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual report (SCP); information requested (CPB, PBL and WODC).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
6 Government laboratories
In this chapter we discuss five public knowledge organisations that we have defined as government
laboratories, based on the role that they play. Their set of tasks consists largely of implementing
knowledge-intensive government tasks (see Table 4). The Netherlands Forensic Institute (NFI) carries
out forensic research. The Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) issues general weather
forecasts and warnings, performs seismological tests and issues reports, and manages the meteorolo-
gical and seismological infrastructure of the Netherlands. The National Institute for Public Health and
the Environment (RIVM) monitors food and drugs, coordinates the National Immunisation Programme,
coordinates screening programmes, combats infectious diseases, and conducts onsite tests during
incidents and disasters. The Netherlands Institute for Safety (IFV) supplies the different safety regions
with the necessary knowledge and materials, and Statistics Netherlands (CBS) produces official national
statistics on behalf of and for the national government. These tasks require specific knowledge that the
above organisations generate. In all five cases, the tasks of these government laboratories are en-
shrined in the law14 law14 (see Table 7). That is why the two organisations that do not fall under the
national government in organisational terms (CBS and (N)IFV) are legal persons with statutory tasks
(RWTs). See Appendix 3 for more information on the work of the individual organisations.
Table 7 Origin of government laboratories
151617
Name Acronym Founded Statutory basis Legal status Governing
ministry
Royal Netherlands
Meteorological Institute
KNMI 1854 KNMI Act (since 2001)15 Administrative
agency
I&M
Statistics Netherlands CBS 1899 Statistics Netherlands Act (since
2003)
ZBO16/RWT EZ
National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment
RIVM 1909 RIVM Act (since 1996) Administrative
agency
VWS
Netherlands Forensic
Institute
NFI 1999 Decree on NFI Tasks Administrative
agency
V&J
(Netherlands) Institute for
Safety
(N)IFV (1996)
201317
Dutch Safety Regions Act (since
2013)
ZBO/RWT V&J
14 The new Meteorology and Seismology Tasks Act [ Wet Taken Meteorologie en Seismologie ] came into force on 1 January 2016. This act replaces
the KNMI Act and spells out the Minister of I&M’s duty of care with regard to meteorology and seismology. The tasks that the KNMI is obliged to
carry out in this regard have been laid down in a Ministerial Decree, which also became effective on 1 January 2016.
15 As of 1 January 2016: Meteorology and Seismology Tasks Act [ Wet Taken Meteorologie en Seismologi e] and underlying Ministerial Decree.
16 The two governance bodies of the CBS (the director-general for statistics and the Central Commission for Statistics (CCS)) are independent
administrative bodies (ZBO).
17 The Safety Institute was the result of a 2013 merger between the Netherlands Institute for Safety (NIFV) and the Netherlands Bureau of Fire
Services Exams (NBBE). A number of tasks charged to the Ministry of Security and Justice – the National Disaster Response Facility (LFR) and
National Management Development for the Fire Brigade Services (LMD-Brandweer) – have been entrusted to this new organisation (Tweede
Kamer. 2010/11, 32841, no. 3).
Rathenau Instituut 17
Rathenau InstituutSources: websites (CBS, KNMI, NFI, RIVM); Regeling taken NFI (2012); Wet op het Centraal Bureau voor
de Statistiek (2003); Wet op het Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch Instituut (2001); Wet op
het RIVM (1996); ZBO-register (http://almanak.zboregister.overheid.nl); Overzicht agentschap-
pen Rijksoverheid (https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/rijksoverheid/ inhoud/
agentschappen/lijst-agentschappen); Tweede Kamer, 1995/96 24454, no. 3; Tweede Kamer.
2010/11, 32 841, no. 3.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Table 8 Size of government laboratories in 2014 (income in thousands of euros)
Name No. of FTE’s Income
RIVM 1,376.9 *339,365
CBS 1,777.0 176,593
NFI 516.8 75,335
KNMI 354.3 58,953
IFV 210.0 **62,530
Table 8 shows how the five government laboratories differ in size. In total, these five organisations
employ 4,234.9 FTEs. Almost 75 per cent of these employees work for the CBS (1,777 FTEs) and the
RIVM (1,376.9 FTEs). The (N)IFV is the smallest of the five, with only 210 FTEs.
Figure 4 shows the sources of income n 2014. The NFI and the CBS receive almost 90 per cent of their
income from their governing ministry (institutional funding), the RIVM and the (N)IFV less than half. It
should be noted that in the case of the RIVM, some of the income classified as contract research has
also been provided by its governing ministry. As is the case for the other government laboratories, not
all of the activities classified as contract research actually involve research; some are implementation-
related, such as the National Immunisation programme (RIVM) or the management and delivery of
firefighters’ uniforms ((N)IFV).
Figure 4 Sources of income of government laboratories in 2014 as a percentage of total income
Rathenau Instituut
Rathenau Instituut
Sources: annual reports (CBS, NFI, IFV, RIVM); Annual report and Final Budget Act of the Ministry of
Infrastructure and the Environment (KNMI); website ((N)IFV); information requested (KNMI).
* The RIVM uses a portion of its income for coordination purposes (see Appendix A), for example of
the National Immunisation Programme and screening programmes. The RIVM does not spend this
money itself, but distributes it to the organisations that carry out the programmes.
** The IFV uses some of its funding to procure and manage materials, equipment and telecommuni-
cations facilities for the police force and safety regions (see Wet veiligheidsregio’s, Art. 68:1).
Sources: annual reports (CBS, NFI, IFV, RIVM); Annual report and the Final Budget Act of the Ministry of
Infrastructure and the Environment (KNMI);
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
NFI
CBS
KNMI
RIVM
(N)IFV
Institutional funding Contract research for national government
Contract research Other income

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Rathenau Instituut 19
Figure 5 shows trends in income for the government laboratories between 2010 and 2014.
Two organisations saw their income decline between 2010 and 2014: the RIVM by 5.4 per cent and the
CBS by 15.7 per cent. The drop in income at the CBS was caused largely by a € 35 million (18.5 per
cent) shortfall in revenue at the governing ministry. The decline at the RIVM involved income from
contract research (including the expense claim for carrying out the National Immunisation Programme,
PKU screening and special diagnostics), which fell by 30.1 per cent. One major reason for the decline is
the fact that in 2010, the RIVM received € 28.6 million for providing accommodation services to the
NVI and the PBL. That source of income ceased in 2014. The income that this organisation received
from its governing ministry increased by 21.1 per cent.
The IFV’s income increased by 79.9 per cent. That is largely because institutional funding rose by € 20
million (288.9 per cent). That rise is related to the additional tasks with which the (N)IFV was charged in
2013, turning it into a new organisation as of that year (see Appendix A).
The KNMI’s income has remained stable. The NFI’s income increased by 6.8 per cent, thanks to its
almost doubling the amount received for contract research (a rise of € 3.9 million). Whereas contract
research represented almost 11 per cent of its income in 2014 (see Figure 4), it accounted for only 6
per cent of total income in 2010. In contrast, the share of contract research has declined at the other
organisations: by 8.5 per cent at the KNMI, by 10.5 per cent at the RIVM, and by 13 per cent at the
(N)IFV.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Figure 5 Trends in income for the government laboratories, 2010-2014 (in thousands of euros)*
7 TO2 institutes
In terms of their financial scale, the organisations that carry out applied research (‘TO2 institutes’) are
the largest group within the category of public knowledge organisations. More than half of the total
income of public knowledge organisations comes from these six organisations. Each one has a long
history (see Table 9). In 2010, they joined forces in the TO2 Federation. In 2011, the Ministry of
Economic Affairs was made responsible for all TO2 institutes. That means that they receive their
institutional funding from and are held accountable by this ministry. Since that year, policymakers have
regarded them as a single group.
0
50,000
100, 000
150, 000
200, 000
250, 000
300, 000
350, 000
400, 000
450, 000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
RIVM
CBS
NFI
(N)IFV
KNMI
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (CBS, NFI, IFV, RIVM); Annual Report and the Final Budget Act of the Ministry of
Infrastructure and the Environment (KNMI);
* The 2012 data on the (N)IFV are based on the 2011 data.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Rathenau Instituut 21
Table 9 Origin of TO2 institutes
Name Acronym Founded Original name Legal status
Netherlands Aerospace Centre NLR 1919 Government Service for Aeronautical
Studies (RSL)
Foundation
Maritime Research Institute of the
Netherlands
MARIN 1929 Dutch Shipbuilding Testing Facility Foundation
Netherlands Organisation for Applied
Scientific Research
TNO 1932 ZBO/RWT
DLO (Agricultural Research Service) DLO 1938 Agricultural Research Service Foundation/
RWT
Energy Research Centre of the
Netherlands
ECN 1955 Reactor Centre Netherlands Foundation
Deltares - 2007 Merger between GeoDelft, WL|Delft
Hydraulics, Specialist Services
Transport and Waterways and parts
of TNO Construction and
Substratum
Foundation
Of the six TO2 institutes, only the TNO has a statutory basis (although the DLO’s statutory tasks have
also been enshrined in legislation). The NLR was established by law, but the relevant legislation does
not define its tasks. The NLR and the DLO both have statutory funding arrangements.
The TO2 institutes play an important role in promoting and supporting collaboration between govern-
ment, knowledge organisations, and enterprise.
The Ministry of Economic Affairs has identified three basic tasks for the TO2 institutes (Ministerie van
Economische Zaken, 2013):
1. Development, application and dissemination of knowledge in order to resolve societal challenges
and support government task and policy. Part of this research is carried out as a mandatory statu-
tory task.
2. Development, absorption, application and dissemination of knowledge to strengthen the innovati-
veness and competitiveness of the Netherlands, particularly for the top sectors.
3. Management of strategic research facilities, including facilities that are unique in the Netherlands
and facilities of an international character.’
The organisations carry out applied research of practical relevance. They do so at the behest of
ministries (policy support), enterprises and public authorities (contract research) and as members of
public-private consortiums. In this way, they link basic research as undertaken at universities with
innovation in government and enterprise.
Rathenau InstituutSources: websites (MARIN, ECN,NLR, TNO, DLO (WUR)); Tweede Kamer, 2005/06, 27625, no. 63
(Deltares); TNO, 1969.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Two of these organisations, the DLO and the TNO, have also been assigned statutory research tasks
(WOTs). In that role, they generate knowledge required by government to implement domestic and
international legislation. This includes monitoring food for the presence of contaminants, a task carried
out by the RIKILT – one of the DLO institutes – or monitoring fish stocks in the North Sea, the job of
another DLO institute, Imares.
The facilities managed by the TO2 institutes play a vital role in their research and their statutory tasks.
For example, the DLO has a high-containment unit for studying contagious animal diseases, Deltares
operates a Delta Flume used in the design and testing of dikes, and the TNO tests projectiles in its
laboratory for ballistic research. These facilities are needed for R&D, but are too expensive for many
enterprises to maintain themselves. Appendix A describes the six TO2 institutes, their research and
their facilities.
Table 10 Size of TO2 institutes in 2014 (income in thousands of euros)
Name No. of FTE’s (2014) Total income (2014)
TNO* 2,736 424,194
DLO 2,496 330,061
ECN* 450 76,164
Deltares 745 104,082
NLR** 553 80,153
MARIN 366 42,720
In total, the TO2 institutes employ 7,346 FTEs (see Table 10). The TNO and the DLO are the biggest
by far, with more than 2,000 FTEs per organisation. Both organisations operate in a broad field and are
divided into various units. The DLO consists of nine individual research institutes, each one operating
under its own management. Since 1999, the DLO has been part of Wageningen University and
Research Centre (WUR). The TNO is a portfolio organisation consisting of multiple clusters organised
along five socially relevant themes and two areas of expertise: ‘technical sciences’ and ‘earth, life and
social sciences’. Before being reorganised in 2005, 2011 and 2014, the TNO and the DLO were made
up of separate institutes.
Staff numbers have shrunk since 2010 by about 12.6 per cent. The decline has been steepest at the
TNO. The only organisation to see its staff grow in this period, by 62 FTEs, is MARIN.
Figure 6 shows the various sources of income of the individual TO2 institutes. The TNO and the DLO
receive the highest percentage of institutional funding, at about 40 per cent. MARIN and Deltares
receive the lowest amount of institutional funding, both in absolute terms and percentage-wise
(10.9 per cent). Unlike for Deltares, at Marin this amount also includes programme funding. Without
programme funding, institutional funding at MARIN accounts for 8.1 per cent of its total income
(see Table 11).
In the case of the DLO and the TNO, ‘contract research for the national government’ also includes
income sourced from ‘public authorities’. This could include contract research commissioned by
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (TNO, NLR, ECN, Deltares, DLO (WUR)); information requested (MARIN).
* Non-consolidated figures were used for TNO and ECN. The ECN’s figures do not include ECN
Holding (e.g. NRG), and the TNO’s do not include TNO Companies.
** Excluding staff employed by the DNW, the German-Dutch Wind Tunnels.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Rathenau Instituut 23
decentralised authorities. In the case of the ECN, the NLR and Deltares, this is contract research for the
national government. ‘Other income’ may be the result of licensing agreements, prototype leasing
(ECN), leasing of facilities, or income from sales and course fees (DLO).
Figure 6 Sources of income of TO2 institutes in 2014 as a percentage of total income
Figure 7 shows income trends for the TO2 institutes between 2010 and 2014. Four TO2 institutes – TNO,
ECN, DLO and Deltares – saw their income fall. Whereas the DLO’s income fell steadily from 2010
onwards, by 8 per cent, the TNO and Deltares experienced their drop in income after 2012. Deltares’
income declined by 8 per cent in the past two years, and the TNO’s by 16.1 per cent. The ECN’s income
fell by 8.9 per cent.
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (TNO, DLO (WUR), NLR (2008-2012), ECN (2014)); annual accounts (ECN
(2008-2013), NLR (2013-2014)); information requested (Deltares, MARIN).
* Contracts that Rijkswaterstaat awards to Deltares are categorised as contract research for the
national government. Upon enquiry, Deltares stated that it does not receive programme funding.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
TNO
DLO
ECN
NLR
Deltares*
MARIN
Institutional funding Contract research for national government
Contract research Other income

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Figure 7 Trends in income for the TO2 institutes, 2010-2014 (in thousands of euros)
The decline is largely due to a fall in institutional funding by the national government. Institutional
funding dropped by 29.6 per cent at the ECN, by 19.9 per cent at Deltares, by 15.6 per cent at the
DLO, and by 12.1 per cent at the TNO.
This report classifies two different types of funding as institutional funding. The first is basic funding
that the TO2 institutes receive on a structural basis from the Ministry of Economic Affairs, which is the
0
100, 000
200, 000
300, 000
400, 000
500, 000
600, 000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
TNO
DLO
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100, 000
120, 000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Deltares
ECN
NLR
MARIN
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (TNO, DLO (WUR), Deltares, NLR (2008-2012), ECN (2014)); annual accounts
(ECN (2008-2013), NLR (2013-2014)); information requested (MARIN).

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Rathenau Instituut 25
governing ministry. The organisations can use this basic funding to develop the knowledge base and/
or to maintain their facilities. In addition, the organisations receive programme funding from other
ministries with which they have a long-term funding relationship (such as the TNO’s relationship with
the Ministry of Defence: see Table 1). This programme funding is not acquired in competition with
others, but is tied to specific research contracts; the TO2 institutes are therefore not at liberty to spend it
at their discretion.
Upon enquiry, Deltares was the only TO2 institute to report that it does not receive programme
funding. Deltares works on a contract basis for Rijkswaterstaat (part of the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Environment). Although it does not compete with others for these contracts, there is no pre-determined
budget and no funding under a research programme; the individual contracts are awarded as project
funding.
If we consider these two types of funding separately, we see that basic funding provided by the
governing ministry has declined, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of institutional funding
(see Table 11).
Table 11 Trends in basic funding for TO2 institutes18
Name Decline in basic
funding between 2010
and 2014
Decline in programme
funding
(in %)
Share of institutional
funding in 2010 (in %)
Share of institutional
funding in 2014 (in %)
Deltares 19.9 - - -
DLO 59.6 2.8 22.5 10.8
ECN 40.6 26.3 23.4 19.8
MARIN 8.1 +2.7 94.2 79.8
Not only is institutional funding falling, then, but it is also increasingly being tied to specific research
contracts.
Income derived from contract research for the (national) government fell by 13.7 per cent at the DLO and
by 10.8 per cent at the TNO. At the DLO, the decline has been compensated by a rise of 13.8 per cent in
income from contract research commissioned by other parties. At the ECN, contract research for the
national government has increased by 109.4 per cent. Other contract research has fallen by 5.6 per cent.
At Deltares, income from contract research for the national government dropped by 15.8 per cent, while
other contract research has been more or less stable
The NLR’s income has been more or less stable. At MARIN, both institutional and project funding have
increased by 8 per cent. The increase in institutional funding can be ascribed to a very low level of
programme funding in 2010 compared with other years (€ 252,000 in 2010 as opposed to € 500,000 in
2009 and € 600,000 in 2011). Basic funding, on the other hand, has fallen by 8.1 per cent. In addition,
MARIN’s dependence on institutional funding is so small (see Figure 6) that its rise in income can be
ascribed mainly to the increase in project funding.
18 Excluding the TNO and the NLR, for which we have no information.
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (DLO and ECN); personal communication (Deltares, MARIN).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
8 Sector-oriented organisations
The sector-oriented organisations are the biggest group of public knowledge organisations, numbering
ten in all. Of these ten, seven (more than half) are part of the Ministry of Public Health, Welfare and
Sport’s knowledge infrastructure. The remainder receive institutional funding from the Ministry of
Education, Culture and Science (one organisation) and from the Ministry of Infrastructure and the
Environment (two organisations). Table 12 lists the sector-oriented organisations and their origins.
Table 12 Origin of sector-oriented organisations
Name Founded Origin Governing
ministry
Institute for Road Safety Research (SWOV) 1962 I&M
Boekman Foundation 1963 At the initiative of the Federation of Artists
Associations
OCW
Netherlands Institute for Health Services
Research (NIVEL)
1985 Institute of Dutch Physicians (1965) VWS
VeiligheidNL 1985 Consumer Safety Foundation VWS
Trimbos Institute 1996 Merger between the Dutch Mental Health
Centre (NcGv) and the Netherlands Institute for
Alcohol and Drugs (NIAD)
VWS
W.J.H. Mulier Institute 2002 VWS
Geonovum 2007 I&M
Movisie 2007 Netherlands Institute for Care and Wellbeing
(NIZW – founded in 1988)
VWS
Netherlands Youth Institute (NJi) 2007 Netherlands Institute for Care and Wellbeing
(NIZW – founded in 1988)
VWS
Vilans 2007 Netherlands Institute for Care and Wellbeing
(NIZW – founded in 1988)
VWS
Sector-oriented organisations are independent entities operating under private law. Not all of them
were established by the national government. NIVEL is the successor to the Institute of Dutch
Physicians and the Mulier Institute is the product of a partnership between a research office and three
Dutch universities. The Boekman Foundation was founded at the initiative of the Federation of Artists
Associations (see Appendix A). The essence of the relationship between all these organisations and
their primary ministry consists of funding and associated tasks and/or research programming.
What typifies them is that they all take up an position midway between the national government and
‘the field’, consisting of decentralised authorities, executive agencies (such as the police force and
Mental Health Care organisations), and organisations providing non-commercial services (such as
hospitals and museums). The national government is responsible for the quality and availability of
these services as a system, and the organisations are therefore often funded from the public purse.
Their responsibilities lie in public health, safety, the arts, sport, and public spaces.
The roles that they play in this position vary considerably, but all sector-oriented organisations have an
accumulation and coordination function. That means that a single organisation has an overview of all
the knowledge available in its specific area of concern. It accumulates that knowledge, makes it
accessible, and brings it to the attention of various stakeholders. These tasks can be divided into four
roles that the various organisations fulfil, generally speaking: coordination, data collection, knowledge
retention, and platform and network provision:
Rathenau InstituutSources: websites (Trimbos Institute, Mulier Institute, Geonovum, Boekman Foundation); Wouters and
Bakker, 2014 (Vilans, NJi, Movisie); http://www.anababa.nl/praktisch/organisaties/stichting-
consument- en-veiligheid (VeiligheidNL): charter (SWOV); Prins, [undated] (NIVEL).

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Rathenau Instituut 27
 – Coordination means that the sector-oriented organisations ensure the availability, now and in the
future, of knowledge and services in their field. Geonovum, for example, is working to standardise
geo-information sharing.
 – Data collection means that the organisations gather data on their sector and use that data to
conduct monitoring studies. NIVEL, for example, collects data from care providers about primary
care and – like the Trimbos Institute – undertakes various longitudinal monitoring studies.
 – Knowledge retention means that the organisation makes sure that knowledge available in its area
is retained within the organisation itself or made available through the organisation. Movisie, for
example, has a database of effective, evidence-based interventions (which can be accessed on its
website) and the Boekman Foundation runs a library of publications covering all sorts of societal
aspects of art and culture. It also collects available data on culture from public and private sources
(available at www.cultuurindex.nl).
 – Platform and network: the sector-oriented organisations link professionals, policymakers and
consumers/patients so that they can share what they know and generate knowledge collectively.
They do this for example on websites (Vilans), through training (NJi) or by organising expert
meetings and debates (Boekman Foundation).
VeiligheidNL and the Trimbos Institute also play a role in public information and prevention by running
public service campaigns.
Table 13 Size of sector-oriented organisations in 2014 (income in thousands of euros)
Name No. of FTE’s Total income
Trimbos Institute 164.0 17,895
NIVEL 156.7 15,345
Vilans 140.0 31,005
Movisie 121.3 14,441
NJi 96.1 14,327
SWOV 42.4 5,684
VeiligheidNL 41.8 6,031
Mulier Institute 18.9 1,946
Geonovum *13.4 4,150
Boekman Foundation 7.9 **1,168

In 2014, the sector-oriented organisations employed a total of 803.4 FTEs (see Table 13). Their size
varies considerably, from the Trimbos Institute (164 FTEs) to the Boekman Foundation (7.9 FTEs). The
organisations allied with the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (Vilans, NIVEL, NJi, Movisie, Trimbos
Institute, Mulier Institute and VeiligheidNL) represent the biggest group, with 738.8 FTEs.
Figure 8 identifies the sources of income per organisation. The share of income accounted for by
institutional funding varies considerably, from 16.8 per cent at Geonovum to 68.6 per cent at
VeiligheidNL. The differences have arisen not only owing to absolute differences in the amount
received in institutional funding, but also because some organisations receive a proportionally larger
share of their income from project funding.
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (Vilans, Movisie, NJi, SWOV, VeiligheidNL, Mulier Institute, Geonovum); annual
accounts (Trimbos Institute), information requested (NIVEL).
* Some of these employees have been outsourced by the four organisations that provide the
funding: the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the
Land Registry, and the Geological Survey of the Netherlands (part of the TNO).
** This includes the € 100,000 Johannes Vermeer Award, whose presentation is organised by the
Boekman Foundation.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Figure 8 Sources of income of sector-oriented organisations in 2014 as a percentage of total income
Figure 9 shows that trends in income varied between the sector-oriented organisations between 2010
and 2014. Vilans, NIVEL and the SWOV saw their income increase in this period, owing to a rise in
project funding from both the national government and contract research. At 105.9 per cent, the
increase in project funding at the SWOV more than doubled, the biggest increase of all.
The Boekman Foundation also saw its project funding grow, by 42.4 per cent, in this period. On the
other hand, the Trimbos Institute, the NJi, Movisie, VeiligheidNL and Geonovum experienced a decline
in income derived from project funding. The decline was more than 20 per cent for VeiligheidNL,
Geonovum, the NJi and Movisie and 17.1 per cent for the Trimbos Institute. The Mulier Institute’s
income remained stable.
Institutional funding increased at the Trimbos Institute (by 71.6 per cent, € 3.4 million). Along with the
rise in institutional funding, the Trimbos Institute was also given a set of new tasks. In 2013, tobacco
control activities were transferred to this organisation. That makes the Trimbos Institute the centre of
expertise for the prevention of alcohol, drug and tobacco abuse. Institutional funding is on the decline
at six of the sector-oriented organisations, however. Movisie and the Boekman Foundation have seen
this category of income fall by almost a quarter. The same holds for the NJi (20.7 per cent), the SWOV
(16.1 per cent), Vilans (14.3 per cent) and the NIVEL (11.3 per cent).

Vilans, NIVEL and the Boekman Foundation have compensated for the loss of institutional funding with
an increase in project funding. That is not the case for the NJi and Movisie, where project funding is
also declining – as it is at the other sector-oriented organisations, with the exception of the SWOV.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
NJi
NIVEL
Vilans
VeiligheidNL
SWOV
Boekman Foundation
Movisie
Mulier Institute
Trimbos Institute
Geonovum
Institutional funding Contract research for national government
Contract research Other income
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (Boekman Foundation, Mulier Institute, NJi, SWOV, VeiligheidNL, Vilans);
annual accounts (Boekman Foundation, Trimbos Institute, VeiligheidNL), year report
(Geonovum); financial report (MOVISIE); information requested (NIVEL).

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Rathenau Instituut 29
Figure 9 Trends in income for the sector-oriented organisations, 2010-2014 (in thousands of euros)
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual reports (Boekman Foundation, Mulier Institute, NJi, SWOV, VeiligheidNL, Vilans);
annual accounts (Boekman Foundation, Trimbos Institute, VeiligheidNL), year report
(Geonovum); financial report (MOVISIE); information requested (NIVEL).
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Vilans
Trimbos Institute
NIVEL
Movisie
NJi
VeiligheidNL
SWOV
Geonovum
Mulier Institute
Boekman Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
9 Professional research and training organisations
Three of the public knowledge organisations combine research and training. The Police Academy
trains police officers and conducts research for the National Police Force, and the Netherlands Defence
Academy (NLDA) does the same for the army, air force, navy and military constabulary. In the case of
the NLDA, we specifically mean the Foundation for Scientific Education and Research (SWOON), which
carries out research. The third professional research and training organisation is the Clingendael
Institute, which studies international relations and combines this work with training programmes and
courses for Dutch and foreign diplomats of today and tomorrow.
Table 14 Origins of professional research and training organisations
Name Founded Origin Legal status Governing
ministry
Netherlands Institute of
International Relations
Clingendael (Clingendael)
1983 Merger between five organisations Foundation BuZa
Foundation for Scientific
Education and Research at the
Netherlands Defence
Academy (SWOON-NLDA)
2005 NLDA is the result of an administrative
merger between the Royal Netherlands
Naval College (KIM), Royal Netherlands
Military Academy (KMA) and the
Netherlands Defence College (IDL).
Research at SWOON is carried out by the
Faculty of Military Sciences (FMW).
Foundation/
RWT
Defence
Police Academy 1992 National Police Selection and Research
Institute
ZBO/RWT V&J
Each organisation organises training in its own manner. The SWOON-NLDA takes the form of a
university faculty (FMW) and offers Bachelor’s and Master’s programmes. The research that it carries out
is equally academic in nature, although it involves shorter periods of time.
The Police Academy offers training at vocational, higher professional and academic levels and takes
the form of a number of knowledge networks (lectoraten), comparable to a Dutch institution of higher
professional education. The Clingendael Institute does not run any multi-year programmes19, but
instead offers courses and training to the Dutch and foreign diplomatic corps and others in profes-
sional international positions, and to those who are pursuing an international career. See Appendix A
for more information about the individual organisations.
Table 15 Size of professional research and training organisations in 2014 (income in thousands of
euros)
Name No. of FTE’s in 2014 Income in 2014
Police Academy 1,485.4 179,735
SWOON-NLDA 118.0 12,669
Clingendael *69.7 9,700
19 Clingendael has, however, developed a Master’s Programme in International Relations and Diplomacy in cooperation with Leiden University.
Rathenau Instituut
Rathenau Instituut
Sources: website (Clingendael): Klinkert, 2011; Tops and Van der Wal, 2010.
Sources: annual accounts (SWOON-NLDA); annual report (Clingendael, Police Academy); information
requested (SWOON-NLDA).
* The number of FTEs is based on data in previous years.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Rathenau Instituut 31
The three organisations together employ approximately 1,675 FTE’s (see Table 15). Most of these work
for the Police Academy (1,485.4 FTEs). The SWOON-NLDA and Clingendael are much smaller in size,
with 118 and about 70 FTE’s respectively. Figure 10 reports the sources of income for the three
organisations. It shows that institutional funding accounts for almost all of the SWOON-NLDA’s income,
but only 34 per cent of Clingendael’s. The Police Academy occupies a middle position, with 59.4 per
cent of its income consisting of institutional funding. Unlike the other two organisations, we also know
what percentage of the Police Academy’s income (10.2 percent) consists of contract research from the
national government.
Figure 10 Sources of income of professional research and training organisations in 2014 as a
percentage of total income
Rathenau Instituut
Sources: annual report (Clingendael); annual accounts (Police Academy); information requested
(SWOON-NLDA).
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
SWOON-NLDA
Police Academy
Clingendael Institute
Institutional funding Contract research for national government Contract research

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Figure 11 Trend in income for professional research and training organisations, 2010-2014
(in thousands of euros)
Figure 11 shows a downward trend in the Police Academy’s income. Between 2010 and 2014, its
income fell by 13.9 per cent (€ 29 million). Institutional funding declined during this period by 18.7
per cent. Contract research dropped by 10.7 per cent. Contract research for the national government,
on the other hand, increased by 14.1 per cent.
At the Clingendael Institute, income fell until 2012 but by 2014 it was back up to 2010 levels. The
proportions changed, however: institutional funding fell by € 0.5 million (13.2 per cent), whereas
contract research rose by € 0.4 million (6.7 per cent).
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Police Academy
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
SWOON-NLDA
Clingendael Institute
Rathenau InstituutSources: annual report (Clingendael); annual accounts (Police Academy); information requested
(SWOON-NLDA).

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Rathenau Instituut 33
Appendix A Description of public knowledge organisations in the Netherlands
This appendix provides a brief description of each organisation’s history and its key activities. The
descriptions are based on their websites, annual reports and – where available – tasks identified in
legislation or a regulatory framework. We also drew information from historical background studies or
evaluations for a few organisations.
Policy-oriented organisations
CPB
The Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) was founded in 1945. The CPB studies
economic trends as well as such subjects as the functioning of financial markets and the effects of
globalisation and ageing populations. It is best known for its economic forecasts, including the Central
Economic Plan (CEP) and Macro Economic Outlooks (MEV). These forecasts provide the official basis
for the national budget of the Netherlands. The CPB also analyses the economic effects of election
manifestos in the run-up to elections and during the negotiations for a new coalition government.
Finally, the CPB conducts societal cost-benefit analyses, for example of major infrastructural projects.
SCP
The Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP) was founded in 1973. The SCP’s three tasks are to
carry out outlook studies, to assist in selecting informed policy objectives, and to acquire evidence for
evaluating policy.
The SCP conducts research on health care, education, culture and the labour market. Its main focus is
on wellbeing. Examples of topics that it addresses are people’s opinions and behaviour, how public
services in the above four areas are used and organised, and matters related to public and employee
participation. The SCP focuses on three lines of research with regard to these themes. To begin with,
the SCP charts trends. Second, it seeks to explain how differences between individuals or groups can
arise, for example in income or health. Third, it studies the impact of the changing welfare state and
the changing relationship between citizens and government on life circumstances and quality of life.
One of the SCP’s better-known products is its publication De Sociale Staat van Nederland [The Social
State of the Netherlands].
WODC
The Research and Documentation Centre (WODC) was first founded in 1973. In its present form, it was
established in 1994.
The WODC is part of the Ministry of Security and Justice and supports the Ministry’s policymaking by
conducting research in the three areas for which it is responsible: security, justice and alien affairs. It
studies the justice system, judicial procedure and law enforcement, crime, security, and immigration
and integration. The WODC conducts some of this research itself; other projects are outsourced to
external parties, under its supervision. One of the WODC’s five divisions was set up for that purpose.
As the name indicates, the organisation is also responsible for documentation. It does this in two areas.
First of all, the WODC collects judicial and security data and links the two. Based on this data, it
conducts various monitoring studies, for example on youth crime and organised crime. Second, the
WODC makes (scientific) knowledge available in a comprehensible manner, even if it was generated
elsewhere.

KiM
The Netherlands Institute for Transport Policy Analysis (KiM) was founded in 2006. The KiM is an
independent organisation within the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment. Its aim is to
improve the Netherlands’ strategic knowledge base for mobility policy. The KiM describes trends in

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
mobility (including of certain groups), explains past developments, makes forecasts, builds scenarios
(for example about the self-driving car) and performs ex ante and ex post analyses of the effects of
policy measures. This may include mobility-related subjects, such as the sustainability and safety of
mobility and the relationship between government and market. The KiM conducts its own analyses and
amasses knowledge from other sources. It also collects and manages data. Its ‘Knowledge at the Table’
products ensure that it makes a direct contribution to policymaking at the Ministry of Infrastructure and
the Environment. KiM’s knowledge is publicly available both nationally and internationally through its
publications.
PBL
The Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL) was established in 2008 (as a merger of two
former agencies for spatial planning and environment). It is part of the Ministry of Infrastructure and the
Environment.
The PBL is the national institute for strategic policy analysis in the fields of the environment, nature and
spatial planning. Its core tasks are to investigate and document current environmental, ecological and
spatial quality, to explore future social trends that could influence that quality, to evaluate policy, to
‘identify possible strategic options for achieving government objectives’, and to call attention to
societal issues of importance. Policy relevance is the prime concern in all its work and it contributes to
improving the quality of political and administrative decision-making by conducting outlook studies,
analyses and evaluations. The PBL always takes an integrated approach to issues. That means that it
considers ecological, economic and institutional dimensions in its analyses and combines as many
environmental, nature-related and spatial aspects as possible in its research. It addresses such topics as
climate change, energy, mobility, population shrinkage, food supply and spatial planning. Significant
publications include its Assessment of the Human Environment [Balans van de Leefomgeving], Spatial
Outlooks, Nature Outlooks and the National Energy Outlook [Nationale Energieverkenning].
Government laboratories
KNMI
The Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) was founded in 1854, making it the oldest
public knowledge organisation in the Netherlands. It has been an administrative agency since 1995.
The KNMI studies the weather and conducts climatological and seismological research. Many people
believe that the KNMI is responsible for media weather forecasts, but that is not the case. The KNMI
produces general weather forecasts that include warnings about or reports on measured weather-
related phenomena. Radio and television forecasters, or tools like Buienradar (‘Rainfall Radar’ app for
the Netherlands), can use this information to produce their own weather forecasts or products.
The KNMI informs the public, government, and the aviation and shipping industries based on this
information. The KNMI is responsible for issuing weather warnings and also reports on seismological
activity. In the event of disasters, government organisations must make use of the KNMI’s services. To
carry out these basic tasks, the KNMI has installed observation and measuring equipment throughout
the Netherlands and makes use of satellite images. The subjects that the KNMI researches include
climate change and the seismological risks associated with induced earthquakes in the Province of
Groningen (related to gas extraction activities there).
Until 1 January 2016, the KNMI’s tasks laid down in the KNMI Act [Wet op het KNMI]. As of that date,
its basic tasks have been defined in the Ministerial Decree on Meteorology and Seismology Tasks
[Ministeriële Regeling Taken Meteorologie en Seismologie]. The Minister of Infrastructure and the
Environment (I&M) has been assigned various duties of care in this regard. They are defined in the
Meteorology and Seismology Tasks Act [Wet Taken Meteorologie en Seismologie], which also came
into force on 1 January 2016.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Rathenau Instituut 35
CBS
Statistics Netherlands (CBS) was founded in 1899. In 2004, its two governance bodies (the director-
general for statistics and the Central Commission for Statistics (CCS)) became independent administra-
tive bodies (ZBO).20
The CBS’s statutory task is ‘to conduct statistical research for government for practical, policymaking
and scientific purposes and to publish the statistics compiled on the basis of such research’.21 This
means that the CBS is responsible for the Netherlands’ official statistics. It also compiles EU-wide
statistics. The subjects of its statistical research include the population, education, businesses, trans-
port, nature and the environment. The CBS presents these statistics and makes them available (in
relation to each other and in context) in various formats.
The CBS’s figures are publicly available and can be consulted by all. Under certain conditions,
researchers are permitted to inspect the CBS’s anonymised micro data.
RIVM
The National Organisation for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) was founded in 1909. In its
present form, it was established in 1984 after a series of mergers22.
The RIVM started as the Central Laboratory, a research organisation that studied infectious diseases and
their causes (for example cholera, diphtheria, typhus and syphilis), nutrition, pharmacological drugs, and
water and air pollution. This included research on the causes of infectious diseases, on sera and vaccines,
and on detection of hazardous substances in water, food and the air. As the years went by, the research
topics changed. For example, in the 1960s the focus shifted to the environment, while nowadays there is
considerable interest in lifestyle and external safety. In every instance, the RIVM’s work is concerned with
human health and a healthy living environment.
The RIVM has transformed itself from a research organisation into a centre of expertise. It conducted its
first screening programme in 1951.23 From that year forward, the RIVM also began carrying out outlook
studies. From 2005 onwards, the RIVM also became responsible for various coordination and oversight
tasks in addition to its research and advisory work, for example coordination of the National Immunisation
Programme in 2008.
The organisation also became more active in providing public service information. In 2007, it set up
the RIVM Centre for Healthy Living, meant to promote a healthy lifestyle. In 2003, most of the RIVM’s
vaccine-related activities were transferred to the Netherlands Vaccine Institute. Nevertheless, the RIVM
has retained its traditional research tasks; it is currently building a new location, a third of which will
consist of laboratories.
20 The intention is to turn the two ZBOs into a single ZBO (Jaarverslag CBS, 2014, p. 7).
21 Wet op het Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek, Article 3.
22 In 1934, the Central Laboratory merged with the National Serological Institute to form the National Institute for Public Health (RIV) In 1984, the
RIV merged with the National Institute for Drinking Water Supply (RID) and the Institute for Research on Waste Materials (IVA) to form the
Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM).
23 Screening pregnant women for syphilis.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
NFI
The Netherlands Forensic Institute (NFI) was established in 1999. It is an administrative agency of the
Ministry of Security and Justice.

The NFI performs forensic investigations in criminal cases and develops new forensic research methods.
It has a wide array of equipment at its disposal, for example for the analysis of samples (blood, saliva),
firearms and ammunition. The organisation has developed RNA cell typology, a better technique for
determining the nature of DNA traces. The NFI’s third task is to serve as an international centre of
knowledge and expertise for forensic investigations.24
2009 saw the founding of the NFI Academy. The NFI Academy also offers courses for professionals
within and outside the criminal law system, for example emergency workers who must be able work at
the scene of a crime without disturbing any evidence.
(N) IFV
The Safety Institute resulted from a merger in 2013 between the Netherlands Institute for Safety (NIFV)
and various emergency services. The merger paralleled the development of safety regions in the
Netherlands, which became effective in 2010.
The IFV focuses on firefighting, disaster relief, crisis management and medical services during disas-
ters. It considers such aspects as transport safety, fire safety and information supply during a crisis or
disaster. The IFV has been given a number of statutory tasks in this area, for example collecting and
managing relevant knowledge and, where necessary, conducting applied research. Other statutory
tasks include setting up and running officer training programmes for the fire brigade and issuing
exemptions and certificates for firefighting training programmes. Finally, the IFV is responsible for
procuring, managing and, where necessary, making materials and equipment available to the safety
regions.
All of these activities are geared to the safety regions, which must be given access to the IFV’s research
results and can, if they so wish, transfer joint tasks to the IFV. To share its knowledge with professionals
and answer their questions, the IFV runs the ‘Infopunt Veiligheid’ website.
TO2 institutes
NLR
The Netherlands Aerospace Centre (NLR) was founded in 1919.
Its mission is ‘making air transport and space exploration safer, more sustainable and more efficient’.
The NLR works for clients in both civil and military aviation in the aerospace sector. It has a number of
large-scale facilities, the wind tunnels being the most prominent among these.
24 Decree on NFI tasks.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Rathenau Instituut 37
MARIN
The Maritime Research Institute of the Netherlands (MARIN) was established in 192925 by government
and the maritime industry as a joint shipbuilding testing station.
MARIN’s mission is ‘to make ships cleaner, smarter and safer’. The organisation tests and refines new
vessel technologies and assesses their impact on the environment. It does this in various large-scale
basins that can generate currents and waves in order to test propellers, ship models and offshore
facilities. MARIN also has VTS (vessel traffic services) simulators used for training all Dutch VTS opera-
tors and Dutch pilots.
MARIN mainly carries out contract research for businesses but is also involved in research for the
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment.
TNO
The Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (TNO) was established in 1932. It is the
largest of the public knowledge organisations.
The TNO’s mission is to connect people and knowledge to create innovations. Unlike the other five
organisations in its group, the TNO is not dedicated to a single area of endeavour but uses its exper-
tise wherever it can drive innovation and where there is a demand from government or the business
community. Its research is organised into five themes: industry, healthy living, defence, safety and
security, urbanisation, and energy. These themes cover all nine of the Netherlands’ top sectors (mainly
High Tech Systems & Materials and Agrifood). The TNO also conducts research for the Ministry of
Defence. It has one statutory research task, concerning the deep subsurface.
The TNO carries out its research in various laboratories (for example for ballistic research) and testing
facilities (such as VeHIL for active vehicle safety system testing). TNO Companies is an allied business
group, including TNO spin-offs – as well as some of its facilities – that commercialise new technologies.
DLO
The DLO Foundation (DLO), which focuses on agricultural research, was established in 1938. In 1999 it
became an independent organisation and merged with Wageningen University to become Wageningen
University and Research Centre (WUR).
The DLO consists of nine research institutes that each has its own task, from the RIKILT (food safety) to
IMARES (strategic and applied marine ecology). All these institutes focus on the relationship between
agriculture, fisheries, food safety and the environment and base their work on the DLO’s mission:
‘to explore the potential of nature to improve the quality of life’. The DLO has been charged with a total of
six statutory research tasks. The facilities differ from one institute to the next. The DLO manages several
databases. One of its bigger facilities is the High Containment Unit in Lelystad, dedicated to studying
contagious animal diseases. The DLO also runs various laboratories and field testing facilities.

ECN
The Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands (ECN) was founded in 1955. In 1997, its nuclear
research activities were transferred to the Nuclear Research Group (NRG), now the ECN’s biggest
subsidiary. The ECN focuses on sustainable energy systems, energy efficiency and energy policy.
De missie van ECN is “wij ontwikkelen kennis en technologie voor een duurzame energiehuishouding”.
The ECN’s mission is to develop new technology and conduct pioneering research to facilitate the
25 Founded in 1929, commenced activities in 1932.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
transition to sustainable energy management. It conducts research in its own laboratories and model-
ling and testing facilities. The ECN also has a wind turbine testing facility, while the NRG operates a
High Flux Reactor for research purposes and for the production of medical isotopes.
Deltares
Deltares was established in 2007. At the time it was known as the National Delta Institute.
Deltares’s mission is ‘Enabling Delta Life’. It undertakes research and uses its technical knowledge to
advise on water, subsurface and infrastructure matters in delta regions. This might concern flood risk
management, drinking water supply, dyke monitoring, or the protection of delta ecosystems. Deltares
has an extensive array of software simulation products (numerical models), various hydro facilities
including the Delta Flume (for studying the impact of waves on dykes), and geo facilities, including the
GeoCentrifuge.
Sector-oriented organisations
SWOV
The Institute for Road Safety Research (SWOV) was established in 1962 in order to coordinate and
encourage the scientific study of road safety.
The SWOV conducts research and disseminates knowledge about road safety to traffic and transport
professionals working for local, regional and national government, consultancy firms, businesses and
interest groups, all for the purpose of improving road safety. Its research covers not only human
behaviour, human safety, vehicles and roads, but also ageing, urbanisation, computerisation and other
phenomena. In addition, the SWOV identifies, monitors and investigates road safety problems.
The SWOV has a knowledge centre (a virtual and physical library) that can be accessed by third parties
and runs its own facilities, for example a driving simulator. It also uses data provided by other parties,
for example the CBS and the police force.
Boekman Foundation
The Boekman Foundation was founded in 1963 at the initiative of the Federation of Artists Associations.
Its aim is to study the relationship between art and government and the role of art in society.
The Boekman Foundation studies the arts and culture in both policy and practice. Its mission is twofold.
First of all, it collects and disseminates knowledge and information about the arts and culture. Second,
it encourages research and thinking about various aspects of the arts and culture. It does this mainly by
managing its own digital and physical collections in a library that basically contains all publications
concerning ‘organised culture’, from research papers to the annual reports of cultural institutions. It
also disseminates knowledge by holding debates and through its Arts Index Netherlands website
(www.cultuurindex.nl), organised in cooperation with the SCP .
NIVEL
The NIVEL was founded in 1985. In 1995, its area of operation was expanded to cover the entire field
of health care. Its name was changed accordingly (Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research),
but the acronym was retained.

The NIVEL studies the effectiveness and quality of health care by combining applied and basic
research. It also studies the organisation of the Dutch health care system: patients, professionals,
institutions (from hospitals to health insurers) and the relationships between them, as well as the
structure and policy within which they operate.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Rathenau Instituut 39
The NIVEL manages a number of databases and panels, such as the NIVEL Primary Care Database,
where it collects data on the utilisation of GP services and prescription drugs. The NIVEL bases much
of its research, including a number of monitoring studies, on the information provided by these panels
and databases.
VeiligheidNL
VeiligheidNL – the Consumer Safety Institute – has been around since 1985 but was known until 2013
as Stichting Consument en Veiligheid [Consumer Safety Foundation]. VeiligheidNL receives funding
from the Ministry of Public Health, Welfare and Sport for recording and monitoring physical injuries and
for its efforts to change behaviour in high-risk categories.
Its aim is to reduce the toll of injuries in the Netherlands, and it focuses especially on safety in everyday
situations, for example in the home, at work, at school, in traffic, in the playground, and in nursing and
care facilities. VeiligheidNL focuses on such subjects as sports injuries (and their prevention), preven-
ting falls among the elderly, occupational safety, and bullying at school. It monitors and carries out
research geared to resolving safety issues. It also specialises in developing and evaluating campaigns
aimed at safe behaviour and interventions.
Trimbos Institute
The Trimbos Institute – the Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction – was established in
1996. In 2013, tobacco control activities were transferred to this organisation. That makes the Trimbos
Institute the Netherlands’ centre of expertise for the prevention of alcohol, drug and tobacco abuse.
The organisation focuses on mental health, substance use and addiction issues. Its main themes are
alcohol, drugs, tobacco, behavioural addictions, severe mental illness, and mild & moderate mental
health disorders. The Trimbos Institute addresses the symptoms, treatment and prevention of mental
health and addiction problems by monitoring, by developing new guidelines, treatment methods and
prevention programmes, and by studying and evaluating mental health and addiction care organisations.
To ensure that this knowledge is disseminated to professionals and those needing care, it runs a wide
range of websites geared to the general public, operates an information hotline for smoking, drugs
and alcohol, and offers a broad range of training courses for care professionals.
Mulier Institute
The Mulier Institute – the Centre for Research on Sports in Society – was founded in 2002 as the result
of partnership between the research organisation Diopter, Janssens & Van Bottenburg bv and Tilburg
University, Utrecht University, and the University of Amsterdam. Since 2013, it has had its own
Management and Supervisory Boards.26
The aim of the Mulier Institute is ‘to stimulate the coordination, synchronization and cooperation of
more fundamental and policy-based scholarly sports research in the Netherlands’. It monitors develop-
ments in sport, concentrates existing research and carries out research of its own. Until 2013, the
Mulier Institute was responsible for coordinating sports research at the universities. That responsibility
was removed in 2013. The organisation continues to promote sports science by encouraging and
supporting the appointment of full and associate professors in this field and by providing young sports
researchers with facilities. Two of the Mulier Institute’s specific tasks are to support higher education in
training sports researchers and to encourage the appointment of full and associate professors in that
area.
26 Before that year, the board consisted of representatives of the relevant institutions of higher education; there was no supervisory board.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Geonovum
Founded in 2007, Geonovum is the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) executive committee in
the Netherlands. Its mission is threefold: to provide better access to geo-information in the public
sector, to develop and maintain the required geo-standards to do so, and to help government make
better use of geo-information. Its primary task is to develop, standardise and innovate the National
Spatial Data Infrastructure. It works to facilitate access to geo-information and the sharing of geo-
information and other types of data. Geonovum also informs government organisations about existing
facilities and links parties that require geo-information to those who can help them.
Movisie
Movisie – the Netherlands Centre for Social Development – is one of the three organisations that
succeeded the Netherlands Institute for Care and Wellbeing (NIZW) in 2007, which was then dis-
banded.
Movisie is the primary knowledge organisation operating under the Social Support Act [Wet
Maatschappelijke Ondersteuning, WMO] and focuses on such social issues as wellbeing, participation,
care and personal safety. Movisie gears its services to the needs of the field, and is charged with
collecting, enhancing, validating and disseminating knowledge useful to implementing organisations
and local councils.
Movisie focuses on collecting, generating and sharing knowledge and on supporting the implementa-
tion of that knowledge, calling itself a ‘knowledge institute and consultancy service’. Like Vilans and
the NJi, Movisie plays a role in bringing professionals together, for example by coordinating digital
platforms and organising knowledge-sharing meetings. For example, it manages a database of
effective social interventions, i.e. intervention methods that have proven their value.
NJi
The Netherlands Youth Institute (NJi) is one of the three organisations that succeeded the Netherlands
Institute for Care and Wellbeing (NIZW) in 2007, which was then disbanded.
The NJi’s mission is ‘to promote the healthy development of children and young people and the social
and pedagogical quality of the context in which they live’. The NJi therefore focuses on youth and
parenting issues, specifically ‘by increasing the quality and effectiveness of the services rendered to
children and young people and their parents’. Like Vilans and Movisie, the NJi gears its services to the
needs of the field, and is charged with ‘collecting, enhancing, validating and disseminating knowledge
useful to implementing organisations and local councils’.
Besides developing and managing a knowledge base for the youth sector in the form of databases and
websites, the NJi is also actively involved in practical improvement projects and knowledge utilisation.
To connect professionals and share knowledge with them, the NJi manages online platforms, gives
training courses, and offers research, consultancy, and support services. The knowledge that it amasses
in this way is then integrated into its knowledge base.
Vilans
Vilans is one of the three organisations that succeeded the Netherlands Institute for Care and
Wellbeing (NIZW) in 2007.27
Vilans is the centre of expertise for long-term care. It considers how long-term care is organised and
the quality of that care. In the latter case, its aim is to improve the provision of care and the quality of
27 Vilans, Movisie and the NJi were established at that point to operate as decentralised organisations in the care sector, responsible for implemen -
ting three pieces of legislation: the Exceptional Medical Expenses Act (AWBZ), the Social Support Act (WMO) and the Youth Care Act ( Wet op
de Jeugdzorg ).

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Rathenau Instituut 41
life of people who require long-term care, with an emphasis on organising and promoting self-reliance.
The target group for its research consists of employees in the care sector, who can improve their work
with the outcomes. Vilans is charged with ‘collecting, enhancing, validating and disseminating know-
ledge useful to the field (implementing organisations and local councils) in these areas’.
In order to disseminate knowledge and link professionals so that they can share what they know, Vilans
runs a number of digital platforms (consisting of several websites) where professionals, volunteers and
the elderly in care can find information, training and new tools and can communicate with each other.
Professional research and training organisations
Clingendael
Clingendael is the outcome of a merger in 1983 between five organisations active in international
relations.
Clingendael is the Netherlands Institute of International Relations. It researches economic diplomacy,
international security and conflict management. Its main focus of study is the role and position of the
Netherlands. Knowledge about Europe also plays an important role. The organisation combines its
research work with training programmes and courses for Dutch and foreign diplomats of today and
tomorrow. In addition to education and research, Clingendael also performs contract research for both
the public and the private sector. It disseminates the knowledge it has amassed at conferences and
seminars.
Police Academy
The Police Academy was founded in 1992. It was the first time that all police training programmes at
both the national and the municipal level were combined into a single institute.
The Police Academy provides training and is organised into ‘knowledge networks’ [lectoraten]. Its
curricula cover initial police training programmes as well as courses and advanced training for police
personnel. It runs programmes and courses at secondary vocational, higher professional and academic
levels.

In addition, the Police Academy also conducts research in order to support advances in police training
and practical police work. It studies how the police force operates today and what improvements can
be made to its working methods. It studies police history, forensic research, cybersafety, public order
and other relevant subjects. It considers how to improve the effectiveness of investigations and the use
of new forensic techniques in the field, for example.
The Police Academy not only carries out research itself but also collects, validates and disseminates
knowledge through its digital police database. Its mission is to (help) promote the professionalism and
learning capacity of the police force and its people.
SWOON – NLDA
The Faculty of Military Sciences (FMW) was founded in 2005 as part of the Netherlands Defence
Academy (NLDA), also founded in that year. The NLDA’s research activities were clustered in a single
unit, the FMW. The FMW patterns its organisation on that of a university faculty.
In 2011, the FMW became a legal person: the Foundation for Scientific Education and Research at the
Netherlands Defence Academy (SWOON-NLDA). This allowed the FMW’s programmes to gain
accreditation and made the FMW into an independent unit within the Ministry of Defence.
The NLDA is the Netherlands’ military training institute. Within that context, the FMW provides the
academic portion of its officer training programmes. It runs three Bachelor’s and two Master’s pro-
grammes. The military portion of the officer training programme is provided by the Royal Netherlands

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Military Academy (KMA) and the Royal Netherlands Naval College (KIM). Civilians may also enrol in the
Master’s programmes.
In addition, the FMW conducts research that is compatible with its academic training tasks. Examples
include research on military strategy, operations and ethics, civilian-military cooperation, and military
logistics. Its research programmes have a duration of approximately ten years.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Rathenau Instituut 43
Appendix B Organisations not included in this report
The following groups of organisations were not selected for this report.
 – Advisory councils: Councils such as the WRR (Scientific Council for Government Policy) and the
Health Council of the Netherlands. Research is a secondary task for these councils (see Advisory
Bodies Framework Act [Kaderwet Adviescolleges], 1996).
 – Inspectorates: research is a secondary task.
 – NWO and KNAW institutes: come under the Dutch Higher Education and Research Act (WHW).
 – Rijkswaterstaat: no separate research units (see Decree on organisation of Rijkswaterstaat organi-
sational units, Article 3.7).
 – Organisations that have been disbanded: such as the Nederlands Vaccine Institute, which was
included in the report Verstand op veilig.
 – Top Technology Institutes/Top Societal Institutes: primarily networks that facilitate research.
 – National museums: research is a secondary task.
 – National Library of the Netherlands: comes under the Dutch Higher Education and Research Act.
The following organisations were considered but ultimately excluded from the final selection for
various reasons:
Name of organisation Reason for exclusion
Netherlands Centre for Family History (CBG) Research is a secondary task
Dutch Centre for Crime Prevention and Safety (CCV) Research is a secondary task
De Nederlandsche Bank (DNB) Research is a secondary task
Europa Decentraal Research is a secondary task
NEN Research is a secondary task
National Institute for Family Finance Information (NIBUD) Research is a secondary task
NICTIZ Research is a secondary task
Cultural Heritage Agency Research is a secondary task
Rutgers Research is a secondary task
Centre ’45 Foundation Research is a secondary task
Netherlands Nutrition Centre Research is a secondary task
Dutch Metrology Institute (VSL) Research is a secondary task
Netherlands Academy for Eating Disorders Does not undertake research
ProDemos Does not undertake research
Dutch Safety Board Research only in the event of disaster
Atria Institute on gender equality and women’s history No systematic relationship with national government
STOWA - Foundation for Applied Water Research
No systematic relationship with national government; only with
water boards
Verwey-Jonker Institute No systematic relationship with national government
Africa Studies Centre Academic institute, part of Leiden University
Netherlands Cancer Institute Antoni van Leeuwenhoek
European Institute of Public Administration Bears more similarity to a university medical centre
Dutch Knowledge Centre for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry An EU organisation
KIT A network organisation.
CLM An association
Netherlands Water Partnership A private foundation
Koninklijk Instituut voor de Tropen A network organisation
Stichting Centrum landbouw en Milieu (CLM) Deze organisatie is een private stichting.
Stichting Nederlands Water Partnership Deze organisatie is een netwerkorganisatie.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Appendix C Acronyms and abbreviations
BuZa Ministry of Foreign Affairs
CBS Statistics Netherlands
CCS Central Commission for Statistics
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis
Defensie Ministry of Defence
DLO Agricultural Research Service
ECN Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands
EZ Ministry of Economic Affairs
FMW Faculty of Military Sciences
I&M Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment
(N)IFV (Netherlands) Institute for Physical Safety
KiM Netherlands Institute for Transport Policy Analysis
KNAW Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
KNMI Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
MARIN Maritime Research Institute Netherlands
MNP Environmental Assessment Agency
NcGv Dutch Mental Health Centre
NFI Netherlands Forensic Institute
NIAD Netherlands Institute for Alcohol and Drugs
NIVEL Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research
NIZW Netherlands Institute for Care and Wellbeing
NJi Netherlands Youth Institute
NLDA Netherlands Defence Academy
NLR Netherlands Aerospace Centre

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Rathenau Instituut 45
NVWA Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority
NWO Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
OCW Ministry of Education, Culture and Science
PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency
RIVM National Institute for Public Health and the Environment
RMO Dutch Council for Social Development
RPB Netherlands Institute for Spatial Research
RWT Legal person with statutory tasks
SCP Netherlands Institute for Social Research
SWOON Foundation for Scientific Education and Research
SWOV Institute for Road Safety Research
TNO Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research
TO2 Organisations for applied scientific research
TWIN Total Investment in Research and Innovation
V&J Ministry of Security and Justice
VWS Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport
WHW Higher Education and Research Act
WODC Research and Documentation Centre
ZBO Independent administrative body

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
Bibliography
Aanwijzingen voor de Planbureaus. (2012). Staatscourant, 3200.
Ad-hoc commissie Brugfunctie TNO en GTIs. (2004). De kracht van directe verbindingen. Den Haag:
B&A Den Haag [secretariaat].
Blankesteijn, M. et al. (2014). Verstand op veilig. De waarde van publieke kennisinstellingen voor de
veiligheid van Nederland. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Boekmanstichting. Jaarrekeningen 2012-2014. Amsterdam: Administratiekantoor ASK.
Boekmanstichting. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014.
Boekmanstichting. (2013). Activiteitenplan 2013-2016.
Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Den Haag: CBS.
Clingendael. Annual reports 2010-2014. Den Haag: Clingendael.
Deltares. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Delft: Deltares.
Energieonderzoek Centrum Nederland. Jaarstukken 2011-2013. Petten: ECN.
Energieonderzoek Centrum Nederland. Annual report 2014. Petten: ECN.
Geonovum. Jaarrapporten 2010-2014. Amersfoort: Geonovum.
Geonovum. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Amersfoort: Geonovum.
Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid. Jaaroverzicht 2011, 2013 en 2014. Arnhem: IFV.
Kamerstukken II 1995/96, 24454, nr.3: Wet op het Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu. MvT.
Kamerstukken II 2005/06, 27625, nr.63: Waterbeleid. Brief van de minister en staatssecretaris van
verkeer en waterstaat.
Kamerstukken II 2006/07, 31031 XVI, nr.1: Jaarverslag en slotwet Ministerie van Volksgezondheid,
Welzijn en Sport 2006.
Kamerstukken II 2010/11, 32841, nr.3: Wijziging van de Wet veiligheidsregio’s in verband met de
oprichting van het Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid en in verband met de volledige regionalisering van de
brandweer. MvT.
Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 27565, nr. 128: Alcoholbeleid. Brief van de staatssecretaris van
Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport.
Kamerstukken II 2014/15, 29517, nr. 90: Veiligheidsregio’s. Brief van de minister van Veiligheid en
Justitie.
Kamerstukken II 2015/16, 34000 XVI, nr. 2: Vaststelling van de begrotingsstaten van het ministerie van
Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport (XVI) voor het jaar 2015. MvT.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Rathenau Instituut 47
Kennisinstituut voor Mobiliteitsbeleid. (2009). ‘Evaluatie van het Kennisinstituut voor Mobiliteitsbeleid
(KiM). Eindrapport’. www.kimnet.nl/positionering-kim.
Klein Haarhuis, C.M., L.L.C. Hagen & M.P .C. Scheepmaker. (2009). Toetsen en verbinden. Over het
WODC in de tijd en de relatie tussen onderzoek en beleid in het bijzonder. Den Haag: Boom
Juridische Uitgevers.
Klinkert, W. (2011). Mars naar de wetenschap. Het streven naar de wetenschappelijk opgeleide officier,
1890-2011. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/241862065_Mars_naar_de_wetenschap_Het_
streven_naar_de_wetenschappelijk_opgeleide_officier_1890-2011.
Koninklijk Nederlands Meteorologisch Instituut. Jaarverslag 2012. De Bilt: KNMI.
Meinen, G. & A. Meurink. (2006). Kennis en economie. R&D inspanningen in Nederland, 2003.
Voorburg/Heerlen: CBS.
Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken. [z.j.]. ZBO Register (http://almanak.zboregister.overheid.nl).
Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken. (2009). Kamerbrief betreffende de motie-Koopmans over plan-
bureaus, 6 april 2009. Kenmerk: 2009-0000197162.
Ministerie van Economische Zaken. (2013). Visie op het toegepaste onderzoek. Den Haag: Ministerie
van EZ.
Ministerie van Infrastructuur en Milieu. Jaarverslag en slotwet 2010-2014. Den Haag: Ministerie van I&M.
Ministerie van Onderwijs, Cultuur en Wetenschap. (2012). Toekenningen culturele basisinfrastructuur
2013-2016. Bijlage bij brief Besluiten culturele basisinfrastructuur 2013-2016. Den Haag: Ministerie
van OCW.
Ministerie van Veiligheid en Justitie. (2013). ‘Wet veiligheidsregio’s’ (brochure). https://www.ifv.nl/
kennisplein/Documents/Brochure-wet-veiligheidsregio-s-november2013.pdf.
Ministerie van Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport. (2013). Beleidsdoorlichting letselpreventie 2008-
2012.
Movisie. Jaarbericht 2010-2014. Utrecht: Movisie.
Movisie. Financiële Verslagen 2011-2014. Utrecht: Movisie.
Mulier Instituut. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Utrecht: Mulier Instituut.
Nationaal Lucht- en Ruimtevaartinstituut. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Amsterdam: NLR.
Nationaal Lucht- en Ruimtevaartinstituut. Jaarrekeningen 2013-2014.
Nederlands Forensisch Instituut. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Rijswijk: NFI.
Nederlands Jeugdinstituut. Jaarverslagen 2011-2014. Utrecht: NJi.
Anoniem. [z.j.]. Notariële akte oprichting stichting wetenschappenlijk onderwijs en onderzoek NLDA.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands
OECD. (2002). Frascati Manual. Proposed Standard Practices for Surveys on Research and Experimental
Development. Parijs: OECD publishing.
OECD. (2011). Public Research Institutions. Mapping Sector Trends. Parijs: OECD publishing.
Organisatie voor Toegepast Natuurwetenschappelijk Onderzoek. (1969). Organisatie TNO. Wet, beslui-
ten en statuten. Den Haag: TNO.
Organisatie voor Toegepast Natuurwetenschappelijk Onderzoek. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Den Haag:
TNO.
Politieacademie. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Apeldoorn: Politieacademie.
Politieacademie. Jaarrekeningen 2010-2014. Apeldoorn: Politieacademie.
Prins, A.A.M.[z.j.]. SIAMPI final report WP5 health.
Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Bilthoven: RIVM.
Rijksoverheid. [z.j.] Overzicht agentschappen rijksoverheid (https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/
rijksoverheid/inhoud/agentschappen/lijst-agentschappen).
Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Den Haag: SCP .
Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau. (2014). Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau – strategisch koers 2015-
2020. Werkprogramma 2015. Den Haag: SCP .
Speelman, H. en S. Angelino. (2006). Vernieuwing van de publieke kennisinfrastructuur van Nederland.
Eindrapportage inzake de niet-universitaire kennisinfrastructuur. Delft: TNO.
Speelman, H. & K. Maas. (2010). De publieke kennisinfrastructuur van Nederland op hoofdlijnen. Delft:
TNO.
Steen, J. van (2009). De Nederlandse publieke onderzoeksinstituten – Feiten en Cijfers 2. Den Haag:
Rathenau Instituut.
Steen, J. van. (2015). Totale Investeringen in Wetenschap en Innovatie (TWIN) 2013-2019, Feiten en
Cijfers 14. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
Stichting Consument en Veiligheid. Jaarverslag 2010. Amsterdam: Stichting Consument en Veiligheid.
Stichting Wetenschappelijk Onderwijs en Onderzoek NLDA. Jaarverslagen 2012-2014. Breda: NLDA.
Stichting Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek Verkeersveiligheid. [z.j.]. Statuten. Den Haag: SWOV.
Stichting Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek Verkeersveiligheid. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Leidschendam:
SWOV.
TNO. (1969). Organisatie TNO. Wet, Besluiten en Statuten. Den Haag: TNO.
Toolen, A. van der. (2009). Bacteriënjagers en andere verhalen. Bilthoven: RIVM. p. 95-103.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Rathenau Instituut 49
Tops, P . & R. van der Wal. (2010). Kennis is macht, doch meer dan kennis is karakter. Een kleine
geschiedenis van het politieonderwijs. Apeldoorn: Politieacademie.
Trimbos-instituut. Jaarrekeningen 2010-2014. Utrecht: Trimbos-instituut.
Trimbos-instituut. (2015). Focus op de geestelijke gezondheid. Utrecht: Trimbos-instituut.
Unesco. (1978). Recommendation concerning the international standardisation of statistics on science
and technology. Parijs.
VeiligheidNL. Jaarverslagen 2011-2014. Amsterdam: VeiligheidNL.
VeiligheidNL. Jaarrekeningen 2012-2014. Amsterdam: VeiligheidNL.
Vilans. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Utrecht: Vilans.
Vilans. (2014). Werkprogramma 2015. Kenniscentrum voor langdurige zorg. Utrecht: Vilans.
Visitatiecommissie WODC. (2014). Het WODC als baken in feiten-gedreven justitieel en veiligheids-
beleid. Maar een nieuwe balans tussen wetenschap, beleid en uitvoering voor de toekomst?
Den Haag: WODC.
Wageningen UR. Jaarverslagen 2010-2014. Wageningen: WUR.
Wouters, A. & H. Bakker. (2014). Onderweg naar nieuwe verhoudingen. Onderzoek VWS-kennisfunctie
langdurige zorg, WMO en Jeugdzorg. Den Haag: ABDTOPConsult.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50 Public Knowledge Organisations in the Netherlands

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Rathenau Instituut 51
Previous editions of Facts and Figures (in order of publication). Publications available in English
are listed under their English title.
F&F 1 Steen, J. van (September 2008). Universities in the Netherlands – Facts and Figures 1.
The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&F 2 Steen, J. van (2008). Science System Assessment Facts and Figures 2: The public
research institutes. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 3 Meulen, B. van der, J. Dawson, J. van Steen (februari 2009) Organisatie en governance
van wetenschappelijk onderzoek, een vergelijking van zes landen – Feiten en Cijfers 3.
Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 4 Steen, J. van (april 2011) Overzicht Totale Onderzoek Financiering (TOF) 2009-2015. Den
Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 5 Steen, J. van (april 2012) Overzicht Totale Onderzoek Financiering (TOF) 2010-2016. Den
Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
F&F 6 Chiong Meza, C. (2012). Universities in the Netherlands 2012. Facts and Figures 6 . The
Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&F 7 De Goede, M., Belder, R. and De Jonge, J. (2013). Academic Careers in the Netherlands
2013. Facts & Figures 7. With Appendix. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 8 Steen, J. van (maart 2013) Totale Onderzoek Financiering 2011-2017. Den Haag:
Rathenau Instituut.
F&F 9 Leonie van Drooge, Stefan de Jong et al. (2013). Twenty Years of Research Evaluation.
Facts & Figures 8. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 10 Horlings, T. Gurney, J. Deuten, L. van Drooge (november 2013) Patenten van kennis- in-
stellingen. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
F&F 11 Steen, J. van (2014). Total Investment in Research and Innovation (TWIN) 2012-2018.
Facts & Figures 11. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 12 Chiong Meza, C., J. van Steen & J. de Jonge (augustus 2014) De Nederlandse universi -
tair medische centra. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut (ook beschikbaar in het Engels).
F&C 13 Goede, M. de & L. Hessels (november 2014) Drijfveren van onderzoekers. Den Haag:
Rathenau Instituut
F&F 14 Steen, J. van (2015). Total Investment in Research and Innovation (TWIN) 2013-2019,
Facts & Figures 14. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
F&C 15 De Jonge, J. (november 2015), Vertrouwen in de Wetenschap 2015. Den Haag: Rathenau
Instituut
F&C 16 Dorst, H., Deuten, J. en Horlings, E. (februari 2016), De Nederlandse wetenschap in de
European Research Area. Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Publication details:
© Rathenau Instituut, The Hague
August 2016
Rathenau Instituut
P .O. Box 93566
NL-2509 CJ Den Haag
+31 (0)70-3421542
www.rathenau.nl
Preferred citation: L. Koens, C. Chiong Meza, P .
Faasse & J. de Jonge (2016) Public knowledge
organisations in the Netherlands, Facts and Figures
17. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut
This publication may be printed, photocopied or otherwise duplicated and/or published for non-commercial
purposes, provided that the full attribution is given. Duplication or publication for any other purpose is
permitted only with the permission of the publisher.
The Rathenau Institute has an Open Access policy. Its reports, background studies, research articles and
software are all open access publications. Research data are made available pursuant to statutory provisions
and ethical research standards concerning the rights of third parties, privacy and copyright.
About this publication
This is the seventeenth publication in the Rathenau Facts and Figures series. This
edition reviews various facts and figures on the Dutch public knowledge organisations
gathered from a range of different sources. For further information on this publication,
please contact the authors: Lionne Koens MSc. (l.koens@rathenau.nl), Dr Catherine
Chiong Meza (c.chiongmeza@rathenau.nl), Dr Patricia Faasse (p.faasse@rathenau.nl),
drs. Jos de Jonge (j.dejonge@rathenau.nl) or the head of research, Prof. Barend van
der Meulen (b.vandermeulen@rathenau.nl).
