
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Report

NWO programmes for curiosity-
driven research
Possible bases for budget distribution

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 2
Authors
Paul Diederen and Jos de Jonge

Editing
Communications department

Cover photo
Delft University of Technology library – Robin Utrecht / ANP / Hollandse Hoogte
Preferably cite as:
Rathenau Instituut (2023). NWO programs for curiosity-driven research –
Possible bases for budget distribution – Mogelijke grondslagen voor
budgetverdeling. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut. Authors: Diederen, P. en J. de
Jonge

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 3
Foreword
This report is about how the budget for curiosity-driven research is distributed
across four groups of scientific disciplines. NWO has two programmes for this
purpose: the Open Competition and the Talent Programme, known for the Veni,
Vidi and Vici grants. Competition for these research budgets is fierce and the award
rates vary considerably across disciplines. Consequently, several discipline groups
are dissatisfied with the current budget distribution.

In both programmes, honouring grant requests should be done carefully. For years,
NWO has used the same procedure of making an initial distribution across four
areas of science, each covering a group of disciplines. Anno 2023, this division is
mainly based on historically determined proportions. This raises the question: what
is the basis for such a division? This question was posed to us by NWO and is
addressed in this report.

One practicable option is to base the distribution of the available research budget
on the level of demand for funding. However, our desk research and interviews at
home and abroad revealed that such a basis does not do justice to other
considerations. For example, it may be desirable to also make budget allocation
dependent on variables that measure quality or impact of research, but this
approach could be subject to practical obstacles. An additional issue is dealing with
funding applications for research that covers different scientific domains. At NWO’s
request, we also offer ideas on this issue.
Prof Eefje Cuppen
Director Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 4
Summary
The questions asked in this study
The reason for this publication is that NWO has asked the Rathenau Instituut to
investigate possible bases for distributing budget for free, curiosity-driven research.
NWO has two instruments for funding that type of research: the Open Competition
and the Talent Programme. NWO distributes the available funds across four
domains:
i) exact and natural sciences (ENW),
ii) social sciences and humanities (SGW),
iii) applied and technical sciences (TTW)
iv) medical sciences (ZonMw).
In addition, NWO has asked the Rathenau Instituut to conduct research on how to
determine the share of the budget for cross-domain research.

The current division between the domains has grown historically; there is no
specific basis for it. All budget applications are considered within one of the four
domains. There is currently no separate assessment procedure for proposals that
cross domain boundaries.
Overview
Our research shows that stakeholders consider the distribution of resources
primarily from two perspectives: equitability and effectiveness. A basis for budget
distribution should help achieve a distribution that is perceived as both fair and
effective. Moreover, a basis should be practical: the indicators on which it is based
should both adequately measure relevant arguments and have data available.

The question about cross-domain research was prompted by the observation that,
nowadays, many promising developments fall within the intersection of disciplines
and domains, including in basic research. The current division of domains may
hinder these developments.

A basis for budget allocation ideally takes into account a number of complicating
factors:
i) the cost of research varies widely between domains (depending on the
method of research and the resources needed for it: infrastructure, data,
computing power);
ii) available sources of funding vary (the availability of donations, private
funding, international funds);
iii) The importance of stability and a long-term perspective.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 5
Other countries
To get an idea of possible bases for budget allocation, we consulted public
research funders (research councils) in a number of surrounding countries. The
councils differ in the scope of their task (only funding academic research, or also
development and innovation) and in their position vis-à-vis their own funders. This
makes comparison between countries difficult. For instance, in the UK, Norway and
Sweden, councils’ spending is strongly determined by the priorities set by
ministries. The issue of budget allocation across domains is, therefore, less of an
issue.

Although all the research funders we consulted consider the question of a good
method of distribution relevant, the actual distribution across the countries we
examined appears to be largely historically determined and quite stable. We did not
find that the distribution in other countries leads to much controversy. Where a
council uses a method for budget distribution, it is relatively simple and aimed at
gradually adjusting the distribution to align with developments in research costs and
demand for funding.

A possible explanation for this can be found by looking at the procedures used in
other countries: not setting specific deadlines for submitting grant applications,
limiting opportunities for resubmission of proposals, and facilitating crossovers.
Types of bases for funding
We distinguish different (groups of) potential bases for budget allocation, based on:
• the demand for research funding,
• the quality of research, and
• the impact of research.
Bases for funding based on demand for research funding
The available research budget could be distributed based on actual or potential
funding demand from scientists. Higher demand from a domain could justify a larger
share of the budget. This demand for funding can be measured directly, by looking
at actual applications, or indirectly, by looking at the numbers of completed PhDs in
a domain, scientific staff, or research output. Depending on the weight given to
such indicators, their use can be expected to lead to smaller or larger shifts in the
budget distribution in favour of the domains with the lowest chances of being
honoured.

Several remarks can be made about available indirect indicators. For one, PhDs in
the medical domain are less likely to choose a research career than PhDs in other
domains. Secondly, scientific staff in the SGW domain are appointed with less
research time on average than those in the ENW domain. Lastly, publication

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 6
cultures in the various domains differ greatly, so that indicators for scientific
production based on publication data are not comparable.
Bases for funding based on quality or impact of research in a domain
The distribution of the available research budget could also be based partly on the
quality of research within a domain, or its impact. Higher quality and/or more impact
of a research project could legitimise a larger share of the budget. But, indicators of
quality and impact have important limitations. Publications and citations measure
scientific quality and scientific impact only indirectly and partially; they are
yardsticks that measure only certain aspects of quality and impact. Moreover,
because of the large differences in research practices, they are not suitable for
comparing domains.
Cross-domain applications
To better accommodate cross-domain proposals, we see two possibilities:
i) a structural adjustment in the form of a separate facility for applications,
or
ii) procedural adjustments to properly accommodate these proposals within
existing structures.
In principle, it is possible to allocate part of the total budget for cross-domain
applications and develop separate assessment procedures for these applications.
The alternative is creating more tailored assessment within the current domains.
Possibilities include giving applicants influence on which assessment panels assess
their application, or decoupling assessment from the question of which domain
funds a proposal.
How to proceed
Whether a budget allocation is fair and effective cannot be determined by looking at
the basis for budget distribution. The order should be the other way around: an idea
of what is equitable and effective determines which indicators to include in a basis.
However, the number of available indicators is limited and possibly insufficient to
arrive at a satisfactory basis, especially if it has to include quality and impact of
research in addition to demand for resources.

In light of this, several other interventions are worth considering, including balancing
procedures across domains, limiting opportunities to submit proposals repeatedly,
and promoting more coordination among research grant applicants.

A more radical option would be to place the Talent Programme, and perhaps the
Open Competition, outside the matter domains.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 7
Content
Foreword .............................................................................................................. 3
Summary .............................................................................................................. 4
Introduction .......................................................................................................... 9
1 Budget distribution ................................................................................... 12
2 Other countries ......................................................................................... 14
2.1 The position of research councils .............................................. 14
2.2 The distribution and allocation of budgets ............................... 16
2.3 A brief overview by country ........................................................ 17
3 Possible bases .......................................................................................... 19
3.1 Demand for funding .................................................................... 19
3.1.1 Number of applications in previous periods ............................. 20
3.1.2 Number of PhDs awarded ........................................................... 20
3.1.3 Size of the scientific staff ........................................................... 21
3.1.4 Research output .......................................................................... 22
3.2 The quality of research ............................................................... 23
3.2.1 Numbers of citations .......................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.2.2 Rankings ...................................................................................... 24
3.3 The impact of research ............................................................... 26
3.3.1 Careers ......................................................................................... 26
3.4 Additions...................................................................................... 28
4 Cross-domain research ............................................................................ 30
4.1 The scope of cross-domain research ........................................ 30
4.2 Cross-domain research in other countries ................................ 31
4.3 What to do with cross-domain research .................................... 32
5 In conclusion ............................................................................................. 34
5.1 Results ......................................................................................... 34
5.2 How to proceed ........................................................................... 36
Annex 1: research councils in other countries ................................................ 40
Annex 2: respondents ....................................................................................... 50

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 8
Annex 3: literature, digital sources ................................................................... 51

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 9
Introduction
In late 2022, NWO asked the Rathenau Instituut to conduct a study on possible
bases for the distribution of NWO funds for the Open Competition and the Talent
Programme. The aim of the study is to identify options and provide insight into the
advantages and disadvantages of different bases.

The method of distribution of the available budget among the four NWO domains,
as used in recent years, has developed historically. The question of what the
rationale behind the distribution is, and whether it should be based on more of an
explicit basis, is being discussed again at each funding round. In this study, we use
the term ‘basis for funding/grant distribution’ to mean one or more variables in a
functional relationship: a formula.
Motivation
There are several reasons to address this issue now:
• Some stakeholders feel that the distribution of funds has become unbalanced
over time. They do not perceive the current distribution as fair because success
rates vary widely between domains.
• For the two instruments mentioned, the budget has been substantially
increased by 2023. This raises the question of whether the additional funds
should be distributed among the domains according to the same distribution
key as the existing budget.
• NWO distributes funds for the Open Competition and the Talent Programme
across four domains, each of which encompasses a number of related
disciplines. Developments in science (and society) also – and perhaps
increasingly – demand research that transcends domain boundaries. There is
no separate counter for cross-domain research in the current system. A current
question is how a basis for budget distribution could best accommodate this
research.
Research questions
NWO’s Governing Board (BoG) has expressed its intention to reflect in 2022-2023
on the distribution of NWO’s Open Competition funds among the four NWO
divisions of exact and natural sciences (ENW), social sciences and humanities
(SGW), applied and technical sciences (TTW) and medical sciences (ZonMw). A
similar question can be asked for the other major NWO programme implemented by

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 10
the domains: the NWO Veni/Vidi/Vici talent programme. The BoG has asked for
external advice on this distribution issue.

Thus, NWO has formulated the following questions:
1. What principles can NWO apply to the distribution of funds for the Open
Competition and the Talent Programme Veni/Vidi/Vici across its domains?
What bases are known from literature or experience of other (international)
councils, for example?
a. What is the justification for each of these bases, and what objections
might they raise?
b. Which bases are practical? For example, are underlying data available, or
easily made available?
2. What bases lead to an indication of the size of cross-domain research? How
can NWO possibly apply them for the allocation of funds to cross-domain
research in Open Competition and Talent Programme?
3. How can NWO adapt the distribution mode(s) that follow from the bases
mentioned in 1. and 2. to changing circumstances in the future?
Approach
To arrive at the results we describe in this report, we delved into the information
found on the websites of the various public research funders (research councils) in
a number of reference countries. We held interviews with staff from foreign funders
to discover how they allocate budgets across domains. We held interviews with
representatives of stakeholders in the Netherlands, in which we asked for their
views on the topic of budget distribution.
Delineation
This report deals with budget allocation for two instruments: the Open Competition
and the Talent Programme. These two instruments are intended for free, curiosity-
driven research. For thematic research and for funding scientific infrastructure,
NWO has other instruments. These are beyond the scope of our study. This report
is not about the extent to which NWO’s programme lines match the societal needs
of the Netherlands and how the Open Competition and the Talent Programme fit in.
In this report, we suggest a number of possible bases for budget allocation, without
making a judgement on the desirability of the different variants. However, we do
indicate the limitations of different possible bases.

This report has been written on the basis of the information gathered during our
orientation by analysing the available documentation and conducting interviews. It
offers no more than an eclectic overview of foreign systems and of current opinions

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 11
on this topic among stakeholders in the Netherlands. It limits itself to answering the
questions posed, using the information obtained as a source of inspiration.

The main question NWO has put to us is about possible bases for budget
distribution. The question to us is not whether the budget distribution across
domains as it is now should change and whether it should be based on a
foundation. During our research, we came across a variety of views on this. We
touch on these views in this report, but do not provide a balanced overview of them,
let alone a unified answer to this question. We also do not answer the question of
whether promoting bottom-up, curiosity-driven research is a task best invested in
NWO’s domains.

The additional question NWO asked us was about an indication of the extent of
cross-domain research and how to use it in the allocation of funds to this type of
research. We were not asked how important cross-domain research is for the
development of science and society, nor whether cross-domain research proposals
structurally come off less well in the current assessment and funding system and
whether reserving funds for this research is therefore desirable. We also
encountered divergent views on these issues in our research. We touch upon them
in this report, but do not provide any empirical evidence or pass judgment on them.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 12
1 Budget distribution
Before addressing the question on what possible bases a budget distribution for the
Open Competition and the Talent Programme could be based, it is useful to reflect
on the requirements that a budget distribution should ideally meet. This will clarify
what a budget distribution system, whether based on a foundation or not, should
achieve.

We have come across the following requirements:
• Fairness: a budget distribution should be perceived as fair by stakeholders.
While few will dispute the importance of fairness, opinions do differ on what is
fair. Is it fair if all researchers who apply for the instruments in question have an
equal chance of being funded? Or does justice require first and foremost that
the best proposals be funded?
• Effectiveness – supporting the goals of the instruments: the Open Competition
and the Talent Programme are there to fund free, curiosity-driven research
across the full breadth of science, in order to arrive at new, preferably ground-
breaking scientific insights and thus create a breeding ground in terms of
knowledge and capacity for further fundamental, thematic and applied
research.

For a budget distribution to be perceived as legitimate by the field, it is necessary
that it is seen as fair and effective. The field will only perceive a distribution as such
if it is based on a clear and transparent argument. A quantitative basis could play a
role in this.

There is disagreement among stakeholders on the above requirements, in
particular on whether the current budget distribution is fair or not, and whether the
distribution adequately supports the objectives of the instruments or not. A shared
view of the extent to which the current budget distribution is equitable and effective
would be a first step towards answering the question of whether something should
be done to the distribution system, for instance by basing it on a foundation.

The debate on the distribution of resources is conducted against the background of
diverging images of the future of science, and thus of the function of the Open
Competition and the Talent Programme in the set of funding instruments. Some of
our interlocutors see a future mainly in more cooperation in larger, often
interdisciplinary programmes. This is where the Open Competition and the Talent
Programme should fit in. Others believe that scientific progress is primarily served

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 13
by giving free rein to the curiosity of individual scientists and the work that this
inspires. They value the Open Competition and the Talent Programme as the
instruments par excellence to provide the necessary space for independent
research.

Besides these requirements that a budget distribution should meet, we also came
across a few factors that a distribution system could or should take into account. On
these, we have come across less discussion in the field. These factors include:
• Differences in cost of research. Research in some disciplines, not only in
most humanities, but also, for example, in mathematics, is significantly cheaper
than research in other disciplines such as medical sciences. Therefore, a
budget allocation could take into account: i) the average cost of a research
project within a domain, or ii) the average amount requested within a domain
over the past three years (in cases where that amount is not capped ex ante).
• Alternative sources of funding. For example, for the medical domain, unlike
the other domains, funds are available from public fundraising and from the
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport. For a number of, mostly technical,
disciplines, more funds are available from contract research, including Horizon
Europe, than for others. To the extent that this funds curiosity-driven research,
one can let this influence the budget distribution.
• A good balance between predictability and flexibility. On the one hand, a
budget distribution should have a certain degree of stability over the years. Too
much fluctuation in the distribution of funds makes planning difficult, both for
funders and potential applicants. On the other hand, insights or circumstances
may change over time and a budget distribution should be able to respond to
those.

If adjusting the budget distribution is desirable, it could be done by grounding the
distribution on a basis. A question to ask with any possible basis is whether it can
lead to a budget distribution that meets the requirements of equitability and
effectiveness. To answer this question, two steps are necessary. The first is to
determine whether, in principle, a basis leads to such a budget distribution. Then, it
is to determine whether that can be the case in practice, given what data is and is
not available and to what extent those indicators reflect what the basis would like to
measure.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 14
2 Other countries
Before looking more closely at possible bases for funding distribution, we briefly
describe how science councils in other countries deal with the distribution of
budgets across disciplines. In this chapter we sketch a general picture; in Annex 1
we provide additional information per country. In consultation with NWO, we looked
at the situation in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland, Belgium (Flanders),
Germany and the UK.
2.1 The position of research councils
There are considerable differences between the research councils we looked at for
this study. Some, like NWO, invest exclusively in academic research at public
knowledge institutions. Others, like the Norwegian council, also fund innovation at
companies. In doing so, they combine the function of NWO and RVO (the part of
the Dutch ministry of economic affairs that stimulates innovation). Whereas NWO
does not invest in research at national knowledge institutions and RTO institutions
(public knowledge institutions for applied research), the German council does to
some extent. We also see this broader target group in Norway and the UK.

In most countries, the council is not the only source of research funding. Just as in
the Netherlands other ministries besides the ministry of education, culture and
science (OCW) also fund scientific research (including the ministries of economic
affairs, health and agriculture), this also happens in Norway, the UK, Sweden and
Germany. In addition, scientists also have access to European Union programmes.

Furthermore, the organisational position differs from country to country. In some
countries, a counterpart of OCW directs the council and in others, e.g. the UK, it is
a ministry primarily dealing with economic affairs. Funding usually comes from the
departmental budget, but is sometimes supplemented by additional resources from
other departments.

The councils also differ widely in the degree of autonomy they have in spending
funds. Those of Finland, Denmark and Germany are largely autonomous, similar to
NWO. There are also some, for example those of the UK, Norway and Sweden,
which receive clear instructions from their parent or co-funding department
regarding substantive priorities. This is somewhat similar to the relationship of the

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 15
Dutch ministry of health to ZonMw. Where this is the case, the ex-ante distribution
of resources across domains and topics is a given.

Box 1 Autonomy or politics
Different countries interpret the role of departments in relation to funders
(councils) in various ways:

Setting frameworks. In this model, the department’s role is limited to that
of setting the budget. This is a matter of political decision-making, for
which the usual budget cycles are followed. This usually leads to fairly
stable or slightly increasing budgets. Decisions on spending are in the
hands of the funder. This involves the division between fundamental and
strategic research, between funding of individuals and of consortia,
between disciplines and domains, and ultimately between the various grant
applications. Usually, scientific criteria and advice from (often international
panels of) peers are decisive.

Guiding on outlines. The department, and thus politics, not only
determines the larger frameworks, but also determines the distribution of
money across instruments (across programmes, across types of spending
such as infrastructures or careers) or across domains and/or research
themes. This leads to arguments such as innovation potential and
competitiveness playing a role in the decision-making process, in addition
to scientific criteria. The funder decides on the allocation of funds to
projects.

Steering in detail. Politics plays a defining role down to the level of
decision-making on projects. The council advises on the distribution of
money across instruments and domains and on project funding, partly on
the basis of peer review, and the ministry decides. The council mainly has
an executive task and monitors the scientific quality of the research to be
carried out.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 16
2.2 The distribution and allocation of budgets

When we looked into budget distribution of other countries, we could not find a clear
story about why the distribution of budgets across disciplines is as it is. On further
enquiry, concerning the part of the funding that goes to fundamental research,
some councils, such as the Danish and Norwegian councils, do use a formula to
adjust the distribution over time. These are fairly simple keys, which take into
account developments in the demand for funding (in terms of funds requested and
numbers of applicants), and do not lead to large shifts in the distribution from year
to year. None of our interlocutors from other countries indicated that the distribution
used leads to much tension and discussion. Reportedly, distributions of budgets
across domains are generally quite stable and fairly widely accepted. This may
have to do with the fact that adjustments, insofar as they take place, are based on a
formula. It may also have to do with the fact that the design of the system is less
rigid than the Dutch system: there are more opportunities to work across domain
boundaries and, for example, assess and/or fund projects together. For example,
the German DFG works with four domains and, below them, 48 separate funding
boards, managed by nine departments of the organisation. Thereby, the content of
an application may result in its assessment and funding being spread across
several funding boards.

How the distribution across disciplines works out in different countries is difficult to
visualise from the available data. The division into domains varies greatly from
country to country. Moreover, it is far from clear whether the available figures refer
to spending in universities of resources on free, curiosity-driven research.

Procedures used by councils are similar. Reviews of proposals are all done in peer-
review committees, which give advice to the final decision-makers. Especially small
countries see to it that the reviewers do not come from within the country or at least
some come from abroad.

In some countries, such as the UK and Norway, impact is explicitly mentioned as a
criterion in funding decisions. Domains such as life sciences, medicine and
technical sciences then have an advantage over more fundamental disciplines
because impact is much easier to demonstrate or make plausible there. Whether
this also leads to those fields actually being better off financially is not explicitly
stated.

The low level of funding rates is an issue in all countries, but more of a concern in
some countries than in others. Concerns about the low level of funding are
significantly higher in countries such as Germany, the UK and Flanders than in

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 17
Finland, Denmark, Norway and the Netherlands. To address this, some countries,
including Norway, limit the number of applicants by imposing conditions on
resubmission, as does the European Commission. In doing so, individuals whose
applications have been assessed as unsatisfactory cannot reapply for a period of
one or two years afterwards.

Countries deal differently with the assessment of inter- and transdisciplinary
research. In Denmark, Flanders and Finland, separate committees aimed at
assessing interdisciplinary research exist for this purpose, in addition to the
disciplinary-oriented committees. In Germany, applicants can indicate by which of
the 48 disciplinary funding boards, or a combination thereof, they want to be
assessed and funded.
2.3 A brief overview by country
In Sweden, the VR (Vetenskapsrådet) has a limited mandate: the spending of 80%
of the money is guided in terms of content and procedure by detailed annual
regulations from the government. There are three scientific councils (the technical
sciences and natural sciences fall under the same council) and a few committees.
The budget distribution among the councils has been stable for years and it is not
clear what it is based on. Because most of the money is mandated by the
government, the scope of possible bases would be relatively marginal. For the part
that the VR can decide, variables such as the number of applications, the number
of scientific staff and the cost of research have been considered in the past, as well
as how other countries address the issue. No further changes to the distribution key
have resulted from that, except an adjustment of the budget for social sciences and
humanities to bring the distribution more in line with those in other countries. As
elsewhere, history determines the distribution.

Norway has a science council (RCN) with 16 portfolio boards. Of these, 13 are
subject-focused. Three fund basic research and each serves a specific discipline
group. The distribution of funds among the portfolio boards is determined by the
interplay of the ministries involved. The three basic research boards are funded by
the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Science. Among these three, the budget
distribution was determined at one time in the past on the basis of the number of
scientists in the various fields at the universities. Nowadays, three-quarters of the
distribution is based on last year’s budgets and the remaining quarter on the share
of applications. If a certain field receives many applications, it gets slightly more
money. This system leads to gradual fluctuations each year.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 18
The Science Council of Denmark (DFF) has six domains and one interdisciplinary
domain. Again, there is a traditional ratio of budgets per domain. Small variations
per year are achieved by basing the distribution 60% on the previous year’s
distribution, 30% on the average amount granted over the past three years and
10% on the number of applications in the last three years.

In Finland, the Academy of Sciences (AKA) works with three research councils and
a more finely-meshed division into discipline groups. The distribution of budgets
among the councils is not predetermined. Proposers indicate within which councils
they want to be assessed. Fees do not vary much per year and per research
council. So there are no predetermined distributions and there is no formula for this.

In Flanders, the public research funding body (FWO) does not apply a
predetermined budget distribution across its six domains (one of which is cross-
disciplinary). Applicants submit proposals, indicating themselves within which
domain they want to be assessed and funded. Evaluation panels use a uniform
system to award points to proposals. FWO then funds the proposals with the
highest scores. Over the years, this system results in very limited changes in the
budgets per domain. The award chances per domain are very close to each other.
1

Germany’s science funding body (DFG) also does not assume a predetermined
distribution among science fields, and thus does not use a basis for distribution. Yet
that distribution is remarkably constant over the years. Again, applicants indicate
within which fields and which of the 48 funding boards (or combinations thereof)
they want to submit.

In the UK, the Ministry of Economic Affairs (BEIS) is the primary funder. Spending
is specific in nature, as the target groups for funding are not only universities, but
also public knowledge institutions and companies. A basis for distribution is actually
not an issue. The government determines the budget; the councils have to
demonstrate that proposals show scientific quality and will have impact. Proposals
from the council (UKRI) and the Royal Academy of Science are an input for the
government to determine the distribution. We have no information on how UKRI
and the academy arrive at their proposals.

1 Scientific Research Fund Flanders (2023b).

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 19
3 Possible bases
In this chapter, we identify possible bases for the distribution of Open Competition
and Talent Programme budgets across the four NWO domains. We found three
groups of possible bases that influence the perceived fairness and/or effectiveness
of budget distribution:
1. Foundations that measure current or potential demand for funding;
2. Foundations that measure the quality of research in a domain;
3. Foundations that measure the (scientific or societal) impact of research in a
domain.
The sections below discuss these three groups.
3.1 Demand for funding
A basis for budget allocation could take into account the potential demand for
funding from the relevant field of researchers. The idea here would be that a higher
demand for funding justifies a larger share of the budget. To measure potential
demand, we see the following possibilities:
• applications in previous periods;
• numbers of promotions per year in the different fields;
• the size of the scientific staff within the various fields at universities and
academic hospitals;
• the extent of research output in the different domains.
In the table below, we give the figures for each of these indicators for 2022. Use of
the indicator ‘applications in previous periods’ we have also encountered abroad.
The impact of the use of (a combination of) the mentioned indicators becomes clear
at once in the table below. ENW shows a downward trend, while ZonMw in
particular shows an upward trend.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 20
Domain Possible indicators Distribution in 2022
Previous
appli-
cations
PhDs
awarded
Acade-
mic staff
Re-
search
output
Open
Compe
tition
Talent
line
Total
both
instru-
ments
ENW ? 19% 13% 34% 46% 37% 42%
SGW ? 25% 30% 14% 23% 33% 28%
TTW ? 18% 20% 12% 20% 12% 16%
ZonMw ? 38% 37% 39% 12% 18% 14%
Sources: PhDs: CBS (2022); WP: Rathenau Institute (2023) and (2021); output research: Rathenau Institute
(2022a).2
3.1.1 Number of applications in previous periods
This indicator refers to grant applications in one or more previous periods, in terms
of numbers and/or in terms of euros.

We know of no publications or data files in which figures on the numbers of
applications and requested budgets are given for the two NWO programmes
separately. However, the basic material for this is expected to be available in the
NWO organisation.

This indicator could be further refined by counting only those proposals that came
out as qualitatively up to par in the assessment. If there are relatively few proposals
in a given domain, but many of them have a good rating, this should have a positive
impact on the base. Just the number of proposals or amounts requested may not
say enough. By including the evaluation of proposals, the perverse incentive to just
submit a large quantity of low quality applications can be partly overcome.
3.1.2 Number of PhDs awarded
The number of PhDs awarded per year is accurately known. The most commonly
used figures are those from CBS, because they include healthcare PhDs, where

2 Notes:
• Figures on the number of PhDs by discipline are presented annually by CBS. CBS uses a discipline
classification with ten categories. These are traced to NWO’s four domains.
• The Rathenau Institute presents fact sheets on staffing at universities. That does not include medics and
the primary data on them have been provided by the NFU to the Rathenau Institute for several years. In
turn, both sources can be traced back to the personnel records of universities and UMCs. The data have
been traced back to the classification of NWO domains.
• The data on publication output have their source in the Web of Science Database. The classification into
six main areas has been traced back to the NWO domains.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 21
those are missing from the data of Rathenau Institute and Universities of the
Netherlands (UNL). CBS’s classification is a different one from NWO’s, but can be
more or less reduced to that by redirections:
• ENW: CBS code 5 (mathematics, natural sciences) and 6 (computer science);
• SGW: CBS code 1 (education), 2 (design, arts, languages and history), 3
(journalism, behaviour and society) and 4 (law, administration, commerce and
business services);
• TTW: CBS code 7 (engineering, industry and construction) and 8 (agriculture,
veterinary and animal care);
• ZonMw: CBS code 9 (health and welfare).
The table above is based on figures from one specific year. To avoid excessive
fluctuations, it would be better to work with a moving average over a number of
years.

Looking at the numbers of PhDs, it is striking that ENW receives more than twice as
much budget as would be expected based on these numbers alone, and that this is
mainly at the expense of ZonMw, which receives only a little over a third of what
this indicator would suggest. Looking at the Talent programmes alone, SGW has
relatively more and TTW less budget to distribute.

The number of PhDs is a very rough indicator of the demand for research funding.
The extent to which PhDs apply for the Talent Programme or the Open Competition
differs between fields. For example, we see a relatively large proportion of the total
number of PhDs in medical sciences. However, it is known that PhDs there are
mostly written as a stepping stone to training as a medical specialist, rather than
with a view to a research career. A high proportion of PhDs in healthcare therefore
does not mean that there is a high demand for participation in NWO and ZonMw
programmes.

It is also known that PhDs in engineering are much more likely to be found outside
university than those in social sciences and humanities. The same is also true, but
slightly less so, for those in the natural sciences.
3
3.1.3 Size of the scientific staff
Dutch universities and UMCs employ scientists in various positions, from PhD to full
professor. NWO’s various instruments each target particular positions. From the

3 Koier, E. and J. de Jonge (2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 22
Rathenau Institute’s figures, aggregate data can be extracted of the size of the
workforce per field of science. The original sources are UNL’s WOPI files and the
NFU (Dutch federation of academic hospitals) system. These can be converted into
NWO’s classification of research domains. In doing so, the Economy, Behaviour
and Society, Law, Education and Language and Culture sectors have been
allocated to the SGW domain, Technology and Agriculture to TTW, Nature to ENW
and Health to ZonMw. The figures all refer to numbers in FTEs.

This indicator presents a similar picture to that of PhDs awarded. Largely the same
remarks apply here as for the PhD indicator. For ENW it pans out somewhat more
extreme: it receives more than three times the budget than would be expected
based on this indicator.

One factor limiting the value of this indicator is that there is no one-to-one
relationship between the background or workplace of researchers and the domain
to which they apply for funding. Depending on their research proposal, for example,
researchers from outside technical universities submit applications to TTW and
researchers at academic hospitals submit applications to ENW or researchers at
science faculties submit applications to SGW.

For this indicator, it should be noted that there is a difference between the size of
scientific staff and the size of research capacity. Not everyone belonging to the
academic staff has research tasks of equal size. In disciplines where student
numbers have grown most rapidly while lump sum funding for research has not kept
up, research appointments are more limited on average. The question is whether a
base should be based on the distribution of staff numbers across domains, or on
the ratio of research capacity across domains.
3.1.4 Research output
An important indicator of the volume of research production is the number of
articles in scientific journals. This involves English-language, peer-reviewed
journals. In the table above, we use the Rathenau Institute’s figures based on data
from Web of Science.
4

We note that where the medical field gets only one-seventh of the funds from these
two programmes, it produces four out of ten scientific articles. In contrast, the social
sciences and humanities receive a larger share of funds relative to scientific
production. The other two domains are in between.

4 Rathenau Institute (2022a).

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 23

This indicator also has its own limitations. It is important to keep in mind here that
publication cultures vary for the different domains. Particularly for the SGW domain,
many results here are not published as articles in English-language journals, but as
articles in another language, which therefore do not appear in the Web of Science,
or as books, whose writing is relatively time-consuming.
3.2 The quality of research
A basis for budget distribution could take into account the development of research
quality in the different domains. The idea behind this could be that a domain should
receive a larger share of the budget the higher the quality of its research: backing
winners. Of course, an alternative idea could be that a successful domain actually
needs less support. Citations are a common, but not necessarily a useful measure
of quality. Another indicator of quality can be derived from international university
rankings.

The nature of research varies widely across fields and even disciplines. In some
disciplines, there is some agreement on intellectual priorities, the research agenda
and the definition of quality, while in others there are competing paradigms and
agendas. In some disciplines, (large-scale) collaboration is common or even
necessary, while in others research is rather an individual activity. Between
disciplines there are strong differences in methods, routines and cultures of
research.
5 Also, publication and citation habits differ widely. All this means that
comparisons of research quality between domains are not very meaningful.
Nevertheless, below we pay attention to the bases for budget distribution that might
make use of them.
3.2.1 Citation index
The quality of research is often described in terms of the citation index. This index
indicates how often an article is cited by other authors. The global average is
normalised to the value of 1. A score above 1 means that the particular article from
which the index is calculated is cited more than the average and a score below 1
the reverse. It is thus a score of scientific impact. The citation index can be
calculated for a single article, for a single author but also for an entire country or –
and this is the point here – for a domain in a country.

5 Scholten, W., L. van Drooge and P. Diederen (2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 24
Figure 1
Development of the Dutch research profile (2004-2020)

Note: In this graph, the citation impact score is plotted against the percentage of Dutch articles in the total number
of articles in a science field. The arrows indicate the development from 2004 to 2020.
Source: Rathenau Institute (2022b).

Figure 1 above shows how five Dutch science fields developed between 2004 and
2020 (due to limited data in the Web of Science database, the humanities are not
shown). The citation impact score has increased for all except natural sciences. Its
score was a lot higher than that of the other fields at the beginning of the period;
although it has decreased, it is still above the others. The Netherlands is in the top
five best scoring countries in all fields, but there are differences. Because we do not
have data for much of the SGW domain for this indicator, we have not translated it
into a budget distribution per domain.

Citations can give an indication of research quality within a domain, but they are at
best a partial and indirect indicator. They are certainly not suitable for comparing
research quality across domains.
3.2.2 Rankings
An alternative could be to use university rankings. The CWTS Leiden Ranking
differentiates by five domains, namely: biomedical and health sciences, life and
earth sciences, mathematics and computer science, physical sciences and
engineering and social sciences and humanities. These domains are not very
similar to NWO’s domains. The QS World University Rankings by Subject

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 25
distinguishes five domains that, when the last two are combined, are much more
similar to NWO’s:6
i) natural sciences;
ii) engineering and technology;
iii) life sciences and medicine;
iv) arts and humanities;
v) social sciences and management.
If Dutch universities rise faster in one of the domains than in other domains, this
could be a reason to increase that domain’s budget share, for example.

By way of illustration, the table below shows the development of the average scores
of Dutch universities in the five QS domains. For this, we used the 2020 and 2023
QS data.7

Domains Average score NL universities
2020 2023 Difference
Life sciences and medicine 75,7 73,3 -2,42
Natural sciences 72,9 72,6 -0,30
Arts and humanities 74,1 71,6 -2,54
Engineering and technology 72,1 70,8 -1,33
Social sciences and management 71,3 69,9 -1,38

The average scores of Dutch universities do not vary widely across the different
domains. In both 2020 and 2023, life sciences and medicine scored highest and
engineering and technology and social sciences and management scored second-
lowest and lowest, respectively. Natural sciences and arts and humanities switched
places. Between 2020 and 2023, the scores of all domains decreased, those of
natural sciences the least and those of arts and humanities and life sciences and
medicine the most.
8 Were a distribution base to move with the change in scores, it
would be at the expense of the latter two.

6 The similarity is not exact. For example, agriculture and forestry falls under life sciences and medicine at QS,
but does not fall under ZonMw in the Netherlands. Given that QS also makes available disaggregated data,
this could be corrected for.
7 QS World University Rankings by Subject 2023.
8 Interestingly, the scores of the domains in the QS ranking decreased between 2020 and 2023, while the
citation impact scores of some domains increased between 2004 and 2020. The QS ranking is based on a
number of indicators, of which citations is one. See the QS World University Rankings by Subject 2023
website for details.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 26
3.3 The impact of research
A basis for budget allocation could also be based on an indicator of the impact of
research from different domains has. The idea behind this would be that a domain
whose research has more impact should receive a larger share of the budget.
Impact is not a property of the research itself, but is a consequence of the research.
A distinction is often made between societal (including economic) and scientific
impact. With the Open Competition and the Talent Programme, the main focus is
on scientific impact. Societal impact is not an objective here.

When it comes to measurement, scientific impact is indistinguishable from research
quality. This has already been addressed in the previous section. Societal impact of
curiosity-driven research within a domain is completely impossible to measure. In
general, it is impossible to establish a direct relationship between certain research
and specific societal changes, because all kinds of additional factors come into play
over a long period of time. A secondary impact of research, indirect but intended, is
the effect of the two instruments in question on researchers’ career development.
This could perhaps be included in a basis for budget distribution.
3.3.1 Careers
In particular, the three components of NWO’s Talent Programme are intended for
separate phases of the scientific career: newly promoted, several years of
experience and senior researcher. The aim here is to facilitate the next step in the
career: getting a permanent appointment, going through a tenure track and
developing one’s own research group.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 27
Figure 2

Career development of grant recipients of the NWO Talent Programme, 2002-2021 (in percentages): i) postdocs, ii)
assistant professors, iii) associate professors, iv) full professors
Source: Rathenau Institute (2022d).

Figure 2 gives an impression of the extent to which a Talent grant actually makes
that next career step attainable. It shows what happens to researchers’ tenure
between the award of a Veni, Vidi or Vici grant and the end of their project. Many
researchers move on to a higher scientific position during their awarded project. For
example, the share of postdocs among Veni laureates decreases by 34%, while the
share of UDs increases by 20%. With Vidi and Vici, besides the share of postdocs,
the share of UDs also decreases significantly. After being awarded a Vici, almost
half of the laureates receive a chair.

If these data are available by domain, they can be used in a basis for budget
allocation. But data are limited here. Due to GDPR restrictions, it is no longer
possible to track individuals longitudinally, let alone identify differences between
domains. With the current data, it is not possible to find out whether laureates make
career moves or not. If this is to be included in a basis for budget distribution, more
detailed data are needed.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 28
3.4 Additions
To conclude this chapter, we briefly draw attention to three aspects that are
important in the design of a base for budget allocation: the functional form of a
base, the use of growth rates, and additional possible arguments for a base..
Functional form
A basis for budget allocation can be based on one or more of the indicators we
have described above. The functional form of a basis can be made very
complicated, but it can also be very simple and transparent. A good example is the
distribution key used in Denmark: the share of the total budget a domain receives is
equal to 60% of the budget share from the previous year; of the remaining 40%,
three quarters is distributed based on the average amount applied for from the
domains in the past three years, and one quarter based on the average number of
applicants in the past three years from the domains:

Budget sharet = 60% budget sharet-1 + 30% share of total amount requested t-1 ... t-3 +
10% share of total number of applicants t-1 ... t-3.

This allocation key ensures stability on the one hand and, on the other, that it
moves with (in this case) the demand for funding. The ratio between stability and
responsiveness is easy to adjust by choosing a ratio other than 60 / 40.
Levels or relative changes
One problem with many indicators mentioned in this chapter is that they turn out
very differently in different domains. Numbers of publications and citations,
numbers of collaborations, qualities of project proposals, amounts requested per
project proposal: all such variables have a domain-specific character because
research routines differ. This means that the levels of these variables cannot be
compared between domains in a meaningful way. Therefore, it is better to work with
growth rates rather than level variables in a base. For example, what matters for
next year’s budget distribution is not so much what the numbers of citations within
the different domains are, but rather how big their increase or decrease is. Given an
initial budget distribution, its dynamics can be made dependent on the relative
changes in the parameters to be chosen.
Incentive effect
There is an incentive associated with each budget allocation base. If the base
contains a certain variable, this leads to behaviour to influence that variable in a
favourable direction. In doing so, it is important to keep two things in mind. First, if
the indicators in a base deviate from the purpose of the financing instrument, this
leads to a perverse incentive. This is the case, for example, when an indicator of

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 29
actual or potential demand for funding is included in the base. This further fuels
financing demand. Ceteris paribus, this leads to even lower award rates. Second, if
indicators measure the purpose of the funding instrument, but do so in an imperfect
or partial way, a perverse incentive also arises from this. This can happen, for
instance, if quality or impact is measured by citations. Then the basis encourages
researchers to focus on measured quality (more citations, higher rankings), and not
necessarily on desired quality. How strong this incentive effect is cannot be said.

Perverse incentives also lead to loss of efficiency. A budget distribution key based
on the level of demand for resources provokes more demand. This may involve
both more proposals being submitted and proposals asking for more resources. If
more proposals are submitted, it leads to more costly evaluation procedures and to
more rejections of proposals that are good but still cannot be honoured. This is at
the expense of the efficiency of the grant instruments.

Whereas a budget distribution based on a formula can lead to perverse incentives,
a stable budget distribution determined on historical grounds leads to self-
reinforcing effects. For example, if the historical distribution proportionally funds a
specific domain generously, this leads to capacity growth in this domain, thereby
increasing demand for resources and perpetuating the original imbalance.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 30
4 Cross-domain research
Following the main question on possible bases for budget allocation, NWO asked
us a secondary question: ‘What bases lead to an indication of the size of cross-
domain research? How can NWO possibly apply these for the allocation of funds to
cross-domain research in Open Competition and Talent Programme?‘

Virtually all our respondents in this survey endorse the importance of cross-domain
research. A number of them expect scientific progress at the interfaces of
disciplines, not only in applied research, but also in basic research. Therefore, they
feel it is important that there is sufficient room for cross-domain research proposals,
also within programmes for curiosity-driven research such as the Open Competition
and the Talent Programme. They fear that within the existing structure, there are
too few opportunities for cross-domain research.
4.1 The scope of cross-domain research
To determine the scope of cross-domain research within the Open Competition and
the Talent Programme, first of all, a characterisation and delineation of cross-
domain research is needed. To qualify as cross-domain research requires more
than researchers from different domains being involved. Cross-domain research is
a form of interdisciplinary research. For a further characterisation of interdisciplinary
research, please refer to Knowledge Platform for Inter- and Transdisciplinary
Research established by NWO for this purpose and to the system used by the
Flemish Research Council FWO to distinguish interdisciplinary research proposals.

The simplest way to determine the extent of cross-domain research is then to
categorise and count submitted and awarded research proposals in terms of
numbers and requested budgets. This allows the shares of requested and allocated
funding to be calculated.

Other variables could also be used, analogous to those mentioned in the previous
chapter, such as the extent of cross-domain research output, the number of
references to cross-domain research, or the number of career moves to a research
position of a cross-domain nature. If such indicators say anything at all about the
extent of cross-domain research, they do so in a very indirect way. Moreover, due
to small numbers and data limitations, using these variables seems impractical.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 31
4.2 Cross-domain research in other countries
What is considered cross-domain research in different countries depends on the
division into domains. This varies somewhat between countries. A proposal that is
cross-domain in the Netherlands because it belongs to both TTW and ENW is not
seen as being cross-domain in Sweden, for example, because there it falls under
the domain ‘nature and technology’. This makes it difficult to compare numbers of
cross-domain proposals across countries.

Moreover, the distinction between domain-specific and cross-domain research is
inappropriate in many countries. In many councils, a significant part of their
spending is already driven by theme-oriented decisions by central government, for
example in Sweden, Norway and the UK.

There are three ways for a research funder to deal with research that belongs to
multiple domains:
• Establish a separate facility for applications for cross-domain research, in
addition to facilities for individual domains.
• Do not set up a separate facility, but make it as easy as possible to fund
research from the budgets of different domains.
• Fund research along thematic lines, focusing on a specific topic and thus
potentially cross-domain.
Sweden does not have a separate facility for cross-domain research, but has
created framework conditions to enable interdisciplinary research. In the statistics,
cross-domain research does not appear as a separate category. There is relatively
large scope for thematic research and the lion’s share of the budget is spent on
that.

In Norway, research money is distributed through 16 councils. Thirteen of these are
strategic in nature and not disciplinary. Together, they spend 90% of the research
budget (at universities, research institutes and companies). Multidisciplinarity is
ingrained in these councils. There are three disciplinary councils (natural sciences
and engineering, life sciences, humanities and social sciences) that together spend
the remaining 10%. Among these three, there is no separate facility for cross-
domain grant applications.

Denmark’s research funding body DFF has five councils (natural sciences, medical
sciences, engineering, social sciences and humanities) and a cross-council
committee. This committee consists of the chairs of the five councils. It coordinates
the handling of cross-domain proposals. Researchers wishing to submit a proposal

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 32
to more than one domain submit it to the committee, which then decides which
procedure the application will go through. Councils can also submit a proposal to
the committee if they believe it partly belongs in another domain. For genuinely
cross-domain proposals, DFF has set aside a sum of money.

In Finland, the council distinguishes over 60 disciplines, divided into seven
discipline groups that fall into three domains. There is no specific focus on nor
reporting of cross-domain research.

Flanders distinguishes between fundamental research and strategic basic
research. Within basic research, there are 30 expert panels and one
interdisciplinary panel where grant applications are assessed. The number of
researchers with an interdisciplinary application is limited: 3% of pre-PhD applicants
and 4% of postdoc applicants.

In Germany, DFG does not have a separate counter for interdisciplinary research.
However, it does optimise the conditions to enable interdisciplinary research. There
are 48 separate councils, all of which have a disciplinary composition. Applicants
decide themselves by which council or combination of councils they want to be
assessed. This also leads to cross-border proposals being funded by different
councils. Statistical information on what proportion of spending is on cross-council
research (in money or number of applications) is not available.

In the UK, six research councils invest in research within as many disciplinary
domains and three councils invest in innovation, knowledge transfer and research
facilities. There is no separate counter for cross-domain research. However, some
projects are not assigned to one of the research councils but are submitted directly
to the UKRI umbrella organisation. Of these, no disciplinary origin is noted, nor is it
known whether they are interdisciplinary proposals and projects. At the time of
writing, UKRI is, however, in the process of putting together an interdisciplinary
assessment college.
4.3 What to do with cross-domain research
In principle, it is possible to allocate a budget for cross-domain research and open a
separate desk for it. This might be appropriate if cross-domain proposals within the
current assessment system are at a structural disadvantage compared to proposals
that fall within a single domain. This is the case, for example, when assessment
committees within domains are not well placed to appreciate the qualities of cross-
domain proposals.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 33
A separate facility and review process also has challenges. For instance, there are
numerous ways in which different disciplines can interact in a cross-domain
proposal. This complicates putting together good assessment committees.

An alternative is to create more opportunities for cross-domain proposals within
NWO’s current organisational structure. We see the following options (some
inspired by practices in several other countries – for details, see the description in
Annex 1):
• Adjust rules to make crossovers between domains easier (compare Germany).
This may involve submission of a grant application to more than one domain. It
may also involve submission to a domain other than the applicant’s own
discipline (e.g. an application from the medical field to ENW – after all, many
new developments in medicine have their origins in physics).
• Harmonise the procedures of the Open Competition across domains, issue
calls for proposals centrally and/or appoint assessment panels centrally,
instead of each domain board separately (compare Finland, Germany, Norway,
Flanders). When domains function less as parallel organisations organising
everything in their own way, and when more activities are arranged centrally
and along the same lines, crossovers may be easier to accommodate.
Continuously opening up schemes rather than issuing calls with specific closing
dates may help here.
• Ensure that whether a proposal fits within a specific domain is not an
assessment criterion in the review process. Decouple the review process from
the question of which budget the funding should come from.
• Allow submission and funding of proposals by two domains, especially where
domains overlap (compare Norway, Germany).
• Allow proposers to indicate by which review panel, or where desirable by which
panels, they would like their application to be reviewed (compare Germany,
Finland and Flanders). If applicants have a say in where they are assessed,
they can ensure that all relevant disciplines are involved in an assessment
process.
• Offer proposers the opportunity to have a proposal evaluated as a cross-
domain proposal. In that case, it is not only evaluated against the usual
(substantive and other) criteria, but additionally against specific evaluation
criteria for this type of proposal. This results in a score, which is weighted in the
overall judgement of the proposal (compare Flanders).

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 34
5 In conclusion
5.1 Results
We took stock of which bases for budget distribution are conceivable and practical.
Looking at the evidence, the following picture emerges. Three groups of bases are
conceivable:
• Bases for funding based on variables reflecting demand for funding
On the one hand, there are variables that measure demand quite directly:
numbers of proposals submitted or amounts requested per domain in the
recent past. On the other hand, there are indirect variables: promotions,
academic staff and research output per domain. Variables that measure the
demand for funding directly give a purer picture of the demand for funding than
indirect variables. A reason for using indirect variables nevertheless could be
that there is a perverse incentive from using direct indicators. Ex ante,
however, it is impossible to say how powerful this incentive is.
• Bases for funding based on variables measuring the quality of research
in a domain
Research quality is difficult to measure and certainly not easy to compare
between domains. The available variables (citations and rankings) measure
quality of research in a domain in a very specific, indirect and incomplete way.
There is something to be said for allowing research quality within domains to
play a role in budget allocation across domains. However, the practical
constraints for doing so are insurmountable.
• Bases for funding based on variables measuring the impact of research
in a domain
Not only the quality, but also the impact of research in a domain is not easy to
measure and compare across domains. After all, this is free, curiosity-driven
research. Scientific impact almost corresponds to quality of research: as
mentioned, it is not easy to measure. The full direct impact of free, curiosity-
driven research in a domain (scientific, economic and societal) is even less
traceable. Of the indirect impact, on career developments, for example, no
reliable measurements can be made.

In short, of all the possible variables that could be used as ingredients in a formula
for budget allocation, only the direct or indirect measurement of demand for funding
remain as practicable options. Furthermore, when looking at research funding

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 35
aborad, we have also not come across formulas for budget allocation that use other
variables – to the extent that such formulas are used there at all.

In addition to this, in the first chapter we mentioned three more aspects to consider
when allocating budgets across domains:
• Differences in research costs: average research costs vary across
disciplines. What the ratio is of the costs of research from different domains
can be seen from the amounts requested per research proposal in recent
years. To what extent the budget distribution across domains should
compensate for differences in research costs is a choice. The question is
whether and to what extent research costs should be an argument in the
selection of research to be funded in the Open Competition and the Talent
Programme. If costs are not an argument, then one can measure the direct
demand for funding mentioned above in terms of numbers of proposals
submitted. If cost is an argument, then one can measure the demand for
funding in terms of amounts requested. There are also intermediate routes
(compare Denmark).
• Alternative sources of funding: besides the funding by research councils,
there is research funding from contract research, from public fund raising and
from lump sum financing by government. Most funds from the latter sources are
not intended for free, curiosity-driven research. When it comes to the
distribution of budgets for the Open Competition and the Talent Programme,
funds from the first pillar (Excellent science) of Horizon Europe (ERC and
possibly MSCA) could be taken into account.
• Predictability and flexibility: on the one hand, a certain stability of budget
distribution is important, but on the other hand, the ability to adapt to changing
circumstances is also of importance. The simplest way to navigate this issue –
which we have also found abroad – is to split the total budget into two parts,
dividing one part based on the historical distribution key and the other on the
basis of a formula.
Regarding the size of cross-domain research, we found that a good way of
measuring the demand for funding for this type of research is by identifying which
submitted proposals meet criteria for this type of research. In principle, a share of
the total budget for cross-domain research could be determined on this basis.
However, we also concluded that setting up a separate facility for this research
does not solve any problems with the assessment of these proposals, and that
there are several procedural possibilities to better accommodate cross-domain
research.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 36
5.2 How to proceed
The ultimate question at stake is how to arrive at a budget distribution across
domains that is equitable and effective. Foundations for budget distribution cannot
answer that question by themselves. For that, it is necessary to first determine what
constitutes equitable and effective distribution.
Equitability
The main reason for questioning the fairness of the current budget distribution is the
disparity of award rates between domains. The ratio of budget demand to budget
availability varies considerably. While the Talent Programme funded 21% of
proposals at ENW in 2021, in the other domains it was 11% (see Figure 3). We
have no such figure for the Open Competition: whereas the domains execute the
Talent Programme along similar lines, in the Open Competition they each do so in
their own way.

Figure 3

Award rates per domain in the Talent Programme: i) ENW, ii) SGW, iii) TTW, iv) ZonMw, v) Total
Source: Rathenau Institute (2022f).9

If the intention of the Open Competition and the Talent Programme is to encourage
free, curiosity-driven research, one could argue that it should not matter for the
success rate whether the research proposal comes from one domain or the other.
Equal chances of honouring proposals of similar quality would be fair. But do

9 For the years 2007 to 2015, the data come from a file provided by NWO. In 2016 and 2017, the data come
from a printout of NWO’s project database. From 2018 onwards, the data are from the NWO website.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 37
unequal award rates indicate structural injustice? Or is something else going on.
For example:
• The design of instruments varies by domain. Some domains operate grant
rounds with periodic deadlines for proposal submission, while others work with
continuous submission. This leads to different dynamics. Deadlines lead to
more submissions, also of unsatisfactory proposals, as we heard from the
German DFG and from ENW, which has experience with both procedures.
Continuous submission encourages perfecting a proposal before submitting it
(compare also Germany). Deadlines therefore lead to more proposals per year
and lower award rates. The differences in the implementation of instruments
makes the award percentages in Figure 3 difficult to compare.
• The working conditions for researchers differ between domains. In one domain,
scientific staff have much more research time available in their appointment
than in another. For example, employees within the SGW domain have, on
average, more teaching duties than their colleagues within the ENW domain.
This has several effects. On the one hand, researchers with less research time
have less time to develop good research proposals. On the other hand, they
have a greater incentive to develop research proposals: external funding for
research is the only path to a university career for them. This also makes the
number of submissions across domains difficult to compare. Possibly, it is not
so much a lower available budget as a stronger application incentive and thus
a structurally higher number of submissions (especially if you measure it not
per researcher, but per research FTE) that explains lower award rates.
• The management of proposal submission varies between domains. Besides
institutions and research groups that tightly direct and dose grant applications,
there are also those that leave submission to the individual researcher or
reward periodic proposal submission. Such differences in application strategy
can lead to different numbers of applications across the four domains.
These three points show that award rates cannot simply be compared across
domains. Differences in outcomes may be caused by budget availability (the
numerator) and application volumes (the denominator), as determined in part by
procedure, circumstances, and management.
Effectiveness
Besides questioning equitability, comments can be made on the effectiveness of
the current allocation of resources. Resource allocation is effective if it contributes
to achieving the instruments’ goal. The Open Competition and the Talent
Programme promote free, curiosity-driven research across the full breadth of
science. At NWO, they are the main instruments for funding research and research
capacity development at the fundamental end of the research spectrum. There is no

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 38
thematic guidance regarding the proposals to be submitted to it. An issue is
whether this remains desirable:
• More attention could be paid to the balance in the research chain, between
investment in the more foundational research and the more application-
oriented research. Today’s curiosity-driven research provides the basis for the
application-oriented research of the future.
• More attention could be paid to societal needs. The government highly values
strategic autonomy, the business community likes to see key technologies
developed and society considers health in particular very important (see the
Dutch national science agenda NWA). At the moment, what proposals are
submitted is determined by the universities’ hiring policies, which in turn largely
depend on the demand for academic education and thus on the study choices
of high school graduates. The question is whether this is optimal.
With regard to effectiveness, it is also worth noting that a significant part of the
available resources (from research council funds and from the lump sum) are not
spent on conducting research or writing scientific articles, but on writing and
evaluating proposals that are never funded and implemented.
10 Thus, many
resources are not spent effectively.

A complicating factor in determining whether budget allocation is effective is that
the domains are very different in nature. The ENW and the SGW domains comprise
the basic science disciplines. At heart, the TTW domain and the ZonMw domain
focus much more on applied research. The different character of TTW and ZonMw
is reflected, among other things, in a different interpretation of the Open
Competition. TTW and ZonMw have substantial content overlap with the ENW
domain and with each other (and to a lesser extent with the SGW domain). This
leads to researchers from different constituencies submitting research proposals
not only to their ‘own’ domain, but also to the others. It is more complicated to
distribute a budget effectively (and equitably) across four disparate domains than
across four units that are of a similar character.
Intervention options
Taking steps to improve on the system of budget allocation for the Open
Competition and the Talent Programme starts with developing a shared view with
regard to equitability and effectiveness. Only then can we determine whether a
basis for budget distribution makes sense and what it might look like. The options
are limited.

In addition, there are other intervention options worth considering in this context:

10 Arensbergen, P. van, L.K. Hessels and B. van der Meulen (2013). See pp. 47-48, where it is calculated that
about a quarter of the Veni grant funds are spent on writing and selecting proposals.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 39
• Harmonise procedures. Do not work in one domain with periodic deadlines and
in the other with continuous submission of proposals. Of course, with
continuous submission, it is important to have sufficient budget to get through
most of the fiscal year, otherwise the incentive to submit too early remains.
• Limit opportunities to resubmit proposals (compare European Commission).
For example, set terms within which a revised proposal may not be
resubmitted.
• Promote more coordination among submitting disciplines. Uncoordinated
submission leads to inefficiency, duplication and a lot of extra work.
• To the extent it still happens: discourage universities from making the
submission of proposals or the acquisition of grants in the Open Competition or
the Talent Programme a part of their human resources policy.
• Develop a system for finding qualified reviewers of cross-domain proposals.
On a different tack
A further possibility to solve the problem of budget distribution across domains for
the Open Competition and/or the Talent Programme would be to not distribute the
available budget ex ante, but to make the distribution dependent on actual
submissions. Add up per domain the amounts requested – after filtering out the
proposals that do not meet the (formal or minimum quality) conditions – and take
the ratio between these numbers as the distribution key across the domains (this is
how it works in NWO’s Rubicon instrument). While this system has a considerable
incentive effect that may need to be addressed, it is the same for all domains.

An even more far-reaching possibility would be to place the Open Competition and
the Talent Programme outside the scope of domains. This could be done by
working entirely bottom-up. That it is possible to allocate funds for individual
research projects on the basis of competition, without predetermining in which
domain those funds should end up, is shown by the practice in Flanders and at the
ERC. One option would be to gather research proposals once or twice a year in a
central round and then channel them to a review panel for assessment. Several
dozens of these are necessary (Flanders has 32, Germany 48).

The applicants choose the review panel. If necessary, they request an additional
assessment by an expert with a disciplinary background not represented on the
panel. In Finland, where applicants can also choose their assessment panel, there
is the possibility of requesting the opinion of more than one panel. In Norway,
panels coordinate on their own initiative. Panels score proposals according to a
uniform system of criteria. The NWO Board then decides to honour the proposals
with the highest scores.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 40
Annex 1: research councils in other
countries
In this appendix, we provide additional information on the system of budget
allocation in a number of other European countries. We note a number of facts that
caught our eye and may be relevant in the light of the research questions we
answer in this report. Appendix 3 lists for each country the main written sources we
consulted.

In the main text, experiences of other countries have already been presented
insofar as they are directly relevant to the questions at hand. In general, these
countries all have a de facto fairly stable distribution of resources over the years.
But nowhere is the basis for this explicitly mentioned. History seems to be the most
important determinant of distribution in these countries, as it is in the Netherlands.

Remarkably, award rates vary widely between countries. In Germany and Flanders,
at 25-35%, they are much higher than in the Netherlands, Finland and Denmark,
where they are around 10-15%. We did not find a clear explanation for this, but
procedural arrangements such as working with continuous submission or calls may
play a role in this.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 41
Box 2 Award rates
NWO aims for proposal award chances of around 25%. Currently, these
are significantly lower. The view that the distribution of the budget across
domains is unfair is fuelled by the fact that award rates vary widely across
domains. In some domains they are around 11 or 12%, while in others they
are double. What about award rates in reference countries and the
differences across domains?

Comparison is difficult because procedures differ. Some countries, such as
Germany, operate a system of continuous submissions, while others work
with one or a few rounds per year. According to DFG, this leads to
researchers submitting a proposal only when they are very convinced of its
quality. This would lead to fewer proposals being submitted per year, of
higher quality on average. This experience is in line with what we were told
from ENW, where they also have experience with both systems.

In practice, the management of proposal submission appears to vary from
university to university and between discipline groups. In some places, the
initiative to submit is left entirely to the individual researcher and their
career prospects depend on it. This leads to many proposals. In other
places, proposals are first pre-selected in order to increase the chance of
success and ensure the research fits in with the traditions and spearheads
of the institution or capacity group. This tends to limit the number of
proposals.

Sometimes award rates are determined administratively: a predetermined
percentage of proposals are awarded until the budget is exhausted. Then
the scheme is closed until new budget is available. In our international
comparison, it was not possible to find out all the backgrounds of the
award chances. This makes comparison difficult.

Sweden: we do not have a clear picture of award rates for this country.
Neither on average nor for the individual domains.

Norway: award rates there are low, averaging 13.9% in 2021.
11 The
differences between disciplines are relatively limited: humanities 12.9%,
natural sciences 13.3%, social sciences 16.3%, technology 11.5%, life

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 42
sciences 11.5%, agricultural sciences 21.1%. The aim is to achieve a
minimum 25% pass rate through various measures.

Denmark: the success rate of proposals has decreased over the years
from 18% in 2012 to 13% in the last 2 years. No specifications for
discipline groups are known to us.

Finland: here, too, the success rate for submitted proposals is quite low at
14% on average. Differences between discipline groups are limited: natural
sciences 14%, engineering 14%, biological sciences 17%, agricultural
sciences 17%, life sciences 16%, social sciences 13%, humanities 13%.

Flanders: according to the 2021 annual report, award rates for the
different science fields barely diverge. They are around 28%. If we
differentiate between junior and senior researchers, between fundamental
and strategic research and between projects and mandates, we see more
differences, but they are not very large. Flanders aims for a 33% success
rate for both projects and mandates (individual grants).

Germany: the success rate for submitted proposals in Germany at the
DFG averages 28% and is fairly constant over the years. Between
domains, the differences are minimal: they range between 25 and 30%.

UK: the award rate averages 23%. The odds range from 17% for natural
environment, 19% for medical, 26% for humanities, 28% for biotechnology,
33% for social sciences and 37% for science and engineering.
Sweden: VR
Sweden’s Vetenskapsrådet (science council, VR) invests almost eight billion kronor
(about 720 million euros) in research every year. The VR’s website has a handy
interactive page to get a picture of the investments: Swecris – search for Swedish
research projects.12

11 Dates have been published in https://www.forskningsradet.no/siteassets/publikasjoner/2022/forskingsradets-
arsrapport-2021_2.pdf Page 22
12 Swecris (2013).

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 43
Besides four committees dealing with research in specific subject areas (education
studies, development studies, clinical research and research in the arts), the VR
has four scientific councils that advise on grants in their respective fields:
• The Scientific Council for Humanities and Social Sciences;
• The Scientific Council for Medicine and Health;
• The Scientific Council for Natural and Engineering Sciences;
• The Council for Research Infrastructures.
Every year, the Ministry of Education and Research mandates the VR to initiate
projects within certain frameworks. Since 2008, VR funding has included a sum of
just over two billion kroner (about €172 million) earmarked for the four councils. The
size of the amount and distribution among the councils has been more or less
stable since then. In addition, the government provides an amount to spend in
specific research directions or on certain research programmes. This amount has
grown, however. Whereas this earmarked budget was still considerably smaller
than the budget for the councils in 2008, it is now more than twice as large. The VR
receives an annual assignment letter regarding the spending of this budget. The
implementation of the policy, the actual spending of the earmarked amounts, is the
responsibility of the councils. This gives the ministry an important voice in the
decisions on which directions the VR invests in. That makes the question of the
distribution of a budget across domains much less of an issue here.

The research councils issue calls for proposals and set up review panels to assess
grant applications. The council for humanities and social sciences has 10 panels,
that for natural and engineering sciences 19 and that for medicine and health 20.
The panels advise and the councils make the decisions.

The VR still has some leeway for decision making, but it is limited. A few years ago,
for instance, it was decided to slightly increase the budget for the council for
humanities and social sciences, partly as a result of a comparison with the
distribution of funds in other countries. The VR has also looked at the differences in
research costs between universities with different disciplinary profiles and slightly
adjusted the budget distribution as a result.

For interdisciplinary projects, the VR does not have a separate council. However,
applicants can request review from two different councils if their proposal falls within
both domains. There is also a call for larger interdisciplinary projects. Here,
decisions are not taken by individual councils, but by the central board. In addition,
the VR has centre of excellence grants to which several institutions and several
disciplines can jointly apply on a theme of their choice.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 44
Norway: RCN
The Norwegian Forskningsrådet (Research Council of Norway, RCN) funds not only
basic research, but also strategic and applied research and innovation. The
council’s activities are organised around 16 portfolio boards with 10-12 members
each. Where the boards’ themes overlap, calls and investments are coordinated
among them. In assessing grant applications, the boards receive advice from
review committees. These are the themes of the boards:

Democracy, administration and
renewal
Energy, transport and low
emissions
Global development and
international relations
Oceans Health Humanities and social sciences *
Industry and services Climate and polar research Land-based food, the
environment and bioresources
Life sciences * Enabling technologies Natural sciences and technology *
Petroleum Education and competence Welfare, culture and society
Sámi

Three of these boards, marked with an asterisk, are for basic research: humanities
and social sciences, life sciences and natural sciences and technology. The total
budget for all boards combined is 12.6 billion kroner (just over €1 billion). Of this,
about 10% is for basic research, funded by the Ministry of Education and Science,
and to be shared by the three aforementioned boards. The rest of the funding
comes from the specialist departments and is strategic in nature. For instance, the
energy, transport and low emissions board alone has almost as much budget as the
three basic research boards combined. The portfolios for strategic research and
innovation are thematic in nature and are much less disciplinary.

RCN advises on the allocation of money between themes, but ultimately it depends
on ministerial budgets. Sometimes the departmental choices match the council’s
advice, but this is not always the case. Moreover, some departments’ substantive
directions are much more detailed than others. Besides the 16 boards, there are
also provisions for infrastructure and centres of excellence, as in Sweden. The RCN
wants to achieve a reduction in the number of boards. The budget distribution
among the three boards that fund basic research (and which can best be compared
to the two NWO programmes this study is about) is three-quarters based on the
previous year’s distribution. At the start of the system, the distribution was
determined based on the number of scientists in the relevant area at universities.
The remaining quarter is determined by a given area’s share of applications. This
leads to gradual fluctuations in the distribution from year to year. Now the

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 45
distribution is about 40 per cent for life sciences and 30 per cent for each of the
other two. There is not much discussion about that.

Award rates vary between instruments and boards and range from 7% to almost
35%. In the case of the three basic research boards, the Ministry of Education and
Science wants to move towards an average of 25%. To this end, it is trying to
reduce the number of applications, for example by introducing a ‘quarantine policy’:
applicants with a low assessment are not allowed to submit an application for
several years, following the example of the ERC. RCN is also moving from a regime
where applications can be submitted once a year to a system of continuous
submission, where evaluation starts as soon as a certain number of proposals is
received.
Denmark: DFF
The Independent Research Fund Denmark (DFF) has five research councils, for
humanities, natural sciences, medical sciences, social sciences and technology and
production sciences. The councils fund research activities based on researchers’
own initiatives. There is also a cross-council committee for interdisciplinary
research initiatives.

The distribution of the available budget among the councils is based 60% on last
year’s budget, 30% on the average amount granted over the past three years and
10% on the number of applications in the past three years. This is mainly based on
historical ratios and allows for minor variations due to differences in developments
in research costs and the number of applications.
Finland: AKA
The Finnish Academy of Sciences (Suomen Akatemia, AKA) has three research
councils: for Biosciences, Health and the Environment, for Culture and Society and
for Natural Sciences and Engineering. In addition to the three domain-specific
research councils, there is a separate council for strategic research. This covers all
domains and disciplines and has its own programme and budget.

The distribution of funding among research councils is fairly stable over the years,
but may change slightly: i) to take into account domain-specific developments in the
cost of research, and ii) to ensure that the award rates of applicants from different
research areas are more or less equal. In 2022, for example, these are between 13
and 17% for postdoc projects (similar to the Veni).

There are no calls for proposals from each of the research councils individually. The
main calls are centrally organised twice a year by the Academy of Finland, not by
the councils. The calls are open in nature and do not specify research topics. What

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 46
counts for whether or not they receive funding is the scientific quality of the
proposal. Nevertheless, a council can invite research proposals on a specific
theme. For example, in 2022, the Council for Natural Sciences and Engineering
indicated that chemical research with a specific interest for Finland, e.g. on biomass
processing from wood, needs strengthening.

The Academy also organises the assessment panels. These give advice to the
three councils. These then take decisions on funding the applications that fall within
their remit, taking into account the advice of the panels. For funding, they use the
budget allocated to them.

As in Flanders (see below), it is up to the applicants to choose which assessment
panel gives advice on their application. That is, after the reform of the assessment
system currently being implemented.

There are (or will be) review panels covering a wide range of disciplines. Applicants
with proposals that fall within the domains of different councils can therefore opt for
such a broad panel. After consideration by a panel, their application is then
forwarded to one of the three councils, which then decides on funding. Councils do
not jointly fund proposals that cover more than one domain.
Belgium (Flanders): FWO
The Flemish Fund for Scientific Research (FWO) funds fundamental and strategic
research through various channels. Most of these operate strictly bottom-up: there
are no disciplinary or thematic restrictions that applicants have to meet. Scientific
excellence is the decisive selection criterion. There is no ex ante distribution of the
budget across domains. An important channel is that for ‘Junior and Senior
Research Projects’. This funds research projects initiated by researchers and has
similarities with the Open Competition.

The call for proposals for these research projects in 2023 opened at the beginning
of the year and closed in early April. Evaluation and selection of proposals will take
place during the rest of the year and the decision will be made in December,
allowing successful proposals to start in early 2024. For the evaluation, 32 panels
have been set up with basically 12 (sometimes more) members, more than half of
them non-Flemish. Of the 32 panels, 31 deal with a particular disciplinary theme
within one of five domains (biological sciences, medical sciences, humanities,
social sciences and natural sciences and technology) and one is for
interdisciplinary, cross-domain proposals. Evaluation is done in two steps. The first
step is a remote assessment by two external reviewers and two panellists, followed
by a rebuttal by the applicant and a synthesis of the latter and the four evaluations

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 47
by a rapporteur. The second step is an assessment by the panel in a meeting,
assigning a score and determining a ranking of proposals.

What is important in this system is that the applicant chooses the panel to be asked
to assess a proposal. There is the option of indicating that the project is
multidisciplinary and, in that case, requesting an additional external assessment by
a reviewer with expertise not represented within the relevant discipline-specific
panel. Explicit requirements are imposed on proposals for the interdisciplinary
panel, for example on the relationship between the disciplines and the nature of the
synergy.

Assessment is done using a set of explicit criteria related to the research team and
to the research project. The scores for the project determine three quarters of the
proposal’s final score and those for the characteristics of the team count for one
quarter. For interdisciplinary projects, the project counts for 55% and the score for
interdisciplinarity for 20% (and here also the team for 25%).

Because applicants themselves choose which panel evaluates an application and
the panels all use the same system to score and rank applications, the distribution
of funds across domains occurs in a bottom-up manner. The panels do not deal
with a specific ex ante determined share of the budget. Ultimately, FWO funds the
proposals that received the highest score. Implicitly, proposals from all disciplines
and domains are balanced against each other in this way.
Germany: DFG
The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) funds research with a budget
provided by the Federal Government and the 16 Länder. The German research
infrastructure consists of universities plus a number of large, renowned non-
university research organisations: the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, the Helmholtz-
Gemeinschaft, the Leibniz-Gemeinschaft and the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft.
Whereas in most countries non-university research institutes carry out at most 10%
of academic research, in Germany it is almost half. The DFG mainly funds
universities.

The DFG distributes EUR 2.7 billion in research funds to universities. That is about
a third of the total flow of competitive funding in Germany. Of the total amount, DFG
spends just under half on programmes aimed at individual researchers. The DFG
distinguishes between four areas:
i) Humanities and social sciences,
ii) Life sciences,
iii) Natural sciences,
iv) Engineering sciences.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 48
Among them are 48 review boards, which in turn are managed and directed by nine
departments of the DFG’s bureau organisation.13 These 48 boards were created to
review the 20.000 to 30.000 proposals DFG receives per year for funds from these
individual-focused programmes. Every four years, members of the review boards
are elected from the relevant scientific community. The preliminary work for the
review boards is done in a peer review process that involves some 15.000
researchers per year. Formally, the role of the review board is to give advice and
the DFG’s central board to take decisions, but in practice the board rarely deviates
from the advices.

The distribution of money among discipline groups appears to be quite stable over
the years. The procedures used have been the same for years and are hardly ever
challenged; decisions are hardly ever challenged. Flexibility and responsiveness
have been injected into the system as the review boards work together. For
example, they can combine money from their budgets to jointly fund grants covering
multiple research topics. They can also publish calls for proposals together. They
also set aside a small percentage of the budget for flexibility, e.g. for unusually
large proposals that are expensive but nevertheless considered important, or for
interdisciplinary proposals. When interdisciplinary proposals come in, they are
assessed and, if granted, funded by different review boards.

The distribution of the budget among the 48 boards is done using a fairly simple
formula. Half of the budget is determined on the share of the respective board in the
previous year. The other half is determined by the budget share of proposals in the
previous three years. As the award rate averages 28%, is fairly constant over the
years and also varies little between the domains, the shares of the individual review
boards do not vary much either.

A proposal for one of the individual programmes (Einzelvorderungen) can be
submitted throughout the year: it does not go in periodic rounds. There are four to
six times a year when review boards decide on proposals. A more open procedure
can help reduce the number of submissions: when there are no deadlines, fewer
proposals will be submitted that are still incomplete. There are no restrictions on
resubmission of proposals that have been rejected and subsequently modified.

DFG does not expect many changes to the system. Working with output
parameters in budget distribution would be nice. But that generates so much
discussion that it is not expected to be introduced anytime soon.

13 Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 49
United Kingdom: UKRI
The UK science council United Kingdom Research and Innovation (UKRI) is now
part of the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology. Until recently, the
council was part of the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BEIS, the
Department for Economic Affairs). UKRI not only funds research at universities, but
also subsidises R&D at companies (thus combining the tasks of NWO, ZonMw and
RVO). UKRI invests in research and innovation and in equipment and
infrastructure.

Periodically, UKRI develops a budget proposal as part of the Spending Review. On
that, the ministry allocates funding, including a distribution of the budget across the
nine councils and a number of strategic programmes. So ultimately, the ministry
decides on the budget allocation. It looks not only at scientific excellence, but also
at expected impact. How exactly the distribution is arrived at in the interaction
between UKRI and the ministry is qualified as opaque. Within the frameworks set
by the ministry, the nine councils each put out their calls and make decisions on
individual grant applications.

Of the nine councils, six fund research in specific scientific fields. The table below
shows the distribution of applications among the councils and the budget
allocation.
14

applications applications
accepted
amount
requested
amount
honoured
Humanities AHRC 14% 14% 6% 6%
Life Sciences BBSRC 14% 15% 14% 14%
Exact wts. and engineering EPSRC 25% 34% 33% 44%
Social sciences ESRC 13% 13% 8% 9%
Medical sciences MRC 20% 13% 26% 18%
Natural environment NERC 14% 11% 13% 8%
100% 100% 100% 100%

14 Calculated from fee data, available via UK Research and Innovation (n.d.-b).

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 50
Annex 2: respondents
We spoke to:
• Kristen Danielsen Forskningsradet, Norway
• Emma Olsen Vetenskapsradet, Sweden
• Daniel Bovelet and Ilka Paulus DFG, Germany

Written information we received from:
• Riitta Maijala Academy of Finland, Finland
• Trine Theodorsen and Thomas Hansen DFF, Denmark
• Michelle Truman UKRI, UK
• Isabelle Verbaeys FWO, Flanders

In the Netherlands, we spoke to:
• Jeroen Geurts UNL, VU
• Ciska Wijmenga and Nienke de Deugd UNL, RUG
• Pancras Hoogendoorn and Kim Karsenberg NFU, LUMC
• Marjolein Blaauboer KNAW
• Jan de Boer NWO-ENW, UvA
• Hans de Bruijn NWO-SGW, TUD
• Margot Weijnen NWO-TTW, TUD
• Huib Pols and Veronique Timmerhuis ZonMw

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 51
Annex 3: literature, digital sources
Arensbergen, P. van, L.K. Hessels en B. van der Meulen (2013). Talent Centraal:
ontwikkeling en selectie van wetenschappers in Nederland, Den Haag:
Rathenau Instituut. https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/werking-van-het-
wetenschapssysteem/talent-centraal

CBS (2022). Wetenschappelijk onderwijs; promoties, studierichting jaar 2020-21.
https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/cijfers/detail/83966NED

Koier, E. en J. de Jonge (2018). De zin van promoveren – Loopbanen en
arbeidsmarktperspectieven van gepromoveerden. Den Haag: Rathenau
Instituut. https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/werking-van-het-
wetenschapssysteem/de-zin-van-promoveren

QS World University Rankings by Subject 2023.
https://www.topuniversities.com/subject-rankings/2023?qs_qp=topnav

Rathenau Instituut (2021). Factsheet: Het personeel bij de universitair medische
centra (periode 2020). https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-
cijfers/wetenschappers/personeel-aan-de-universiteiten-en-umcs/het-
personeel-bij-de

Rathenau Instituut (2022a). Factsheet: Publicatie-output naar wetenschappelijke
hoofdgebieden (WoS) periode 2017-2020.
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/output/publicaties/publicatie-
output-naar-wetenschappelijke-hoofdgebieden-wos

Rathenau Instituut (2022b). Factsheet: Ontwikkeling van het wetenschappelijk
onderzoeksprofiel van Nederland, wetenschap in cijfers.
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-
cijfers/output/publicaties/ontwikkeling-van-het-wetenschappelijk-
onderzoeksprofiel-van

Rathenau Instituut (2022c). Factsheet: Ranglijsten/ rankings.
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/werking-van-de-
wetenschap/excellentie/ranglijsten-rankings

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 52
Rathenau Instituut (2022d). Datapublicatie: Loopbaanontwikkeling gehonoreerde
onderzoekers in het NWO-Talentprogramma.
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/werking-van-de-
wetenschap/excellentie/loopbaanontwikkeling-gehonoreerde

Rathenau Instituut (2022e). Honoreringspercentages NWO.
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/werking-van-de-
wetenschap/excellentie/honoreringspercentages-nwo

Rathenau Instituut (2022f) Factsheet: Aanvraagdruk bij NWO
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/werking-van-de-
wetenschap/excellentie/aanvraagdruk-bij-nwo

Rathenau Instituut (2023). Factsheet: Wetenschappelijk en ondersteunend
personeel per universiteit en vakgebied (periode 2020).
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/wetenschap-cijfers/wetenschappers/personeel-
aan-de-universiteiten-en-umcs/wetenschappelijk-en

Scholten, W., L. van Drooge en P. Diederen (2018). Excellent is niet gewoon –
Dertig jaar focus op excellentie in het Nederlandse wetenschapsbeleid. Den
Haag: Rathenau Instituut. https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/werking-van-het-
wetenschapssysteem/excellent-niet-gewoon.
Sweden
Vetenskapsradet (2022). The Swedish research barometer 2021.
https://www.vr.se/english/analysis/reports/our-reports/2022-01-25-the-
swedish-research-barometer-2021.html

Vetenskapsradet (2019). Future choices for the Swedish research system.
https://www.vr.se/english/analysis/reports/our-reports/2019-12-13-future-
choices-for-the-swedish-research-system.html

Swecris (2023). Overzicht van toekenningen door de Vetenschapsrädet in de
periode 2018-2021.
https://www.vr.se/english/swecris.html#/?funder=202100-
5208&year=2020&year=2018&year=2019&year=2021.
Norway
Forsknungsradet (2019a). The Research Council of Norway through 30 years.
https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/about-the-research-council/what-we-
do/what-does-the-research-council-do/

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 53
Forsknungsradet (2019b). Budsjett 2023. (Noors)
https://www.forskningsradet.no/siteassets/publikasjoner/2023/budsjettbok-
2023.pdf

Forsknungsradet (2023). Årsrapport 2021 Idékraft verda treng. (Noors)
https://www.forskningsradet.no/siteassets/publikasjoner/2022/forskingsradet
s-arsrapport-2021_2.pdf
Denmark
Independent Research Fund Denmark (n.d.). https://dff.dk/en/about-us/organisation
Finland
Academy of Finland (2022). Academy of Finland funding statistics on September
2021 call. https://www.aka.fi/globalassets/1-tutkimusrahoitus/2-arviointi-ja-
paatoksenteko/5-rahoituspaatokset/aka_funding-
statistics_september_call_2021_web.pdf
Belgium (Flanders)
Fonds wetenschappelijk onderzoek Vlaanderen (n.d.).
https://www.fwo.be/nl/onderzoeksfinanciering/onderzoeksprojecten/junior-
en-senior-onderzoeksproject/

Fonds wetenschappelijk onderzoek Vlaanderen (2023a). FWO Opening new
horizons. https://www.fwo.be/media/1024972/projecten2023_infosessie.pdf

Fonds wetenschappelijk onderzoek Vlaanderen (2023b). FWO jaarverslag 2022.
https://www.fwo.be/media/1024839/fwo-jaarverslag-2022.pdf
Germany
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2022). Subject Area Structure and
Interdisciplinarity.
https://www.dfg.de/en/research_funding/principles_dfg_funding/interdisciplin
arity/index.html

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2021). Funding Atlas 2021.
https://www.dfg.de/sites/fundingatlas2021/download/dfg_fundingatlas_2021.
pdf

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2023a). Processing Times and Success Rates.
https://www.dfg.de/en/dfg_profile/facts_figures/statistics/processing_times_s
uccess_rates/index.html

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 54
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2023b). Jahresbericht 2022 Aufgaben und
Ergebnisse. https://www.dfg.de/en/dfg_profile/annual_report/
United Kingdom
UK Research and Innovation (2020). Annual Report and Accounts 2021-22.
https://www.ukri.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/UKRI-180123-
AnnualReportandAccounts-21to22.pdf

UK Research and Innovation (n.d.-a). 2021/22 budget allocations for UK Research
and Innovation. https://www.ukri.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/UKRI-
270521-UKRI-Allocation-Explainer-2021-22-FINAL-
PDF.pdf?_ga=2.136666360.997369528.1634892440-
492648676.1626438557

UK Research and Innovation (n.d.-b). Competitive funding decisions.
https://www.ukri.org/what-we-do/what-we-have-funded/competitive-funding-
decisions/

UK Research and Innovation (n.d.-c). UKRI allocations process map.
https://www.ukri.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/UKRI-160222-
UKRIallocationProcessMap.pdf

UK Research and Innovation (n.d.-d). How we’re funded. https://www.ukri.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/08/UKRI-050822-FundingExplainer-
HowWereFunded.pdf

UK Research and Innovation (n.d.-e). Get support for your project – If your research
spans different disciplines. https://www.ukri.org/apply-for-funding/before-
you-apply/preparing-to-make-a-funding-application/if-your-research-spans-
different-disciplines/

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
NWO programmes for curiosity-driven research 55
© Rathenau Institute 2024
Reproduction and/or publication of (parts of) this work for creative, personal or
educational purposes is permitted, provided copies are not made or used for
commercial purposes and provided the copies contain the full reference above.
In all other cases, no part of this publication may be reproduced and/or published
by print, photocopy or any other means without prior written permission.
Open Access
The Rathenau Institute has an Open Access policy. Reports, background studies,
scientific articles, software are published freely available. Research data are
made available subject to legal provisions and ethical standards for research on
third-party rights, privacy, and copyright.
Contact details
Anna van Saksenlaan 51
PO Box 95366
2509 CJ The Hague
070-342 15 42
info@rathenau.nl
www.rathenau.nl

Board of the Rathenau Institute
Drs Maria Henneman
Prof Noelle Aarts
Drs. Felix Cohen
Dr Laurence Guérin
Dr Janneke Hoekstra MSc
Prof. Dr Erwin Muller
Drs Rajash Rawal
Prof Eefje Cuppen – secretary

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
The Rathenau Institute stimulates public and political opinion formation on the
societal aspects of science and technology. We conduct research and organise
debate on science, innovation and new technologies.
