Review
forward

Moving forward together with open science
Towards meaningful public engagement with research

Moving forward together with open science 2
Authors
Anne-Floor Scholvinck, Wout Scholten, Paul Diederen, with the
cooperation of Sven van Ewijk

Cover photograph
Participants in the National Garden Bird Count (photo: Sabine Joosten/HH)
Please cite as:
Rathenau Instituut  (2021). Moving forward together with open science – Towards
meaningful public engagement with research (authors: Scholvinck, A.M., W.
Scholten, P. Diederen)

Moving forward together with open science 3
Foreword
Sharing in scientific advancement and benefiting from its results is a human right,
laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. When researchers involve
society in their research, they are helping to fulfil this right. In addition, their
research can benefit enormously from this collaboration. Citizens can help
researchers by asking relevant questions, collecting data, disseminating results and
putting them into practice.
The European Commission and the Dutch government have high expectations of
open science in their research agendas, both for science and for society. Science
conducted in an open way is more deeply embedded in society and can therefore
contribute more to tackling major societal challenges. Openness can also make
science faster and more efficient.
Unfortunately, open science policy is still mainly confined to making publications
and data publicly accessible. This is mostly of interest to other scientists. Public
engagement with science is in danger of being disregarded. Where that
engagement does arise, it is by no means always meaningful. Sometimes it is done
mainly for show.
The Rathenau Instituut sought to answer the question: how can open science
contribute to the democratisation of science? We set out to find out what
meaningful public engagement is and how it can be organised in today's open
science era. We analysed the scientific debate about, and policies for, public
engagement over the past few decades. We also conducted studies looking at
public engagement in three scientific fields. The engagement of societal actors with
science has been steadily developing. Whereas it began as a way of educating
citizens about science, there is now greater scope for equal dialogue.
In this publication, the Rathenau Instituut is providing a platform for meaningful
public engagement in the debate on open science. Five practical steps indicate the
direction for future development.
Dr Melanie Peters
Director, Rathenau Instituut

Moving forward together with open science 4
Summary
Rationale
The European Commission and the Dutch government have high expectations of
open science, both for science and for society. Open science, they believe, is better
embedded in society and is more helpful in addressing major societal challenges.
Openness would also make science faster and more efficient.
To make scientific research more open, scientists and policymakers are currently
devoting considerable attention to promoting free access to scientific articles and
research data. This pushes the openness of science to society into the background.
Moreover, engaging the public in a meaningful way is no easy task in the real world.
Although research funders are increasingly focusing on public engagement, this
can lead to scientists involving "public groups" mainly for the sake of appearance
(tokenism).1 Citizens may appear to be involved, but in fact contribute little and
have little influence.
In this review, we attempt to ascertain when public engagement is meaningful and
how it can be organised. For this purpose, we examine the (scientific) ideas about
the relationship between science and society and the European and Dutch policy
developments in this respect. We also draw on three domain studies that we
published previously.
2 We present practical steps for policymakers, researchers and
the public that can be taken to make public engagement with research more
meaningful.
The scientific debate about public engagement
Since the mid-twentieth century, sociologists of science have been pointing out that
science is a collective search process, in which it matters who is involved. Different
types of knowledge are gradually being recognised: citizens can possess
experiential knowledge, which complements the formal knowledge of scientists. It is
useful to involve stakeholders in research, especially when faced with uncertain
facts, major interests and conflicts over values. Similar issues are at play in
technology development. Who is involved makes a difference to the way new
technology is embedded in society.
3
We also see a shift in science communication. Whereas this used to be mainly
concerned with explaining science to the general public it is now more focused on

1  In this review we use the term public groups to indicate that "the public" consists of groups of people with
different wishes, interests and contributions.
2  In order of date: Rathenau Instituut (2019), Rathenau Instituut (2020a) and Rathenau Instituut (2020b).
3  In 1986 this led to the establishment of NOTA, the forerunner of the Rathenau Instituut. This organisation was
tasked with systematically studying the social significance of technology and assisting both politicians and the
public to form judgements on new technology.

Moving forward together with open science 5
dialogue. This dialogue involves not only conveying scientific knowledge, but also
sharing values, interests, power and trust.
Public engagement policy
The development of this line of thought on public engagement is reflected in
European and Dutch science policy. The European policy framework Responsible
Research and Innovation (RRI) promotes science as a transparent, interactive
process in which societal actors and researchers are receptive to each other's
perspectives and needs. Attention to dialogue and participation, and to new forms
of knowledge co-creation, has grown as a result of RRI. In the Netherlands, the
Dutch National Research Agenda attempts to connect science and society.
Policies at both European and national level are now focusing on open science and,
in particular, on more mutual collaboration and easier data sharing to achieve
better, more efficient and more reliable science. This means that the relationship
amongst scientists is considered more important than the relationship between
science and society. Compared to RRI, the ambitions for public engagement have
been watered down. Participation is often narrowed down to citizen science, i.e.
citizens helping to conduct research.
Public engagement in practice
In three (separately published) case studies, we examined practical examples of
public engagement in different fields: psychiatry, educational research and research
into water quality. This research shows that the necessary structures and incentives
that enable, promote or support public engagement are not developed well enough
in the world of science. Scientists are less valued if they conduct research with
public groups. In addition, the prevailing methodology and epistemology within
some scientific disciplines stand in the way of public engagement.
4
Individuals' need for engagement with research varies according to their immediate
interests. For example, patients are easier to mobilise for psychiatric research than
nature lovers are for water quality research. Another factor is the degree of
organisation. Where interest groups such as patients' associations advocate for a
place at the research table, public engagement is less fragmented. A low degree of
organisation, as we found among teachers for example, can lead to engagement
being limited to individual front-runners, with little effect on the field of practice as a
whole.
Meaningful public engagement
Our search culminates in the proposition that public engagement is meaningful
when it contributes to the democratisation of knowledge development.

4  One example is the use in the medical sciences of randomised controlled trials, which require a strict
separation between investigator and research subjects.

Moving forward together with open science 6
Democratisation means changing the (power) relationship between knowledge
producers and the various groups in society in favour of the latter. This involves:
1. Accessibility; how high are the barriers to influencing research and research
agendas?
2. Inclusion; do all groups of stakeholders and interested parties get involved?
3. Participation; to what extent do external stakeholders determine the role they
play and the contribution they make to public research?
There can be various reasons for public engagement: substantive (citizens
contribute additional knowledge), normative (citizens have a right to be involved)
and instrumental (public engagement ensures greater support and a better match
with society's needs). If public engagement is to be meaningful, the reasons for it
must align well with:
• who will be involved (stakeholders or interested parties);
• where it takes place;
• in which phase it takes place (agenda-setting, execution of research, or
implementation of research results); and
• what form it takes (providing information, co-executing, advising, joint
decisions).
Five steps to meaningful public engagement
Based on the current interpretation of open science, progress towards the
democratisation of science is overshadowed by a one-sided emphasis on open
access and open data. And yet, organising meaningful public engagement is a
challenge for everyone: researchers and policymakers at knowledge institutions
and research funders, citizens, interest groups, patients and professionals. That is
why we have drawn up five steps towards meaningful public engagement.
1. Make research accessible and inclusive for diverse public groups
In order to maximise the social impact of research, it is important to make research
as accessible as possible. This can be done by minimising the use of research
jargon and academic language and, as far as possible, translating insights from
research into practical tools. The more accessible the research, the greater the
diversity of the participants. More diversity can enhance both the quality and
legitimacy of research. In addition, wider engagement with research promotes
scientific literacy among citizens. It also strengthens the position of science in
society.

2. Coordinate diversity of participation and raise awareness of its added value
Involving a variety of perspectives in the formulation of research questions can
improve the research agenda and make it socially more relevant. This is not just a
task for researchers. Civil-society organisations can play a part in this, for example
by highlighting the role and contribution of different public groups.
3. Make it attractive for researchers to engage public groups

Moving forward together with open science 7
Knowledge institutions should encourage researchers to step outside the box. The
current system of recognising and valuing (and rewarding) researchers often gets in
the way of more interaction with societal actors. But changes are afoot: the
ambitions expressed by the VSNU, NFU, KNAW, NWO and ZonMw in 2019 must
now be translated by the knowledge institutions into specific (policy) measures. For
example, a good step would be to assess funding applications for the Dutch
National Research Agenda (NWA) more closely in terms of engaging public groups.

4. Make expectations explicit, evaluate and reflect on public engagement
Involving public groups requires attention to specific aspects of the research
approach and quality assurance. For example, it is important to pay attention to the
quality of the data that citizens collect, the influence of the relationship between
citizens and researchers on the quality of the research, and the learning
experiences that citizens acquire during the process. Joint reflection on these
aspects can give rise to interim adjustments to the research. Evaluation of public
engagement requires a focus not only on the direct research output, but also on its
wider impact: where do the results end up and how are they used?

5. Give citizens a say
It is motivating for people to get a say in the goal of the research, its execution and
their own role in it. If those involved can influence the research to a certain extent
and decide on their role in it, this will increase public support for research.

Public engagement with science is a human right. According to Article 27 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: "Everyone has the right freely to participate
in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific
advancement and its benefits". Science flourishes and advances when scientists
are free and autonomous, but not operate outside of society. Only when science
works in tandem with society will it produce the benefits that we need: answers to
the challenges we are facing together. For this reason, a practical search for
meaningful public engagement with science is of fundamental importance.

Moving forward together with open science 8
Contents
Foreword ................................................................................................................. 3
Summary ................................................................................................................. 4
1 Introduction ................................................................................................. 10
1.1 The context .................................................................................... 10
1.2 Who are the public? ..................................................................... 12
1.3 What will the public be engaged in? ........................................... 14
1.4 Public engagement for the sake of appearance ........................ 15
1.5 Research question and reader's guide ....................................... 16
2 The thinking about public engagement .................................................... 17
2.1 Conceptual origins of public engagement ................................. 17
2.2 A historical sketch of science ..................................................... 18
2.3 Public engagement with technology .......................................... 19
2.4 From deficit to dialogue ............................................................... 20
2.5 Responsibility ............................................................................... 21
2.6 Openness ...................................................................................... 22
3 Public engagement policy ......................................................................... 24
3.1 New policy as sedimentary layers .............................................. 24
3.2 Responsible Research and Innovation ....................................... 26
3.3 Open science ................................................................................ 28
4 Public engagement in practice .................................................................. 32
4.1 Factors in science ........................................................................ 32
4.2 Factors in society ......................................................................... 35
5 Meaningful public engagement ................................................................. 36
5.1 Democratic knowledge development ......................................... 36

Moving forward together with open science 9
5.2 Why, who, where, when and how ................................................ 38
6 Conclusion .................................................................................................. 43
6.1 Public engagement in open science ........................................... 43
6.2 Five steps towards meaningful public engagement ................. 44
6.3 Scientists, engage society ........................................................... 47
7 Bibliography ................................................................................................ 49

Moving forward together with open science 10
1 Introduction
Everyone in the world has the right to share in scientific advancement and to benefit
from its results. This right to science is enshrined in Article 27 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which requires us to organise our knowledge
development in an open, transparent and democratic manner. Engaging citizens
and societal actors with science contributes to this democratisation. In addition,
their input helps scientists answer their questions and ask the right questions.
The engagement of societal actors in research has been steadily evolving over the
years in our (scientific) thoughts about science, in Dutch and European science
policy and in scientific practice. While this started out primarily as a way of
educating citizens in science, it has now increasingly become a way of getting
citizens' voices heard in scientific research. For example, there is now Open
Science, the most recent vision of science which is supported by both the European
Commission (EC) and the Dutch government (European Commission, 2016 and
Dutch Ministry of General Affairs, 2017). There is no shortage of ambition. Science
conducted in an open way would be more transparent and therefore more verifiable
and responsive. The ambition is for science to become better embedded in society
through open science, thus contributing more to tackling the major challenges
facing society. Moreover, openness should make science faster and more efficient.
The elaboration of open science policy focuses mainly on science itself. Both in
Europe and in the Netherlands, the introduction of open science places the
emphasis on making publications and data publicly accessible (Stilgoe et al., 2013
and Jones, 2014). So far, relatively few structures, practices or institutions have
been set up in the context of open science to involve society more closely in the
scientific research process, even though there are opportunities to use the
knowledge and insights available in society and to gear research to the questions
and needs of society.
The Rathenau Instituut identified a need to showcase specific examples of public
engagement with science in various disciplines, and to interpret these examples.
For this reason, over the past two years the institute has carried out three domain
studies into the way public engagement takes place in psychiatry, educational
research and research into water quality. The findings from these case studies, and
an analysis of both the scientific debate on public engagement and its manifestation
in science policy, form the basis for the present review.
1.1 The context
The development of greater public engagement with science is not an isolated
event. In the course of a few decades, many social institutions that were initially

Moving forward together with open science 11
rather autonomous have become increasingly democratised. Autonomy of
institutions was a typical feature of the compartmentalised society that was the
Netherlands until around the 1960s.5 Autonomy was self-evident for public
administration, which operated at a considerable distance from the population. The
people elected their representatives once every four years, after which
representative democracy operated "without charge or consultation". Authorities
within other institutions, such as the central bank, courts of law, health care
institutions and churches, also enjoyed a large degree of autonomy.
This has now changed, and democratic involvement is no longer limited to the ballot
box. People are demanding greater transparency, more accountability for the
spending of public funds and more opportunity to have their say about utility and
necessity, direction and strategy. They are well informed and they speak up, even
across traditional hierarchical relationships. For example, individuals can influence
policy or take up public tasks themselves (Rathenau Instituut, 2015). This leads to a
different interpretation of citizenship, in addition to exercising the right to vote.
Citizens are involved on more occasions and have a say in individual topics of their
choosing.
Science is also affected by this democratisation. For decades, science was an
autonomous bastion. In exchange for public funding, universities and research
institutes provided knowledge development and academic education. According to
the ideal of academic freedom associated with the German scientist Alexander von
Humboldt (1769-1859), scientific institutions should function independently of
government interference and economic interests (Anderson, 2004). Protecting
scientists from outside interference is still given a high priority, for example by
UNESCO.
6 However, the traditional social contract between science and society is
undergoing a transformation (Gibbons, 1999). The democratisation of science is
keeping pace with public engagement with other institutions in our democracy.
Citizens are demanding and are being given a greater say in science.
7
The characteristics shown in Box 1 (see next page) reflect society's interconnection
with science. In addition, society is seeking solutions to pressing collective
problems such as climate change and global depletion of resources, and ways of
achieving the global Sustainable Development Goals. Addressing such complex
challenges benefits from engaging the public. Collaboration with various actors with
their different interests turns out to be important for the success of practical
solutions.

5  "Sphere Sovereignty" was the title of Abraham Kuyper's address at the opening of the Vrije Universiteit (Free
University) in Amsterdam in 1880. This organisational principle recognised the relative autonomy of different
social circles (spheres), their powers and moral frameworks. (Balkenende & Tieleman, 2001).
6  In 1974 UNESCO adopted the Recommendation on the Status of Scientific Researchers, which stressed the
independent position of scientists. This recommendation was replaced in 2017 by the Recommendation on
Science and Scientific Researchers. The independent position of scientists is still an important element and the
responsibility of scientific institutions for safeguarding this position has been given greater emphasis.
7  UNESCO is currently taking steps to issue a Recommendation on Open Science by the end of 2021.

Moving forward together with open science 12
1.2 Who are the public?
In policy discussions, the term "the public" is regularly given the undifferentiated
meaning of "the general public", which means something like "society". This is a
catchall term, covering all kinds of different specific public groups. The relevant
public may consist of individuals with an interest or direct involvement in a study.
They could also be professionals working in a particular field. Civil-society
organisations may represent groups of citizens or professionals. In medical
research, for example, patients themselves can play a role or patient associations
can do so on their behalf. Employees of water authorities can contribute to water
research and teachers to research in education. Civil-society organisations may
also be involved, acting on behalf of a general public interest. In environmental
research, for example, environmental organisations can represent the public
interest in nature conservation. The definition of "the public" therefore varies from
subject to subject and is rarely homogeneous. In this document, we always
describe whom we mean as best we can, or use the term public groups to indicate
that the public consists of groups of people with different desires, interests and
contributions (Mohr & Raman, 2012).

Moving forward together with open science 13
Box 1 The right to science
The right to science as laid down by the United Nations (Article 27 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights) is not limited to sharing in the material
products of scientific progress. It also includes developing a critical mind and
participating in the practice of science (United Nations Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2020). The UN lists five characteristics
of this right.
• Availability of scientific advances; the conduct of science and the
conservation and dissemination of scientific knowledge and its
applications.
• The provision of equal access to knowledge and knowledge
production for all, without discrimination.
• Quality of the scientific process; ensuring quality by following the
latest scientific and ethical standards.
• Acceptability of science; efforts to ensure the acceptance of
knowledge in different cultural and social contexts and to conduct
science according to prevailing ethical codes.
• Freedom and independence of scientists; protecting scientists from
undue influence on their findings. They should also be able to
establish autonomous research institutes and determine the aims and
methods of research. They should be able to openly question the
ethical value of research, to withdraw if their conscience so requires,
and to have the opportunity to collaborate with other scientists
nationally and internationally. Where possible, they should share their
scientific data and analysis with policymakers and society.
In this review, we focus on engagement that arises from non-commercial motives.
Although knowledge institutions maintain long-term and fruitful relationships with
industry to promote the economic valorisation of knowledge, public-private
partnerships are not a subject of study here.8

8  On the subject of the "entrepreneurial university" model and its collaborations with industry, the Rathenau
Instituut published a report titled Industry seeking university (Rathenau Instituut, 2018).

Moving forward together with open science 14
1.3 What will the public be engaged in?
The term "scientific research" is a catchall name for a motley collection of activities.
Scientific research can be fundamental or practice-oriented. It takes place at
knowledge institutions such as universities, colleges, and public knowledge
organisations. Science encompasses many disciplines and fields of study, within
which often various methodologies and views on science predominate. Their
relationships with society and with policymakers also differ.
Logically, the function of public engagement with research is just as diverse and
multifaceted. When individuals contribute their own knowledge, expertise,
perspectives and abilities which complement the knowledge of scientists, we refer
to this as knowledge co-creation.9 Individuals can also carry out specific research
tasks, such as collecting, supplying, analysing and categorising data. This form of
engagement has recently been revived under the heading of "citizen science".
Public engagement can take different forms at each stage of research. Although in
reality the knowledge chain is rarely linear, public groups can be engaged in:
1. decisions concerning management, programming and financing;
2. conducting the research; and
3. disseminating and exploiting the results.
There are various ways of involving society in the development of science. For
example, policymakers gather input for setting scientific agendas from public
consultations, questionnaires and interviews. The Eurobarometer has been
conducted since the 1970s to collect the opinions and feelings of EU citizens on
issues such as science, technology and innovation. Of more recent date is the
Dutch National Research Agenda, a major initiative in the Netherlands to involve
society in research programming. In addition, some domain-specific research
funders, such as health funds, draw up their scientific programmes in consultation
with their constituencies. There are also various research networks, for example
around academic collaborative centres in education, which are teaming up with
civil-society partners to set up a scientific agenda.
10
Individuals and civil-society organisations can also play a part in conducting
scientific research. The initiative for this may come either from them or from the
scientists concerned. People often participate under the supervision of professional
scientists, but there are also instances of "do-it-yourself science" where citizens
conduct research on their own initiative (Landrain et al., 2013). An interesting hybrid

9  See also previous Rathenau Instituut research into knowledge co-creation: Samenwerken aan werkzame
kennis [Working together on effective knowledge] (2012) and Kenniscoproductie voor de grote
maatschappelijke vraagstukken [Knowledge co-production for major social issues] (2013).
10  An academic collaborative centre is a partnership between a university or college and one or more practice-
based institutions, with the aim of translating practice-related issues into research questions and translating
research results into practice.

Moving forward together with open science 15
form is known as user research, in which citizens conduct their own research with
support from a university.
When it comes to disseminating and exploiting the results of scientific research, the
debate centres on making them accessible to public groups. The aim of making
scientific articles available free of charge (open access) is the dominant element in
this debate. However, making scientific results understandable and usable for a
wider public requires more than just free access. Intermediaries, such as NEMO
Kennislink, have been established to ensure real public engagement with the
dissemination and exploitation of knowledge. Many of their activities are in the field
of education. This type of science communication is not always based on an equal
dialogue between scientists and public groups.
In some research fields, researchers are increasingly working on an equal footing
with those who will be putting the knowledge obtained into practice. This has also
been described as the "participatory turn" (Jasanoff, 2003). The idea behind this is
that researchers who engage with future users during the research process can
make better use of their practical knowledge and respond to their needs. This can
prevent problems that would otherwise only surface at the end of the journey
(Wilsdon & Willis, 2004).
1.4 Public engagement for the sake of appearance
Policymakers and research funders are becoming increasingly aware of the
importance and added value of public engagement and are therefore increasingly
focusing on it. For example, experiential experts assess some of the research
proposals at ZonMW based on the criteria of relevance, feasibility and level of client
participation.
Funders' focus may lead to scientists paying attention to public engagement, but
not always in a meaningful way. Sometimes scientists engage public groups
primarily for the sake of appearance. Civil-society partners, for example, will then
only be able to participate in discussions on subjects of little or no importance to the
researchers. This means they do not get an opportunity to make a meaningful
contribution and, consequently, researchers fail to see the value of engaging them
(Ives et al., 2013). In other cases, external stakeholders do make a clear
contribution, but their input is brushed aside when it doesn't match the wishes and
interests of the researchers (Abelson et al., 2003). These situations are both cases
of tokenism: citizens appear to be involved but in fact contribute little. This often has
a demotivating effect on all those involved because the effort expended in public
engagement is of little value. Public engagement then quickly becomes a box-
ticking exercise to satisfy the wishes of the research funder (Snape et al., 2014 and
Felt, 2017).
Greater or more engagement is not always better, if it results in tokenism. The point
is not to engage citizens more often or in greater numbers. Rather, the point is to

Moving forward together with open science 16
ensure that the way in which they are engaged (the form) aligns with the reasons
for engaging them. Because not all public engagement reaches a satisfactory
conclusion, in this review we are looking for non-tokenistic, meaningful public
engagement. The results of our search are the elaboration of this concept and
some practical steps towards achieving this engagement.
1.5 Research question and reader’s guide
This review is about meaningful public engagement with research. Our main
question is: what is meaningful public engagement and how do you organise it?
In order to answer this question, in the second section, we examine the (scientific)
debate on public engagement with research. We delve into the academic literature
on the relationship between science and public groups, and explore how the way
we think about the nature and ambitions of public engagement with science has
changed over time.
This evolution in the debate has affected European and Dutch policy on public
engagement with science and vice versa. The development of these policy
frameworks is set out in the third section of this review, focusing on Responsible
Research and Innovation and Open Science.
The fourth section examines how public engagement with science plays out in
practice. The key element of this section is the information we gained from three
case studies examining public engagement in psychiatry, educational research and
research into water quality.
The debate about, the policy for and the practice of public engagement with science
influence each other, with theory, policy and practice evolving in tandem. We have
decided to consider them separately because each provides its own perspective on
our main question: what is meaningful public engagement and how do you organise
it?
The results of our search in these three sections form the basis for the analysis in
section five, in which we summarise what makes public engagement meaningful. In
section six we present practical steps for policymakers, researchers and the public
to (continue to) encourage meaningful public engagement with research.

Moving forward together with open science 17
2 The debate about public
engagement
The concept of public engagement has roots in different domains that have their
own terminology, concerns and thinkers. For this review, we use a very broad
notion of public engagement and look at several domains, which we will briefly
introduce. We go on to describe the history of the debate about public engagement.
The interaction between technology and society has influenced the debate
regarding the relationship between science and society. We explain that what used
to be a deficit model has evolved to become a more democratic dialogue model.
We conclude this section with two concepts that are currently central to the thinking
about public engagement with science: responsibility and openness.
2.1 Conceptual origins of public engagement
The concept of public engagement has several conceptual roots. There are no less
than five domains within which a discourse on public engagement has emerged,
each with its own terminology, focus, strengths and pitfalls (Fransman, 2018). As
we are borrowing ideas from all these domains in this review, it is useful to highlight
the key points in the debate about public engagement in each one.
• Higher education and research. This domain has a long tradition of thinking
about the way the university functions in relation to society. Much emphasis is
placed on measuring and increasing the impact of science and the role of
public groups in this regard. There is also a focus on practical research, in
which the involvement of professionals in the development of knowledge is
intended to lead to insights that can be put into practice.
• Science and technology. In this domain, also known as Science &
Technology Studies (STS), the debate regarding science and society has
undergone a transformation from a deficit model to a dialogue model.
• Public Policy. Ideas about the role of public groups have emerged in
healthcare, social work and education. In this domain, public engagement is
referred to in terms of participation. Initially, the idea was that the government
should strive for an ever higher level of public engagement, from consultation
via cooperation to commissioning. This ambition was subsequently
reconsidered.
• International development cooperation. Within this domain, the focus has
long been on traditional forms of knowledge and knowledge development,
where the different roles in knowledge development are to be understood as
reflecting power relationships. Recently, the focus has shifted to measuring the

Moving forward together with open science 18
impact of public engagement, partly under pressure from NGOs that fund
research.
• Community development. In this domain, there is a tradition of science being
performed by outsiders, such as amateur scientists, outside the existing
frameworks. In addition, it has seen the emergence of action research with
(disadvantaged) communities. The humanities have also raised their profile in
this domain to make themselves visible and relevant in society.
As stated above, for this review we are drawing on the various conceptual sources
of the debate regarding public engagement. Only where necessary and useful do
we refer explicitly to the specific genesis of the concepts discussed.
2.2 A historical sketch of science
Our thinking on the nature of science has a long history. Whereas scientists in the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries viewed science primarily as the activity of
a specific group of people, by the mid-nineteenth century the idea emerged that it
was not the practitioner but the method used that determined what science was
(Oreskes, 2019). This interest in the scientific method has long dominated the way
we think about science. Until the middle of the last century, scientists considered
themselves as treasure hunters who systematically search for hard, incontrovertible
facts and objective truths (Sismondo, 2010). This is still a common view among
some scientists, especially in the natural sciences.
Halfway through the twentieth century, attention shifted back from the method to the
practitioner. Science is increasingly regarded as a collective affair, with scientists in
a community building on each other's ideas and thought patterns (Oreskes, 2019).
This emphasis on the collaborative process lays the foundation for the current
dominant idea that science is a social construct. By studying scientists from an
anthropological perspective, the conclusion was that they don't find the truth, but
collectively construct it (Latour & Woolgar, 1979). Scientists are therefore not
treasure hunters, but architects. This implies that it matters who is engaged in
science. The more diverse the community (in terms of backgrounds, views,
perspectives), the more diverse are the questions asked, the methods used and the
ways in which findings are interpreted.
11
Diversity is not only important for people within science, but also for those who are
involved from outside. In the scientific sphere, recognition of different types of
knowledge is increasing and universities are losing the monopoly on true
knowledge that they used to have to some extent. People realise that non-scientists

11  This line of thinking coincided with the tail end of second-wave feminism - women philosophers of science
argued that more women scientists were not only needed for emancipatory reasons but that their female input
was crucial to the functioning of science and improving it (Longino, Science as social knowledge and Harding,
The Science Question in Feminism).

Moving forward together with open science 19
such as teachers, patients, or nature lovers possess relevant experiential
knowledge that complements the formal knowledge of scientists (Wynne, 1998). In
situations where facts are uncertain, stakes high, decisions urgent and values in
dispute, there is reason to engage in Post-Normal Science (Funtowicz & Ravetz,
1993). This is the idea that "the scientific method does not claim to be value-free,
nor ethically neutral" (ibid, page 86). In Post-Normal Science, the closed, narrow
scientific community that is normally involved in the creation and evaluation of
knowledge should be expanded to include experts from different fields and lay
people who have an interest in knowledge.
The term "Mode 2" science was coined at the end of the twentieth century
(Nowotny, Scott & Gibbons, 2001). In Mode 2 science, knowledge is not only
produced within the walls of the university, but also in multidisciplinary teams that
seek to solve problems in the real world. Knowledge should not only be scientifically
reliable but also socially robust (Nowotny, 2003). This means that a research result
is not only valid in a sterile laboratory setting, but also outside, where social,
economic, cultural and political factors exert an influence. Socially robust
knowledge is created in cooperation with various actors, such as scientists from
different disciplines, and the end users or intended end users of the knowledge.
Society is no longer just a receiver of knowledge, but also an active partner in the
production of knowledge.
Mode 2 science characterises a shift in thinking about the function of science in
society. Science should not only satisfy curiosity; socially robust knowledge should
also be of public value. Science should have the right impact, for example in line
with the values set out in the European Convention on Human Rights (Owen et al.,
2012), or by contributing to the sustainable development goals of the United
Nations. In other words, the place where the knowledge agenda is determined is
shifting from the scientific domain to a place where researchers, together with
industry and public actors, ask scientific questions (Gibbons, 1999). This makes it
increasingly important to determine who is allowed to ask these questions.
2.3 Public engagement with technology
In the 1960s, technological change began to play an increasingly important role in
our society. At the same time, social and ethical concerns about technological
developments, such as biotechnology and ICT, were growing. A new type of policy
research (technology assessment) highlighted the social risks and benefits of new
technologies (Wong, 2014). In the 1980s, politicians and administrators wanted to
anchor social and ethical issues more systematically in science and technology
policy, by institutionalising the way science and technology were treated (Rathenau
Instituut, 2017). In the Netherlands, education minister Deetman set up the
Netherlands Organisation for Technological Research (NOTA), which later became
the Rathenau Instituut, in 1986. It was tasked with systematically studying the social
significance of technology and encouraging both politicians and the public to form
an opinion on new technology (Rathenau Instituut, website).

Moving forward together with open science 20
In the 1990s, there was a growing awareness that society was not just a market for
technology, but that technology and society were (or should be) interconnected.
There was a need for social debate, for example with regard to bioethical issues.
The focus of technology assessments was also shifting. Rather than just assessing
the effects of new technologies, constructive technology assessments (CTAs)
broadened the focus to include the design, development and implementation
processes. According to Schot and Rip "CTA can be seen as a new design practice
in which impacts are anticipated, users and other impacted communities are
involved from the start and in an interactive way, and which contains an element of
societal learning" (Schot & Rip, 1996, p. 255). The need for integration of ethical,
legal and social research with technological developments continued into the
twenty-first century (Rathenau Instituut, 2017).
The development of CTA in technology has also influenced our ideas on the
relationship between science and society. Societal actors can be engaged in
applied science and technology development, but can also get involved earlier in
the knowledge production chain, moving towards fundamental research. This
engagement goes beyond merely examining the ethical, legal and social
consequences of scientific developments. In fact, public engagement with science
helps to democratise (medical) ethical issues, thereby changing the relationship
between citizens, experts and government at a fundamental level (Jasanoff, 2011).
Moreover, there is a growing awareness that scientists need to involve public
groups at an earlier stage in scientific developments in order to strengthen public
trust in science (van Est, 2011).
2.4 From deficit to dialogue
As we have seen above, the relationship between science and society is constantly
changing. Until the second half of the twentieth century, the prevailing view was that
science needed to be explained better. The idea was that anyone who understands
how science works cannot help but appreciate it. Society was portrayed as ignorant
and assumed to need to be informed and educated about science. Referred to as
the "deficit model", this view emerged from the field of science communication
(Wynne, 2006 and Fransman, 2018). This way of thinking can be traced back to
some activities undertaken to popularise science.
However, the deficit model has been criticised on several fronts. Durant (1999)
summarised the criticism into three main points. The deficit model:
1. is based on conveying undisputed facts. However, as we have indicated
above, knowledge is a social construct. Partly because of this, new, socially
relevant knowledge is often provisional and rarely uncontroversial.
2. tends to define the public exclusively in negative terms, as lay people who
lack expert knowledge. This ignores the relevant, informal knowledge that
public groups do possess.

Moving forward together with open science 21
3. places the responsibility for problems in the relationship between science and
society squarely on society, which is deemed to be ignorant. Critics point to
the many other factors that can disrupt the complex relationship between
science and society, such as disputed knowledge claims, conflicts over values
and clashes between commercial, social and political interests.
In response to this criticism of the deficit model, a more democratic view is currently
in vogue. This is based on the changing ideas about the relationship between
science and society, as described above. This democratic model aims to achieve
an equal relationship between scientists and public groups and emphasises
dialogue as a prerequisite for arriving at a satisfactory resolution of differences of
opinion, even when scientists present divergent perspectives on reality. Whereas
the deficit model considers only formal knowledge to be important in the
relationship between scientists and lay people, the democratic model involves a
wider range of factors, such as informal or implicit knowledge, values, and power
and trust relationships (Durant, 1999).
2.5 Responsibility
In recent years, the way people think about the relationship between science and
society has taken on a more concrete form. In this context, philosophers of science
refer to a science that maintains a responsible relationship with society. What
"responsible" means has been interpreted in different ways in the discourse on
European policy on science, technology and innovation. Science is responsible
when (Owen et al., 2012):
• it is focused on societal challenges and needs;
• it is responsive, prepared to be guided by society in dialogue; and
• scientists take a broad view of their social responsibility.
Responsible science is therefore science that not only engages society in research,
development and innovation but is also guided by and responds to society's needs.
By taking into account the following four dimensions in research and innovation
processes, scientists will actually be able to take on this responsibility (Stilgoe et al.,
2013):
• Responsiveness. Making the governance of science, technology and
innovation more flexible will enable a quicker response to societal and
technological developments.
• Inclusion. Bringing together people with different perspectives, beliefs and
expertise can generate new ideas and make people sensitive to each other's
point of view.
• Anticipation. Discussing the societal aspects of science, technology and
innovation at an early stage makes it possible to adjust development paths.
Ethical, social and legal dilemmas then become opportunities for innovation
rather than obstacles.

Moving forward together with open science 22
• Reflexivity. The processes and outcomes that are considered acceptable are
established through joint consultation. This requires awareness of one's own
beliefs, motivations and limits.12
The ambitions of responsible science are sometimes difficult to reconcile with the
prevailing mores in practice (Felt, 2017 and Owen & Pansera, 2019). According to
these authors, responsible science can only be embedded in society if public
engagement becomes an integral part of the practice of science. This means that
researchers need to be trained to get a feel for how research links in with societal
issues. However, in the dominant discourse and practices of new public
management, scientists are judged by quantitative indicators, including their fund-
raising abilities. This gives rise to a risk that the principles of responsible science
will be pragmatically translated into a few questions on an application or report form
and therefore become a box-ticking exercise, leading to tokenism. Responsible
science then becomes a ploy to satisfy the research funder, rather than scientists
being intrinsically motivated to engage public groups with their work in a meaningful
way.
2.6 Openness
In recent years, in addition to the ambition to create a sense of responsibility in
science, there has been a trend towards open science. This trend is partly
technology-driven as new technological applications and digital technologies are
providing new opportunities for information-sharing and collaboration.
Because of this focus on technological opportunities, the trend towards open
science is not primarily about the democratisation of science. This has been
included in the formulation of this concept, which has been dubbed "open science"
in policy circles.
13 Open science spans several schools of thought. Fecher and
Friesike (2014) describe five schools of thought from which the ideas of open
science have been derived.
• Democratic; based on the assumption that access to knowledge is unevenly
distributed. For this school, the aim of open science is to make knowledge
freely available, which requires scientists, politicians and citizens.
• Pragmatic; knowledge development can be organised more efficiently if
scientists cooperate more. The main purpose of open science for this school is
to open up knowledge development so that scientists from different disciplines
can contribute.

12  A self-critical attitude is a core principle of science. Yet lack of self-criticism appears to be a persistent problem
in science (Stilgoe et al., 2014, Wynne 2006). In addition to self-reflection, Wynne (1993) therefore argues for
"institutional reflection" through public engagement, such as in RRI.
13  Initially, this new way of practising science was called Science 2.0; after a "public consultation" by the
European Commission in 2015, it was decided to name it open science from then on (EC, 2015).

Moving forward together with open science 23
• Infrastructural; the underlying assumption is that efficient research depends
on the availability of tools and applications. With open science, scientists and
platform providers aim to create freely accessible platforms, tools and services
for researchers.
• Public; open science aims to make science accessible to public groups.
Citizen science is an important element of this school.
• Bibliometric; based on the assumption that the quality and impact of scientific
output is not properly measured in the current system, this school is trying to
develop an alternative system of scientific impact measurement under the
banner of open science.
In Fecher and Friesike's (2014) analysis, sharing in the benefits of science is the
key issue. The schools of thought they describe focus mainly on access to
knowledge and the process of knowledge development. In this interpretation,
involving societal actors at the front end of the scientific process, when formulating
the research questions, receives less attention. Yet this is precisely the phase in
which societal actors and citizens can bring in new perspectives, thereby making a
meaningful contribution to science (Delgado, Kjølberg & Wickson, 2011).

Moving forward together with open science 24
3 Public engagement policy
It is not only scientists who search for meaningful public engagement with science:
the subject has also occupied a prominent position in various European and Dutch
science policy programmes. The conceptual quest described in the previous section
has obviously inspired the policy for public engagement with research.
In this section, we describe the most important successive science policy
frameworks in the Netherlands and Europe. We will see that each new policy
programme has boosted public engagement with science. The focus on the
relationship between science and society has also become increasingly wide-
ranging over the years. Whereas in the mid-twentieth century informing public
groups was regarded primarily as a supplementary activity to science, there is now
an increasing focus on the integration of public activities into knowledge
development. Under the banner of open science, European and other policymakers
are now even advocating a transformation of science so that it can better serve
society (European Commission, 2016).
3.1 New policy as sedimentary layers
The policy process that shapes the interaction between science and society can be
characterised as a sedimentation process (Felt et al., 2013). New policies and new
policy discourses to guide this interaction form fresh layers (sediments) on top of
earlier policies, which do not disappear and are not replaced, but co-exist with new
policy programmes and must relate to them. In this way, we can also consider the
search for a policy to engage a broader group of social actors with research and
innovation as a sedimentary layer. In successive programmes attention shifts from
(one-sided) communication from science to society to dialogue and participation
(ibid.).
In the late 1980s, the relationship between scientists and society began to change
under the influence of national policy programmes (Durant, 1999; Gregory & Lock,
2008; Jones, 2014). A publication by the British Royal Academy in 1985 aimed at
enhancing the understanding of science in society was the starting point for this
trend (Bodmer et al. 1985). Initially, the deficit model was at the forefront, based on
the idea that society needs to be better informed about scientific progress. Since
then, large surveys, such as the EU's Eurobarometer, have been used to monitor
the knowledge and attitudes of the public towards science in general and towards
specific technologies.

Moving forward together with open science 25
Box 2 Science shops
In the 1970s, several relatively small initiatives led the way in the
Netherlands. Science shops were set up in various university towns. These
hubs facilitated cooperation between students and lecturers who wanted to
conduct socially relevant research, and non-profit organisations or
residents' groups who had a particular question. The question came from
society and the science shop would then seek out interested lecturers and
students to conduct the research. Although the science shops managed to
combine the social, scientific and educational value of science, this
concept failed to become widespread or structurally embedded in Dutch or
European science policy.

Launched by the European Commission in 1998 as part of the Fifth Framework
Programme for Research and Development, the Raising Awareness Programme
was largely in line with the deficit model and focused mainly on communication.
Through outreach activities, policymakers and science communicators tried to raise
public awareness of scientific and technological developments and their
consequences for society. While the programme did not involve any research
activity, the European Commission did encourage researchers and their employers
to attract a more diverse group of young researchers.

The focus changed over the three subsequent framework programmes of the
European Commission (FP6, FP7 and Horizon 2020).
14 Financial resources were
made available in the research programmes to investigate and further stimulate the
interaction between science and society. Increasingly, experimentation with
participatory research practices and co-creation of knowledge by scientists and
societal actors was subsidised. The titles of the programme components that
specifically focused on interaction show this shifting perspective: Science and
Society (FP6), Science in Society (FP7) and Science with and for Society
(H2020).
Science and society were regarded less and less as separate entities in successive
framework programmes. There was greater attention for a dialogue that should lead
to joint knowledge production (Felt et al., 2013). Within the European Commission,
it has now become a central tenet that: "societal actors (researchers, citizens,
policymakers, business and third sector organisations) work together during the

14  Funding Programme (FP) 6 ran from 2002 to 2006, followed by FP7 from 2007 to 2013. Horizon2020 began in
2014 and ran until 2020.

Moving forward together with open science 26
whole research and innovation process in order to better align both the process and
its outcomes with the values, needs and expectations of society" (European
Commission, 2018). The basic premise, therefore, is to involve societal actors as
early as possible in the development of scientific knowledge and new technologies
to explore acceptable solutions to societal challenges (Burget et al., 2017; de Saille,
2015; Owen et al., 2012).
3.2 Responsible Research and Innovation
European research and innovation policy has long regarded the promotion of
science and technological development as an end in itself. This is in contrast to
almost all other policy efforts by the European Commission, which are aimed at
achieving specific normative, political objectives, such as a high level of security,
sustainable development or a competitive social market economy. For a long time,
the policy assumed that stimulating innovation would automatically lead to
economic growth and increased employment. Market forces would ensure that
innovation was focused not only on meeting society's needs, but also on addressing
societal challenges. As a result, research and innovation policy did not have to
worry about the direction of scientific and technological development. It could
confine itself to setting criteria, for example with regard to the quality and safety of
innovative products (Von Schomberg & Hankins, 2019, p.16).
This technology neutrality as a basis for research and innovation policy ended with
the introduction of the European policy framework Responsible Research and
Innovation (RRI), which from about 2012 began to emerge as a new sediment layer
on top of the previous policy programmes. RRI is: "a transparent, interactive
process by which societal actors and innovators become mutually responsive to
each other with a view on the (ethical) acceptability, sustainability and societal
desirability of the innovation process and its marketable products (in order to allow
a proper embedding of scientific and technological advances in our society)" (Von
Schomberg, 2011, p.9). The Commission calls RRI a cross-cutting issue, a focus
that applies to all parts of Horizon 2020 (European Commission, 2018). Therefore,
stated much more forcefully than in previous policy initiatives, RRI is intended to be
an integral part of scientific research and not an additional activity on top of
mainstream research practice (Felt, 2017). In addition, RRI was the guiding
framework for the above-mentioned Science with and for Society research
programme that ran until 2020.
The focus on public engagement through dialogue and participation has grown
because of RRI. Researchers and societal actors have been able to experiment
and gain experience with new forms of knowledge co-creation. However, an
evaluation of RRI (European Commission, 2017) shows that existing patterns of
conducting science are hard to change. For example, civil-society organisations
without links to commercial parties play a minor role in Horizon 2020. A very small
part of the research budget (<1%) is allocated to them. In only 11% of funded
projects do they play a role in setting the research agenda and its implementation.

Moving forward together with open science 27
Flink and Kaldewey (2018) also point out the persistence of existing research
practices and the difficulty of changing them.
As the sediment layer of the European RRI policy was taking shape, the Dutch
government also developed policies to link science and society more closely. The
Dutch National Research Agenda (NWA) was the main instrument for this. The
Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science wanted to use the NWA to make
scientific research more demand-driven and more closely aligned with the demands
and needs of the Dutch people. The question is whether the NWA is succeeding in
this regard (see Box 3). Minister Van Engelshoven again focused on public
engagement in the 2019 science letter (Ministry of Education, Culture and Science,
2019). A new element was the request to NWO to reward researchers who enter
into dialogue with society. The minister also made three million euros available for
connecting the knowledge gained from the NWA to society. In line with this
development, universities of applied sciences have set up "Centres of Expertise", in
which they work with industry, government bodies and other public and civil-society
organisations.

Moving forward together with open science 28
Box 3 Dutch National Research Agenda
The Dutch National Research Agenda (NWA) was launched in 2015. At the
request of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, a knowledge
coalition15 conducted a national consultation to find out the questions which
Dutch people believed science should be addressing.
Society ("everyone") could submit questions online during a public
consultation that had been widely publicised on various media outlets, with
appearances by well-known Dutch personalities and leading scientists. 11,700
questions were submitted, which were clustered into 140 questions by a jury of
scientists. Scientists, businesses, citizens and civil-society organisations then
discussed the content of the agenda in the course of three conferences.
Despite the open nature of these steps, some reservations can be made
regarding the actual engagement of society with the development of the NWA.
The reports show that mainly businesses and research organisations
submitted questions during the consultation phase. Mostly scientists attended
the public conferences (Dutch National Research Agenda, 2016). In addition,
the public was no longer involved in the prioritisation phase of the agenda. The
social perspective also appeared to be given little priority in the
implementation of the NWA. For example, civil-society organisations were
unable to apply for research funding.16
3.3 Open science
In recent years, a new sedimentary layer has formed under the heading of open
science, on top of previous initiatives to promote public engagement with scientific
research. In the new European framework programme Horizon Europe (2021-
2027), RRI is therefore losing momentum in favour of open science policies
(Shelley-Egan et al., 2020).

15  The knowledge coalition consists of the Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU), the
Netherlands Association of Universities of Applied Sciences, the Federation of Dutch applied research
institutes (TO2), the Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers (VNO-NCW),
the Royal Dutch Association of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (MKB Nederland), the Dutch Research
Council (NWO) and the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW).
16  NWO, 2018, Call for proposals - Dutch National Research Agenda: Research along Routes by Consortia.

Moving forward together with open science 29
Even more than previous plans, the open science policy proposes a major
transformation of scientific knowledge development, as can be read in the policy
paper Open Innovation, Open Science, Open to the World (European Commission,
2016). At the same time, Horizon Europe no longer allows scope for a programme
component that is specifically devoted to the interaction between science and
society, such as SwafS from Horizon 2020 (see Box 4).
The open science policy is aimed both at the relationship between scientists and at
changing the relationship between science and society. Open science is not so
much about responsible science, but rather focuses on science functioning faster
and more efficiently. Mutual collaboration, easier data sharing and improved
replicability of research should ultimately lead to better, more efficient and more
reliable science. Mutual cooperation between scientists was a less prominent part
of RRI.
Box 4 Science and society in Horizon Europe
The framework programme Horizon Europe does not have a component
specifically dedicated to the interaction between science and society. The
intention is for the focal points of the previous Science with and for Society
(SwafS) programme component to be better interwoven with the entire
framework programme, so as to "place citizens at the core of Horizon Europe"
(European Commission, 2020).
The European Commission's framework programmes are always translated
into biennial work programmes with their own (sub)objectives and budgets.
The European Commission recognises that translating the focal points for
science and society into these work programmes will require attention, with
different contents and challenges in each field. Scientists have expressed
concern that the disappearance of the specific programme component will
lead to a weakening of the focus on the interaction between science and
society. In June 2018, for example, a network of science sociologists launched
a petition to advocate for a specific Horizon Europe programme component for
science-society interaction, but this was to no avail.17

Another difference between open science and RRI is that open science policy
focuses more on institutional and technical change, whereas RRI policy focuses

17  See https://www.sisnetwork.eu/about/news/call-for-action-horizon-europe-needs-a-programme-for-funding-
science-society-and-citizens_-initiatives

Moving forward together with open science 30
more on cultural change (van Lente et al., 2018). The Open Science Policy Platform
(OSPP) has been given the task of further developing the policy agenda for open
science in the EU. The OSPP has a clear focus on technical and organisational
change in this assignment. One example is the European Open Science Cloud, a
large online platform for sharing research data according to FAIR principles.18 The
OSPP is also focusing on making open access publishing the standard and
adjusting the evaluation and remuneration structure for scientists. The OSPP
reduces engaging public groups with science mainly to citizen science: public
engagement in conducting research.

The principles of open science are also at the forefront of Dutch science policy. The
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science presented the National Open Science
Plan in early 2017. The priorities of this plan show the more internal scientific and
institutional approach to open science in Dutch science policy namely:
• promoting open access to scientific publications;
• promoting the optimal use and reuse of research data; and
• adjusting evaluation and assessment systems to align with the aims of open
science.
Citizen science is one of the themes of this plan. The Citizen Science working
group presented its final report in late 2020 (National Open Science Programme,
2020). The working group defines citizen science as being more than just getting
citizens to help collect data. It is any form of research in which "scientists
collaborate with [...] volunteers and in which the involvement of the latter is
essential to achieving good results". The working group has two specific proposals:
1. to develop a network that facilitates the sharing of knowledge and experience
and encourages cooperation and innovation; and
2. to develop an assessment instrument that makes it possible to assess the
form, approach and chances of success of citizen science as objectively as
possible. This tool can help scientists, organisations or individuals aiming to
embark on a citizen science project to think about the different components,
focal points and pitfalls in advance.
All in all, the democratisation of knowledge development within the European and
Dutch policy frameworks for open science is a less prominent theme than it was
under RRI. Under the banner of open science, access to scientific results and data
is now paramount and expectations and ambitions for public engagement with
science have been lowered. Public groups are less often being invited to
systematically consider the structural and long-term implications of research and
innovation (Shelley-Egan et al., 2020). Citizen participation is often limited to the

18  Data that meets the FAIR principles is easy to find, accessible, interoperable and reusable.

Moving forward together with open science 31
assistance individuals can provide in collecting research data (Fecher & Friesike,
2014).
Several authors saw this prioritisation coming. For example, Jones (2014, p.29)
stated that: "It would be a pity if the enthusiasm for open access and open data
were to eclipse the progress that’s been made in promoting the need for such
public engagement". Stilgoe et al. (2013) also warned that open access could divert
attention away from the bigger challenge of engaging public groups with science in
a meaningful way, and that open access could come to be regarded as a substitute
for meaningful public engagement. These authors highlighted the risk that, due to
the current dominance and the interpretation of open science policy, the dialogue
between science and the public would revert to an unequal role pattern.

Moving forward together with open science 32
4 Public engagement in practice
We examined examples of public engagement in three fields: psychiatry,
educational research and research into water quality. This allowed us to
supplement our search for meaningful public engagement with practical
experiences. We have written a report on each field that details the benefits and
challenges of public engagement in that field. In addition, we have drawn lessons
from these case studies that are also relevant outside the specific field. Box 5 (see
next page) summarises the key findings from each case study.
The case studies provide insights into public engagement in all of the fields. In the
research practices we analysed, this is a quest for researchers, policymakers and
the public itself (representatives of civil-society organisations, practitioners and
citizens). Engaging public groups is also a dynamic process. We see new practices
emerging and evolving. These practices look different in each field and in each
(policy) domain. We discuss scientific, domain-specific and societal factors
separately below.
4.1 Factors in science
Our field studies show that the necessary structures and incentives which enable,
promote or support public engagement are not well enough developed in the world
of science. The current academic system of recognition and reward has little regard
for collaboration with external public groups. For example, in our case study on
public engagement with psychiatric research, we noted that scientists who engage
patients (and their representatives) with research are not recognised or rewarded
for doing so. Indeed, research conducted at the request of, or in collaboration with,
patients is generally less likely to be published in leading medical journals. Medical
committees that advise the government and insurers on care standards and
guidelines rely on articles published in these journals to determine the quality of
reimbursable care. As a result, research in collaboration with patients actually has
less social impact than regular research, which does get published in top journals.
Moreover, these publications are important for the career of researchers.

Moving forward together with open science 33
Box 2 Findings from psychiatry, water quality research, and education
In psychiatry, we are witnessing a small, but growing and relevant movement
towards greater patient engagement with academic psychiatric research.
Patients are engaged with setting the agenda and selecting research
proposals. Thanks to their input
, more attention is being paid to issues such as
recovery and empowerment, the perspective of relatives and the quality of
care. These themes contrast with the prevailing biomedical perspective, which
focuses on understanding, diagnosing and curing psychiatric disorders. These
new research themes also demand  different approaches to research, such as
qualitative and participatory research. The engagement of patients with
research coincides with trends in psychiatric care, in which the patient is given
a greater say. Within psychiatry, there is some resistance to these
paradigmatic changes in the profession. This shows that something
fundamental is at stake in this field.
In water quality research, agenda-setting is highly institutionalised. The
existing research institutions and policy organisations do devote attention to
public interests and values, but there is little scope for direct citizen
participation. Citizens do get involved in data collection relatively often.
Sometimes these studies have a scientific purpose. However, academic
researchers disagree on whether data collected by nature lovers can be of
sufficient scientific quality. Moreover, not all of these projects aspire to be of
scientific value. Sometimes the aim is mainly to increase citizens' water
awareness (awareness that the quality of Dutch surface water is under
pressure) and the support for measures to improve that quality. However,
there has been little evaluation of whether these projects actually contribute to
greater water awareness. In addition, a small group of researchers and
citizens try to point out shortcomings to scientists and policymakers through
their own research.
In educational research, public engagement takes the form of setting the
agenda for, implementing and disseminating research, albeit on a modest
scale at present. Individually, teachers and school leaders are involved in the
agenda-setting and programming of practice-based research. There has been
an increased focus on practical research, for example in academic
collaborative centres. The research conducted there usually focuses on a
specific practice and not on generic knowledge development. The education
sector is also investing a great deal of energy in making research results
accessible and in ensuring that they are applied in order
to improve the quality
of education. Nevertheless, the initiatives to get people involved are poorly
coordinated and the involvement of education professionals is based on

Moving forward together with open science 34
individual enthusiasm. Involving students and parents is considered "a bridge
too far".

Many reseachers regard the fact that they are less appreciated for research
involving public groups than for their conventional scientific work, as a barrier to the
further development of public engagement. The academic system of recognition
and reward is currently under review. Research funders, universities and the
Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU) can use this opportunity to
encourage researchers to engage public groups with their research in a meaningful
way.
The prevailing methodology and epistemology within a scientific discipline also
determine which forms of public engagement can be fruitful. Disciplines are
characterised by their own paradigm, with dominant views on which research
questions are relevant and how they should be investigated. Public engagement
sometimes fits in easily, but it can also be difficult to reconcile with this paradigm. In
psychiatry, for example, we have seen the dominant view of research into mental
illness shift over the years. Whereas in the past this research was mainly
biomedically oriented, nowadays it tends to focus more on qualitative research into
the psychosocial aspects of psychiatric disorders. This has implications for the role
that patients can play and the value that is attached to their input. Within a large-
scale biomedical study, patients traditionally have the role of anonymous
participants in a randomised controlled trial. In qualitative studies into coping with
an illness or into the quality of life, patients are given a say. This creates an
opportunity for them to become involved in the design of the research as well.
To what extent a scientific discipline is application-orientated, also influences the
form and extent of public engagement. The more application-oriented, the more
obvious it is to engage professionals and users with the research process. The
conditions under which application-oriented research is conducted, inevitably
affects the outcomes. This makes knowledge within educational research, for
example, highly context-dependent, as all children, classes, teachers and schools
are different. For example, enquiry-based learning can be effective in Dalton
schools where pupils are used to working independently but may be less suited to
traditional education. This means that research results always have to be translated
into an application context and this requires the involvement of people who are
thoroughly familiar with this context. If insights from research in a particular school
or classroom are to be used, teachers need to have an inquisitive attitude and
possess research skills. The teachers' research interest will then encourage them to
continue contributing to research.

Moving forward together with open science 35
4.2 Factors in society
Our case studies show that the public's need for engagement with research varies.
It is different in every policy context. In water quality research, for example, a low
level of public engagement is one of the reasons for involving nature lovers, the
expectation being that contributing to research, for example by sampling water in
their environment, will increase participants' water awareness (see Box 5). The
tasks performed by these volunteers are generally simple and require little
knowledge, although long-term monitoring projects do require a lot of commitment.
In our case study, we found that the contribution of these volunteers does not
generally exert much influence in the field. The major research topics, research
methods and quality criteria of water quality research do not change substantially
as a result of public groups being involved. However, this is the case in psychiatry,
where patients demand to be involved, for example in putting research topics on the
agenda. They try to shift the long-standing focus on the scientific value of
knowledge to relevance for healthcare in practice. In psychiatry a system transition
is taking place in which new research topics become important, new methods are
used and new quality criteria are (or have to be) defined.
In addition, the way in which a domain is organised is essential for the way public
engagement is shaped. In the education domain, teachers are not well organised
and the interest representatives that do exist (trade unions and professional
associations) are not very active in research and knowledge development. This
creates the risk that engagement is limited to enthusiastic frontrunners who have
time for it, and that this leads to division in the profession. Some schools have the
time and resources to engage in educational research, while for other schools (not
infrequently in disadvantaged areas or with many vulnerable pupils) this is not
possible. Schools involved in research and development can become more
innovative, attract teachers that are more ambitious and hence increase their lead
over others. This may even increase the inequality of opportunity in education.
Likewise, student and parent representatives do not engage much with the
knowledge agenda of education or educational research in general. This is different
in medical research, for example. Patient associations do play an important part in
this area, particularly in putting certain research themes on the agenda.
Finally, external developments influence the demand for public engagement. For
example, water quality in the Netherlands is under pressure. Because the Dutch
public's low level of water awareness is regarded as one of the reasons for this, it is
considered an attractive idea to engage citizens in research on water quality. In
psychiatry, patients' engagement with research is related to their empowerment in
health care; the empowered patients are vocal not only in the consulting room but
also in the laboratory. These social trends and circumstances influence the need for
and form of public engagement with research.

Moving forward together with open science 36
5 Meaningful public engagement
We have seen that the pursuit of meaningful public engagement is an ongoing
quest in the debate about research, research policy and research practice. There is
a wide diversity of ideas, plans and practices: from information and science
communication to citizen science and knowledge co-creation. New ideas on the
interaction between science and society are constantly demanding attention and
policy measures are placing different emphases. Nevertheless, there is a risk that
researchers are engaging public groups with their research mainly for the sake of
appearance. Therefore, the question of when public engagement is meaningful is
relevant: how does this engagement acquire scientific and social value?
Based on our research, we draw two conclusions about meaningful public
engagement that we will elaborate on in the rest of this section.
• Public engagement that contributes to the democratisation of research is
meaningful.
• For public engagement with research to be meaningful, the form (who is
involved, where, when and how) must align with its goal (the why) (see also
Fransman, 2018).
5.1 Democratic knowledge development
The more public engagement contributes to democratic knowledge development,
the more meaningful it is from a societal perspective. What we mean by
"democratic knowledge development" is research that is accessible and inclusive
and in which societal stakeholders have a say in the part they play and the
contribution they make (see also Brown & Guston, 2009).
Democratisation of knowledge development is about changing the balance of power
between public knowledge producers and society, to the benefit of different groups
in this society. It is about participation and co-determination. Three aspects are
relevant to democratisation (Abelson et al., 2003).
1. Accessibility. How high are the thresholds for different groups of interested
parties and stakeholders to influence public research agendas and public
research?
2. Inclusion. Do all groups with an interest or concern get involved?
3. Ownership. To what extent do external stakeholders determine the role they
play and the contribution they make to public research?

Accessibility also determines inclusion. The lower the thresholds, the more relevant
groups are able to participate. This is not just about citizens in general or civil-

Moving forward together with open science 37
society involvement, but about involving groups that actually shape diversity in
society (Bonney et al., 2015). Accessibility is vital if these new groups are to be
involved in the research process. The European Commission states that it is
important to open up a project to anyone who is interested (European Commission,
2020). However, more is needed to achieve inclusion, according to the literature
(Kennedy et al., 2018). Research will become more inclusive when people who do
not directly seek access to scientific research themselves are explicitly invited and
barriers to their involvement are lowered. In water research, for example, it is
important to reach not only nature lovers through citizen science projects, but also
citizens who are not (yet) concerned about water quality.
The third aspect of democratisation is ownership. The more researchers regard
external stakeholders as partners in a research project and as contributors of
additional knowledge and skills, the further this will go. Ideally, together with the
researchers, they will determine both the goal (why) and the form (who, where,
when, how) of their involvement. This can be far-reaching, for example when
patients themselves study aspects of their illness that they consider relevant. There
are also nature lovers who set up their own research project to draw attention to an
issue they consider important (see Box 6). In many other cases, the ownership over
one’s contribution does not go as far. Bird watchers may be perfectly content to
collect sighting data in a survey designed by professional researchers.

Moving forward together with open science 38
Box 3 Public engagement to influence the agenda
In the water quality case study, we see different motives among research
participants. Activism may motivate nature lovers. They want to voice their
concerns through (their contribution to) research projects and put subjects on
the scientific and/or political agenda. For example, they want to demonstrate
that the water quality at a specific location has been insufficiently investigated.
Or they argue that too is being done about (a certain aspect of) our water
quality and they want to raise public and political awareness about this.
Examples of concerned citizens who measure water quality themselves are
the Oostland Surface Water Quality Project Group and the Meten=Weten
[Measurement = Knowledge] association. They want to use their results to
make recommendations to the responsible authorities. Water activism also
exists among larger interest groups, such as the Dutch Society for the
Protection of Birds and Natuur & Milieu [Nature & Environment], an
environmental organisation. They sometimes employ professional hydrologists
and ecologists to carry out their own research.
5.2 Why, who, where, when and how
For public engagement to be meaningful, it is necessary that the reason for this
engagement (the why) aligns with its form (who, where, when and how) and that
those involved have similar views in this regard.
Why
There are several possible arguments for public engagement, sometimes even
within a project. These arguments can be divided into three categories: substantive,
normative and instrumental (Duncan & Oliver, 2017).
• The motivation for public engagement can be substantive, focusing on the
quality of the research. Input of other forms of expertise, such as practical
knowledge and experiential knowledge, can increase the quality of research.
This is true for the agenda-setting of relevant research questions in psychiatry
and for data collection in water quality research, which would not be possible
without the involvement of volunteers.
• Normative reasons for engagement with research boil down to the argument
that people have a right to it. This argument can refer to direct stakeholders.
For example, patients have a right to participate in research into their illness,
because it directly affects their body and their life. This argument can also refer

Moving forward together with open science 39
to the more indirect, general public interest. Research into good education
affects not just students and teachers, but all of us, as society benefits from
having a well-trained workforce. Another normative argument is that publicly
funded science should be of service to taxpayers, who, after all, have paid for
it. These normative arguments are often aimed at changing power relations
and increasing public participation and inclusiveness. They call for a more
democratic knowledge development process.
• In instrumental arguments, public engagement is used as a means of achieving
other goals. For example, when people bring in the perspective of societal
actors, they expect the research to be more in line with society's values or
needs and to become better socially embedded. Other instrumental goals of
public engagement include generating support for scientific research and
increasing citizens' scientific literacy.
Who
Different public groups can contribute to research. Public engagement can only be
meaningful when the public group involved aligns with the purpose of the
engagement. People can participate in research projects on the basis of their
profession, for example as teachers, psychiatrists or water managers. These
people are often the users of knowledge, who can put research results or
innovations to use straight away. But people can also participate in research
projects as citizens with or without specific interests, knowledge or concerns. In our
case studies, for example, they were nature lovers, students and patients.
There are all kinds of intermediary structures for organising public groups. They
may be interest groups who represent the needs and wishes of patients and pupils,
or who represent the interests of biodiversity and nature conservation. There are
also platforms that match interested citizens with researchers who want to engage
public groups. In water quality research, for example, citizens compile their
collected data on the website waarneming.nl. This is an important resource for
research into, and policy on, biodiversity.
Where
As already discussed in Section 1.3, scientific research usually takes place within
universities, universities of applied sciences and public knowledge organisations,
where researchers can invite public groups to contribute to research. Of course, a
lot of research takes place outside of these physical locations, such as the
collection of nature data. Research is also conducted in virtual networks. Academic
collaborative centres in educational research do not always have a fixed location
and research therefore takes place both in schools (in classrooms) and universities.
In addition, research funding organisations can engage public groups. (Health)
funders, NWO and ZonMW, can give patients a voice in decisions about the
programming and funding of research. Furthermore, research results are not
necessarily disseminated and implemented at knowledge institutions themselves.
The public groups involved are therefore not always present at the location where
the research itself takes place.

Moving forward together with open science 40
Finally, a small group of researchers and public groups conduct research outside of
established structures. In the case of water quality research, for example, they are
nature lovers who are doing science with an activist goal in mind. Through their own
research, they want to point out shortcomings in water policy and research to
scientists and policymakers (see Box 6).
How and when
The role of public groups and the intensity of their engagement can take a variety of
forms. A well-known hierarchical classification of engagement is the Ladder of
Citizen Participation (Arnstein, 1969). The transfer of power is central to this
concept: the higher up the ladder they are, the greater the agency public groups
have. On the lowest rung, those involved are informed of research, without the
opportunity to respond to it. One rung up, researchers consult them at the times
and on the subjects that the researchers determine. The next rung is consultation,
followed by science co-production. At the highest level of participation, public
groups decide (or are included in decisions) on the research. Criticism of this model
focuses on the assumption that participation always involves a transfer of power; it
ignores the possibility that the input of experiential experts can also be considered a
supplement to expert knowledge. There is also criticism of the hierarchical nature of
the ladder, which suggests that a higher level of participation is better by definition
(Tritter & McCallum, 2006).
Public engagement takes different forms in the different phases of scientific
research.
• In the agenda-setting phase of research, stakeholders, for example patients,
put forward topics that they consider important. In such instances, the social
relevance of the research (knowledge for use) is given greater emphasis than
the scientific motivation (knowing for the sake of knowing). Real-world insights
can inspire scientific research questions, which makes it possible, for example,
to better estimate the practical feasibility of a study.
• In the implementation phase of the research, citizens and civil-society
organisations have more of a supporting role. For example, they can be
entrusted with the technically simple, large-scale collection of nature
conservation data. During this phase, public groups have only limited
opportunities to have an equal conversation with the researchers about the
direction of the research. In general, in this phase, citizens, professionals and
other societal actors carry out the instructions set by the researchers.
• Public groups can also be involved in the dissemination and implementation of
research results. Translating scientific knowledge into context-specific practice
requires skills and practical experience that not everyone automatically
possesses. This requires intermediaries, citizens or professionals with an
inquisitive attitude.

The relationship between the research phase and the form of engagement is not
set in stone. In the implementation phase, for example, patients can also advise on
how to minimise the physical or mental strain on subjects during data collection.

Moving forward together with open science 41
A basic precondition for meaningful engagement is that the answers to the
questions why, who, where, when and how are well aligned.19 In psychiatry, for
example, they are relatively well aligned. In water quality research, the form (when)
and target group (who) of public engagement are not always well aligned with the
goal (why). These examples are described in detail in Box 7.

19  We have borrowed these ideas from the Theory of Change Approach, which is used to evaluate social
programmes or initiatives (Blamey & Mackenzie, 2007).

Moving forward together with open science 42
Box 4 Coherent rationale or not?
In the psychiatry case study, we have seen that the elements of the rationale
for public engagement (why, who, where, how and when) align logically.
Patients and their representatives point out that the emphasis on biomedical
research in recent decades has produced too little relevant improvement in
care. They believe that their experiential knowledge can contribute to more
relevant research, and thus present a substantive argument for more
engagement. The answer to the "who" question is also clear. It is those
directly affected by the research, namely the patients, who demand a place at
the table. They do this where the relevant decisions are taken, such as at
health funds and research funder ZonMW. Their goal also determines the
"how" and "when" of their engagement. In order to be able to influence the
research questions, they want to have an advisory or joint decision-making
role in the agenda-setting and programming phase. In this way, they can help
to improve the match between psychiatric scientific research and the needs of
society.
The narrative in the water quality case study follows a different line of
reasoning. In this case, mainly scientists and policymakers set up projects
aimed at involving citizens in research. Sometimes the aim is to collect data on
scientific quality. In other projects, the aim is to increase participants' water
awareness and, with it, public support for the research. The place where public
engagement takes place ties in with this. This is the place where the research
takes place, often outside in the natural environment or at other places where
water quality can be measured.
Our research shows that there is little evaluation of whether the form of public
engagement – helping with data collection – actually contributes to
participants' water awareness. Moreover, participants are often nature lovers
who are already interested in the natural environment, biodiversity and water
quality. It is therefore unclear whether the form aligns well with the goal. The
target group is also not always well chosen, considering the goal. In other
words, the elements of the narrative of public engagement in water quality do
not always align well.

Moving forward together with open science 43
6 Conclusion
In this report we highlighted the conceptual, policy and practical search for
meaningful public engagement with science. We outlined the historical
developments, opportunities and challenges faced by policymakers, scientists and
the engaged public. From our analysis we concluded that science becomes more
democratic if it is accessible and inclusive to societal actors, and if citizens are
given a say in their own role. In addition, we concluded that public engagement is
meaningful when the goal of this engagement (the why) aligns well with who is
involved, where, when and how.
In this final section, we connect these conclusions to the policy debate on open
science. Based on our findings, we set out practical steps that can help
policymakers and researchers to make initiatives in which they engage public
groups more meaningful. This review ends with an appeal to the scientific
community to take these recommendations to heart.
6.1 Public engagement in open science
Anyone who wants to involve public groups in research, or who wants to become
involved in research, will find themselves in a world where (talking about) open
science predominates. Research proposals must comply with open access and
FAIR data guidelines, knowledge institutions have appointed open science officers
to disseminate the ideas and researchers can attend workshops to organise their
research in accordance with open science principles.

The ambitions for open science are grand. Open science promises to transform
science for the benefit of society. This will allow science to become more deeply
embedded in our society, help to solve societal challenges and make the research
process more efficient and effective. Thus, using fewer resources, research will
answer the right societal questions.

In the previous sections, we have seen that this idea of open science and the
associated policy framework did not appear out of thin air. Both build on a trend in
the interaction between science and society that has been going on for a long time.
This trend has so far been towards involving public groups at an increasingly early
stage, in an increasingly equal manner. It has given rise to Responsible Research
and Innovation. These democratising ambitions are also reflected in the work of
UNESCO and the United Nations that articulates the right to science (United
Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2020).

Moving forward together with open science 44
However, the current interpretation of open science gives rise to a risk that the
progress made in the democratisation of science will be overshadowed by a one-
sided emphasis on open access and open data. The concept of public engagement
is also in danger of being narrowed down to citizen science, which is usually
associated with citizens collecting data. As a result, the dialogue between science
and the public could lapse back into a pattern of unequal roles.
6.2 Five steps towards meaningful public engagement
Public engagement should be given the consideration it deserves as an integral
part of the pursuit of open science. This review calls for this consideration. In order
to make this consideration concrete, we have translated our findings below into five
practical steps to give shape to meaningful public engagement with research. We
call not so much for more, but for better, public engagement: engagement that
benefits both science and society.
We have seen that organising meaningful public engagement can be a challenge
for all parties, including researchers, policymakers at knowledge institutions,
research funders, citizens, interest groups, users, patients and professionals. The
key to meaningful public engagement with research therefore lies in both the
scientific and the social domain.
1. Make research accessible and inclusive for public groups
In order to increase the social significance of research, it is important to make
research as accessible as possible. The first step is to remove barriers. These
barriers include the use of research jargon and academic language. Translating
research findings into usable guidance and tools for use in practice can improve the
accessibility of the research process.
The more accessible the research is to the public, the greater the diversity of the
participants. More diversity can enhance both the quality and the legitimacy of
research. Research benefits when people with widely differing perspectives and
insights have a say in decisions. In medical research, for example, it makes a
difference to a person's input whether they have a chronic condition or have already
recovered, or whether they are medically literate or not. When a wider range of
groups is involved in research, this promotes scientific literacy and strengthens the
position of science in society.
2. Coordinate diversity of participation and raise awareness of added value
Increasing the diversity of participants in scientific research is also related to the
way a social domain is organised. Ideally, many different parties should be
represented when research questions are being formulated – not just the "usual
suspects". In educational research, for example, it would be good if not only
enthusiastic teachers and school leaders were given a voice, but also educational
professionals who are less at the forefront. Moreover, parents and pupils are

Moving forward together with open science 45
seldom involved in educational research. Both scientists and societal actors have a
responsibility to maximise the diversity of the public groups involved.
In our case studies we have seen that public engagement can make research
substantively better and/or more socially relevant. Public groups contribute
additional forms of expertise, such as practical and experiential knowledge. This
can lead to different research questions, new options for data collection, empirical
research in practical situations and a better translation of research results into
practice. Public groups can therefore play different roles in research. For example,
nature lovers are mainly involved in data collection. In psychiatry, patients
contribute experiential knowledge.
Civil-society organisations, such as nature conservation organisations, trade unions
and patient associations, can continue to develop and highlight these roles in
research. In this way they can increase the added value of public engagement and
strengthen the support for it. If public groups see their input clearly reflected in the
final result, this will encourage them to (continue to) contribute.
3. Make it attractive for researchers to engage public groups
One way of encouraging public engagement with research is to make it attractive
for researchers to go public. Research shows that the way researchers are
currently recognised and rewarded prevents them from interacting more closely
with societal actors (Felt, 2017). Meaningful public engagement must therefore take
its place in the academic system of recognition and reward. To achieve this, the
VSNU, NFU, KNAW, NWO and ZonMw took the first step in 2019.
20 It is now up to
the knowledge institutions to translate the stated ambitions into specific (policy)
measures.
It is also important to develop appropriate quality standards for research involving
public groups (see Box 8). This enhances the societal impact of this type of
research, which can motivate researchers to involve public groups in their work.

20  These parties signed the position paper Ruimte voor ieders talent - Naar een nieuwe balans in het erkennen
en waarderen van wetenschappers [Room for everyone’s talent: towards a new balance in the recognition and
reward of academics], which also includes impact as a key variable.

Moving forward together with open science 46
Box 5 New standards are needed
New forms of research sometimes follow new methodological paths, which
requires new standards of quality and reliability.
In psychiatry, for example, it is more difficult to publish the results of research
in collaboration with patients in reputable medical journals. Publication in these
journals is an important quality check for the medical committees that advise
the government and insurers on guidelines and reimbursable care. They have
difficulty determining the reliability of research if the results do not appear in
reputable journals, which means that research involving patients actually has
less of an impact on society. This is exactly the opposite of what is intended.
Therefore new, socially relevant quality standards for research should be
developed in consultation with the public, for example, by opening up quality
control to civil-society partners.

4. Make expectations explicit, reflect on and evaluate public engagement
Engaging public groups with research involves assumptions about how an activity
will lead to results or outcomes. Sometimes these assumptions remain implicit.
However, it is important to make these explicit, to base them on existing knowledge
where possible, to reflect on them and to evaluate the result.
Assumptions are often made when the why, who, where, how and when of public
engagement are being discussed (see Section 5). For example, in water quality
research, it is often assumed that a higher level of water awareness is created
when citizens take part in research (see Box 7). This is not always tested. The
learning processes citizens go through as a result of their participation in research
projects are still mostly unknown (Bonney et al., 2015; Ballard et al., 2017).
In addition to making assumptions explicit and substantiating them, it is also useful
to reflect on engagement. The engagement process can be evaluated through
surveys of participants, through focus groups and interviews or by making self-
reflection part of the research process. There are several options for having multiple
stakeholders collectively reflect on a research process (Metze et al., 2017). This
makes it possible to make timely adjustments. The insights from the reflection can
also help bring about effective forms of public engagement in future.
When evaluating a project, the direct output is important, as much as its societal
impact. For the time being, public engagement initiatives focus mainly on efforts
and activities whereas a picture of the wider impact seldom emerges (Mejlgaard et

Moving forward together with open science 47
al., 2019).21 This wider impact is not properly evaluated. In educational research, for
example, quality differences between schools may increase because some
participate in academic collaborative centres while others do not. This unintended
side effect should be part of the evaluation of the wider impact of public
engagement.
5. Give citizens a say
To achieve a science that is accessible to everyone, it is important that people have
a say in what science investigates and how it does that. In general, the earlier the
parties are involved in a research process, the better able they are to contribute. In
this way, in consultation with researchers, public groups can have a say in the goal
of the research, its execution and their own role in it. They can choose to be
involved in formulating the research question or only contribute as a volunteer data
collector. If those involved have a certain amount of influence on the research and
their role in it, this will increase support for the research.
6.3 Scientists, engage society
This review has shown that public engagement with science becomes more
meaningful as it makes science more democratic. Meaningful engagement gives
citizens or societal actors a say in the direction in which science develops. This
results in new research questions and increased public support for science.
Ultimately, science also produces more knowledge that is socially useful or
otherwise valuable.

In our study we demonstrated that the debate regarding, and policy on, public
engagement with science goes back decades. We found promising real-world
initiatives where different forms of engagement are put to the test. It also became
clear that engaging public groups with science is not yet standard practice. It is not
always self-evident to invite public groups to the scientific table as equal partners in
discussions with researchers.

In order to engage society on an equal footing and organise democratic knowledge
development, it is important to encourage scientists to involve public groups in their
work. It is necessary to make this collaboration attractive to scientists, citizens and
societal actors alike. Scientists must be recognised and rewarded for this. For
citizens, engagement must be accessible, inclusive and fruitful.

In addition, it has become clear that there is no instruction manual for organising
meaningful public engagement. Public groups can make a different contribution in
every field and in every type of research. The practical steps in this section are not

21  The MICS (Measuring Impact of Citizen Science) project is an EC-funded project to develop impact indicators.
See https://mics.tools/

Moving forward together with open science 48
a recipe that anyone can use, with the right ingredients and preparation methods, to
conjure up a dish of meaningful engagement. However, the steps do point in the
right direction.

Our findings make it clear that the funding and other structures which organise
public engagement with science need to be further developed. In the Netherlands,
the Dutch National Research Agenda (NWA) is the most recent, concrete example
of scientists being encouraged to engage public groups and of public groups being
invited to engage with science. However, citizens and societal parties play a limited
role in the selection of research proposals and the implementation of NWA
research.
22 If this programme is continued or expanded, there will be plenty of
opportunities to make the engagement of citizens and societal actors more
meaningful. This will enable a larger and more diverse group of people to be
involved in the programming, selection and execution of research funded by the
NWA. Scientists applying for NWA funding can be encouraged to engage public
groups by also assessing their proposals on the basis of this criterion and by
helping them to do so in a meaningful way. Making the assumptions explicit and
reflecting on the public engagement process could become part of the NWA's
evaluation.

We began this review with a reference to the right to science, as expressed in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that every human being has
the right to "share in scientific advancement and its benefits". For science to flourish
and advance, scientists are needed who are free and autonomous, but who do not
stand outside of society. Only when science actually works in tandem with society
will it produce the benefits that we need: solutions to the challenges, both large and
small, that we are facing together. For this reason, a practical search for meaningful
public engagement with science is of fundamental importance.

22  As explained in Box 3.

Moving forward together with open science 49
7 Bibliography
Abelson, J., P.G. Forest, J. Eyles, P. Smith, E. Martin, & F.P. Gauvin (2003).
Deliberations about deliberative methods: Issues in the design and evaluation of
public participation processes. Social Science and Medicine, 57(2), 239-251.
Anderson, R.D. (2004). In Germany and the Humboldtian Model. In: European
Universities from the Enlightenment to 1914. Oxford: OUP.
Arnstein, S.A. (1969). A Ladder Of Citizen Participation. Journal of the American
Institute of Planners 35 (4): 216-224.
Balkenende, J.P., & H.J. Tieleman (2001). Soevereiniteit in eigen kring,
subsidiariteit en economische orde. Tweeluik en perspectief. [Sphere sovereignty,
subsidiarity and economic order. Diptych and perspective]. In: Becker, M. & C.J.
Klop (red.), Economie & Ethiek in Dialoog, pp. 194-210.
Ballard, H.L., L.D. Robinson, A.N. Young, G.B. Pauly, L.M. Higgins, R.F. Johnson,
& J.C. Tweddle (2017). Contributions to conservation outcomes by natural history
museum-led citizen science: Examining evidence and next steps. Biological
Conservation 208: 87-97.
Blamey, A., & M. Mackenzie (2007). Theories of Change and Realistic Evaluation:
Peas in a Pod or Apples and Oranges? Evaluation, 13(4), 439–455.
Bodmer W.F., R.E. Artus, D. Attenborough, R.J. Blin-Stoyle, K. Durham, J. Mason,
M.J. Savory, Swann, D. Wedderburn, M. Weston & J.M. Ziman (1985). The public
understanding of science. London: The Royal Society.
Bonney, R., T.B. Phillips, H.L. Ballard, et al. (2015). Can citizen science enhance
public understanding of science? Public Understanding of Science 25(1): 2-16
Brown, M. & Guston, D.H. (2009). Science, Democracy, and the Right to Research.
Sci Eng Ethics 15: 351-366.
Burget, M., E. Bardone, M. Pedaste (2016) Definitions and Conceptual Dimensions
of Responsible Research and Innovation: A Literature Review. Science and
Engineering Ethics 23(1).
Delgado, A., K.L. Kjølberg & F. Wickson (2011). Public Engagement Coming of
Age: From Theory to Practice in STS Encounters with Nanotechnology. Public
Understanding of Science 20(6): 826-845.
Duncan, S. & S. Oliver (2017). Motivations for engagement (editorial). Research for
all 1(2): 229-233.
Durant, J. (1999). Participatory technology assessment and the democratic model
of the public understanding of science. Science and Public Policy, 26(5), 313–319.
Est, R. van (2011). The broad challenge of public engagement in science Sci Eng
Ethics 17: 639-648.

Moving forward together with open science 50
European Commission (2016). Open Innovation, Open Science, Open to the World
– a vision for Europe. Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
European Commission (2017). Interim evaluation of Horizon 2020. Directorate-
General for Research and Innovation.
European Commission (2018). Responsible Research & Innovation. Directorate-
General for Research and Innovation.
European Commission (2020). Citizen Science and Citizen Engagement -
Achievements in Horizon 2020 and recommendations on the way forward.
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Fecher, B. & Friesike, S. (2014). Open Science: One Term, Five Schools of
Thought. In: Bartling S. & S. Friesike (eds.), Opening Science. Springer, Cham.
Felt, U. (2017) “Response-able Practices” or “New Bureaucracies of Virtue”: The
Challenges of Making RRI Work in Academic Environments. In: Asveld L., R. van
Dam-Mieras, T. Swierstra, S. Lavrijssen, K. Linse, J. van den Hoven (eds.)
Responsible Innovation 3. Springer, Cham.
Felt, U., D. Barben, A. Irwin, P.B. Joly, A. Rip, A. Stirling & T. Stöckelová (2013).
Science in Society: caring for our futures in turbulent times. Strasbourg: European
Science Foundation. Policy Briefing 50.
Flink, T. & D. Kaldewey (2018). The new production of legitimacy: STI policy
discourses beyond the contract metaphor Research Policy 47(1): 14-22.
Fransman, J. (2018). Charting a course to an emerging field of “research
engagement studies”: A conceptual meta-synthesis Research for All, 2(2): 185-229.
Funtowicz S.O., & J.R. Ravetz (1993). The Emergence of Post-Normal Science. In:
Von Schomberg R. (eds.) Science, Politics and Morality. Theory and Decision
Library (Series A), vol 17. Springer, Dordrecht.
Gibbons, M. (1999). Science's new social contract with society. Nature 402, C81–
C84.
Gregory J. & S.J. Lock (2008). The Evolution of ‘Public Understanding of Science’:
Public Engagement as a Tool of Science Policy in the UK Sociology Compass 2(4):
1252-1265.
Ives, J., S. Damery, & S. Redwod (2013). PPI, paradoxes and Plato: who’s sailing
the ship? Journal of Medical Ethics, 30(3), 181-185.
Jasanoff, S. (2003). Technologies of Humility: Citizen Participation in Governing
Science. Minerva 41, 223–244.
Jasanoff, S. (2011). Constitutional Moments in Governing Science and
Technology. Sci Eng Ethics 17, 621–638.
Jones, R.A.L (2014). Reflecting on public engagement and science policy Public
Understanding of Science special issue 23(I) 27-31.

Moving forward together with open science 51
Kennedy, E.B., E.A. Jensen & M. Verbeke (2018) Preaching to the scientifically
converted: evaluating inclusivity in science festival audiences International Journal
of Science Education Part B 8(1) 14-21.
Landrain, T., M. Meyer, A. Perez & R. Sussan (2013). Do-it-yourself biology:
Challenges and Promises for an Open Science and Technology Movement.
Systems and Synthetic Biology 7 (3), 115-126.
Latour, B. & S. Woolgar (1979). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific
Facts. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
Lente, H. van, Z. Koretsky & R. Zeiss. (2018). FIT4RRI D2.2 - WP2 Summary
Report. Zenodo.
Mejlgaard, N., C. Bloch & E.B. Madsen (2019). Responsible research and
innovation in Europe: A cross-country comparative analysis. Science and Public
Policy 46(2): 198-209.
Metze, T., T.J. Schuitmaker, L. Bitsch, & J.E.W. Broerse (2017). Breaking barriers
for a bio-based economy: Interactive reflection on monitoring water quality
Environmental Science & Policy 74; pp. 1-7.
Ministry of General Affairs (2017). Confidence in the future – Coalition agreement
2017-2021 VVD, CDA, D66 and ChristenUnie.
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (2019). Curious and committed – The
value of science.
Mohr A., & S. Raman (2012). Representing the Public in Public Engagement: The
Case of the 2008 UK Stem Cell Dialogue. PLoS Biol 10(11): e1001418.
National Platform Open Science, Citizen Science Working Group (2020).
Knowledge and strengths combined – Citizen science in the Netherlands; Science
and society in co-creation.
Dutch National Research Agenda (2016). From Vision for Science to Dutch
National Research Agenda in 365 days.
Nowotny, H. & P. Scott & M. Gibbons (2001). Re-Thinking Science: Knowledge and
the Public in An Age of Uncertainty. Contemporary Sociology. 32.
10.2307/3089636.
Nowotny, H. (2003). Democratising expertise and socially robust
knowledge, Science and Public Policy 30 (3), pp 151–156
Oreskes, J., (2019). Why trust science? Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Owen, R. & M. Pansera (2019). Responsible Innovation and Responsible Research
and Innovation. In: Simon, D., S. Kuhlmann, J. Stamm & W. Canzler (eds.)
Handbook on Science and Public Policy. Edward Elgar publishing: Cheltenham

Moving forward together with open science 52
Owen, R., P. Macnaghten & J. Stilgoe (2012). Responsible research and
innovation: From science in society to science for society, with society, Science and
Public Policy 39 pp. 751–760
Rathenau Instituut (2020a). In Open Science toont zich de meester – publieke
betrokkenheid bij onderwijsonderzoek. [The master shows himself in Open Science
– public engagement with educational research.] The Hague (authors: A.F.M.
Scholvinck, S. van Ewijk, W. Scholten & P. Diederen)
Rathenau Instituut (2020b). Open science op de oever – Publieke betrokkenheid bij
onderzoek naar waterkwaliteit. [Open science on the shore – Public engagement
with water quality research.] The Hague (authors: W. Scholten, A.F.M. Scholvinck,
S. van Ewijk & P. Diederen)
Rathenau Instituut (2019). In de geest van Open Science – publieke betrokkenheid
bij onderzoek in de psychiatrie. [In the spirit of Open Science – public engagement
with research in psychiatry.] The Hague (authors: S. van Ewijk, W. Scholten & P.
Diederen)
Rathenau Instituut (2018). Industry seeking university. The Hague (authors: S.Y.
Tjong Tjin Tai, J. van den Broek, T. Maas, T, Rep & J. Deuten)
Rathenau Instituut (2017). Urgent Upgrade - Protect public values in our digitized
society. The Hague (authors: L. Kool, J. Timmer, L. Royakkers & R. van Est).
Rathenau Instituut (2015).Geef burgers meer dan een noodrem. [Give citizens
more than an emergency brake]. The Hague (authors: I. Korthagen & I. van
Keulen).
Rathenau Instituut (website). https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/over-ons/wie-we-zijn
Saille, S. de (2015). Innovating Innovation Policy: The emergence of ‘Responsible
Research and Innovation’ Journal of Responsible Innovation 2(2): 152-168.
Schot, J. & A. Rip (1996). The Past and Future of Constructive Technology
Assessment Technological Forecasting and Social Change 54, 251-268.
Shelley-Egan, C., M.D. Gjefsen, en R. Nydal (2020). Consolidating RRI and Open
Science: understanding the potential for transformative change. Life Sciences,
Society and Policy 16:7.
Sismondo, S., (2010). An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd..
Snape, D., Kirkham, J., Preston, J., Popay, J., Britten, N., Collins, H.M., … Jacoby,
A. (2014). Exploring areas of consensus and conflict around values underpinning
public involvement in health and social care research: a modified Delphi study. BMJ
Open, 41(1), e004217.
Stilgoe, J., R. Owen, P. Macnaghten (2013). Developing a framework for
responsible innovation. Research policy 42: 1568-80

Moving forward together with open science 53
Tritter, J.Q. & A. McCallum (2006). The snakes and ladders of user involvement:
Moving beyond Arnstein. Health policy 76: 156-168
United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2020). General
Comment No. 25 (2020) on science and economic, social and cultural rights (article
15 (1) (b), (2), (3) and (4) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights). United Nations Economic and Social Council.
https://undocs.org/E/C.12/GC/25
Von Schomberg, R. (2011). Towards Responsible Research and Innovation in the
Information and Communication Technologies and Security Technologies Fields.
Ethics and Gender Unit, DG Research and Innovation of European Commission.
Von Schomberg, R., & J. Hankins (2019). International Handbook on Responsible
Innovation – a global resource. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Wilsdon, J., & Willis, R. (2004). See-through Science: Why public engagement
needs to move upstream. London: DEMOS.
Wong, J. (2014). The history of technology assessment and comparative
effectiveness research for drugs and medical devices and the role of the federal
government Biotechnology Law Report 33 (6), pp. 221-34.
Wynne, B. (2006). Public engagement as a means of restoring public trust in
science – hitting the notes, but missing the music? Community Genet 9: 211-20.
Wynne, B. (1998). May the sheep safely graze? A reflexive view of the expert-lay
knowledge divide. In: S. Lash, B. Szerszynski & B. Wynne (eds.), Theory, Culture &
Society: Risk, environment and modernity: Towards a new ecology pp. 44-83
London: SAGE Publications Ltd.

Moving forward together with open science 54
© Rathenau Instituut 2022
This work or parts of it may be reproduced and/or published for creative,
personal or educational purposes, provided that no copies are made or used for
commercial objectives, and subject to the condition that copies always give the
full attribution above. In all other cases, no part of this publication may be
reproduced and/or published by means of print, photocopy or by any other
medium without prior written consent.
Open access
The Rathenau Institute has an open access policy. Its reports, background
studies, research articles and software are all open access publications.
Research data are made available pursuant to statutory provisions and ethical
research standards concerning the rights of third parties, privacy and copyright.
Contact details
Anna van Saksenlaan 51
Postbus 95366
2509 CJ Den Haag
+31 (0)70-342 15 42
info@rathenau.nl
www.rathenau.nl

Rathenau Instituut Board
Gerdi Verbeet
Prof. Noelle Aarts
Felix Cohen
Prof. Roshan Cools
Dr Hans Dröge
Dr Laurence Guérin

Het Rathenau Instituut stimuleert de publieke en politieke meningsvorming over
de maatschappelijke aspecten van wetenschap en technologie. We doen
onderzoek en organiseren het debat over wetenschap, innovatie en nieuwe
technologieën.

Moving forward together with open science 3
