
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Report

Research programmes with a
mission
Lessons for challenge-driven innovation policy

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Research programmes with a mission 2
Authors
Laurens Hessels, Jos van den Broek, Isabelle van Elzakker,
Leonie van Drooge and Jasper Deuten

Cover photograph
Thisisengineering via Unsplash
Preferred citation:
Rathenau Instituut (2021). Research programmes with a mission - Lessons for
challenge-driven innovation policy. The Hague.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Research programmes with a mission 3
Foreword
We cannot solve the great challenges of our time through technological innovation
alone. For example, the transition to circular agriculture envisaged by the outgoing
Dutch government, requires not only new farming techniques, but also a revolution
in the way we market, transport and even consume food. To achieve this kind of
transition, it helps to develop innovation policies which have a different focus. In a
Message to Parliament in 2020, the Rathenau Instituut advocated challenge-driven
innovation policy, an approach that does not try to promote specific technologies or
sectors, but takes a societal challenge as its starting point.

Building on our earlier analysis of European research and innovation policy, the
Rathenau Instituut wants to use this report to contribute to the continuing
development of this new genre of challenge-driven innovation policy. We focus on
research programmes that are intended to help address societal challenges. Based
on insights from the scientific literature and an analysis of three international
examples, we formulate some points of attention for organising this type of research
programme.

Whereas the governance and management of scientific research has traditionally
left researchers and consortiums considerable leeway, we see that challenge-
driven programmes require firmer coordination and management at programme
level. At the same time, the programmes have to be sufficiently agile. Given the
dynamic environment of challenge-driven programmes, they will need to continually
evaluate their focus and approach to ensure that their activities match their
stakeholders' knowledge needs and capabilities. The government itself also plays a
key part in this, partly because of the politically charged goals set for these types of
programmes.

If the government really intends to mobilise research and innovation to tackle
societal challenges, such as the transition to circular agriculture, it must also invest
in its own capacity to participate as an active partner in the knowledge ecosystems
surrounding societal challenges. The aim should be not only to bring in knowledge
and expertise from policy, but also to ensure that research is driven by public
values.

Jeroen Heres
Chief scientist, Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Research programmes with a mission 4
Summary
In recent years, the Dutch government has been trying to focus science and
innovation policies more strongly on societal challenges, such as reducing climate
change, keeping healthcare affordable or transitioning to a sustainable system of
food production and consumption. This is reflected, for example, in the Dutch
National Research Agenda (NWA) and in the government's mission-oriented top
sectors and innovation policy introduced in 2019. This policy change is part of a
broader international trend in which governments are seeking to use research and
innovation in a more targeted way to address complex societal challenges. This
ambition differs from previous research and innovation policies that focused on
economic earning power, technological opportunities or scientific curiosity. The new
ambition to help address societal challenges in a targeted way calls for a new,
complementary genre of research and innovation policy. We call this challenge-
driven research and innovation policy.

The Rathenau Instituut wants to contribute to the development of this new genre,
and does so in various projects. In previous publications we reflected on, among
other things, developments within Dutch innovation policy (Rathenau Instituut,
2020c) and the way in which the European Union is fulfilling its ambition to refocus
research and innovation on societal challenges (Rathenau Instituut, 2020a, b). In
this study, our focus is on research programmes, as there is little experience with
these programmes to date. The key research question is: what requirements does a
challenge-driven approach impose on the design and management of research
programmes?

Based on desk research, a workshop, and an analysis of international examples,
this report explores what it takes to design and manage challenge-driven research
programmes. Our goal is to provide practical insights for those involved in the
funding, design, governance and management of research programmes, such as
research funders, programme managers, and policy staff in the various government
departments.

The report consists of four parts: In the first part (Sections 1 and 2), we position
challenge-driven research programmes within a broader trend in which the
government is trying to mobilise research and innovation more specifically towards
societal challenges. We describe characteristic differences between challenge-
driven programmes and innovation-driven programmes. In Section 3, we discuss
three international examples of programmes with challenge-driven features. In
Section 4, we identify practical building blocks which can be used to design and

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Research programmes with a mission 5
manage challenge-driven research programmes. Finally, we reflect on questions
that this new way of programming raises about the multiple roles of government in
mobilising research and innovation in challenge-driven research programmes.

Challenge-driven research programmes
Based on the literature, we argue that challenge-driven research programmes have
a different ‘theory of change’ than traditional research programmes that focus on
stimulating new knowledge and new (often technological) solutions. The starting
point of challenge-driven programmes is not the promise of new scientific
knowledge or an emerging key technology, but a complex societal problem and the
socio-technical system change needed to solve it. The nature of the problem and
the system change determine what knowledge and solutions are needed. It may be
just as necessary to combine knowledge from different sources and disciplines as it
is to develop new knowledge or technology. Another typical component of a
challenge-driven theory of change therefore involves connecting, reordering and
building knowledge ecosystems.

Because challenge-driven research programmes are based on a different theory of
change than conventional research programmes, research funders and programme
managers will have to develop new ways of working. The question is how.

Three international cases
We look at three international examples to learn lessons on ways of designing and
managing challenge-driven research programmes:
1. CGIAR's Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS)
programme. CGIAR is a global alliance of international organisations involved
in food security research.
2. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), an agency of
the US Department of Defense responsible for developing emerging
technologies for use by the military.
3. The Utmaningsdriven innovation (UDI, challenge-driven innovation)
programme of VINNOVA, the innovation agency of the Swedish government.

We selected these three cases because they all have a specific (societal) challenge
as a starting point. CGIAR's CCAFS programme mobilises research to help develop
a safe and future-proof food system. DARPA promotes research and technology
development to enhance national security. Sweden's UDI programme funds
research and innovation to contribute to the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals.

It turned out that the three programmes were not challenge-driven in every respect
as defined above. Of the three programmes, Sweden's UDI most closely resembles

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Research programmes with a mission 6
a conventional innovation-driven programme using calls for proposals which allow
researchers and stakeholders ample scope to develop and submit their own project
proposals. The CCAFS and DARPA examples provide more avenues for learning
about the targeted mobilisation of research and innovation to address societal
challenges.

Both in CCAFS and DARPA we observe an active and guiding role for programme
management. The design, governance and management of the programmes are
based on a well-developed theory of change which takes the societal challenge as
its starting point. Unlike conventional innovation-driven programmes, programme
management remains closely involved with the projects over the course of the
projects. Programme managers make interim adaptations when there is a risk of
the projects no longer aligning with the overarching programme. With CCAFS, we
also see that the programme explicitly addresses responsible research practices at
both project and programme level. At all stages of the programme cycle,
participants work with actors who are needed to put the knowledge and solutions
developed into practice, such as local communities. They therefore pay close
attention to the way research programmes are embedded in the ongoing innovation
and transition process.

Building blocks for a challenge-driven approach
From our desk research and international cases, we distil two major characteristics
of challenge-driven research programmes that carry over into their design,
organisation and control: active programme management and reflexivity.

1. Active programme management throughout the programme cycle
The international cases show that challenge-driven programming of research
requires active and decisive programme management to organise and
monitor their orientation towards societal challenges. Appropriate activities
include developing a shared theory of change at the start of the programme,
creating and monitoring coherence between projects, adapting specific
projects as necessary, organising interactions with stakeholders inside and
outside the programme and integrating results.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Research programmes with a mission 7
2. Learning approach
Challenge-driven research programming also requires reflexivity in which
programme management and participants regularly reflect on whether the
theory of change is still appropriate and whether the projects and goals are
still relevant. After all, the societal context in which the results must be applied
is dynamic, and interim project results may prompt adjustments to the
portfolio, e.g. by organising additional activities, involving new parties or
linking up projects.

These two characteristics require investment in time and in skills. These
investments can only be justified if the active and targeted mobilisation of research
actually ensures a more effective contribution to addressing the challenge
concerned. Partly for this reason, proper monitoring and evaluation is important.

From the literature and the analysis of international examples, we have distilled
practical action options for adopting a challenge-driven approach in research
programming. We describe these options using ten phases of the programme cycle,
from programme preparation to completion and evaluation.

Concluding remarks on roles of government
Challenge-driven programmes depend in part on active and variegated involvement
and direction from policymakers. Indeed, a typical feature of challenge-driven
research programmes is that government itself is also part of the underlying theory
of change - often in different ways. To a greater extent than in innovation-driven
research programmes, it is important for government to participate in the design of
the theory of change. This is necessary to focus the programme on public values
and to make explicit what roles the government itself should play.

We identify typical roles that the government can play, e.g. creating the right
conditions for developing the programme, investing in and supplying knowledge,
participating in projects and promoting knowledge utilisation in policy and/or
practice.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Research programmes with a mission 8
Contents
Foreword ................................................................................................................. 3
Summary ................................................................................................................. 4
Contents ................................................................................................................. 8
1 Introduction ................................................................................................... 9
1.1 Background ..................................................................................... 9
1.2 Objective ........................................................................................ 12
1.3 Our approach ................................................................................ 13
1.4 Reading guide ............................................................................... 14
2 Challenge-driven innovation policy .......................................................... 16
2.1 A new genre of innovation policy ............................................... 16
2.2 Missions in challenge-driven innovation policy ........................ 20
2.3 The logic of challenge-driven research programmes ............... 21
Interlude - Food transition .................................................................................. 24
3 Three international examples .................................................................... 29
3.1 Analytical framework .................................................................... 31
3.2 CGIAR/CCAFS ............................................................................... 33
3.3 DARPA ........................................................................................... 37
3.4 VINNOVA/challenge-driven innovation ....................................... 41
3.5 Comparative analysis ................................................................... 43
4 Implications for challenge-driven research programmes ....................... 48
4.1 The essence of challenge-driven programming ........................ 48
4.2 Building blocks for challenge-driven programmes ................... 49
5 Concluding remarks on roles of government .......................................... 56
6 Bibliography ................................................................................................ 60
Appendix 1: Methodology ................................................................................... 62

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Research programmes with a mission 9
1 Introduction
In this introduction, we begin by explaining the reason for this report, namely the
emergence of a different kind of innovation policy that is focused not so much on
more innovation, but on innovation that helps to resolve societal challenges. Next,
we describe the objective of and research question of this study and the approach
we adopted in answering these questions.
1.1 Background
The major societal challenges of our times, such as the energy and climate
transition, the nitrogen problem, sustainable mobility, social inequality, affordable
healthcare and equal opportunities in education, are systemic problems. The
current Covid-19 pandemic is a perfect illustration of how complex, multifaceted and
uncertain the problems raised by societal challenges can be, and how difficult it is
to develop an effective approach that takes account of all the aspects and interests
involved.

There is now a growing realisation among policymakers that the structural changes
needed require a transition approach. A good example of this is the European
Green Deal through which the European Commission aims to provide a roadmap to
make the EU economy sustainable. The Green Deal states that this will succeed
only if the climate and environmental problems in all policy domains are used as an
opportunity to make the transition as fair and inclusive as possible for everyone
(Rathenau Instituut, 2020a). A similar initiative in the Netherlands is the Climate
Agreement in which industry, civil society organisations and government bodies
have jointly set out a package of measures and agreements aimed at roughly
halving greenhouse gas emissions in the Netherlands by 2030.

The policy domain covering research and innovation is not immune to the
increasing focus on societal challenges and transitions. Until now, innovation policy
has been used primarily to stimulate economic growth by strengthening the (mainly
technological) innovation capacity of industry. Although some policy instruments are
linked to societal challenges, addressing them is usually a secondary objective
alongside increasing competitiveness. There is now a growing awareness that this
business-oriented approach is not sufficient to ensure that innovation helps to
address societal challenges and transitions. More active involvement on the part of
government and society is needed for all research and innovation activities to

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Research programmes with a mission 10
contribute to a systemic innovation as part of a socially responsible transition
process. This new approach is emerging alongside conventional innovation policies
that focus on technology development and business competitiveness.

In the Netherlands, we see this shift in emphasis in innovation policy in the Mission-
oriented Top Sectors and Innovation Policy introduced by the government in 2019.
A number of major societal challenges have been crystallised into 25 specific
missions for which knowledge institutions and industry have jointly drawn up multi-
year mission-oriented innovation programmes. These agendas provide guidance on
the substance of research and innovation projects. The Dutch National Research
Agenda is another example of the growing ambition among policymakers to
connect scientific research to societal challenges and societal partners.

The European Commission is known as a prime mover with its focus on societal
challenges as a mainspring for research and innovation. A clear example of EU
innovation policy being used to address societal challenges is provided by the
missions in the new Horizon Europe framework programme. Artificial intelligence
policy also focuses not only on technology incentives and high-tech companies, but
also on getting society involved in developing and applying this new key
technology. In addition to the ecosystem of excellence, the Commission also wants
to build an ecosystem of trust.
1

Those who put structural societal change centre stage will need to rethink the
instruments of innovation policy as existing innovation policy is designed to
encourage industry investment in research and innovation and to get industry to
work better with knowledge institutions. When societal challenges and transitions
are chosen as policy goals, it is no longer sufficient to focus on technology
development, business innovation and cooperation between industry and
knowledge institutions, as societal challenges are more than a commercial
opportunity for industry. And technological solutions can only contribute to tackling
societal challenges if they are part of a system innovation.

Social innovation is every bit as important as technological innovation. When
societal challenges are chosen as the main objective of innovation policy, a new
genre of challenge-driven innovation policy is needed, in addition to existing
technology- and business-oriented innovation policy (Rathenau Instituut, 2020c).

A typical feature of a challenge-driven innovation policy is that research and
innovation are used to serve a societal transition. Challenge-driven innovation
policy cannot therefore be viewed in isolation from the social and political debate

1 Rathenau Instituut, 2020a. De belofte van opgavegericht innovatiebeleid: Een analyse van Europees
innovatiebeleid voor de Green Deal en kunstmatige intelligentie. Rathenau Instituut, The Hague.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Research programmes with a mission 11
around what exactly the problem is and what changes and innovations are
necessary and desirable in order to address it. The agenda for research and
innovation is determined by what politicians and society deem necessary to give
system change more focus and/or greater momentum, leading to specific
requirements for knowledge and solutions for each societal challenge.

This change in perspective brings into focus a wider range of actors and aspects
that may need to play a part in developing and implementing innovation policy. In
addition to the usual suspects such as industry and knowledge institutions, we also
expect civil-society organisations, public sector professionals, citizens and
municipalities to be key players in challenge-driven innovation policy. The change in
perspective also allows for a greater understanding of what counts as relevant
research and innovation. It does not always or only take ground-breaking scientific
research or high-tech development to tackle societal challenges. Sometimes it will
actually be essential to build on existing knowledge or to combine knowledge or to
join with users to achieve social innovations through co-creation.

This new genre of innovation policy is still in its infancy. There are still many
questions to be answered about how this policy can be structured and what
measures and policy instruments are appropriate. As part of Horizon Europe, the
European Commission has defined five missions, including Climate-neutral and
smart cities and Soil health and Food. In 2020, a mission board submitted an
overall proposal for the activities to be performed by each mission to achieve its
objective. It is evident from these proposals that there are still many questions to be
answered about the exact way in which the coherence between the projects will be
monitored and about the division of tasks between different parties in managing and
supervising the projects. In the Netherlands, government, industry and knowledge
institutions have jointly formulated multi-year mission-oriented innovation
programmes and the first projects under these programmes are currently being
developed. Again, this still raises plenty of questions about project management,
monitoring and evaluation.

The Rathenau Instituut would like to contribute to the further development of
challenge-driven innovation policy. In this report we focus on a specific part of this
policy innovation, i.e. on the question of what challenge-driven innovation policy
means for the design and management of research programmes.

Since the emergence of innovation policy in the 1990s, research funders such as
NWO have gained considerable experience in involving industry and other
knowledge users in research programmes and projects and their governance.
These include the Netherlands Genomics Initiative, the programme for Responsible
Innovation, and the National Research Agenda. Public-private partnerships in

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Research programmes with a mission 12
research are now an established part of the repertoire of innovation-driven research
programming.

However, a challenge-driven approach requires further innovation in the way
research is funded, programmed and supervised. According to existing practice,
research programmes often give considerable leeway to individual researchers or
research consortiums to formulate their own projects, whether or not within a
thematic focus area. For example, in the case of project proposals aimed at societal
breakthroughs NWO does ask applicants to make the intended impact clear in
advance, based on a theory of change
2 or explicit impact pathways, but this only
relates to the impact of the individual project. The question is whether this bottom-
up approach of soliciting research proposals based on a work programme provides
enough coherence and continuity in research. How do you ensure that it is not the
interests and concerns of research groups that take precedence, but the question of
what society needs to step up transitions? Mobilising scientific research to address
a societal challenge seems to require more active involvement from programme
management. The question is how.
1.2 Objective
The objective of this report is to contribute to the development of a new genre of
challenge-driven innovation policy, to complement the existing genre of technology-
and business-oriented innovation policy. We do this by formulating lessons on the
design and management of challenge-driven research programmes.

This objective is consistent with the Rathenau Instituut's mission to support the
political and public debate on the impact of science and technology on society with
information and analysis to ensure that science, technology and innovation benefit
society. Challenge-driven research programmes are an excellent means of
ensuring that scientific knowledge is developed and deployed to achieve social
goals.

This project builds on previous research into mobilising and coordinating diverse
actors in research and innovation.
3 We have also previously conducted research
into the management and programming of multi- and transdisciplinary research that
is indispensable for tackling many societal challenges.4

2 A theory of change describes the causal relationships assumed between a particular intervention (such as a
research project) and its intended impact on society.
3 For example, on living labs (Living labs in Nederland, 2017), research coordination (Coördinatie van
onderzoek in publiek-private samenwerkingsverbanden, 2012) and social embedding of innovation (Voorbij
lokaal enthousiasme, 2020).
4 For example, the report on knowledge co-creation (Samen werken aan werkzame kennis, 2012).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Research programmes with a mission 13
1.3 Our approach
The key question in this study is: what is needed to design and manage research
programmes in a challenge-driven way? Our ambition is to provide practical insights
for those involved in funding, designing, and managing research programmes, such
as research funders, programme managers, and policy staff in the various
government departments.

Our approach to answering this question consists of four components: desk
research, an online workshop, three international cases and an empirical
exploration.
Desk research
We first conducted desk research into recent trends in innovation policy in general
and the role of research programmes within it in particular. Based on this research,
we characterised challenge-driven research programmes in terms of their typical
theory of change. Much has been written about the role of societal challenges and
societal missions in innovation policy, but little about the implications for research
programming. We found good pointers in the literature on transdisciplinary research
because transdisciplinary researchers also need new ways of programming
research. In transdisciplinary research, scientists work closely with practitioners
such as health care workers or conservationists based on the realisation that input
from different disciplines and domains is needed to arrive at integrated (systemic)
solutions.
5 The ideas formulated from the transdisciplinary research tradition to
programme research differently are also relevant to challenge-driven research
programmes.
Online workshop
To complement the desk research, we also held an online workshop involving some
25 experts and policymakers. The aim was to organise a dialogue between
policymakers and programme leaders on the one hand and researchers in the field
of science policy and transdisciplinary collaboration on the other. This workshop
was a digital alternative to a session we had prepared for the cancelled conference
of the European Forum for Studies on Policies for Research and Innovation (Eu-
SPRI) in Utrecht. The Rathenau Instituut collaborated with Dr Flurina Schneider of
the University of Bern, an expert in research programmes for social transformation.
We used the experience gained from this to deepen and refine our findings.

5 The OECD recently published a report on the potential of using transdisciplinary research to address societal
challenges (OECD, 2020. Addressing socetial challenges using transdisciplinary research. OECD, Paris.)

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Research programmes with a mission 14
International cases
Third, we looked at three international cases to learn how programming for mission-
oriented research has been designed:
• The Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security programme (CCAFS) run
by CGIAR, an international NGO in the field of research on sustainable
agriculture and development cooperation;
• The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the United
States;
• The Utmaningsdriven innovation (UDI, challenge-driven innovation) programme
of VINNOVA, the Swedish innovation agency.

There are currently no longer-running research programmes that are designed and
managed in a challenge-driven manner in all respects. We have therefore chosen
programmes that have been around for a long time and each of them, in its own
way, embodies an interesting aspect of the challenge-driven approach.

The CCAFS programme was chosen because, based on a well-developed theory of
change, it seeks to ensure that research and innovation make a targeted
contribution to sustainable agriculture in times of climate change. The DARPA case
was chosen so that we could learn about the role of programme management
throughout the programme cycle. The Swedish programme was selected because it
seeks to mobilise consortiums that want to contribute directly to addressing a
societal challenge through research and innovation. Because of their different
approaches, they constitute extreme cases, each highlighting a particular aspect of
a challenge-driven approach.
Empirical exploration
Finally, we also conducted an empirical exploration of current trends in research
programming for the food transition in the Netherlands. This exploration is based on
desk research, interviews with those directly involved and observations during
online and in-person meetings. We held about ten exploratory interviews with
various stakeholders, including policy makers in local and national government,
researchers and stakeholders from bodies such as the Food Transition Coalition.
We will describe this case by way of an interlude to illustrate the pitfalls that
stakeholders may encounter when trying to deploy research and innovation to
address a (contested) societal challenge.
1.4 Reading guide
In the next section, we first explain the key concepts of this report in more detail.
Among other things, we explain what we mean by challenge-driven innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Research programmes with a mission 15
policy as a new genre of innovation policy, and how this relates to mission-oriented
innovation policy. In addition, we draw on the literature to present an outline of
challenge-driven research programmes in terms of their characteristic logic of
change.

In Section 3, we discuss the three international examples, i.e. CCAFS, DARPA, and
UDI. For each programme, we will discuss the approach at two levels: programme
level and project support.

Section 4 formulates lessons for the coordination and management of challenge-
driven programmes based on the literature and international examples. We will
present these lessons in relation to ten phases in the life cycle of a research
programme. The main concerns are active programme management and reflexivity.

Finally, in Section 5 we focus on the political and managerial context of challenge-
driven research programmes. Precisely because of the normative orientation of
these programmes, government will have to be an active partner. We cannot
provide a blueprint for exactly how this role should be filled. If government is serious
about challenge-driven innovation policy, this also requires a learning process with
regard to its own role. This role will depend in part on the nature of the challenge,
the capabilities of other parties and the choices made by politicians.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Research programmes with a mission 16
2 Challenge-driven innovation
policy
2.1 A new genre of innovation policy
In recent years we have noticed a development in innovation policy in which the
government is targeting its subsidies and other measures so as to tackle societal
challenges. The development of innovation policy is often described in terms of
three "generations".
6 First-generation innovation policy from the 1950s focused on
enticing firms to invest more in research and technology development. Beginning in
1990, this policy was supplemented by encouraging cooperation in innovation
systems. Since the mid-2000s, there has been an increasing focus on innovations
aimed at effecting transitions needed to tackle societal challenges. Whereas
societal transitions initially played a modest part in innovation policy, they are
currently featuring more prominently. From 2020 onwards, the policy mix therefore
consists of three parts: enticing industry to invest in research and technology
development, encouraging public-private partnerships in research and innovation
and addressing societal challenges (see box Three generations of innovation
policy).

We explain the emergence of transitions as an additional motive for innovation
policy by touching on two different trends. On the one hand, governments, civil-
society organisations and research and innovation funders are gradually realising
that a number of persistent problems in the world, such as climate change,
declining biodiversity, an ageing population and economic inequality, cannot be
solved without transitions. Addressing these challenges can only be effective if we
radically change our economy and the way we have organised society. In particular,
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals are a powerful symbol for
raising awareness of these issues. In addition, there is a growing belief that
government is capable of guiding innovation.

6 See also Schot, J., Steinmueller, W.E., 2018. Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of innovation
and transformative change. Research Policy 47, 1554-1567. and the relevant article on the Rathenau website:
https://www.rathenau.nl/en/knowledge-ecosystems/mission-driven-innovation-policy-what-how-why

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Research programmes with a mission 17
Three generations of innovation policy7
From 1950 onwards: enticing industry
Up to and including the 1980s, government innovation policies primarily
sought to entice industry to invest more in research and technology
development by providing subsidies, tax breaks and intellectual property
protection. The legitimacy for this policy was the principle of market failure:
companies will be less inclined to invest in research and development (R&D)
than is socially desirable because others will benefit from its results.

From 1990 onwards: connecting parties
Starting in the 1990s, the idea of national innovation systems came to
predominate, with the government's primary role being to fix system failures.
Innovation policy focused more on connecting actors
in the innovation system,
mainly by encouraging public-private partnerships between knowledge
institutions and industry.

From 2020: stepping up societal transitions
In the past few years we have seen the emergence of a challenge-driven
innovation policy alongside the existing genres. This policy aims to stimulate
targeted and selective innovations that help to step up societal transitions. In
this new approach, government has a more substantive and guiding role in
helping to find innovative solutions and transition paths for pressing social
challenges, such as the transition to a low-carbon economy or a circular
economy (Schot & Steinmueller, 2018).

Mariana Mazzucato's work has shown how decisive publicly funded research has
been for some of the technological innovations of the twentieth century and for the
economic ascendancy of Silicon Valley in particular (Mazzucato, 2015). If
government can exert so much influence on innovation in industry, why shouldn't
government use it for public interests? Motivated by this initiative, more and more
governments are orienting their innovation policies towards transitions, giving
innovation policy broader legitimacy. Government interventions in this area no
longer serve just to resolve deficiencies in the market and drive interactions in the
innovation system that do not emerge spontaneously but also to address transition
failures. Transition failure refers to the problem that desired social changes seldom

7 Based on https://www.rathenau.nl/en/knowledge-ecosystems/mission-driven-innovation-policy-what-how-why

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Research programmes with a mission 18
get off the ground without government direction.8 The new genre of challenge-
driven innovation policy is therefore emerging in addition to existing policy.

This report is about organising research programmes as part of third-generation
innovation policy. We want to explore how research programmes can be designed
to contribute to transitions needed to address societal challenges. We therefore
refer to challenge-driven research programmes, building on the concept of
challenge-driven innovation policy that we introduced in an earlier report (Rathenau
Instituut, 2020a) and a Message to Parliament (Rathenau Instituut, 2020c).

The public-private partnerships that the government has pushed as part of second-
generation innovation policy, with schemes such as the Innovation-Oriented
Research Programmes, the Leading Technology Institutes, and the BSIK/FES
incentives were primarily established within the context of a technological promise
or economic opportunity for industry. This includes the Dutch Polymer Institute
(DPI), a leading technological institute which has developed high-level scientific
knowledge about polymers and strengthened the links between knowledge
institutions and industry. Initiatives such as the DPI have enhanced the
competitiveness of Dutch industry and the development of knowledge ecosystems.
A number of programmes have also certainly contributed to sustainability or other
social goals. However, addressing a societal challenge was rarely their primary
goal.
9

A more coherent and integrated approach is needed to effectively address
persistent societal problems. An illustration of this is the OECD's 2015 analysis of
the Dutch agricultural research and innovation system (OECD, 2015). The report
underscored the fact that although this system is very effectively designed to
increase productivity, it is inadequately equipped to make Dutch agriculture climate-
smart.

Challenge-driven innovation policy is distinguished from second-generation
innovation policy in that its primary goal is stepping up and/or adapting societal
transitions. The basic premise of this policy is that more innovation is not always
better, but that innovation should be used selectively and in a targeted manner to
achieve social objectives. In this genre of innovation policy, government provides
new direction for innovation policy (directionality).
10

8 Frenken, K., Hekkert, M.P., 2017. Innovatiebeleid in tijden van maatschappelijke uitdagingen, Sturen in een
verweven dynamiek. Ministerie van Economische Zaken.
9 A good example of a public-private research programme that did explicitly focus on a societal challenge is
TransForum (sustainable agriculture), but this programme did not come about thanks to challenge-driven
innovation policies. The challenge-driven approach was the initiative of the consortium partners rather than the
grant scheme that funded it (BSIK/FES).
10 See, for example Schot, J., Steinmueller, W.E., 2018. Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of
innovation and transformative change. Research Policy 47, 1554-1567.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Research programmes with a mission 19

In this connection, challenge-driven innovation policy is based on a very different
theory than previous generations of innovation policy. The societal challenge is not
primarily defined as an economic opportunity for industry. Challenge-driven
innovation policy considers the societal challenge as a complex and multifaceted
problem for which different solutions must be developed in conjunction. According
to this policy theory, societal transitions are needed to bring about system-level
change, i.e. a coherent set of innovations that collectively add up to system
change.
11

With this goal in mind, challenge-driven innovation policy uses a broad definition of
innovation. The basic premise is that for an innovation to be a success, it must be
socially embedded. This requires research and development in multiple
dimensions. Besides technological development, economic, legal and socio-cultural
perspectives are particularly important.
12 In many cases, therefore, an
interdisciplinary or even transdisciplinary approach is required.

Moreover, challenge-driven innovation policy must anticipate the (sometimes
unintended) impact of innovation on society, especially when it comes to radical
innovations that can become part of disruptive system changes. To this end, the
principles of responsible research and innovation provide guidance.
13

According to the scientific literature, challenge-driven innovation also requires
greater diversity in knowledge networks and partnerships than conventional
innovation policy, which focuses on companies, consortiums and knowledge
institutions. In addition to the usual focus on researchers and entrepreneurs who
explore and exploit new technological options, challenge-driven innovation policy
therefore also focuses on the actors who have to embed the innovations in society
and ensure that they become part of the envisaged system changes.
14 Depending
on the type of challenge, these can be consumers and professional users, network
managers, regulatory and supervisory bodies, civil society organisations, interest
groups, residents' associations, standardisation organisations, water boards,
provinces or municipalities and their departments. For this, the government will
have to develop appropriate instruments to organise and monitor cooperation and
exchange.

11 Ibid.
12 Rathenau Instituut, 2019. Voorbereid op de praktijk: anticiperen op de maatschappelijke inbedding van
innovatie bij onderzoeks- & ontwikkelprogramma's. Rathenau Instituut, The Hague.
13 For more information, see:von Schomberg, R., 2013. A vision of responsible innovation, in: Owen, R., Heintz,
M., Bessant, J. (Eds.), Responsible Innovation. John Wiley, London.
14 Kuhlmann, S., Rip, A., 2018. Next-generation innovation policy and grand challenges. Science and Public
Policy 45, 448-454.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Research programmes with a mission 20
2.2 Missions in challenge-driven innovation policy
The new orientation of innovation policy towards societal challenges is mainly
identified in the scientific literature as the emergence of mission-oriented innovation
policy.
15 In addition to numerous academic articles, reports by TNO (TNO, 2018),
the OECD (Larrue, 2021) and the European Commission (Mazzucato, 2018) have
recently been published with pointers for the further development of this type of
policy. Utrecht University has set up a special policy lab to analyse mission-oriented
innovation policy
16 and TNO is participating in an international observatory for
mission-oriented research and innovation.17 A characteristic of mission-oriented
policy is that it formulates specific, ambitious but achievable goals.

The Rathenau Instituut has deliberately chosen the broader term challenge-driven
to highlight the complexity and multifaceted nature of societal challenges.
Formulating missions with specific goals can be a powerful tool for challenge-driven
innovation policy, but it will not always be necessary or possible. Missions are
especially meaningful when there is agreement on the direction of the solution
route. This was the case, for example, when a mission approach was used in the
space and defence industries in the past. The most famous example is probably the
legendary Apollo project in which NASA went all out to put a man on the moon in
the foreseeable future. But also, closer to home, the Delta Works can be seen as a
mission-oriented project for which much (mainly technological) research and
innovation had to be mobilised with the clear goal of protecting the Netherlands
from the sea.

To use missions as part of a challenge-driven approach, they must form a link
within a broad and far-reaching change process whose solutions are only partially
known. Creating such a mission requires more than just research and technology
development. For example, major changes are needed in existing food production
and distribution systems in order to step up the transition to circular agriculture.
Technological innovation is only one dimension of this transformation process.
Innovations in production chains and revenue models, changes in legislation, and
changes in the attitudes and routines of farmers, supermarkets and consumers, for
example, are at least as important.

The advantage of choosing the term challenge-driven instead of mission-oriented is
that it emphasises that missions are only one part of the policy mix which

15 For an accessible introduction, see Janssen, M., Hekkert, M., Frenken, K., 2020. Missiegedreven
innovatiebeleid: een nieuw perspectief op vernieuwing en vergroening Wetenschappelijk Bureau GroenLinks,
Utrecht.
16 https://www.uu.nl/en/research/copernicus-institute-of-sustainable-development/mission-oriented-innovation-
policy-observatory
17 https://jiip.eu/mop/wp/

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Research programmes with a mission 21
governments can use to tackle major societal challenges such as the climate
challenge. By using the term "challenge-driven" we want to take account of the
uncertainty, complexity and (often) controversy that characterise transitions.

Transitions cannot be planned. This means that government has to adopt a
reflexive attitude, experiment with new instruments and institute a learning process
to constantly improve its own approach. Stefan Kuhlmann and colleagues
(Kuhlmann et al., 2019) therefore speak of "tentative governance arrangements," a
policy approach that takes a tentative position but constantly adapts it as needed. In
this case, public and private interventions and actions form part of a continuously
evolving process that is adjusted and adapted along the way. This attitude also
chimes with the trends of adaptive governance in environmental management and
anticipatory governance of innovation.
18

It is not immediately obvious how missions based on specific goals and timelines
can be fitted into such a flexible and learning strategy. They can only make a
powerful contribution to transitions where sufficient learning capacity and reflexivity
have been organised at the overarching level of the transition approach. In our
project, we will be exploring the possible demands this places on the coordination
and governance of research programmes.
2.3 The logic of challenge-driven research
programmes
Despite the increasing amount of literature on mission-oriented and challenge-
driven innovation policy, relatively little has been written about the organisation and
governance of challenge-driven research programmes. In this section, we use the
more general literature on the new generation of innovation policy to outline
challenge-driven research programmes in terms of their theory of change. This
outline serves as a basis for examining the design and management of these types
of programmes based on the practice in some international examples (Section 3).

A theory of change describes all the expectations people have about the way
activities will lead to a change in practice and in society. It is a cause-and-effect
reasoning in which inputs (resources, such as time, money, and expertise) are used
in a mix of activities that will lead to outputs (results of the activities). The use of

18 See, for example Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P., Norberg, J., 2005. Adaptive governance of social-ecological
systems. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 30, 441-473.; Guston, D.H., 2014. Understanding ‘anticipatory
governance’. Social Studies of Science 44, 218-242.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Research programmes with a mission 22
these outputs will lead to outcomes, which will then contribute to effects at the level
of impacts (see Figure 1).

Figure 1 Theory of change as cause-and-effect reasoning

In conventional innovation policy, a theory of change is used (implicitly or explicitly)
to show what economic and social impacts are possible thanks to investments in
research, development and innovation. This helps to legitimise public investment
and, in addition, to take into account at an early stage the possible application of
the results in practice, so that attention can be paid to the broader embedding of the
innovations in society.

Typically, a challenge-driven theory of change starts with a complex societal
change challenge. Impact is formulated in terms of the contribution to be made to
addressing a complex societal change challenge. One example would be the
energy transition that requires a fundamental socio-technical systems change in the
way we produce, distribute and use energy.

The cause-and-effect reasoning starts with a socio-technical system innovation and
step by step we work back through outcomes to the kinds of outputs, activities, and
inputs that are required for them. This kind of challenge-driven theory of change
helps to make choices about what activities are suitable for creating the desired
impact paths.

Challenge-driven theories of change take a broad view of what counts as relevant
outcomes, outputs and activities. After all, challenge-driven research programmes

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Research programmes with a mission 23
are about targeted and coherent innovations that can add up to integrated solutions
and changes at system level.19 20

System change not only requires technological innovation, it also needs social
innovation. For example, in addition to disciplinary scientific research, there will be
room for other knowledge practices, such as bringing together existing knowledge
from different disciplines and domains, co-creation with practitioners or individuals
and embedding innovations in practice and society. This means that in addition to a
holistic view, a forward-looking and anticipatory view is needed to mobilise a wider
range of actors and activities.

Another important output of challenge-driven research programmes could be the
creation of new knowledge networks that help to strengthen research and
innovation ecosystems around a specific societal challenge. Thus, typical outputs
need not be defined only in terms of research results, but can also be formulated in
terms of new combinations of existing knowledge from different domains or of new
networks and relationships (in knowledge ecosystems).

By characterising a challenge-driven theory of change as above, we mainly want to
show that the perspective on what counts as relevant knowledge, as relevant
knowledge activities or as relevant knowledge partners becomes much wider. This
is not to say that all challenge-driven programmes always have to utilise this
perspective to its full extent or that research must always be multidisciplinary or
transdisciplinary. It is even quite conceivable that a programme might decide to
focus on basic disciplinary research if the theory of change shows that a lack of
fundamental knowledge is a major problem.

19 Kuhlmann, S., Rip, A., 2018. Next-generation innovation policy and grand challenges. Science and Public
Policy 45, 448-454.
20 Schot, J., Steinmueller, W.E., 2018. Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of innovation and
transformative change. Research Policy 47, 1554-1567.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Research programmes with a mission 24
Interlude - Food transition
Introduction: the food system is stuck
Farmers' protests, potato surpluses and distressing figures on biodiversity loss: our
agriculture and food system is squeezed on all sides, as Carola Schouten, the then
Dutch Minister of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality also wrote in her 2018 vision
for the future.21 The need to change the current situation is very urgent. In the
Netherlands (and the rest of Europe), the credo "Never hungry again" has led to
increasingly efficient food production in recent decades, focused on economies of
scale and exporting. It is now clear that our environment is paying the price for
this.
22

Most parties seem to agree on the question of whether the current agricultural and
food system is in need of a thorough overhaul.23 But a unanimous answer to the
question of what this system should look like - and, consequently, what changes will
be needed and who will have to bear the burden - seems to be a distant prospect at
present. From the report of the first election debate of 2021 by newspaper Trouw:
"All parties agree with the statement that farmers can hardly run a profitable
business any more, but the solutions vary from 'halving livestock' (D66 and
GroenLinks) to 'it's not right to blame farmers' (CDA and PVV)".24

Moreover, the discussion about the transition to a sustainable agricultural and food
system affects not only the farmer, but also the processing industry, the
multinational food corporations, the large supermarket chains and ultimately all of
us as individuals and consumers. Farming differently, producing differently, eating
differently: the transition to a sustainable agricultural and food system is not so
simple.

An additional exploration
In this report, we explore what it takes to develop challenge-driven research
programmes. To answer this question, we analyse three cases, each of which has
some characteristics of a challenge-driven approach. Indeed, fully challenge-driven
research and innovation programmes are not yet commonplace in the real world.

21 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/ministerie-van-landbouw-natuur-en-
voedselkwaliteit/documenten/beleidsnota-s/2018/09/08/visie-landbouw-natuur-en-voedsel-
waardevol-en-verbonden
22 https://www.cbs.nl/nl-nl/corporate/2020/06/zicht-op-100-jaar-afname-biodiversiteit-in-agrarisch-
gebied
23 https://www.agf.nl/article/9289914/noodzaak-transitie-naar-duurzame-landbouw-erkend-in-
verkiezingsdebat/
24 https://www.trouw.nl/politiek/in-het-eerste-lijsttrekkersdebat-komt-wilders-als-sterkste-naar-
voren~be2bf7ce/

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Research programmes with a mission 25
To gain an insight into the challenges parties face when trying to put a challenge-
driven approach into practice, we conducted an additional exploration for which we
used the transition to a sustainable agricultural and food system, or food transition
for short, as a case study. In this interlude25 we report on this exploration with
regard to the following two questions:
• What issues do parties face when deploying research and innovation to step up
the food transition?
• What insights does this provide for challenge-driven programming of research
and innovation?

Research and innovation do not equal structural change
Politicians, farmers and businesses all hope that research and innovation will help
develop insights and solutions that can speed up the shift to a sustainable food
system, e.g. by developing new farming techniques, innovative products and
sustainable revenue models for producers.

While our interlocutors endorse the importance of research and innovation, they
question the assumption that investing more in research and innovation will
naturally lead to innovation and therefore speeding up of the transition. After all, the
transition to a sustainable food system requires system change. In this regard,
research and innovation - and the parties involved, funding structures, partnerships
- are not separate from the system but are themselves part of it.

In a recent Letter to Parliament, Minister Schouten stated: "[...] that research and
innovation are at the heart of the success of Dutch agriculture, horticulture and
fisheries."
26 This quote illustrates the interconnectedness of the current research
field with these industries. Take Wageningen University and Research (WUR).
WUR has traditionally had a leading position in agricultural research, education and
consultancy and from this position has made a significant contribution to the
development of current agricultural practices. Or take the evolution of the food
supply: consumer preference-inspired product innovations have led to the massive
range of products we now find in the supermarket.

Existing research and innovation ecosystems are therefore closely linked to the
current agricultural and food system. The analysis of the Dutch agricultural
innovation system presented by the OECD in 2015 endorses this observation:
research and innovation mainly contribute to increasing productivity and exports,
but are insufficiently focused on making the agricultural system more sustainable
(OECD, 2015).

25 This interlude is based on a number of informal conversations with various parties involved in
research and innovation in the agriculture and food domain and on relevant policy documents and
articles. In this interlude we give an impression of the practice appropriate to the main questions of
this report. In doing so, we cannot do full justice to the complexity of the discussion on the
transition to a sustainable food system.
26 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukken/2021/02/10/kamerbrief-over-inzet-
speciaal-gezant-innovatie

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Research programmes with a mission 26

Thus, if the goal is to change the current system, this raises questions about the
organisation of research and innovation as part of this system. What kind of
research and innovation ecosystems do we need? How can or should existing
ecosystems change with them? And how can we get that done?

We highlight two practical challenges faced by policymakers seeking to drive a
transition in such an environment, i.e. positioning the programme and encouraging
innovation.

Positioning the programme within the societal challenge
Researchers and companies who want to contribute to the transition to a
sustainable food system through research and innovation find that they become
part of the normative discussion surrounding the challenge. The struggle over the
transition to a sustainable food system is echoed in the discussion of what research
is needed, who decides, and then who can participate.

In some cases, even the question of whether investing in research and innovation
makes sense is up for debate. For example, we heard from innovators in the sector
that they sometimes experience investment in research as a strategy of
policymakers to avoid or postpone making policy decisions and taking concrete
action.

Even when government, knowledge institutions and industry agree on the
importance of research and innovation in a general sense, their visions of the
necessary direction of innovation can clash. For example, farmers who advocate
commitment to further technological development may find themselves diametrically
opposed in the public debate to colleagues who advocate commitment to
experimenting with nature-inclusive forms of agriculture (known as the technologists
versus ecologists debate).
27

These examples show that the content and form of research within a contested
societal challenge can be controversial. What this means for challenge-driven
programmes is that they cannot avoid their partly normative nature. A key challenge
for this type of programme is therefore to be transparent and reflexive about how
the approach within the programme relates to the societal challenge. Discussing the
programme's theory of change and making it explicit can help achieve this.

Stimulating innovation
Research and innovation can never provide a complete solution to a complex
societal challenge: it also requires political choices and specific changes. For
example, the transition to a sustainable food system will require farmers to cultivate
their land differently and consumers to change their eating habits.

27 https://www.volkskrant.nl/kijkverder/2018/voedselzaak/artikelen/weg-met-het-hokjesdenken-in-de-
landbouw

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Research programmes with a mission 27

The lesson is that all parties necessary to bring about specific change must be
involved in the design and implementation of the programme. Thus, the design of a
challenge-driven research programme is not just a matter for researchers and
technology developers. In our interviews, for example, it emerged that "new" parties
- such as (innovative) farmers or civil-society organisations - cannot easily join
existing programmes because they are not seen as relevant knowledge partners or
cannot claim financial support for participation. This is problematic because parties
with practical experience should be able to share their thoughts about what
innovations are necessary and feasible and how they can then be put into practice.

A similar conclusion was drawn from the debate organised by the Rathenau
Instituut in 2019 on how knowledge can contribute to the transition within the
agricultural sector: a bridge needs to be built between research, education, practical
applications, industry and government policy.28 Circulation of knowledge is vital in
this regard because there is also a lot of knowledge to be gained on the farm.
Experiences and questions from the field should therefore be part of joint research
programming.

The recent review of the FoodSwitch proposal submitted to the Dutch National
Growth Fund shows that this perspective is increasingly shared.
29 In justifying the
decision not to fund the proposal, the assessment committee indicated, among
other things, that the proposal does not sufficiently involve the demand side and
does not provide enough space for new players, despite the fact that they are badly
needed for change and innovation.30

In conclusion: shared responsibility
As described in the introduction, we see from the agriculture and food domain that
there are still many differing views on the route to be taken towards system change.
We see a similar diversity in the (current) research and innovation landscape: from
scientific programmes that focus on technological innovations31, to civil-society
parties that experiment on a small scale with an area-based approach32, and
multinationals such as Unilever that invest in numerous innovations within their own
ranks because they consider it necessary to have a fundamental transformation of
the food system.33

28 https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/terugblik/maatschappelijke-transitie-alleen-mogelijk-met-circulaire-kennis
29 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/publicaties/2021/04/9/rapport-beoordelingsadviescommissie-ngf-
eerste-ronde
30 https://www.nationaalgroeifonds.nl/documenten/rapporten/2021/04/09/adviesrapport-eerste-
beoordelingsronde-commissie-nationaal-groeifonds
31 https://www.wur.nl/en/Dossiers/file/dossier-precision-agriculture.htm
32 https://www.staatsbosbeheer.nl/Over-Staatsbosbeheer/Dossiers/natuurinclusieve-landbouw
33 https://www.unilever.nl/news/overig-nieuws/2019/unilever-opent-nieuw-foods-innovation-centre-in-
wageningen.html

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Research programmes with a mission 28
It is a given that a variety of parties, programmes and projects cluster around a
particular transition. To avoid fragmentation and a lack of direction, various parties,
including the Dutch Food Transition Coalition34, stress the importance of conducting
a clear problem analysis in advance, and of having a shared vision of how the
various projects and programmes are interrelated and can build on each other.

Ultimately, it's about political choices: how do we want to change our agricultural
and food system? And how do we use research and innovation to contribute to
these choices? Precisely because this requires balancing (conflicting) interests and
potentially drastic changes, politicians and policymakers will have to be actively
involved in this.

Learning along the way about what is a good approach to the challenge is key.
However, within the agriculture and food domain, stakeholders point out that as
long as politicians and policymakers lack a clear overview and direction, there is a
high probability that businesses and researchers will continue to work on different
futures for too long.

34 https://transitiecoalitievoedsel.nl/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Voorstellen-missiegedreven-
innovatie-van-TcV.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Research programmes with a mission 29
3 Three international examples
In this section, we provide three examples of how different international
organisations are trying to use their programmes to mobilise research and
innovation to address a societal challenge. The three examples are:
• CGIAR's Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) programme.
CGIAR is a global partnership of international organisations engaged in food
security research which aims to reduce rural poverty, increase food security,
improve health and nutrition and make natural resource management more
sustainable.
• The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), an agency of the
US Department of Defense, which is responsible for developing emerging
technologies for use by the military.
• The Utmaningsdriven innovation (UDI, challenge-driven innovation) programme
of VINNOVA, the innovation agency of the Swedish government. The UDI
programme focuses on funding projects that seek to make a specific
contribution to addressing a societal challenge within one of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals.

All three organisations are tasked with helping to address a specific societal
challenge. Each organisation tries in its own way to ensure that its programme and
projects make a contribution. We see differences and similarities in the way the
organisations develop this focus in the design and implementation of specific
programmes. The examples therefore serve as an illustration of and inspiration for
ways of developing a challenge-driven approach to the design and implementation
of research programmes.

For the case descriptions, we consulted various sources to get an impression of
how the different programmes work and made a selection of relevant material for
each example, based on availability and quality. The description of CGIAR/CCAFS
is based on public information provided by CGIAR. For the description of DARPA,
we relied primarily on public information and several chapters from the book The
DARPA Model for Transformative Technologies Perspectives on the US: Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (Bonvillian et al., 2019). Finally, for the
description of the UDI programme, Technopolis Group conducted a preliminary
study commissioned by the Rathenau Instituut, which has also allowed us to utilise
Swedish-language material. For a complete overview and justification of sources
used, please refer to Appendix 1 of this report.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Research programmes with a mission 30
The section is structured as follows. First, we introduce the framework we use to
analyse the three cases. We then provide a brief description of each case. In the
final paragraph of this section, we show the pointers a comparison of the different
cases provides for the further development of a challenge-driven approach to
research programming.

Lessons learned from transdisciplinary programmes

A key feature of challenge-driven research programmes is that they seek to
involve different parties in the production and application of knowledge,
including researchers from different disciplines and professionals from the
field. Precisely because of the complexity of societal challenges, the
programmes must bring together diverse parties to jointly develop knowledge.
Experience with this form of collaboration has been gained in recent decades
in the school of transdisciplinary research.

This framework discusses the relevance of transdisciplinary experience for
coordinating and managing challenge-driven research programmes, based on
academic literature and a workshop35 involving policymakers and experts in
mission-oriented innovation policy and transdisciplinary research.

In transdisciplinary research, researchers from different disciplines collaborate
with practitioners. Like challenge-driven research programmes,
transdisciplinary programmes often focus on a societal challenge. The OECD
recently emphasis
ed the added value of adopting a transdisciplinary approach
to societal challenges (OECD, 2020). The survey also showed the problems
that can arise when putting a transdisciplinary approach into practice. This
report shows that the way we fund and organise research is often not
appropriate for transdisciplinary collaboration.

Transdisciplinary research programmes are not the same as challenge-driven
programmes as in a challenge-driven programme not all the research needs to
be transdisciplinary. On some issues, a monodisciplinary approach (input from
a single scientific discipline) or an interdisciplinary approach (integration of
research from different disciplines, without an explicit role for practitioners) will
suffice. The type of research needed is determined by the theory of change

35 This online meeting was held on 18 June 2020. For more details, see Section 1.3.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Research programmes with a mission 31
and the specific contribution the programme seeks to make to the pace or
direction of societal transition.

In addition, the aim of challenge-driven programmes, more so than
transdisciplinary programmes, is to help address a particular challenge. This
direction means that challenge-driven programmes place a greater emphasis
on both connecting parties within the programme and coordinating with and
following developments outside the programme

Despite these differences, the insights gained from transdisciplinary research
offer valuable pointers for the design of challenge-driven programmes. What
experience with transdisciplinary research has taught us is that bringing
together different parties and integrating different perspectives is quite a
challenge. We have also learned that programmes whose ambition is to
connect different parties and have them develop knowledge together require a
wider interpretation of the role of programme management than is usual. This
mainly involves creating synergy between projects, supporting researchers
with new ways of working and ensuring that both the various projects and the
entire programme are and remain focused.
3.1 Analytical framework
To analyse the cases, we build on a model developed by Flurina Schneider and
colleagues based on experience gained from a number of transdisciplinary
research programmes (Figure 2) (Schneider et al., 2019). In this model, they
distinguish between activities at programme level and at project level. Between
them is the project support level: interventions from the programme to assist the
projects to optimise their contribution to the programme. During the programme
cycle, different types of activities, such as programme preparation and project
selection, can be clustered into ten steps spread across these three levels (see
Figure 2). In this report, we will use this diagram as a framework for analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Research programmes with a mission 32
Figure 2 Ten stages in the development of research programmes (Schneider et al.,
2019).

This model involves three levels of activity: (1) programme, (2) project support and
(3) project implementation. We are disregarding Level 3, project implementation,
because we are specifically interested in the role of programme management. Our
analysis therefore focuses on the programme level and project support.
Programme level
Activities at this level focus on aligning the programme and its portfolio of projects
with the societal change challenge. At this level, the issue is how the stakeholders
involved develop the programme's theory of change and how they determine what
kinds of activities and projects are needed to achieve the intended outcomes and
social impact. How do they ensure that developments in the programme's
environment are considered during the course of the programme in order to make
interim revisions to the theory of change and associated activities and projects, if
necessary?
Project support
This level is between the programme and the projects. At this level, the issue is how
the programme aligns the goals of individual projects with the programme goals and
what the parties involved are doing to monitor this coherence. In what ways does

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Research programmes with a mission 33
programme management monitor the progress of specific projects? To what extent
and in what ways do they adapt the projects where necessary? To what extent and
in what ways does programme management provide for a coherent portfolio of
projects? For example, do they agree data and other standards and/or concepts to
be used in the projects? Does programme management have requirements as
regards the circulation and aggregation of project results?

In the sections below, we use the two levels to show the extent to which and the
ways in which the three organisations put their research programmes to work
addressing a societal challenge. In each case, we first provide a brief introduction to
the organisation and then cover the activities at both the programme and the project
support level. In Section 4, we will formulate points of interest for each of the ten
steps in the diagram.
3.2 CGIAR/CCAFS
CGIAR, formerly the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research, has
been conducting development research in the field of agriculture since 1971. It is a
network of fifteen research centres located around the world. Each centre focuses
on a specific area of agriculture. For example, there are centres that do research
into rice in the Philippines and Côte d'Ivoire, a centre that focuses on corn and
wheat in Mexico, a centre in Malaysia that focuses on fisheries and a centre in
Kenya that focuses on forestry. CGIAR operates research programmes that link the
research of the fifteen centres, focusing on a topic that goes beyond the scope of
the individual research centres.

One of these programmes is the CCAFS programme, which stands for Climate
Change, Agriculture and Food Security. This programme focuses on the impacts of
climate change on agriculture and the food supply and aims to make agriculture
and the food supply climate-smart. CCAFS contributes to CGIAR's three goals, i.e.
reducing poverty, increasing food security and improving natural ecosystems.

CCAFS works with four substantive focus areas (flagships): climate-smart
agricultural practices; low-emission agriculture; climate information services,
weather reports and insurance services; and climate-smart agriculture policy. In
addition, CCAFS has two intersecting focus areas: one on gender and
inclusiveness and one on upscaling climate-smart agricultural practices.

CGIAR receives funding from a wide range of donor organisations. These
organisations include member states such as the Netherlands and non-
governmental organisations including the Dutch SNV. The organisation also

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Research programmes with a mission 34
receives contributions in kind from universities, including Wageningen University &
Research. Its annual budget is between USD 800 and USD 900 million
(approximately EUR 680 - EUR 760 million). The annual budget of the CCAFS
programme is over USD 50 million (over EUR 40 million).
Programme level
CGIAR aspires to a world free of poverty, hunger and environmental degradation.
The management of the CGIAR umbrella group has a key role in aligning the work
of the various research centres with the wants and needs of the donors and the
host countries in which the research is conducted. Representatives of donors and
host countries are involved, having seats on the CGIAR supervisory board. This
board oversees CGIAR's strategy, mission, impact and continued relevance.

CGIAR aims to make a substantial contribution to solving the world food problem.
To keep activities within the various centres and programmes aligned with this goal,
CGIAR operates with (1) central programming of the research conducted by the
fifteen centres; (2) a theory of change, goals and outcome measures at every level;
and (3) an active commitment to the ongoing dissemination and application of the
knowledge and insights developed.

Central programming
To encourage coherent research within the CGIAR network, CGIAR operates
centrally determined, results-oriented research programmes in which the various
CGIAR research centres collaborate. CCAFS is an example of such a collaborative
programme. By developing these programmes, CGIAR aims to bring together work
from the various centres and improve its alignment with CGIAR's overarching goals.

CGIAR writes of the CCAFS programme that it is intended to boost CGIAR's
research and expertise in climate-smart agriculture, food systems and landscapes.
Furthermore, it should ensure the integration and coordination of all CGIAR's
climate research to maximise CGIAR's contribution. The CCAFS programme
therefore links all the research by the fifteen centres into climate-smart agriculture
and, for this reason, can also coordinate it.

CGIAR has to a great extent structured the development and approval of the
programmes. For example, in 2015, CGIAR published a 67-page document
describing the process of establishing a portfolio of research programmes, including
ambitions, requirements and responsibilities. CGIAR expects a coherent set of
twelve interrelated proposals, names the programmes and specifies the budget for
each programme.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Research programmes with a mission 35
Theory of change at every level
CGIAR works at all levels (organisation, programme and subprogramme or
flagship) with theories of change, goals and outcome measures. In recent years,
CGIAR has been using the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals as a
frame of reference. It has developed precise outcome measures based on these
sustainable development goals, on CGIAR's objectives and also on the wants and
needs of the donors and host countries involved.

The CCAFS programme consists of a number of subprogrammes known as
"flagships". Each of the flagships is assigned a theory of change that defines its
vision, assumptions, actions and specific objectives, e.g. the flagship that focuses
on the provision of services. This flagship's vision is for effective climate services to
be available to farmers in Asia, Africa, and Latin America (weather reports,
historical climate data) and for them to be protected with the right financial safety
nets (loans for the purchase of commodities, such as seeds, and insurance cover
against, for example, damage caused by extreme weather). The assumption is that
farmers need this to make the transition to climate-smart agriculture and that it will
give them a more resilient income position. Examples of outcome measures for this
flagship include "15 key regional and national organisations have developed and
improved demand-driven equitable climate services in support of local farming
communities, based on CCAFS research" and "8 million farm households have
improved access to weather-related insurance - this also benefits women."

CCAFS monitors the progress of the various flagships from the umbrella
programme. If the results differ from expectations, there is scope for adjusting the
underlying theory of change accordingly.

Dissemination and application
CCAFS anticipates further use of the research results in several ways. The
programme actively seeks collaboration with local farming communities and other
organisations on the ground, such as cooperatives and agricultural agencies. The
programme therefore increases the likelihood of developing solutions that are field-
tested and found to be applicable.

Complementarity is a major concern. A good example is the choice of regions in
which it conducts research. CCAFS researches and develops solutions for a
diverse range of agricultural practices (products, cultivation methods) and climate
issues (subsoil, desertification, heavy rainfall). When selecting regions, the
programme explicitly takes into account the differences between them. The result is
a diverse and complementary portfolio of regions which allows different solutions to
be developed and tested at different locations in the programme.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Research programmes with a mission 36
Project support
CGIAR uses the CCAFS programme as a means of coordinating the work of the
fifteen research centres and focusing it on a number of specific goals. The starting
point for programming is the research by challenge-driven research centres and the
programme provides an additional dimension. For this reason, CCAFS does not
use open calls. We did not find any information as to whether and, if so, how
CCAFS attempts to adapt individual projects.

CGIAR and CCAFS spend a lot of time and effort monitoring progress and results
and reflecting on their own actions. Responsibility for monitoring management and
progress rests with the project, region and flagship. The very precise outcome
measures make it clear whether the project, region or flagship is contributing as
anticipated. When things change, the question arises whether the theory of change
needs to be adapted accordingly.

An example of ways in which the programme is trying to ensure that the projects
anticipate large-scale application in practice is the Learning Platform on
Partnerships and Capacity for Scaling Climate-Smart Agriculture.
36 This is a cross-
cutting flagship that exists alongside four substantive flagships in the CCAFS
programme. The goal of this platform is to learn what is required to make locally
developed solutions applicable elsewhere. The main focus is therefore on
disseminating knowledge, training users and developing partnerships.

CGIAR/CCAFS have many ways of trying to ensure that projects are coherent and
the portfolio is balanced. For example, projects are expected to do more than just
develop and test a solution for the specific situation. The ability to apply this solution
elsewhere is an important selection criterion, and complementarity is a major
consideration when choosing new regions.

Interaction with stakeholders within CGIAR/CCAFS is also important at project
level. The method developed in the programme, the Climate Smart Village (CSV), is
an example of the participatory approach. In local farming communities,
researchers test and develop new approaches and solutions to local problems.
When choosing a location, aspects such as the type of issues CCAFS wants to
work on, the presence of research capacity and the possibility of working with a
variety of local parties - i.e., not only farmers but also agricultural agencies and
cooperatives - are considered.

The choice of a CSV location is made in consultation with local parties who have
knowledge of local practices and the situation on the ground. CCAFS tries to take

36 https://ccafs.cgiar.org/flagships/scaling-climate-smart-agriculture/approach#.X5vpalAo-Ul

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Research programmes with a mission 37
into account the specific knowledge and practices that different parties bring,
whether they are farmers, agricultural agencies, agricultural cooperatives,
businesses or governments.

When a potential location has been selected, CCAFS researchers approach local
parties to jointly determine what the issues are and what they need. Then, a joint
workshop is held to choose one or more options to be developed or tested locally.
Ideally, some of this testing should also be done by the local parties themselves as,
ideally, these approaches will be adopted over time by the farming community
concerned. The CSV aims not just to benefit the farming community directly
involved, it should also provide an insight into opportunities for scaling up. The
results of the CSV will then be further developed, tested elsewhere and, ideally,
applied in more locations. The development of the CSV approach illustrates the
way CCAFS anticipates its potential application in practice.

Over the course of the programme, CSV proved to be such a successful approach
that other parties and organisations showed an interest in adopting the approach.
For example, the Vietnamese agriculture ministry wants to apply the CSV
approach, which, of course, goes some way towards meeting CCAFS's goals. It has
therefore now presented the approach as its own product and developed a "train-
the-trainer" guide.
37

CCAFS operates on a three-thirds principle.
38 One third of the effort is expended on
engaging stakeholders to jointly determine what research should be done and how.
One third on doing research. And one third on strengthening next users, parties
who will be involved in the further development and application of the research
results. CCAFS has adopted this important principle to facilitate continued use.
Close engagement with stakeholders provides a better understanding of the issues,
inspiring confidence in CCAFS and in the approach being developed. Any new
networks and partnerships needed to follow up the project locally can be
established at any time throughout that process.
3.3 DARPA
DARPA, the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, is tasked with
funding the development of groundbreaking technologies to provide a powerful
impetus. Central to this are the programme managers and the directors, aided by
clearly defined programme-specific goals and outcome measures.

37 Gonsalves J, Baguilat I, Bantayan R, Bernardo EB, Sebastian L. (2020) Eight guide steps for setting up a
Climate-Smart Village: A trainer's guide. Cavite, Philippines: International Institute of Rural Reconstruction.
38 CCAFS (2020) CCAFS 2019 Annual report

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Research programmes with a mission 38

DARPA's creation and remit was prompted by what is known as the Sputnik Shock.
The US thought it had technological superiority over the Soviet Union and felt
caught off guard when the soviets launched their first spacecraft, the Sputnik-1
satellite, in 1957. The US wanted to avoid being overtaken ever again and decided
to pursue the development of strategic technological surprises. As a result, then-US
President Dwight D Eisenhower established DARPA in 1958.

DARPA explores and pushes boundaries and funds the development of radical
innovations. For example, in the first half of the 2010s, it funded the development of
a new type of vaccine based on mRNA technology, which is used in a number of
vaccines that combat coronavirus. In 2013, Moderna, one of the pharmaceutical
companies that produces coronavirus vaccines, received USD 25 million from
DARPA to develop mRNA vaccines.

DARPA is a relatively small and flat organisation, headed up by a small executive
team (directors). In 2020, it employed about 220 staff working in six departments
and each department is focused on a particular type of technology, i.e. Biology
Technology Defense Sciences, Information Innovation, Microsystems Technology,
Strategic Technology and Tactical Technology. Each department in turn has its own
small executive team (office directors) and is also staffed with programme
managers.
Programme level
The challenge that DARPA is called upon to address is the promotion and
monitoring of national security. To this end, DARPA has been designated as funder
of technological developments that the US military may eventually deploy to
safeguard national security, based on the contribution of the various priorities,
departments and programmes.

The US Department of Defense (DOD) sets the context within which DARPA
operates. DARPA's directors and staff have very regular and intensive consultations
with representatives of the military, both formal and informal, both ad hoc and
through scheduled meetings. This is to ensure that DARPA is fully aware of the
developments affecting the military and the challenges it faces.

It does not mean that DARPA programmes are focused on off-the-shelf solutions;
quite the reverse. DARPA programmes aim to develop groundbreaking, innovative
technological solutions that contribute to national security in general. Incidentally,
the DARPA director does not report to the Department of Defense but directly to the
Senate.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Research programmes with a mission 39
DARPA programme managers play an important part in developing and
implementing programmes. It is the programme manager's vision for the goals and
design of the programme that is the deciding factor. From this role, the programme
manager develops a programme in close consultation with various parties: the
DARPA directors and office directors, representatives of the military, research
organisations and industry.

This approach allows the programme manager to get in touch with potential
applicants as early as at the programme development stage. DARPA regards this
as an advantage, as these contacts help it to arrive at a clear, agreed formulation of
the contribution expected from the programme.

In some cases, the directors may wish a new programme to build on previous
programmes, which creates a portfolio that builds on experience and insights
gained from previous research. In addition, the directors also focus on the different
technologies required for a particular development. For example, programmes on
materials, processors, chips, software and system architecture have been
developed during DARPA's long-standing commitment to information technology.

Because DARPA focuses on funding groundbreaking technologies at the early
stages of development, networks and relationships between research and industry
are often not yet in place. Programmes at DARPA therefore also give specific
consideration to developing new communities of practice necessary to ensure the
(further) development of a new technology.

DARPA operationalises goals at programme level, not at organisation-wide level.
Within a programme, it is up to the programme manager to formulate programme-
specific goals, conditions, and indicators. These goals and indicators are not static,
but can cause the programme to be adapted.
Project support
A characteristic of DARPA is the guiding role played by the programme manager
during the programme. The programme manager also intervenes in response to
quantitative indicators during the development and implementation of individual
projects.

Programme managers find their bearings at the development stage and consult
with many parties, including possible project implementers. Objectives and
constraints are clearly described in the call for proposals (Broad Agency
Announcement). The programme manager is responsible for the selection of
proposals and may seek advice in this regard. The deciding question in the
selection process is: do the projects contribute to the programme manager's vision?

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Research programmes with a mission 40

DARPA contracts performers, i.e. research organisations and companies, to carry
out the projects. In other words, DARPA does not work on the basis of grants, like,
say, NWO, but based on contracts, which allows DARPA to become deeply
involved in the implementation of the projects it funds. The programme manager
may propose changes in the composition of the consortium and the research
design, visit sites, adapt projects, invite representatives from different projects, ask
for presentations, require attendance at meetings and involve new parties. The
programme manager therefore acts more as an influential additional member of the
consortium, rather than as a party to whom projects have to be justified.

Monitoring at programme level is important at DARPA, based on the goals and
indicators established by the programme manager at the outset. If a project fails to
meet its stated goals, they want to know why. For example, this may be due to
unforeseen problems that again provide an insight into what is possible under a
particular set of circumstances, which, in turn, provides opportunities for learning.
But a project may also turn out to be unviable or a competing project may be more
successful.

In such cases, the programme manager may revise goals and indicators, terminate
projects prematurely or develop additional activities. Failure is not regarded as a
problem so long as those involved actively learn from it and take action based on
the lessons learned. The programme manager is likely to decide to discontinue one
or more projects during the lifetime of a programme.

When developing a programme, a DARPA programme manager also considers
coherence between projects and within the programme. What this coherence looks
like will depend on the situation. A programme may consist of one major project, a
number of complementary projects or a number of very similar and competing
projects. The latter involves a number of options being developed in parallel where
the potential of the various options is not yet sufficiently clear.

The programme manager is expected to become actively involved in developing
new communities of practice. It is common for there to be contact between the
different projects. The programme manager can organise meetings at which all the
projects must be represented. Performers must participate and share their progress
with other projects. The programme manager may also invite to meetings parties
who are not directly involved in a project but are deemed relevant in some other
way.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Research programmes with a mission 41
3.4 VINNOVA/challenge-driven innovation
Vinnova (Verket för innovationssystem or Agency for the Innovation System) was
created in 2001 as a spin-off from NUTEK, the Swedish Agency for Economic and
Technological Development. Vinnova's remit from the government is to promote
sustainable growth by funding demand-driven research and developing efficient
innovation systems. Innovation systems are networks of public and private actors
within which new knowledge and innovations are developed, disseminated and
utilised. As part of its remit to achieve sustainable growth and strengthen Sweden's
competitiveness, the agency has a challenge-driven innovation programme: the
Utmaningsdriven innovation programme (UDI).

The UDI programme was developed in response to the Lund Declaration, which
was drawn up during the Swedish Presidency of the European Union. This
declaration states that research should focus on major and current societal
challenges (then referred to as Grand Challenges) and that this requires
approaches to move beyond rigid thematic programming of research and
innovation. The declaration goes on to state that public and private parties should
be involved in research and innovation. The challenge-driven UDI programme is
part of VINNOVA's attempt to put these ambitions into practice.

At the start of the programme, VINNOVA chose four societal challenges. In 2017, it
changed course from the four challenges to the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals.

VINNOVA has about 200 employees and a budget of SEK 3 billion (about EUR 300
million). The UDI programme is led by a single programme manager who manages
a team of project assessors (who work for other VINNOVA programmes as well as
UDI) and staff who support the practical implementation of the programme. The
budget varies from year to year and is around SEK 220 million (about EUR 22
million), which makes the programme a small part of VINNOVA's overall portfolio of
activities.
Programme level
Each year, VINNOVA and the Swedish government discuss the results achieved by
the organisation and its goals for the coming year. Examples of goals include
getting more women into leadership positions, increasing collaboration with
international organisations and incorporating the sustainable development goals
into the funding of scientific research.

Within VINNOVA's wide remit and these kinds of more specific goals, the UDI
programme is specifically aimed at encouraging challenge-driven innovation. It is

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Research programmes with a mission 42
based on the UN's sustainable development goals in this regard, but the
contribution of the entire programme to these goals is not really further developed
or operationalised at programme level.

As we describe below, the individual projects in the UDI programme are responsible
for this operationalisation. The sustainable development goals are central to the
selection of project proposals: a key criterion during selection is the expectation that
a project will contribute to one of these goals.
Project support
The UDI programme focuses on individual projects. This means that the
programme funds several stand-alone projects that are expected to contribute to
one of the sustainable development goals. The responsibility for justifying the
choice of content and the project design rests with the applicants, who have to
describe the problem they want to solve, how they intend to solve it and with whom.
Projects are assessed on the basis of their internal consistency: does the proposed
project match the challenge identified by the applicants?

As a result, individual projects set and pursue different goals. The programme's
societal contribution therefore unfolds in the individual projects. Programme
management does not aim for coherence between projects. During the
implementation of the projects, the contact between VINNOVA and the
implementers is mainly of an administrative nature, i.e. through mandatory reports.
The VINNOVA programme manager does not adapt the content as a result.

The UDI programme explicitly focuses on internal coherence within a project over
time. A project may receive funding in three phases, creating coherence over time.
Within the UDI programme, the innovation process is broken down into three
sequential steps that will ideally lead to practicable solutions: (1) initiation, (2)
collaboration and (3) implementation. Each phase has its own type of project for
which an application can be submitted after each phase. Different rules and
requirements apply to each type of project. An initiation project runs for about nine
months and focuses on developing an idea. A collaboration project runs for about
two years and focuses on developing collaboration between different partners and
developing and testing innovative solutions. Finally, an implementation project runs
for about three years and is designed to test results on a larger scale and put them
into practice.

VINNOVA funds a smaller percentage of the project cost at each step. The closer a
project is to actual application and therefore commercialisation, the more
involvement and co-funding is expected from the applicants. The reviewers, some
of them VINNOVA staff and some externals, decide by mutual agreement which

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Research programmes with a mission 43
proposals meet the requirements and are therefore eligible for funding, and which
do not. The programme does allow some flexibility in the sequential steps. A side
issue may become the main issue in a subsequent project step, if it is more
promising.

The UDI programme does not focus on coherence between different projects
pursuing a common objective. However, there are a number of embedding
characteristics on which projects are assessed. These characteristics stem from the
notion that concrete innovative solutions to long-term challenges require a focus on
embedding in practice from the outset.

The embedding characteristics include:
• Systems perspective: The programme requires that projects be developed from
a systems perspective. Different aspects of a challenge have to be viewed and
addressed in context. The lack of a systems perspective could result in a
project having unintended undesirable consequences.
• More broadly based than technological innovation: The programme requires
that a project be more broadly based than a purely technological solution, but
also considers other aspects such as reward systems, organisational context,
policies, behaviours or processes.
• Focus on follow-through and application: The programme requires that
applicants sufficiently anticipate further development and application. This
question is present from the outset and becomes increasingly important in the
sequential steps. Projects must have a clear application in mind, where it is
considered likely that there will be tangible results within five years and the
application can be used more widely.

A recent evaluation found that the UDI programme is still failing to achieve these
ambitions. In practice, projects funded from the programme to date have had a
technical focus with little thought given to other aspects, such as social embedding
and incorporation into legislation. In addition, the programme funds a wide range of
projects lacking a clearly defined problem at programme level. The evaluation of the
UDI programme therefore argues that there is a need to integrate and elaborate the
systems perspective more explicitly at programme level in order to be truly
challenge-driven and to be able to realise the stated ambitions.
3.5 Comparative analysis
In this concluding section, we look at the programmes from a comparative
perspective. What mutual differences and similarities do we see in the way the
programmes design and manage their activities at two levels (programme level and

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Research programmes with a mission 44
project support)? How is the contribution to be made by the programme reflected in
the way the programme is organised?
Objective
Each programme has a different type of objective. The UDI programme is the least
focused of the three programmes, where projects within the programme have to
contribute to one of the sustainable development goals. CCAFS and DARPA have
a more specific goal at programme level. These goals are challenge-driven, as a
contribution to addressing a specific societal challenge. CCAFS aims to reduce
rural poverty, increase food security, improve health and nutrition and make natural
resource management more sustainable. DARPA's remit is to fund and drive the
development of breakthrough technologies for the US military. Compared to
CCAFS, DARPA's objective is therefore more technology-oriented.
Programme level
Consistent with our expectations of challenge-driven programmes, CCAFS and
DARPA run their programmes taking into account the way they relate to
developments in the field for which the knowledge and solutions are intended. The
context within which DARPA operates is clearly defined: this agency develops
innovative technology for defence purposes within the US. DARPA therefore
maintains close contact with the US military so that it can match their needs and
capabilities.

The context to which CCAFS has to relate is more diffuse. The CCAFS programme
is part of CGIAR, a global research partnership, which depends on several donors
and operates in multiple countries. Under this umbrella, the CCAFS programme
itself aims to strengthen the links between different CGIAR research centres. Active
coordination between the umbrella organisation, the various centres and the
practitioners is therefore an important part of CCAFS's work. The theory of change
formulated by CCAFS at programme level helps to provide direction for the
implementation of the programme and its associated activities.

Unlike DARPA and CCAFS, UDI does not appear to give much thought to
programme-level coordination. Because the programme's goal has been formulated
in broad terms, without explicit stakeholders, it is not straightforward for the
programme management to coordinate with other parties.

All in all, we find that the two examples that are most strongly oriented towards a
specific societal challenge (CCAFS and DARPA) coordinate most actively at
programme level.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Research programmes with a mission 45
Project support
The programme-level objective is also reflected in the extent to which the various
programmes actively coordinate the programme with individual projects. CCAFS
and DARPA manage all the programmes and projects they fund in an interrelated
way. At this level too, the work they do is more in line with a challenge-driven theory
of change.

Both during the start of the programme and in its implementation, programme
management actively focuses on the coherence between different parts of the
programme, e.g. by pushing for knowledge integration or adapting the substantive
direction of the programme. At DARPA, the programme manager manages the
individual projects with a firm hand using quantitative indicators.

CCAFS closely monitors the progress of programmes using its theory of change at
programme level. It also has a dedicated learning platform to organise knowledge
synthesis. We do not know whether programme management also adapts individual
projects. What is also special about CCAFS is that it reserves a large portion of its
resources for interacting with stakeholders and for empowering next users who
have to put the new solutions into practice.

Again, the UDI programme is different. It only considers the relationship between
the programme and individual projects when selecting project proposals, which
allows for a wide variety of issues, as the programme addresses all of the United
Nations' sustainability goals. Similar to innovation- or knowledge-driven
programmes, programme management hardly manages at all during
implementation of the project.

Whereas the UDI programme consists of a series of projects, each of which
contributes separately to the programme's goals, CCAFS and DARPA also aim for
coherence among the projects. CCAFS and DARPA take interrelationships into
consideration when managing their projects. DARPA sometimes chooses
complementarity between projects and sometimes competing projects with the
same goal. CCAFS focuses on complementarity so that practical solutions are
created for as many regions of the world as possible. In the UDI programme, we
see coherence develop over time in a series of successive projects but no bridges
are built between individual projects.

In addition, the programmes give varying degrees of consideration to the
embedding of individual projects. This is hardly an issue at DARPA, where
alignment with DARPA's remit takes place at programme level. At CCAFS and UDI,
however, we do see a focus on the societal contribution of individual projects.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Research programmes with a mission 46
Furthermore, CCAFS actively develops the relationship between projects and the
societal challenge. Collaboration with local communities and knowledge integration
between science and practice are a matter of course within parent organisation
CGIAR. All projects are expected to base their work on these principles and CCAFS
sets aside a substantial budget to make this possible.

Because UDI's societal contribution is primarily through individual projects, it is
mainly developed at project level. To be eligible for funding, projects must
demonstrate they have the potential to be a real-world application, adopt an
interdisciplinary approach and draw up an intervention logic. The UDI programme
level seems to provide little support in this regard.
Summary
UDI: least challenge-driven
We see relatively few programme-level activities in the UDI programme. Probably
due to the rather general focus on the UN sustainable development goals, we see
little coordination between the programme and other programmes or developments
in the outside world. The UDI programme is primarily a collection of individual
projects that have little mutual coherence. The programme's societal contribution
mainly takes on form and content within the individual projects. However, little
support for this is provided by the programme. Programme management
coordinates projects on the basis of a broadly defined goal and rarely intervenes
except during the selection of project proposals. During implementation, the
programme maintains a primarily administrative relationship with the projects.
Consequently, this programme is only marginally in line with our expectations about
challenge-driven research programmes.

DARPA: Focus on technological development
At DARPA, the focus is on the programme level, where projects are coordinated
and accounted for with the main potential user of the programme's results, the US
military. Within the clearly defined frameworks of each programme's remit,
programme management is given a great deal of leeway to shape a programme
and select projects as it sees fit. Programme managers actively intervene to
monitor the theory of change. The projects within the programmes can evolve in a
protected environment. At project level, the focus is on technological development
and there is little interaction with the context of use.

CCAFS: most challenge-driven
Of the three programmes, CCAFS has the most typical challenge-driven objective,
which is to contribute to a global societal challenge through research and innovation
while also developing directly applicable insights within individual projects. This
translates into a comprehensive structure in which relationships are actively sought

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Research programmes with a mission 47
with potential and current stakeholders at both programme and project level. The
organisation (CGIAR), the programme (CCAFS), and the individual projects each
have their own theory of change. These theories of change are continuously
monitored and aligned with each other and their environment.

This comparison shows that each programme has different emphases based on its
purpose and positioning. It is worth noting that the more specific the objective of the
programme, the more active the programme management is, in terms of managing,
adapting and supporting projects within the programme. All in all, these examples
show that active programme management is needed if a challenge-driven approach
is adopted.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Research programmes with a mission 48
4 Implications for challenge-driven
research programmes
In this section we summarise our findings from the literature and the workshop and
from the three international cases and translate these findings into specific
suggestions for the practice of programming research aimed at addressing societal
challenges. We first highlight the two most important insights and then make
specific suggestions for putting a challenge-driven approach into practice in the
various phases of the programme cycle.
4.1 The essence of challenge-driven programming
Our analysis shows that challenge-driven innovation policy requires the adoption of
a new design and approach for research programmes. Overall, we see two
important differences between innovation-driven programmes and challenge-driven
programmes, which affect programme design, organisation and management.
Active programme management
Our analysis of three international cases has shown that challenge-driven research
programmes require active and decisive management to organise and monitor their
orientation towards societal challenges. Different interventions are needed in
different phases of the programme, e.g. bringing parties together, encouraging
knowledge exchange, monitoring and adjusting specific projects and integrating
results. This is different from innovation-driven programmes consisting of self-
contained project consortiums with their own agendas. In these programmes, the
level of attention shown by programme management declines sharply once the
projects begin.

We found a good example of active programme management in the DARPA case.
DARPA employs programme managers with expertise, authority and perseverance.
To play their role effectively, managers of challenge-driven programmes need a
strong affinity with the subject of the challenge in question. In addition, they must
possess the social skills needed to communicate a compelling vision and mobilise
the parties involved. Finally, they also need a formal mandate to intervene actively
when the dynamics of the programme or the social environment demand it.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Research programmes with a mission 49
Reflexivity
A challenge-driven programme must constantly reflect on the way it functions in
relation to a dynamic social environment. What adjustments, if any, are needed to
deliver the desired impact? The challenge-driven nature of the programme means
that it has to develop reflexivity to ensure that it finds and maintains a connection
with the societal context in which the envisaged system changes are to take place.

This societal context is constantly changing and is often characterised by diverse
and, to a greater or lesser extent, conflicting values and interests. What this means
for a challenge-driven programme is that it is not enough to set goals at the starting
line and wait until the finishing line is reached to determine whether these goals
have been achieved. Reflexivity means giving consideration throughout the
programme to whether both the activities and the goals of the programme are still
relevant. This requires constantly taking care to embed the programme in an
ongoing innovation and transition process, even after the programme ends.

At CGIAR/CCAFS, we see this concern for aligning with societal dynamics in their
focus on next users and scaling-up. There are cross-cutting learning paths on these
types of subjects that transcend individual projects. At DARPA, there are constant
interactions with the military to ensure that knowledge and technology become part
of its ongoing modernisation. DARPA sets intermediate goals that are monitored
and may prompt redirection of the programme and projects within it. In the UDI
programme, the phased approach to projects is a way to be flexible when
responding to change.
Reflection
Active programme management and reflexivity require time and money. These two
characteristics mean that challenge-driven programmes will incur significantly
higher overheads than traditional programmes, with the result that a smaller
proportion of total resources can be devoted to the primary process. It is therefore
important to properly monitor and evaluate how an active and focused mobilisation
of research is paying off in terms of better or faster contributions to addressing a
societal challenge.
4.2 Building blocks for challenge-driven programmes
What do these findings mean specifically in terms of designing and organising
challenge-driven research programmes? Based on the assumption that there is a
growing need for this type of research programme, in this section we provide
building blocks for programme managers and policymakers who would like to set up
a challenge-driven research programme. To provide an insight into the

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Research programmes with a mission 50
requirements, we use the programme model described by Flurina Schneider and
colleagues as the gold standard. This model consists of ten phases in a programme
cycle in which activities take place at both programme and project levels. Their
model (see Section 3.1 for a more detailed explanation) helps to show the kind of
innovations needed to put research programmes to work addressing a societal
challenge. Below we discuss each of the ten different phases of the model in turn.
In the process, we supplement the insights provided by Schneider and colleagues
with results from our own research.

We use the model to outline a number of specific possibilities for adopting a
challenge-driven approach to research programming. It is definitely not meant to be
some kind of recipe or checklist. The objective for challenge-driven research
programming is precisely to design appropriate approaches based on a well-
developed theory of change. The design, organisation and management of these
types of programmes have to be tailor-made to mobilise research for a challenge
effectively. For example, depending on the level of controversy surrounding a
challenge and the goals of the programme, in one programme it may be useful to
have as many parties as possible actively participate in projects (as in CCAFS),
while in another it may be more effective to give stakeholders a role in the
governance of the programme (such as DARPA).
39
1. Programme preparation
Work with stakeholders to develop a clear theory of change that can serve as the
basis for the research programme. It is important that the steps between
programme results (outputs), their use by target groups (outcomes) and the
ultimate impact on the societal challenge are well thought through. Complex
societal challenges involve so many uncertainties and unknowns that a first version
of the theory of change cannot yet be worked out in detail. During the course of the
programme, the theory of change will continue to be fleshed out and adapted in
interactions with the projects and intended users.

A challenge-driven theory of change does not start out from new technological or
scientific opportunities but a complex societal challenge. Therefore, make sure that
the focus is on those who are experiencing the problems and those who are
needed to address the problems. Often an integrated approach will be required for
which knowledge and expertise must be brought together from different sources.
Ideally, then, the theory of change should be drafted in consultation with both those

39 Previous research suggests several possible solutions for dealing with conflicting interests in a research
programme. A programme that focuses on a specific solution that is relatively uncontroversial may keep
substantive opposition out of the programme, but a programme that seeks a substantive breakthrough on a
controversial issue must bring the opposing voices into the conversation within the actual programme itself
(Hessels, L.K., de Jong, S.P.L., Brouwer, S., 2018. Collaboration between Heterogeneous Practitioners in
Sustainability Research: A Comparative Analysis of Three Transdisciplinary Programmes. Sustainability 10,
4760.).

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Research programmes with a mission 51
parties who have a good understanding of the issues and the changes needed and
those parties with an understanding of the possible solutions and the current state
of the art.

Design the program not as a one-time, stand-alone intervention, but as an
intermediate step in a broader and ongoing dynamic. Concrete design questions
that can help with this include:
• How can the programme be linked to other programmes that want to contribute
to addressing the challenge in question?
• How can the programme build on results from previous programmes?
• How can you ensure that the programme has a follow-up that uses results?
• What opportunities are available to develop the programme as part of an
overarching whole (portfolio of programmes)?

Also use the programme to (further) develop challenge-driven ecosystems for
research and innovation. A challenge-driven programme does not intend to mobilise
one-off consortiums but to contribute to sustainable and vital knowledge
ecosystems. Ensure that the ecosystem has sufficient diversity in terms of
participants and knowledge practices (as with CCAFS). In addition to researchers
and industry, users, private individuals and other stakeholders can be important co-
producers of knowledge and innovation.

Therefore, use a broad definition of knowledge, knowledge activities and research.
Where appropriate, give space to the input of practical knowledge, for cocreative
forms of knowledge production, for transdisciplinary research and for linking and
coordinating activities aimed at circulation, integration, aggregation and
implementation of existing and new knowledge.

Also use a broad interpretation of innovation. In this context, an innovation is only
successful if it becomes socially embedded and part of a system innovation. So
focus on non-technological aspects of innovation, such as revenue models,
arrangements for collaboration, regulation, behaviour and standardisation.
2. Proposal elaboration
Provide project developers with a clear picture of the (preliminary) theory of change
at programme level and ask them to position themselves within it with their own
nested theory of change for their own project.

Make project development an iterative phased process in which project goals and
approaches are gradually aligned with the programme's theory of change and vice
versa. In this way, combine top-down direction with bottom-up, concrete
implementation.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Research programmes with a mission 52

Ask project developers to involve relevant stakeholders in project development.
Stakeholders contribute (practical) knowledge and expertise. In addition, they are
important for anticipating the follow-up phase and using project results. If
necessary, approach relevant researchers and civil-society parties in a targeted
manner (see the DARPA example) to motivate them to develop a project proposal if
it follows from the theory of change that certain knowledge and expertise is
essential.
3. Interactions with applicants
Use an iterative and phased process to ensure that the project proposals fit well
into the programme's theory of change in terms of research questions and
approaches.

Provide programme managers with sufficient capabilities and skills to engage in a
conversation about refining the research question or approach, or about the
composition of a project consortium (following DARPA's lead).

Find a balance between competition and collaboration. In some cases, it may make
sense to combine different project ideas into a joint project proposal by creating a
broader consortium.
4. Project selection
Select projects based on the persuasiveness of the (nested) theory of change and
how it is translated into a project plan.

Arrange selection in multiple rounds to ensure a good portfolio of projects. Provide
feedback after each round to give project developers the opportunity to refine their
proposal and better position it in the programme's theory of change.

Use a wide range of knowledge and expertise during the selection process. Ensure
that there is sufficient expertise in interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research
and in the integration and implementation of knowledge into innovations in practice.

Scientific quality is obviously important, but excellence need not be a decisive
criterion. Sometimes combining or recombining existing knowledge is more
important than producing groundbreaking knowledge.

Evaluate project proposals not only on their own merits, but also based on their
position in the portfolio and on how they build on previous programmes and
projects. The example of the UDI programme shows how projects can build on
each other.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Research programmes with a mission 53
5. Research activities
Ensure that projects sufficiently facilitate interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary
research and cocreation with users or local communities, e.g. in living labs or field
labs.

As well as focusing on developing new knowledge, ensure that there is a focus on
other (connecting) activities. Examples include:
• Combining, recombining, integrating and implementing knowledge.
• Establishing and maintaining connections with next users and anticipating
upscaling once the programme has ended.
• Establishing and maintaining connections with other projects in the programme
to work on integrating knowledge and partial solutions.

Ensure the project is appropriately staffed for the type of activities needed. Some
activities may require greater seniority or flexibility than is possible within four-year
PhD tracks.

Require programme management to ensure that project consortiums receive
support where appropriate when designing and organising activities that are not yet
mainstream in science, such as co-creation with users or local communities or
anticipating upscaling. The CCAFS example illustrates the added value of this
action.
6. Joint agenda-setting
Once the projects and consortiums have been selected after several iterations, this
is followed by the phase where all those involved at portfolio level start looking at
how the projects can be even better aligned with each other and with the
programme. Programme management has a directing role in this process.

To make the mutual exchange and integration of knowledge more effective, it may
be necessary to change the way the research question or methods are developed,
e.g. by systematically using regional diversity in research locations (as per CCAFS),
by involving certain stakeholders in multiple projects, by using the same
frameworks or by synchronising certain activities. Integration of knowledge at
programme level is only possible if there are shared frameworks and common goals
(as illustrated by DARPA).

Organise activities and meetings to ensure that all participants feel part of a larger,
common programme and are able to communicate with each other. It is important
to have all participants commit to a shared theory of change and agenda.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Research programmes with a mission 54
7. Networking and integration
It is an important task for programme management to ensure that there is a
programmatic approach to the exchange of knowledge and experiences between
projects during the lifetime of the programme. Therefore, ensure that there is a part
of the programme in which the integration of knowledge - and thus the targeted
contribution to system innovation - is the primary, shared goal.

Ensure that the role of integrator of knowledge and partial solutions is well provided
with people and organisations with appropriate skills, powers and authority. The
process of sharing and aggregating knowledge from different projects does not
happen automatically.
8. Interaction with participating projects
Ensure that programme managers remain actively involved in the projects
throughout the lifetime of the programme. This is necessary for several reasons:
• To assist projects in the design and use of unconventional research methods,
such as the use of living labs. For example, courses or workshops can be
organised through the programme to develop new skills.
• Along the way, project participants will encounter unexpected situations and
problems for which solutions have to be found. They can agree to make interim
adjustments to the original project plan if necessary.
• To monitor progress and make adjustments to the original project plan if
necessary - or even to end a project early if it can no longer be expected to
contribute to programme goals (see DARPA). This requires the establishment
of a clear monitoring and evaluation framework based on the programme's
theory of change.
• To assist projects in organising activities aimed at knowledge sharing and
knowledge integration, e.g. networking activities or making knowledge
accessible and shareable.
• To assist projects in developing and implementing their communications
strategy.
9. External communication and implementation
Making and maintaining connections with organisations and communities that will
have to start using the knowledge from the projects and the programme to develop
innovative solutions to complex problems is a key factor in making the programme
a success. It is therefore important to have a programme-level communications and
liaison strategy. Sufficient funds also have to be budgeted for this purpose.

Organise communication as two-way traffic to benefit from the input of different
target groups. Communication involves more than just disseminating knowledge
products. It is also about shared learning about what is feasible, permissible and

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Research programmes with a mission 55
desirable and ensuring that knowledge ends up being used in practice and policy.
Therefore, make sure that communication happens throughout the lifetime of the
programme.
10. Programme conclusion and evaluation
Evaluation is an integral part of challenge-driven programme management. The
theory of change provides the basis for considering what the desired effects and
impact will be before the programme begins. The theory of change is the basis for
monitoring the progress of the projects and their interrelationships during the period
concerned. On completion, it is the basis for evaluating whether the intended
project and programme goals have been achieved. Of course, immediately after a
programme ends, it is too early to judge whether the intended impact will be
achieved. What can be done, however, is to evaluate whether the follow-up process
has been effectively set in motion, i.e. by involving organisations and communities
in the projects and programme in a timely manner. In addition, it is possible to
evaluate whether it succeeded in mobilising a diverse ecosystem for research that
will continue to benefit challenge-driven research after the programme ends.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Research programmes with a mission 56
5 Concluding remarks on roles of
government
This report aims to contribute to the development of the new genre of challenge-
driven innovation policy. The report focuses on research programming. In this
concluding section, we consider what kind of government involvement and
intervention is needed for this type of research programme to actually contribute to
the system changes needed to tackle societal challenges. Provided they are
carefully and appropriately organised, challenge-driven research programmes can
become a powerful tool for actively mobilising research and innovation in a targeted
way to address societal challenges. But the coordination and cocreation required
also makes them costly. Investing in challenge-driven programmes only makes
sense if government also invests in the capacities that programme managers need
to actively manage such programmes and if it invests in its own capacity to
translate their results into policy and implementation.
Roles of government
A typical feature of challenge-driven research programmes is that government itself
is also part of the underlying theory of change - often in different ways. This is also
evident from the food transition case study that we discussed in the interlude
between Sections 2 and 3.

Creating the right conditions
First, government is involved in creating the right conditions that will enable a
programme to thrive. They include clear legal frameworks, a policy culture open to
knowledge and innovation, good infrastructure and facilities for research and
knowledge exchange, and political legitimacy to experiment with radical solutions.

Democratic legitimacy
Second, government must ensure democratic legitimacy. Challenge-driven
programmes are by definition politically charged because of their objectives with
regard to societal change. Government cannot therefore afford to take a hands-off
approach, but must actively continue to put the public interest first. This means that
government also has a duty to ensure that challenge-driven programmes contribute
to an equitable and democratically legitimised transition process.

Mobilising resources
Third, government has an important part to play in terms of providing the
programme with adequate funding and other resources. Government is not only a

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Research programmes with a mission 57
major funder of research, it is also a provider of knowledge and expertise.
Government employs professionals who themselves can contribute a great deal of
practical knowledge that may be relevant to tackling societal challenges.

Participating in projects
Fourth, policymakers and public sector professionals can participate in specific
activities within the projects. For example, civil servants - in addition to employees
of companies or non-profit organisations - can actively participate in the research as
an authority or professional with expert knowledge. This is especially true when the
research is intended to develop new arrangements for policy or governance.

Encouraging knowledge use
Fifth, government has a role in ensuring that the results of the programme will be
used and actually lead to changes in policy and practice. Government often has a
dual role in this regard. On the one hand, government itself is a knowledge user
who translates knowledge into new policies. On the other hand, government can
take steps to encourage others to use the knowledge and innovative solutions. For
example, as a stimulator of knowledge use, government can create rules that phase
out old, unsustainable solutions. Government can also set standards that enforce
innovative solutions or act as a launching customer itself.
40

In short, challenge-driven research programmes depend for their success (social
impact) on an active and repeated involvement and direction from policy. This is
where challenge-driven research programmes differ from conventional innovation-
driven research programmes used to stimulate technology development or the
innovation capacity of industry. In that kind of programme, government can assume
a more facilitating and detached role.
Programme cycle
In the preparatory phase of the programme cycle, this involvement by policymakers
takes the form of a contribution to the development of the theory of change.
Officials in relevant ministries and perhaps also the implementing bodies in the
public sector or decentralised governments should actively participate in the design
of the underlying theory of change. This is necessary for two reasons: safeguarding
public values and making the division of roles explicit.

Safeguarding public values
Active participation by policymakers is needed first of all to ensure that the research
programme is guided by public values. Depending on the degree of public and

40 For a discussion of the roles of government in addressing societal challenges, see Borrás, S., Edler, J., 2020.
The roles of the state in the governance of socio-technical systems’ transformation. Research Policy 49,
103971.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Research programmes with a mission 58
political consensus on the societal challenge and the transition path to be followed,
a research programme can be used as part of a search process to gain more clarity
on which transition paths are feasible and desirable or to help create a transition
path which has already been chosen. In both cases, the active involvement of
policymakers is important, e.g. to ensure that the partial interests of researchers
(scientific impact) and industry (competitive advantage) do not dominate
programme design. Or that parties with vested interests will not use the research to
thwart or delay overly radical changes, a risk we identified in our interlude on the
food transition.

It helps when there is a widely supported social agreement on the course of action
to be taken to tackle a challenge, as in the case of the Climate Agreement or when
the UN sustainable development goals can be translated into specific goals to
which a programme is to contribute. Creating a sense of direction cannot be left to
the programme itself.

Making the division of roles explicit
Second, proper government involvement in the creation of a theory of change is
necessary to make the division of roles within it explicit. This is particularly true with
respect to the roles that the government itself should play in order to achieve social
impact with the programme. Unlike in the case of innovation-driven research
programmes, government itself is often an indispensable part of the theory of
change in several ways (see above).

Taking an active part in the drafting of the programme theory itself can ensure
greater awareness and responsibility in policy because it is clear from the outset
what government input and involvement is needed before, during and after the
programme. Particularly when the government itself is an intended user of the
programme results, it is important to ensure that the programme is well aligned with
policy practice.

In brief
In the preparatory phase of a challenge-driven research programme, government
cannot afford to take a hands-off approach. It is jointly responsible for ensuring that
the programme is well aligned with developments in policy and the dynamics of
society. In fact, it must ensure that the program's theory of change is well
embedded in the vision and strategy in its own policy.

In addition, it is important for the government, as the client and funder of the
programme, to ensure that programme management has sufficient capabilities and
skills to actively manage the programme, as described in the previous section. Also

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Research programmes with a mission 59
the reflexivity that is needed according to our analysis requires adequate resources
and skills.

Investing in suitable capacities and expertise, incidentally, also applies to all the
roles government has to play to ensure that challenge-driven research programmes
have an impact. Investing in this type of programme only makes sense if
government also invests in the capacities that programme managers need to
actively manage a programme and if it invests in its own capacity to translate its
results into policy and implementation.

During the lifetime of a programme, government should in particular assume the
roles of participant in projects and stimulator of knowledge use. These roles ensure
that the programme produces relevant results and anticipates the follow-up phase
in which these results must begin to impact on policy and practice. Here
government should also cooperate in the reflexivity needed to monitor the
relevance of the programme to the challenge it is intended to help address.

Even after the programme ends, there is a crucial role for government, particularly
as a stimulator of knowledge use as new knowledge does not automatically lead to
new (sustainable) behaviour or to successful innovations, especially when vested
interests are at stake. It is precisely in the translation of outputs into outcomes that
government can play a decisive role by introducing targeted measures, such as
updated legislation, market incentives or information campaigns.

Challenge-driven research programmes are part of a social search and change
process. In this sense, they constitute only a temporary intervention in a larger
movement. They will only flourish when used in conjunction with and as part of a
continuous development process. It is up to government as the funder and
commissioner of these types of programmes to monitor continuity and also to
ensure that they contribute to a just and democratically legitimised process of social
change.

By writing this report, the Rathenau Instituut wanted to underline the potential of
challenge-driven research programmes. In the cases we examined we found
appealing routines and practices that fit into a repertoire for developing and
managing research programmes in a challenge-driven way. It is only a small step in
building a rich arsenal of options for action for a new genre of innovation policy. It is
now important to allow scope for experimentation with new forms of challenge-
driven research programming. This will help funders, implementers and participants
learn about what approaches work best for different societal challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Research programmes with a mission 60
6 Bibliography
Borrás, S., Edler, J., 2020. The roles of the state in the governance of socio-
technical systems’ transformation. Research Policy 49, 103971.

Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P., Norberg, J., 2005. Adaptive governance of social-
ecological systems. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 30, 441-473.

Frenken, K., Hekkert, M.P., 2017. Innovatiebeleid in tijden van maatschappelijke
uitdagingen, Sturen in een verweven dynamiek. Ministerie van Economische
Zaken.

Guston, D.H., 2014. Understanding ‘anticipatory governance’. Social Studies of
Science 44, 218-242.

Hessels, L.K., de Jong, S.P.L., Brouwer, S., 2018. Collaboration between
Heterogeneous Practitioners in Sustainability Research: A Comparative Analysis of
Three Transdisciplinary Programmes. Sustainability 10, 4760.

Janssen, M., Hekkert, M., Frenken, K., 2020. Missiegedreven innovatiebeleid: een
nieuw perspectief op vernieuwing en vergroening Wetenschappelijk Bureau
GroenLinks, Utrecht.

Kuhlmann, S., Rip, A., 2018. Next-generation innovation policy and grand
challenges. Science and Public Policy 45, 448-454.

Kuhlmann, S., Stegmaier, P., Konrad, K., 2019. The tentative governance of
emerging science and technology—A conceptual introduction. Research Policy 48,
1091-1097.

Larrue, P., 2021. The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation
policies.

Mazzucato, M., 2015. The entrepreneurial state: Debunking public vs. private sector
myths. Anthem Press.

Mazzucato, M., 2018. Mission-oriented research & innovation in the European
Union. Brussels: European Commission.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Research programmes with a mission 61
OECD, 2015. Innovation, Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability in the
Netherlands.

OECD, 2020. Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research.
OECD, Paris.

Rathenau Instituut, 2019. Voorbereid op de praktijk: anticiperen op de
maatschappelijke inbedding van innovatie bij onderzoeks- & ontwikkelprogramma's.
Rathenau Instituut, The Hague.

Rathenau Instituut, 2020a. De belofte van opgavegericht innovatiebeleid: Een
analyse van Europees innovatiebeleid voor de Green Deal en kunstmatige
intelligentie. Rathenau Instituut, The Hague.

Rathenau Instituut, 2020b. European research and innovation in a new geopolitical
arena. Rathenau Instituut, The Hague.

Rathenau Instituut, 2020c. Maak werk van opgavegericht innovatiebeleid (Message
to the Dutch Parliament). Rathenau Instituut, The Hague.

Schneider, F., Buser, T., Keller, R., Tribaldos, T., Rist, S., 2019. Research funding
programmes aiming for societal transformations: ten key stages. Science and
Public Policy 46, 463-478.

Schot, J., Steinmueller, W.E., 2018. Three frames for innovation policy: R&D,
systems of innovation and transformative change. Research Policy 47, 1554-1567.

TNO, 2018. The State of Dutch Innovation 2018: Missions and ‘new’ mission-driven
policy.

Von Schomberg, R., 2013. A vision of responsible innovation, in: Owen, R., Heintz,
M., Bessant, J. (Eds.), Responsible Innovation. John Wiley, London.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Research programmes with a mission 62
Appendix 1: Methodology
In Section 3 of this report, we analysed three international cases. These cases give
an impression of the working methods of three programmes that try to put into
practice characteristics of a challenge-driven approach, as outlined in Section 2. As
such, the cases are primarily used for illustration and inspiration.

The case descriptions were produced on the basis of desk research and, for
VINNOVA, on the basis of a number of additional interviews. The sources we
consulted for the various cases are listed below.
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
For the case description of DARPA, we primarily relied on two sources:
1. Information provided by DARPA itself via the web page www.darpa.mil.
2. Several chapters from the book 'William B. Bonvillian, Richard Van Atta, and
Patrick Windham (eds.) (2019). The DARPA Model for Transformative
Technologies Perspectives on the U.S.: Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency. Cambridge, UK: Open Book Publishers', viz
a. Michael J. Piore, Phech Colatat and Elisabeth Beck Reynolds (2019)
“NSF and DARPA as Models for Research Funding: An Institutional
Analysis”;
b. Jinendra Ranka (2019) “DARPA - Enabling Technological Innovation”;
c. Riochard Van Atta (2019) “Fifty Years of Innovation and Discovery”;
d. Larry Jackel (2019) “Program Management at DARPA: A Personal
Perspective”.

To complement this, we consulted the following scientific articles:
• Pierre Azoulay, Erica Fuchs, Anna P. Goldstein, and Michael Kearney (2019)
“Funding Breakthrough Research: Promises and Challenges of the “ARPA
Model”” Innovation Policy and the Economy (19), pp 69-96.
• Erica R. Fuchs (2009) “Cloning DARPA successfully” in Issues in Science and
Technology XXVI (1) fall 2009.
Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security Program (CCAFS) of the
Global Research Partnership CGIAR

The CGIAR case description is mainly based on primary information provided by
CGIAR about the organisation and the CCAFS programme.

We used the following sources for this purpose:

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Research programmes with a mission 63
• CCAFS (2020) CCAFS 2019 Annual report.
• Gonsalves J, Baguilat I, Bantayan R, Bernardo EB, Sebastian L. (2020) Eight
guide steps for setting up a Climate-Smart Village: A trainer's guide. Cavite,
Philippines: International Institute of Rural Reconstruction.
• CGIAR (2016) CCAFS Phase II Proposal 2017-2022 Summary.
• CGIAR (2016) Agreement establishing the CGIAR System Organization as an
International Organization.
• CGIAR (2011) The CGIAR at 40 and Beyond Impacts that Matter for the Poor
and the Planet.
• CGIAR (2011) Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food
Security (CCAFS). Program Plan. Copenhagen, Denmark.
• Philip Thornton (2011) Future Selection of Additional CCAFS Target Regions.
• CCAFS (2009) Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security. A CGIAR
Challenge Program. The Alliance of the CGIAR Centers and ESSP, Rome and
Paris.
Challenge-driven innovation programme (programmet Utmaningsdriven
innovation, UDI ) of VINNOVA, the Swedish innovation agency

The UDI case description is based on a comprehensive case description prepared
by Technopolis Group in October 2020 on behalf of the Rathenau Instituut.
Technopolis Group's report is based on document study and three interviews.

The following sources were used for the description:
• Vinnova's annual accounts.
• Vinnova's publications on UDI.
• The annual government contracts received by Vinnova.
• The reports of two external evaluations of UDI conducted by Ramboll.
• Wikipedia for some historical data.
• Vinnova's webpage.
• Information on legislative texts, from various ministries.

Interviews were conducted with:
• Jens von Axelson, UDI manager at Vinnova.
• Charlotte Brogren, director general of Vinnova (2009-2017).
• Maria Jonsson, independent expert and reviewer of UDI funding applications.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Research programmes with a mission 64
© Rathenau Instituut 2022
This work or parts of it may be reproduced and/or published for creative,
personal or educational purposes, provided that no copies are made or used for
commercial objectives, and subject to the condition that copies always give the
full attribution above. In all other cases, no part of this publication may be
reproduced and/or published by means of print, photocopy or by any other
medium without prior written consent.
Open Access
The Rathenau Instituut has an Open Access policy. Its reports, background
studies, research articles and software are all open access publications.
Research data are made available pursuant to statutory provisions and ethical
research standards concerning the rights of third parties, privacy and copyright.
Contact details
Anna van Saksenlaan 51
Postbus 95366
NL-2509 CJ The Hague The Netherlands
+31 (0)70-342 15 42
info@rathenau.nl
www.rathenau.nl

Rathenau Instituut Board
Drs. Maria Henneman - voorzitter
Prof. dr. Noelle Aarts
Drs. Felix Cohen
Dr. Laurence Guérin
Dr. Janneke Hoekstra MSc
Prof. mr. dr. Erwin Muller
Drs. Rajash Rawal
Prof. dr. ir. Peter-Paul Verbeek
Dr. ir. Melanie Peters † - secretaris

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
The Rathenau Instituut supports the formation of public and political opinion on
socially relevant aspects of science and technology. It conducts research on this
subject and organises debates on science, innovation, and new technology.
