
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
WWW.RATHENAU.NL • 2018
Regional innovation
Jos van den Broek, Timo Maas, Jasper Deuten
In this publication the Rathenau Instituut examines to what extent
and in what manner research and innovation are becoming more
regional and urban in the Netherlands, with its network of small
and medium-sized cities.
Analysing the available data at urban and regional levels gives
us a better understanding of regional hotspots of innovation.
Such hotspots often have close ties with other cities and regions.
That means that innovation in the Netherlands is much more
broadly dispersed across regions than a focus on cities would
suggest.
1 Introduction
The region is hot. While previous Dutch governments had already focused
on devolving tasks to local and regional authorities, the third Rutte
government has made a point of stressing the role of the region by
promoting ‘Region Deals’ and joint investment by national and regional
government.
Regions also play an increasingly prominent role in research and
innovation policy. For example, the Province of Limburg is funding a
research institute in Geleen, and the Brainport public -private partnership in
the Province of Noord-Brabant is the driver behind a regional innovation
ecosystem.
Cities and metropolitan areas worldwide are increasingly positioning
themselves as innovation drivers. They claim that their liveliness and
diversity attract growing concentrations of creativity, entrepreneurship and
innovation (Florida, Adler, & Mellander, 2017).
Much of the interest in urban innovation capacity is based on research
conducted in the United States and the United Kingdom (Glaeser, 2011;
Katz & Bradley, 2013). However, Dutch and European policymakers are
also taking a growing interest in the city as a platform for or driver of
innovation, as the Dutch and EU Urban Agendas demonstrate. The
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) also
identifies a growing importance of cities, calling the 21st century ‘The
Metropolitan Century’ (OECD, 2015a).
Content
1 Introduction 1
2 Dutch regions in Europe 2
3 Differences between Dutch regions in
4
10
innovation capacity
4 Sector differences
5 Final remarks 14
The Rathenau Instituut supports the
formation of public and political opinion
on socially relevant aspects of science
and technology. It conducts research
on this subject and organises debates
on science and new technology.
Facts & Figures

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 Regional innovation
The question, however, is to what extent these claims and expectations also hold true for the Netherlands,
which has a dense network of small and medium -sized cities situated within relatively short distances of
one another. Is innov ation also being concentrated in large cities here? And does innovation capacity
differ from one Dutch city and region to the next? These are important questions, in view of policymakers’
growing interest in the region and the shifting responsibilities of national, regional and local government,
and given the question of whether regional differences in innovation capacity require region -specific
policy.
The data that we have available mainly cover the regional distribution of innovation, with data on urban
areas being limited. This leads us to the following findings:
1. Innovation is broadly distributed over the Netherlands. We find a concentration of innovation
activity in thirty municipalities. Moreover, about half of all innova tive enterprises are located
outside these hotspots.
2. Dutch regions all perform well in EU benchmarks, with several ranked at the top. The score for the
best-performing region, Utrecht, 1 is a third higher than the EU average, while the score for the
worst-performing region, Friesland, is only 5% lower than the EU average.
3. When we zoom in on the nine Dutch top sectors, we see regional hotspots of innovation
within the sectors. These are not isolated islands, however; they have strong ties with
other Dutch regions that extend beyond their provincial borders:
- Research and innovation in High Tech Systems & Materials is concentrated in the
rectangle formed by the cities of Amsterdam, Enschede, Eindhoven and Delft.
- The smaller triangle formed by Leiden, Utrecht and Amsterdam is important for Life
Sciences & Health .
- Wageningen is a centre of exp ertise for another top sector, Horticulture & Starting
Materials, with links to Enkhuizen and the Westland region.
- Much of the Agro & Food sector is concentrated around Wageningen as well, but it
is also fairly broadly dispersed across the entire country.
4. We also note striking differences between regions:
- The ratio between public and private investment in research and development (R&D). 2
Private investment far outstrips pu blic investment in R&D in the provinces of Noord -
Brabant and Limburg, whereas the opposite is true in the province of Groningen. The
province with the largest R&D investment is Zuid -Holland.
- Both startups and scale-ups tend to cluster in Amsterdam and environs, Rotterdam and
Utrecht. These enterprises clearly prefer being located in a strong urban area. We see
innovative enterprises all across the Netherlands, but the majority are situated in only
thirty municipalities.
- Cities, especially those wit h universities, have large working populations that have
completed tertiary education, an important prerequisite for innovation and a location
incentive for enterprises. Nevertheless, tertiary school graduates can be found all
across the Netherlands.
2 Dutch regions in Europe
The European Union plays an increasingly important role in stimulating research and innovation. 3 In
recent years, the EU’s regional policy has come to focus more and more on the role of regional and local
authorities in boosting the Union’s innovation capacity.
1 Utrecht’s strong position can be explained by the large percentage of people who have completed tertiary education,
the large number of scientific and public-private co-publications, and the considerable amount in public funding that it
spends on R&D.
2 R&D is usually defined as creative work undertaken on a systematic basis in order to increase the stock of knowledge and
the use of this knowledge to devise new applications (OECD 2015b).
3 See also ‘De Nederlandse wetenschap in de European Research Area’ by the Rathenau Instituut (2016);
https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/nieuws/nederlandse-wetenschap-steeds-meer-europees.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
In order to qualify for funding from the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), regions must
develop research and innovation strategies for ‘smart specialisation’. That means that Dutch regions must
compete with other EU regions on research and innovation.
The question we answer in this section is: to what extent do the EU regions differ in terms of innovation
performance and how are Dutch regions positioned in that regard? The Regional Innovation Scoreboard
(RIS) offers useful indicators that can help us answer this question. It divides the EU’s regions into four
groups: Innovation Leaders, Strong Innovators, Moderate Innovators, and Modest Innovators. 4
Figure 1 shows that there are considerable differences in regional innovation within the EU. Most of
the Moderate and Modest Innovators are located in southern and eastern Europe. Innovation
Leaders and Strong Innovators are located exclusively in western and central Europe.
Figure 1 Regional Innovation Scoreboard 2017
Source: European Commission, 2017 Rathenau Instituut
4 The scoreboard is based on 18 indicators grouped into four main types (Framework Conditions, Investments, Innovation
Activities, and Impacts). Scores on each indicator are benchmarked against the EU average, making it possible to assess
whether a region is an Innovation Leader, a Strong Innovator, a Moderate Innovator, or a Modest Innovator. For a detailed
description of the methodology and the full report, see http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/innovation/facts-figures/regional_nl.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 Regional innovation
Dutch regions (i.e. the provinces) are relatively successful within the context of the EU. The worst-
performing Dutch region, the province of Friesland, still has a regional innovation index score of 95% of
the EU average and qualifies as a Strong Innovator (it should be noted, however, that even the weakest
countries are classified as ‘Modest’ Innovators). Seven Dutch regions are among the top -scoring
European regions and are Innovation Leaders, with scores ranging from 24% to 36.6% above the EU
average. Utrecht has the highest score, followed by Noord -Brabant. While the classification into
performance groups may suggest otherwise, the differences between the Dutch provinces are
nevertheless considerable. Utrecht’s score, for example, is 40 percentage points higher than Friesland’s.
Table 1 How the Dutch provinces score on the Regional Innovation Scoreboard
Regional Innovation Index Performance group
Score
compared to
other Dutch
provinces
Score
compared to
other EU
regions
Utrecht 107.5 136.6 Innovation Leader
Noord-Brabant 102.5 130.3 Innovation Leader
Noord-Holland 100.4 127.5 Innovation Leader
Zuid-Holland 100.2 127.3 Innovation Leader −
Gelderland 99.2 126.1 Innovation Leader −
Groningen 98.4 125 Innovation Leader −
Limburg 97.6 124 Innovation Leader −
Overijssel 92.9 118 Strong Innovator +
Flevoland 86.2 109.6 Strong Innovator
Drenthe 83.5 106.2 Strong Innovator
Zeeland 81.5 103.6 Strong Innovator
Friesland 74.8 95 Strong Innovator
Source: European Commission. 2017
3 Differences between Dutch regions in innovation capacity
In the previous section, we considered the performance of Dutch regions within the EU and looked
briefly at differences in innovation capacity. In this section, we address those differences at greater
length. We start by considering the regional distribution of R&D expenditure in the private an d public
sectors. We then analyse the regional distribution of innovative enterprises, startups and scale-ups.
Finally, we look at the presence of tertiary school graduates, as this is an important prerequisite for
innovation.
3.1 R&D expenditure
R&D expenditure is an important indicator of technological innovation and innovation activity. The amount
and intensity of R&D expenditure are often used as indicators of a national or regional capacity for
innovation. One of the Dutch government’s official po licy objectives, for example, is to increase total R&D
expenditure to 2.5% of the country’s GDP by 2020, with 1.5% to be generated by the private sector.
Figure 2 shows that private R&D expenditure varies considerably between COROP regions, the forty
Dutch regions used for regional research purposes since the 1970s. R&D expenditure by private
enterprises tends to be concentrated around Amsterdam and Eindhoven, followed by Utrecht.
Rotterdam, Enschede, Maastricht and Den Bosch -Oss trail by some distance. A further notable point is
that private spending on R&D is limited in the three northernmost provinces of Groningen, Friesland
and Drenthe.5
5 If we relate private R&D expenditure to regional domestic product, then the most R&D-intensive provinces are Noord-
Brabant (2.29%), Limburg (1.32%) and Overijssel (1.15%). The provinces of Noord-Holland (0.82%) and Utrecht (0.59%) are
considerably less R&D-intensive (European Commission, 2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Figure 2 R&D expenditure by enterprises by COROP region in 2015
Source: Statistics Netherlands. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut. Rathenau Instituut
Figure 3 shows how public R&D expenditure is distributed between the provinces. 6 This refers to
spending on R&D by research universities, university hospitals (UMCs), universities of applied sciences
and public knowledge organisations such as the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research
(TNO). Most of this expenditure is concentrated in the province of Zuid-Holland, followed more distantly
by Noord-Holland, Utrecht and Gelderland. Public spending on R&D is lowest in the four provinces that do
not have a university.
In Figure 4, we combine public and private R&D expenditure. Zuid -Holland houses the largest amoun t of
R&D expenditure, followed by Noord -Brabant and Noord -Holland. Gelderland and Utrecht follow at some
remove. There are notable differences in the ratio between public and private expenditure. The pattern
displayed by the province of Noord -Brabant is atypical, with 5.7 times as much private as public
expenditure. Private -sector spending on R&D also surpasses public spending by a considerable margin in
Limburg and Overijssel. The opposite is true in the provinces of Utrecht and Groningen: there, publi c
spending on R&D outstrips private spending.
6 Unfortunately, there are no reliable figures on public R&D expenditure at COROP level.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 Regional innovation
Figure 3 Public R&D expenditure by province in 2015
Source: Statistics Netherlands. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut. Rathenau Instituut
Figure 4 Public and private R&D expenditure by province (in millions of euros) in 2015
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
Public R&D expenditure Private R&D expenditure
Source: Statistics Netherlands. Adapted by the Rathenau
Instituut.
 Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
3.2 Innovative enterprises
The Community Innovation Survey (CIS) that Statistics Netherlands organises every other year contains
detailed information about the innovation efforts of enterprises. The CIS surveys innovation in the broad
sense of the word. In addition to product and process innovation, it also includes organisational and
marketing innovation. In other words, enterprises regarded as innovative in the CIS are not necessarily
R&D-intensive.
The distribution of innovative enterprises shown in Figure 5 is roughly comparable to the distribution of
private R&D expenditure in Figure 2. The innovative enterprises indicator is more nuanced, however, in
part because the CIS data are available at municipal instead of COROP level (for example for R&D
expenditure), but also because the indicator looks at innovation in the broad sense and no t only at R&D.
That is why, for example, the city of Groningen shows up as a relatively strong region for innovation in
Figure 5, whereas it did not feature at all in Figure 2.
Figure 5 Number of innovative enterprises by municipality in 2014
Source: Statistics Netherlands. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut. Rathenau Instituut
Figure 2 mainly revealed the differences between COROP regions; Figure 5 shows us that innovative
enterprises also tend to concentrate within these regions. Half of all innovative enterprises are located in
one of the thirty municipalities 7 with the most innovative enterprises. Amsterdam, Rotterdam,
Haarlemmermeer (Hoofddorp and Sch iphol) and Utrecht stand head and shoulders above the rest when it
comes to number of innovative enterprises within their boundaries; in total, they account for more than
15% of all innovative enterprises in the Netherlands. Next is a group of 16 municipal ities with 200 to 500
innovative enterprises, followed by a group of more than forty municipalities with 100 to 200 innovative
enterprises.
7 19% of the municipalities with adequate data

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 Regional innovation
Innovative enterprises are clearly less prevalent in the three northernmost provinces (with the exception
of the city of Groningen), Zeeland, and large areas of Overijssel and Limburg. The majority of
municipalities have fewer than 100 innovative enterprises within their borders, bu t together these
enterprises account for approximately half of the total number of innovative enterprises in the
Netherlands.
Innovative enterprises are therefore concentrated in the larger cities, followed by a large group of
municipalities. However, the re are also many innovative enterprises located outside these municipalities
and dispersed throughout the Netherlands.
3.3 Startups
Startups are young enterprises that have launched themselves in the market with an innovative product
or service. Their locations can serve as an indicator for the regional distribution of innovation. We look
specifically at startups with growth and upscaling aspirations, young enterprises that have based their
product or service on a technological in novation and are attempting to acquire venture capital through
various investment channels. We use the website dutchstartupdatabase.com, which provides access to a
large number of Dutch startups. The public-private partnership Star tUp Delta makes use of this database,
for example. Although it is one of the more reliable databases, we remain cautious in our interpretation of
the data. The database itself is not exhaustive; some of the startups listed there no longer exist, an d new
ones will have emerged since it was compiled. The database lists almost 1000 startups with known
locations. The vast majority of these (75%) are located in large cities (mainly city centres). Most can be
found in Amsterdam, followed by Utrech t and Rotterdam. Amsterdam dominates as a favoured startup
location. Startups thus tend to be more highly concentrated than other enterprises. This indicator
provides information about the regional distribution of innovation above and beyon d the data on private
R&D expenditure and number of innovative enterprises.
Figure 6 Number of startups in Dutch cities, mid-2017
Source: dutchstartupdatabase.com. Adapted by the Rathenau Institute. Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
3.4 Scale-ups
In addition to startups, scale-ups are another indicator for innovation. Scale -ups are defined as
enterprises that have experienced a 20% or more increase in revenue and/or number of employees over
a three-year period. They must have a minimum of ten employees or a minimum of 5 million euros in
revenue at the start of that period. To determine where these fast -growing enterprises are located, we
use the Scale-Up Dashboard developed by the Erasmus Centre for Entrepreneurship.
As in the case of startups, we see that scale -ups are concentrated mainly in more urban areas.
Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Utrecht once again head the list, but there are also many scale -ups in
Eindhoven and The Hague. The most notable municipality on our map is Haarlemmermeer, which ties
with Utrecht in having the third largest number of scale -ups after Amsterdam and Rotterdam. These
scale-ups are concentrated around Schiphol Airport, an area that Statistics Netherlands categorises as a
highly urbanised area bas ed on the density of individual addresses ( in this case particularly business
addresses).
Figure 7 Number of scale-ups in the Netherlands in 2016
Source: Prof J. Jansen. Scale-Up Dashboard 2016. Erasmus Centre for
Entrepreneurship. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut.
Rathenau Instituut
3.5 Percentage of tertiary school graduates in the labour force
A skilled workforce is an important prerequisite for research and innovation. It is crucial to technological
innovation and to the ability to organise innovation. 8 The importance of a good education applies across
all educational levels and study programmes. The indicator that we use to identify approximately where
‘human capital’ is located is Percentage of labour force (15 -74 years) with comp leted tertiary education
(higher professional/academic) . One reason for using this indicator is that much is expected of tertiary
school graduates when it comes to research and innovation. They play an important role in generating
new ideas, in turning ide as into innovations, and in introducing innovations developed elsewhere within
their own organisations .
8 Research conducted by Erasmus University shows that technological advances account for only a quarter of innovation,
whereas the capacity to organise innovation accounts for three quarters (Erasmus Concurrentie en Innovatiemonitor, 2017)..

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Regional innovation
The indicator offers an overall picture of where tertiary school graduates live and work. Because it
basically assigns all tertiary school graduates to the same category, we cannot distinguish between the
various study programmes or the type of work that these graduates do. In reality, each region has its own,
specific human capital needs. A region that has many high -tech enterprises, for example around
Eindhoven, will need employees with a technical background (although not exclusively), whereas a
service economy such as Utrecht will require a more diverse mix of educational backgrounds.
The available dataset allows us to ana lyse the percentage of tertiary school graduates at municipal level.
The map below shows where these people live. We see that they tend to congregate in metropolitan
areas, such as Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Utrecht. We also see that cities such as Leiden, E indhoven,
Groningen and Nijmegen have many tertiary school graduates in their populations thanks to the presence
of universities there, with graduates tending to remain after receiving their degrees. Human capital is
therefore concentrated mainly in larger cities, but also in the surrounding municipalities.
Figure 8 Percentage of labour force (15-74 years) with completed tertiary education in 2016
Source: Statistics Netherlands. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut. Rathenau Instituut
4 Sector differences
In this section, we look at how the regional distribution of research and innovation differs from one
economic sector to the next. To what extent do sectors, and more particularly the Dutch top sectors, differ
in terms of the regional distribution of innovation? We analyse the four largest sectors, measured by the
share that they receive of the total sum in allowances awarded to public -private partnerships (under the
PPP Allowance Scheme ). They are:
- High Tech Systems & Materials (HTSM);
- Life Sciences & Health (LSH);
- Horticulture & Starting Materials (HPM), and
- Agro & Food.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
We use these four top sectors to show how the regional distribution of research and innovation differs
from one sector to the next, with each sector displaying a different pattern. 9 Figure 9 shows the PPP
allowance received, the number of innovation projects undertaken by small and medium enterprises
active in the sector – these are the ‘Top Sector SME Innovation’ (MIT) projects – and the partnerships
formed within the Top Consortia for Knowledge and Innovation (TKIs) for these four top sectors.
Maps 9.1a to 9.4a show the PPP allowance for each of the four top sectors. The allowance is an important
instrument for the national government to promote innovation in these and other top sectors . It stimulates
public-private partnerships within the TKI programmes by paying a bonus on top of the private contribution
that enterprises make to PPP projects. The TKIs pass on the allowance to the participating public
knowledge organisations, where it is spent.
Maps 9.1b to 9.4b show the distribution of MIT projects. MIT is a funding scheme that supports SME
innovation projects in the top sectors. It serves as a second indicator for the regional concentration of
research and innovation by sector.
Maps 9.1c to 9.4c show the partnerships between enterprises and/or knowledge institutions within the
TKIs. Whereas the two previous indicators provided information about the location of knowledge
institutions and SMEs active in the top sectors, these ma ps show which regions tend to work together
within a sector.
9 Maps for the other top sectors are available at https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/page/bijlagen-bij-feiten-cijfers- regionale-
innovatie

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 Regional innovation
Figure 9 PPP allowance received (201 2-2016), number of MIT projects (2013 -2016), and number of TKI partnerships (2012 -2016) in the top sectors High Tech Systems &
Materials (HTSM) and Life Sciences & Health (LSH).
Source: RVO. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut. Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Figure 9 (continued) PPP allowance received (2012 -2016), number of MIT projects (2013 -2016), and number of TKI partnerships (2012 -2016) in the top sectors Agro & Food
and Horticulture & Propagation Materials (H SM).
Source: RVO. Adapted by the Rathenau Instituut. Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Regional innovation
High Tech Systems & Materials
The role of the three universities of technology, in Delft, Eindhoven and Twente, is very clear in all
three indicators. The fact that TNO’s head office is located in The Hague explains why so many PPP
allowances are paid out to projects there. TNO’s own PPP projects are likely to be carried out by
TNO’s offices in Delft and Eindhoven. The most important partners hip hubs are concentrated
around the universities of technology, TNO, and in Amsterdam, which – although it receives a small
share of the total amount paid out in PPP allowances – has many innovative SMEs in the HTSM
sector. There are also hubs in Dordrech t and the Noordoostpolder region. 10 On the whole, the
HTMS sector is situated largely within the diamond formed by Amsterdam, The Hague/Delft,
Eindhoven and the Twente region.
Life Sciences & Health
Amsterdam plays a key role in the Life Sciences & Health sector, followed by Utrecht, Nijmegen
and Groningen. In addition, there are a large number of MIT projects around ‘s -Hertogenbosch,
Leiden, Rotterdam, Eindhoven and Enschede. Regions with a university medical centre or other
large hospital and wit h a university of technology are most prominent. We can explain the lack of
PPP allowances awarded in the ‘s -Hertogenbosch region by the absence of specialist institutions
there, although there are innovative Life Sciences & Health SMEs active in Pivot Par k Oss. The
same pattern can be found in the Eindhoven region, albeit to a lesser extent; Eindhoven University
of Technology does not specialise in LSH.
Agro & Food and Horticulture & Starting Materials
Wageningen UR is by far the most important centre of expertise for the top sectors Agro & Food
and Horticulture & Starting Materials. The Veluwe and Westland regions are the most important
locations for SMEs in Agro & Food, but the Fle voland, Twente, southeast Noord -Brabant, Rijnmond
and Zeeland regions all have a relatively large number of MIT projects. Innovative SMEs in the
HSM sector are located mainly in the northern part of the Province of Noord -Holland and in the
Westland region, both of which host many seed companies. Rotterdam, the bulb -growing area
(‘Bollenstreek’) and the Province of Flevoland are also clearly important. While H SM is mainly
concentrated in Wageningen and the northern part of Noord -Holland, the Agro & Food sector is
more dispersed, with hubs in Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht, Roosendaal, Maastricht and
Groningen.
The general impression is that the PPP allowance is awarded mainly in regions with knowledge
institutions that specialise in the relevant are a of innovation, and that MIT funding shows the same
pattern of concentration to some extent, but is also dispersed to other regions. In other words, the
public knowledge institutions are not always located in the same regions as the enterprises with
which they have partnered. The TKI partnerships clearly show that alliances are forged across what
are, for the Netherlands, long distances.
5 Final remarks
This publication shows the extent to which innovation is distributed regionally across the
Netherlands. It should be noted that solid data sources allowing us to monitor local/regional
innovation policy are still lacking, even though there is a growing volume of policy in that area. For
example, we cannot perform detailed analyses based on data sources such as the Community
Innovation Survey (CIS). That makes it difficult for regional and local governments to pursue a policy
backed up by reliable figures. At a time when policymaking is being devolved to local government, it
would be sensible to improve data collection at regional level so that regional innovation policy can
be grounded in reliable information.
Using available data, we have shown that innovation is broadly dispersed across the Netherlands,
with about half of all innovative enterprises located in thirty hotspots and the other half located in all
the other municipalities taken as a group. In other words, research and innovation are not
necessarily big-city phenomena in the Netherlands. Compared with their counterparts in the EU, all
the Dutch regions are performing well, and some extremely well. If we consider various economic
sectors independently, we see that innovation does tend to be more clustered, but that there are
also stronger ties across municipal and provincial boun daries. The Netherlands’ success in
innovation is therefore the product of many different municipalities and regions working together.
10 The Netherlands Aerospace Centre (NLR) has a branch here.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
References
Erasmus Concurrentie en Innovatiemonitor (2017). Onderzoeksrapport Erasmus Concurrentie
en Innovatie Monitor. Rotterdam: Rotterdam School of Management.
European Commission (2017). Regional Innovation Scoreboard. Brussels: European
Commission.
Glaeser, E. (2011). Triumph of the city: How our greatest invention makes us richer, smarter,
greener, healthier, and happier. New York: Penguin.
Florida. R., P. Adler, & C. Mellander (2017). The city as innovation machine. Regional Studies,
51, pp. 86-96.
Katz, B. & J. Bradley (2014). The Metropolitan Revolution: How Cities and Metros Are Fixing
Our Broken Politics and Fragile Economy. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
OECD (2015a). The Metropolitan Century: Understanding urbanisation and its consequences.
Paris: OECD.
OECD (2015b). Frascati Manual 2015: Guidelines for collecting and reporting data on research
and experimental development. Paris: OECD.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
About this publication
This publication is part of the Rathenau Instituut’s Facts & Figures series. This
edition surveys regional innovation in the Netherlands based on data gathered from
a range of different sources. For further information on this publication, please
contact the authors: Jos van den Broek Msc. (j.vandenbroek@rathenau.nl), Timo
Maas Msc. (t.maas@rathenau.nl) and Dr Jasper Deuten (j.deuten@rathenau.nl) or
the head of research, Prof. Barend van der Meulen (b.vandermeulen@rathenau.nl).
© Rathenau Instituut, The Hague
March 2018
Rathenau Instituut
Postbus 93566
NL-2509 CJ The Hague
Phone: +31 70-3421542
Website: www.rathenau.nl
This publication may be cited as follows:
Broek, J. van den, T. Maas &
J. Deuten (2018). Regional innovation.
The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.
This publication may be printed, photocopied or otherwise duplicated and/or published for non-
commercial purposes, provided that the full attribution is given. Duplication or publication for any
other purpose is permitted only with the permission of the publisher.
The Rathenau Institute has an Open Access policy. Its repor ts, background studies, research articles and
software are all open access publications. Research data are made available pursuant to statutory provisions
and ethical research standards concerning the rights of third parties, privacy and copyright.
