
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Report

European research and innovation
in a new geopolitical arena

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 2
Authors
Laurens Hessels, Sue-Yen Tjong Tjin Tai, Julia Jansen and
Jasper Deuten

Illustration
Rathenau Instituut
Cover photo
Christening the TU Delft Solar Boat 2018 – (c) Hollandse Hoogte
Preferred citation:
Rathenau Instituut (2020). European science and innovation in a new geopolitical
arena. The Hague (authors: Hessels, L., S. Y. Tjong Tjin Tai, J. Jansen & J.
Deuten)

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 3
Foreword
This publication brings together information of relevance to the European Union’s
research policy. In particular, the Rathenau Instituut aims to describe what research
cooperation in the EU (the European Research Area) means for academic research
in the Netherlands. In the coming months, the European Commission will be
presenting the successor to the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research
and Innovation, called ‘Horizon Europe’.

The EU has become more important than ever as a source of research funding
since the launch of Horizon 2020. Horizon 2020 had a budget of 78.6 billion euros
for the 2014-2020 period. Dutch researchers have been relatively successful at
obtaining funding from the programme, making the EU an important source of
funding for research in the Netherlands.

But the EU has become more than simply an additional source of funding for
researchers. It also influences the agenda setting, programming, organisation,
utilisation, and infrastructures of scientific research. For example, the Horizon 2020
programme identified societal challenges as guideposts for research. The European
Research Council encourages research ‘excellence’ by organising funding across
the EU on a competitive basis. Cooperation within the European Strategy Forum on
Research Infrastructures is also meant to lead to an EU-wide research
infrastructure.

The new European Commission has set its sights even higher. What does this
mean in financial terms, and – above all – how is this impacting Dutch research?
And how can the Dutch and other national parliaments assert control? Are ordinary
citizens being engaged, and is that happening at the right time? These are all
important questions, in the opinion of the Rathenau Instituut. We will be tracking
relevant trends and developments over the next several months. At the time of
publication, the COVID-19 pandemic is sweeping the world. The crisis will have a
far-reaching impact on public health, the economy and society in the EU. EU
research and innovation policies may also be affected, although the implications are
difficult to gauge at present. For the sake of completeness, we should note that we
have not included these events in our analysis.
Dr Melanie Peters
Director, Rathenau Instituut

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 4
Summary
This study explores recent changes in the European Union’s research and
innovation (R&I) policies associated with geopolitical, technological and economic
trends and developments. The European Commission’s new R&I policy speaks of a
growing ambition to mobilise researchers, industry and other parties to attain
geopolitical and societal goals, made evident in its new Horizon Europe Framework
Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027), its proposed European
Green Deal, and the new European Defence Fund (EDF). The Commission is
asking the EU Member States to make a major investment in its plans.

Negotiations concerning the Horizon Europe framework programme were fraught
with difficulties. To increase Member States’ support for Horizon Europe, the
Commission must be able to demonstrate that the EU’s R&I policy will have positive
long-term effects for all Member States. In particular, it must demonstrate the added
value of closer integration between Member States’ R&I efforts. The European
Commission is therefore taking a new direction in the European Research Area
(ERA).

The Rathenau Instituut believes that the present policy review period affords a good
opportunity to explore the added value of joint investment in European research
and innovation. A key question in the policy review is to what extent Horizon Europe
should contribute to a more balanced distribution of research capacity across
Member States, and in what way. The logic of ‘global excellence’ suggests that it
will be necessary to concentrate research capacity in centres of excellence (in
Western European countries) to compete globally for talent, knowledge and
investment. On the other hand, a balanced distribution of research capacity can
make European research and innovation more resilient in the long term and help
foster cohesion in the European Union.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 5

Source: Rathenau Instituut
Figure 1 Research and innovation policy in the European Union

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 6
Content
Foreword .............................................................................................................. 3
Summary .............................................................................................................. 4
1 New directions in the EU’s R&I policy ....................................................... 7
1.1 Far-reaching changes ................................................................... 7
1.2 Four strategic targets .................................................................... 9
2 Key changes in European research instruments ................................... 12
2.1 Horizon Europe framework programme .................................... 12
2.2 More emphasis on strategic EU policy priorities ...................... 14
2.3 Mission-oriented approach ......................................................... 15
2.4 Larger budget for ‘widening’ measures ..................................... 16
2.5 European Innovation Council ..................................................... 18
2.6 Strategic European partnerships ............................................... 19
3 Other changes in the EU’s R&I policy ..................................................... 20
3.1 European Defence Fund ............................................................. 20
3.2 More assertive industrial policy ................................................. 21
3.3 Newly reorganised Directorate-General for Research and
Innovation (DG RTD) ................................................................... 22
3.4 European Research Area ............................................................ 22
4 Outstanding issues and ongoing discussions ....................................... 25
4.1 Outstanding issues in Horizon Europe ...................................... 25
4.2 EU and Horizon Europe budgets ................................................ 25
4.3 Excellence versus widening of participation............................. 26
5 Final considerations: added value of European cooperation ................ 27
Bibliography ....................................................................................................... 29
Appendix: List of interviewees .......................................................................... 30

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 7
1 New directions in the EU’s R&I
policy
1.1 Far-reaching changes
The European Union (EU) has become an important factor in Dutch research and
innovation in recent decades. Researchers in the Netherlands often collaborate with
partners from other EU Member States. In an earlier analysis, the Rathenau
Instituut (2016) showed that the EU’s framework programmes for research and
innovation are an indispensable source of funding for Dutch science. Current data
collected by the Rathenau Instituut (2020) show that the eighth framework
programme, Horizon 2020, accounts for 12% of total public research funding in the
Netherlands. In addition to generating an additional source of funding, the EU also
provides guideposts for research in its policy. For example, in recent years Dutch
researchers have increasingly focused on the societal challenges that were central
to the EU framework programme. European rules and guidelines concerning
socially relevant research, gender equality and open access publications influence
the standards set by Dutch knowledge institutions. In addition, the European
Structural Funds have a major impact on regional research and innovation
programmes.

The EU is in a period of major transition at this time. Far-reaching advances in
technology, shifting international relations and the growing impact of climate change
have led the European Commission to redefine its policy on research and
innovation (R&I). This exploratory study is the first part of a project in which the
Rathenau Instituut will be examining changes in European R&I policy in relation to
geopolitical, technological and economic trends and developments. We carried out
desk research for this purpose and interviewed some twenty experts (see the
Appendix).

Based on our analysis, we have identified five major trends that will influence the
EU’s new R&I policy.

1. Rapid advances in digital technologies
Digital technologies are rapidly advancing. Applications making use of artificial
intelligence (AI) can collect and analyse ever-growing quantities of data. For
example, AI is considered a game changer in security and defence (Rathenau
Instituut, 2019), and it is part of the digital arms race. On the one hand, there are
now military versions of digital technologies, including augmented reality, which

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 8
give soldiers better information during operations and more autonomous weapon
systems (Rathenau Instituut, 2019). On the other hand, the cyberworld is also a
new military battlefield, with cyberespionage and cyberweapons posing a threat to
the electricity grid and other critical infrastructure (Rathenau Instituut, 2017).

AI is also hugely significant for business competitiveness. Fast-growing companies
of the past decade were technology companies that also invested heavily in AI.
What is worrying for the EU is that virtually all of the dominant companies – Google,
Apple, Facebook, Huawei, Alibaba and Amazon – originated not in Europe but in
the USA and China. AI is regarded as a winner-takes-all technology, i.e. the first
parties to break into the market successfully can achieve unrivalled dominance
(Taskforce AI position paper 2019). China and the USA have launched major multi-
year programmes to gain and maintain global dominance in AI. Several EU Member
States have also embarked on national AI programmes, including France in March
2018.1 On 19 February 2020, the European Commission presented its digital
strategy, which includes a data strategy and a White Paper on AI. The three key
objectives of that strategy are ‘technology that works for people’, ‘a fair and
competitive economy’, and ‘an open, democratic and sustainable society’.2

2. Geopolitical uncertainty
Geopolitical uncertainty is the second global trend that will influence the EU’s new
R&I policy. Analysts refer to the end of multilateralism.3 The international
geopolitical order is undergoing a major reshuffle. The USA’s supremacy is slipping,
and China is establishing itself as a new economic superpower alongside the USA
and the EU. Russia continues to pose a security threat. All these factors combined
are resulting in an unpredictable geopolitical arena (Wetenschappelijke Raad voor
het Regeringsbeleid, 2017). Faith in neo-liberal globalisation appears to have been
lost. International alliances are under pressure, in particular NATO, the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) and the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty
(Clingendael Institute, 2019). The new team of European Commissioners, led by
Ursula von der Leyen, is specifically presenting itself as a ‘geopolitical
Commission’.

3. Changing position of science in society
The third relevant trend is the changing position of science in society. A survey
conducted by the Rathenau Instituut shows that although the public places great
trust in science (Rathenau Instituut, 2018), it is less inclined to regard researchers
as sources of relevant and reliable knowledge. Increasingly the public, business

1 https://www.aiforhumanity.fr/en/
2 ‘Shaping Europe’s digital future: Commission presents strategies for data and Artificial Intelligence’. European
Commisson website, 19 February 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_273
3 ‘De jaren 10. Hoe de geopolitiek oprukte in de wereld’. In: NRC Handelsblad 30 December 2019.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2019/12/30/de-jaren-10-hoe-de-geopolitiek-oprukte-in-de-wereld-a3985293

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 9
owners, policymakers, interest groups and politicians have easy access to
knowledge from a variety of sources online which may or may not be evidence-
based. Broad access to knowledge obviously supports informed policymaking, but it
can also lead to uncertainty if the available sources contradict one another
(Rathenau Instituut, 2014). Researchers must therefore be able to explain how their
methods result in knowledge that is more robust than knowledge produced by non-
scientific methods. An additional factor is that academia’s emphasis on excellence
causes researchers to publish mainly in academic journals that are almost
inaccessible to the general public. In addition, public-private academic research
partnerships are increasing, giving industry more leverage over research agendas.
This leaves researchers less leeway to consider other stakeholders in society.

All these trends have widened the gap between the public and science.
The new European Commission wants to raise awareness of the meaning and
significance of science to society.

4. Brexit
Fourth, there is Brexit. The departure of the United Kingdom is forcing the
remaining Member States to recalibrate their relationships within the European
Union and consequently to review existing priorities. European cooperation and
integration will decelerate in some policy areas while accelerating in others. At the
same time, Brexit is putting pressure on the EU’s overall budget and thus on the
funding available for the Horizon Europe framework programme. Finally, Brexit has
also curtailed opportunities to maintain partnerships with non-EU countries (‘third
countries’) (see section 4.1).

5. Climate crisis
The fifth and final major development on our list is the climate crisis. We have
known about global climate change for decades, but only now is it becoming a
matter of real political urgency. To meet the targets of the Paris Agreement, the
EU’s economies will have to undergo profound changes, including changes in
consumer behaviour.
1.2 Four strategic targets
The EU is attempting to formulate an appropriate response to these major trends
and developments. In the European Commission’s current policy documents, we

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 10
have identified four key strategic targets for the EU’s R&I policy that are intended to
bolster the bloc’s position in a changing world.4

1. Boost the EU’s competitiveness vis-à-vis the USA and China
This challenge has fuelled joint investment in R&I since the first EU framework
programme back in the 1980s. At that point, Japan and the USA were the
competitors that the EU most feared. Now China has surpassed Japan as a
dreaded rival in R&I.

2. Develop technological sovereignty in the face of emerging technologies
such as AI and the changing geopolitical context
Technological sovereignty benefits not only the EU’s economic competitiveness but
also, and in particular, its security (EPSC, 2019). Now that the ‘faith’ in neoliberal
globalisation appears to be ebbing away and multilateralism is under strain, the EU
wants to gain autonomy from China and the USA and avoid having to rely on these
countries for key enabling technologies such as AI. Instead, the EU wants to lead
from the front in shaping AI and develop AI applications that are in line with
European values. The EU approach to AI focuses on people, and not on the
technology firm and its shareholders (as in the USA) or the nation state (as in
China). The European focus is on the public benefits that AI can bring, such as
better healthcare and cleaner transport. The basic premise is that AI must be in line
with the values as expressed in the Treaty on European Union.
5

3. Promote science and knowledge as European core values
The Commission wants to make it clearer to the public what the EU stands for. That
is why it is positioning research integrity and reliable science as core values that
underpin the ‘European way of life’. The Commission wants to make the impact of
science on the daily lives of European citizens more visible, not only to boost
support for public investment in R&I but also to enhance the legitimacy and
credibility of European researchers in policy discussions.

4. Tackle climate change
The Commission has announced an ambitious ‘European Green Deal’ that has the
support of most of the heads of government in the Union. The EU aims to be a
global leader in this regard. The Commission is prepared to amend all necessary
laws and regulations, thus transforming energy supply and consumer behaviour in

4 For example, European Commission (2019). Orientations towards the first Strategic Plan: implementing the
research and innovation framework programme Horizon Europe; European Commission (2020). White paper
on Artificial Intelligence - A European approach to excellence and trust; ERAC Ad-hoc Working Group on the
Future of the ERA (2019). Draft ERAC opinion on the future of the ERA; Leyen, U. von der (2019). A Union
that strives for more: My agenda for Europe.
5 European Commission (2018). Artificial Intelligence for Europe.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=51625

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 11
such a way that Europe becomes the first climate-neutral continent by 2050. This
target requires a major investment in research and innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 12
2 Key changes in European
research instruments
2.1 Horizon Europe framework programme
In this report, we discuss how the four strategic targets are reflected in a number of
key changes to the EU’s research and innovation policy. Prior to our analysis, we
briefly describe the 9th Framework Programme for Research and Innovation,
Horizon Europe,6 to give readers a context in which to understand the changes.

Figure 2 Structure of the Horizon Europe framework programme

Source: European Commission (2019). Horizon Europe factsheet.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/research_and_innovation/knowledge_publications_tools_and_data/docume
nts/ec_rtd_factsheet-horizon-europe_2019.pdf

Horizon Europe has three pillars. The first pillar is Excellent Science, with a
proposed budget of 25.8 billion euros. Horizon Europe’s predecessor had budgeted
21.7 billion euros for academic research of this kind (see Figure 3). The intention is
to continue allocating funding on a competitive basis. The second pillar is Global
Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness. It combines elements from
the second and third pillars of Horizon 2020. The proposed budget for this pillar is
52.7 billion euros, compared to 45.2 billion euros in Horizon 2020. The second pillar
is organised into a number of clusters and includes the Joint Research Centre, i.e.

6 See European Commission (2018). Proposal for a DECISION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL on establishing the specific programme implementing Horizon Europe – the Framework
Programme for Research and Innovation, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52018PC0436; Presentatie ‘Horizon Europe’:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/horizon-europe-investing-shape-our-future_en

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 13
the European institute for policy research. The third pillar, Innovative Europe,
focuses on entrepreneurship and market-creating innovation. The proposed budget
of 13.5 billion euros is significantly higher than the 2.7 billion euros under Horizon
2020. In addition, 2.1 billion euros has been proposed for measures meant to
improve participation in the framework programme across Europe (‘Widening
Participation & Spreading Excellence’) and to strengthen the European Research
Area.7 Finally, 2.4 billion euros has been budgeted for the Euratom nuclear
research programme. This brings the total proposed budget to 100 billion euros.
This includes 3.5 billion euros allocated to InvestEU, a programme that brings
together under one roof all of the many EU financial instruments and that builds on
and extends the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI, part of the
Juncker Plan8).

Horizon Europe differs from the previous framework programme in five ways:
1. it puts more emphasis on strategic EU policy priorities;
2. it takes a mission-oriented approach;
3. it has a larger budget for ‘widening’ measures;
4. it establishes a European Innovation Council;
5. it deploys European partnerships more strategically.

We explain these five changes below.

7 This amount will be higher because it was later agreed to earmark 3.3% of the total budget for this purpose.
8 The Juncker Plan is the ‘Investment Plan for Europe’, launched by the European Commission in 2015 to
improve investment conditions in the EU after the economic and financial crisis. The plan has three objectives:
remove obstacles for investors, highlight and provide technical support for investment projects, and make
smarter use of financial resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 14

Figure 3 Comparing the Horizon 2020 and Horizon Europe budgets

Sources: Rathenau Instituut, calculations based on: European Commission (2013). Factsheet: Horizon 2020
budget; European Commission (2019). Horizon Europe. The next EU Research & Innovation investment
programme (2021 – 2027)
Note: Insofar as possible, this figure compares the Horizon 2020 budget (at 2013 price levels) with the proposed
Horizon Europe budget (at 2018 price levels). However, the H2020 pillars do not align with those of Horizon Europe
and the new framework programme also has some new instruments.
Our categorisation is based on the instruments in the Horizon Europe pillars.
*H2020 equivalent: Excellent Science without FET
**H2020 equivalent: Societal challenges + Industrial leadership + JRC, without access to risk finance, without
Innovation in SMEs
***H2020 equivalent: EIT
****H2020 equivalent: Access to risk finance + SWAFS + SEWP
2.2 More emphasis on strategic EU policy priorities
In terms of priorities, it is notable that the Commission intends to place more
emphasis in the Horizon Europe framework programme on the Union’s current
strategic policy priorities. The Commission has identified six priorities to which the
framework programme is meant to contribute:

1. A European Green Deal: making Europe the world’s first climate-neutral
continent
2. An economy that works for people: giving Europe a strong and resilient
social market economy
3. A Europe fit for the digital age: making Europe a global leader in the digital
and industrial transformation
21,7
45,1
6,0 4,1
1,6
25,8
52,7
13,5
2,1 2,4 3,5
Excellent Science* Global Challenges &
European Industrial
Competitiveness**
Innovative Europe*** Other: widening
participation, spreading
excellence & ERA****
Euratom InvestEU
Budget for instruments, in billions of euros
Horizon 2020 budget Horizon Europe budget

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 15
4. Promoting our European way of life: protecting European citizens and
European values
5. A stronger Europe in the world: reconfirming Europe’s international position
in a changing world
6. A new push for European democracy: strengthening democracy in Europe.
The Commission intends to make spending under the Horizon Europe budget
largely contingent on these policy priorities and the United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals. It has stated in so many words that the Horizon Europe
programme is part of its vision for a sustainable, fair and prosperous future for
people and planet based on European values. For example, the Commission has
agreed with the Member States to devote 35% of Horizon Europe’s budget to
climate targets.9
Horizon Europe’s focus on EU policy priorities is also expressed in its seeking
synergies with other EU programmes, such as the European Agricultural Fund for
Rural Development, the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund, the European
Regional Development Fund, the Digital Europe Programme, the LIFE Programme
for the Environment and Climate Change, the European Space Programme, and
the European Defence Fund. The Commission wants to coordinate the various
programmes to achieve a greater combined impact. This means, for example, that
the Commission ensures that the design and objectives of these EU programmes
are consistent and that the financing and implementation rules for the various EU
programmes are aligned. When allocating funds from Horizon Europe’s budget to
research and innovation, the Commission will specifically consider the science and
innovation requirements of other EU programmes. The Commission also
encourages other EU programmes to take advantage of Horizon Europe’s research
results and innovative solutions.
2.3 Mission-oriented approach
The second change is the strategy of creating more societal impact by working to
solve urgent problems in society. The EU has defined five mission areas:10

1. Cancer
2. Adaptation to climate change, including societal transformation

9 European Commission (2019). Orientations towards the first Strategic Plan for Horizon Europe.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/research_and_innovation/strategy_on_research_and_innovation/docu
ments/ec_rtd_orientations-he-strategic-plan_122019.pdf
10 The Netherlands is also pursuing a mission-oriented top sector and innovation policy: Ministry of Economic
Affairs and Climate Policy (2019). Missies voor het topsectoren- en innovatiebeleid.
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/binaries/rijksoverheid/documenten/publicaties/2019/04/26/missies/Missies+voor+h
et+Topsectoren-+en+Innovatiebeleid+26-04-2019.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 16
3. Healthy oceans, seas, coastal and inland waters
4. Climate-neutral and smart cities
5. Soil health and food.

These mission areas replace the seven ‘grand challenges’ of the Horizon 2020
programme and will support specific missions aimed at solving these pressing
challenges in society. Each mission must achieve an inspirational and measurable
goal for European citizens within a set timeframe of ten years.

The Commission has established a mission board in each mission area.11 Their
task is to advise on the content of the work programmes and their revision as
needed during implementation. According to reports on the first meetings, the
Commission has tasked the mission boards with broadening the application of
existing knowledge and encouraging the scaling up of local and regional initiatives.
The mission boards are tackling this task by setting up projects that cut across
disciplines, as part of a portfolio approach. The portfolios of four ‘green deal mission
areas’ will be part of the European Green Deal. Typically, the Commission sees the
missions as a learning device for innovation. At first, missions will be relatively small
in scale, with a maximum of 10% of the annual budget of Pillar II being earmarked
for missions during the first three years of the programme. The missions will
develop their portfolio approach step by step. The Commission has mandated the
mission boards to engage the public in programming and in carrying out mission-
oriented research. For example, the Commission has asked all mission boards to
visit each of the Member States.
12 Citizen engagement appears to serve a twofold
purpose: to make practical use of available knowledge and to reinforce the
legitimacy of investing in science.
2.4 Larger budget for ‘widening’ measures
The third change concerns the way funds will be distributed across the EU Member
States.}One of the novelties of Horizon Europe is that the budget reserved for the
‘widening’ measures has been increased from 1.8% to 3.3% at the urging of the
European Parliament. The budget increase addresses a sensitive issue in previous
framework programmes, i.e. the uneven distribution of allocated research budgets
across the Member States, in part because ‘research excellence’ served as a
selection criterion (see Figure 4 and 5). It was above all the EU13 countries
(especially in Central and Eastern Europe) that called for a more balanced

11 https://ec.europa.eu/info/horizon-europe-next-research-and-innovation-framework-programme/missions-
horizon-europe_en; For the tasks of the mission boards, see footnote 6, article 5.1.
12 ‘Missies in 2020, de stand van zaken’. Neth-ER website, 14 January 2020. https://www.neth-
er.eu/nl/nieuws/Missies-2020-de-stand-van-zaken

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 17
distribution key by seeking to change the selection criteria for project funding. The
Commission did not accommodate their request, however, arguing that research
excellence was necessary to drive European competitiveness. The Commission
considers that the EU13 countries should make better use of the EU’s Structural
Funds, i.e. the European Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund, to
improve their R&I capacity.

Figure 4 Relative share of EU Member States in Horizon 2020 funding
allocation versus relative contribution to total EU budget
Sources: Rathenau Instituut, calculations based on data from Horizon 2020 Dashboard, reference date
11 February 2020; European Commission Budget, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/budget/graphs/revenue_expediture.html.
Note: The figure shows the return ratio for all EU Member States. The return ratio is the share of the H2020 budget
that a country received divided by the share that that country contributed to the EU’s Multiannual Financial
Framework (MFF) over the years 2014-2018. The dark red columns are EU15 countries. The pink columns are
EU13 countries (Member States since 2004 or thereafter).
Note 1: As we have no information available on each country’s actual contribution to the Horizon 2020 budget, we
have assumed that it is comparable to the share that each one contributes to the EU budget (MFF).
Note 2: A value greater than 1 means that, over the 2014-2018 period, a country received a higher percentage of
the H2020 budgets on average than the percentage it contributed to the MFF as a whole.
Note 3: The Horizon 2020 Dashboard does not track support received from the EIT.

0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
CY
EE
EL
SI
NL
FI
DK
PT
AT
SE
IE
ES
LU
UK
BE
LV
DE
MT
FR
HU
IT
BG
CZ
HR
LT
SK
RO
PL
Return ratio 2014 - 2018 Return ratio percentage = 1

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 18

Figure 5 Funding received from Horizon 2020 programme and contribution to
European budget (MFF) by country, in billions of euros
Sources: Rathenau Instituut, calculations based on data from Horizon 2020 Dashboard, reference date
11 February 2020; European Commission Budget, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/budget/graphs/revenue_expediture.html.
Note: The figure shows the correlation between the amount each country receives from the H2020 framework
programme (per call year) and each country’s contribution to the EU’s Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF).
Both values represent the total for 2014-2018.
Note 1: As we have no information available on each country’s actual contribution to the Horizon 2020 budget, we
have assumed that it is comparable to the share that each one contributes to the EU budget (MFF). Countries’
contributions to the MFF are total own resources, part of total revenue in the European Commission’s budget for
2014-2018.
Note 2: A position above the linear regression line means that a country has received more from the H2020 budget
than to be expected based on the average ratio of FP received to MFF contributions.
2.5 European Innovation Council
Another novelty is the establishment of the European Innovation Council (EIC),
meant to boost European competitiveness and technological sovereignty. The EIC
builds and expands on several Horizon 2020 instruments. Its aim is to better align
the framework programme for research and innovation with the EU’s industrial
policy. The EIC awards grants and venture capital to promising SMEs to enable
ground-breaking innovations. By launching the EIC, the Commission is creating EU-
wide funding opportunities aimed at scaling up innovative start-ups, SMEs and
AT
BE
FR
DE
ITNL
PL
ES
SE
UK
€ 0
€ 1
€ 2
€ 3
€ 4
€ 5
€ 6
€ 7
€ 0 € 20 € 40 € 60 € 80 € 100 € 120 € 140
Funding received from FP from 2014 to 2018,
in billions of euros
Contributions to MFF from 2014 to 2018, in billions of euros

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 19
entrepreneurs. The idea is to expand the number of ‘unicorns’ in Europe, i.e.
technology firms worth more than USD 1 billion. The EIC offers funding combined
with networking opportunities, mentoring, coaching and strategic advice. It works
through two instruments: ‘Pathfinder’ funding for researchers and technologists who
want to take novel breakthrough technologies to the pre-commercial phase, and
‘Accelerator’ funding for start-ups, SMEs and entrepreneurs wanting to take
innovations to market. Seventy per cent of the EIC’s budget is earmarked for SMEs,
the remainder for non-profit research institutions.13
2.6 Strategic European partnerships
Finally, Horizon Europe puts more emphasis on strategic European partnerships in
a bid to boost the impact of public investment in research and innovation. Under
these partnerships, the EU works with private and/or public partners to develop and
implement a research and innovation programme. Partnerships of this kind allow
the Commission to create synergies between Horizon Europe and national and
regional programmes, to encourage Member States to apply research outcomes,
and to scale up innovative solutions.

The Commission wants to be consistent when entering into partnerships, and it also
wants to be able to dissolve them more easily when they are no longer fit for
purpose. The Commission is scaling down the total number of partnerships,
retaining only the most strategic ones. Of the almost 100 remaining partnerships
from previous framework programmes, 49 candidate partnerships now remain for
the new programme.
14 Instead of the eclectic mix of the past, the Commission now
wishes to concentrate on only three forms of partnership, i.e. Co-programmed
European Partnerships, Co-funded European Partnerships and Institutionalised
European Partnerships. The third form is based on Articles 185 and 187 of the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). Article 185 allows the
Commission to participate in a research programme undertaken by several Member
States. One example is the Active and Assisted Living programme, which funds
R&D into technologies and services for the elderly. Article 187 allows the
Commission to enter into a Joint Undertaking (a public-private partnership), such as
the Electronic Components and Systems for European Leadership (ECSEL),
designed to fund R&D in these key enabling technologies in Europe.

13 Funding for scale-ups is also one of the goals of Invest-NL, launched in January 2020. It is a private enterprise
financed by public funds (1.7 billion euros). Invest-NL is an impact investor focused primarily on energy
transition and scale-ups in the Netherlands. The European Commission (with guidance from the European
Investment Fund) will itself invest on behalf of the EIC. The InvestEU Fund mobilises public and private
investment through an EU budget guarantee.
14 See footnote 9.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 20
3 Other changes in the EU’s R&I
policy
In addition to the Horizon Europe Framework Programme for Research and
Innovation, the EU is introducing four other changes in its research and innovation
policy:
1. the European Defence Fund, EDF
2. a more assertive industrial policy
3. the European Commission’s newly reorganised Directorate-General for
Research and Innovation (DG RTD)
4. a new impetus for the European Research Area (ERA).
3.1 European Defence Fund
The EU established the European Defence Fund (EDF) in 2017 to strengthen
European military capabilities.15 Much of this fund is earmarked for research and
innovation. The purpose of the EDF is to encourage Member States to develop
innovative joint defence technologies that contribute to Europe’s strategic
autonomy.

The EDF is meant to concentrate and consolidate the fragmented, mainly nationally
organised research and industrial development activities in this field. This is the first
time that the EU is funding defence research and technology. The initiative met with
opposition from a number of MEPs who see it as an undesirable move towards the
militarisation of the EU. There is also resistance from European scientists who
prefer to see funding channelled into research on non-violent conflict resolution.

By establishing the EDF, the EU has created a second major research and
innovation programme alongside Horizon Europe. The Commission proposes giving
the EDF a total budget of 13 billion euros over the 2021-2027 period. The EDF
makes funding available to joint projects that have participants from at least three
Member States. The Commission’s proposal for the next budget round is to invest
some 600 million euros annually in research (4.1 billion euros total) and almost
1300 million euros as co-financing for development (8.9 billion euros total). The
Commission has considered making the EDF part of Horizon Europe, but has

15 European Commission (2019). European Defence Fund – factsheet.
https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/34509

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 21
chosen to keep civil and military research separate, both formally and financially.
Nevertheless, the research component of the EDF will parallel the Horizon Europe
system as far as possible, with the phrasing of calls and the project selection
process being similar in the two programmes. The intention is for EDF and Horizon
Europe programming to be closely related in content, something that is certain to
spark much debate. The EDF is politically sensitive because it appears to suggest
that the EU intends building its own military force. There was therefore serious
opposition to the initiative in the European Parliament. As the boundaries between
civil and military research become blurred, the EDF will have ample opportunity to
benefit from civil research on AI and other digital technologies within Horizon
Europe. However, some European researchers and academic organisations wish to
distance themselves from any potential cross-overs between civil and military
research (Rathenau Instituut 2019).
3.2 More assertive industrial policy
As well as building a stronger defence industry, the EU also plans to undertake a
more assertive industrial policy in pursuit of the four strategic goals set out in
section 1.2 above.
16 The EU wishes to boost its position in ‘key strategic value
chains’. i.e. interlinked and integrated activities in key industries, also referred to as
industrial value chains. To do this, it will allow a new type of European alliance for
Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEI).17 IPCEIs are meant to
focus on specific technologies, including clean and autonomous vehicles, an
industrial Internet of Things, low-carbon-emission industry, and cybersecurity.18

IPCEI alliances are typically established at the initiative of several Member States
and enterprises, with these Member States being permitted to grant these private
parties State aid. IPCEIs are therefore not European partnerships like those under
the Horizon Europe framework programme, but they do require the Commission’s
approval. In December 2019, the EU approved the second IPCEI, involving the
development of innovative technologies for lithium-ion batteries supporting clean
and low-emission mobility. The seven participating Member States will provide 3.2
billion euros in State aid (the Netherlands is not one of the participants).19 The EU’s

16 ‘Europe is rediscovering its penchant for statist intervention’. In: The Economist 16 January 2020.
17 Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEI) include innovative research projects which often
involve significant risks and require joint, well-coordinated efforts and transnational investment by public
authorities and industries in different Member States.
18 Strategic Forum for Important Projects of Common European Interest (2019). Strengthening Strategic Value
Chains for a future-ready EU Industry. https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/37824
19 This partnership is part of the European Battery Alliance, which the Commission launched in 2017 with
interested Member States and industrial actors. See: ‘State aid: Commission approves €3.2 billion public
support by seven Member States for a pan-European research and innovation project in all segments of the

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 22
aim in approving this IPCEI is to prevent the European automotive industry from
becoming entirely dependent on a non-EU manufacturer because it lacks the
necessary know-how and production capacity. This is one example of how the EU
is pursuing a more integrated approach to policymaking. That approach should lead
to more strategic autonomy while promoting its climate and sustainability agenda.

The Commission intends to launch a new industrial strategy in March 2020. The
strategy is expected to include the aforementioned IPCEI and an overhaul of
intellectual property and competition rules facilitating the emergence of European
industrial superpowers.
3.3 Newly reorganised Directorate-General for
Research and Innovation (DG RTD)
The Commission is also applying the integrated policy approach in its internal
organisation. The Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (DG RTD) will
administer and monitor the Horizon Europe framework programme and its budget in
conjunction with representatives of other DGs.

Previously, DG RTD bore primary responsibility for the bulk of the Horizon 2020
framework programme budget, and consulted with representatives of relevant DGs
on priorities. Other DGs had primary responsibility for the remaining budget
components. Now, a committee made up of representatives from the DGs
concerned will administer the programme and the budget for each cluster (e.g.
health). The Commission hopes to link the work programmes and the various policy
objectives of the DGs in this manner. There has also been a shake-up of RTD’s
internal organisation. In addition to five directorates handling general DG matters,
RTD has four thematic directorates (Healthy planet, Clean planet, People, and
Prosperity), the idea being to overcome bureaucratic ‘silos’ in these areas.
3.4 European Research Area
Last but not least, the Commission has given the European Research Area (ERA) a
new impetus. The ERA was established in 2000 to promote the free movement of
knowledge and researchers between national research systems in Europe.
Operating alongside the Horizon Europe framework programme, the ERA is an

battery value chain’. European Commission website, 9 December 2019.
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/european-battery-alliance_en,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_19_6705

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 23
important policy instrument for European research and innovation. The
Commission, the Member States and the EU’s knowledge institutions are
responsible for implementing the ERA policy framework. Primary responsibility lies
with the Member States, as each one is in charge of its own national research
system.

The Commission has appointed a European Research Area and Innovation
Committee (ERAC) made up of representatives of the Member States. ERAC
coordinates the implementation of ERA policy and drives matters forward where
necessary. This is because a 2014 study found that ERA implementation varied
considerably from country to country.20 Member States wanted to preclude EU
legislation on the ERA and therefore opted to assume more responsibility for its
implementation. As a result, there are marked differences between Member States
in the progress they are making towards ERA priorities, e.g. effective national
research systems, transnational cooperation, an open labour market for
researchers, and gender equality.21

The new European Commissioner for Innovation and Research, Culture, Education
and Youth, Mariya Gabriel, has chosen the ERA as one of her priorities. She will be
publishing a new Communication on the future of ERA before the summer. An ad
hoc ERAC working group has issued an opinion on the future of the ERA as input
for her Communication. ERAC has since adopted this opinion.
22

The opinion proposes four new ERA priorities:
1. Framework conditions for the production, circulation and use of knowledge,
including research career issues
2. R&I-driven joint action with other policy areas in a global context
3. Relevance and visibility of R&I for society
4. Broad inclusiveness.

Priority 4 is meant to make the ERA more responsive to the needs of the diverse
socio-economic situations across the EU, for example encompassing the
geographical dimension but also gender-related issues.

One important change proposed in the opinion is that the ERA must do more to
address societal challenges and interact more closely with other policy areas,
aspects that have been ignored in the current ERA priorities. In addition, the

20 European Parliamentary Research Service (2016). European Research Area. Cost of Non-Europe Report.
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2016/581382/EPRS_STU(2016)581382_EN.pdf
21 European Commission (2019). ERA progress report 2018. https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/era-progress-
report-2018_en
22 ERAC (2020). ERAC opinion on the future of the ERA. https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-
1201-2020-INIT/en/pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 24
working group recommends making EU citizens much more aware of the benefits of
European research and innovation (and the ERA in particular) in their daily lives so
as to mobilise support for the necessary investment. The Commission aims to
promote science, research and knowledge as core values of Europe in this manner,
in response to geopolitical developments that require a more powerful European
identity. Our interviewees expect the new Communication on the future of the ERA
to follow the broad outlines of this opinion. The Member States will then draw up
European Council conclusions under the German Presidency in the second half of
2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 25
4 Outstanding issues and ongoing
discussions
4.1 Outstanding issues in Horizon Europe
The following three issues have yet to be clarified within the Horizon Europe
framework programme:
1. relationship with other EU programmes
2. international cooperation
3. the budget.

The European Council and the European Parliament have yet to negotiate the
relationship between Horizon Europe and associated EU programmes.

Brexit has led to a postponement of any decision on the terms and conditions for
international cooperation. Collaboration on research and innovation with non-EU
countries has priority in addressing global societal challenges. In addition, if the EU
is to compete with major forces such as the USA and China, then the Member
States must form a bloc in certain strategic research areas such as AI. That makes
it interesting for the EU to cooperate with Canada and Japan, or with Israel, where
a hub of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) opened in late
2019. Important criteria for cooperating with non-EU countries include such matters
as funding and open access.

There has also been no decision regarding the Horizon Europe budget. The
Commission must have the support and approval of the Member States for its
plans. Based on our interviews, recent policy documents and news reports, we
have identified two main issues in that respect.
4.2 EU and Horizon Europe budgets
The main areas of debate concern the total budget for the EU and for Horizon
Europe. At the moment, the Member States, the European Commission and the
European Parliament are negotiating the budget of the European Union, the
Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF), for the next seven years. The Horizon
Europe budget is a pawn in the battle over the MFF.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 26
Budget negotiation involves a complex trade-off between competing interests.
Roughly speaking, there are two opposing camps: the old EU Member States (until
Brexit, known as the EU15) versus the newer Member States, known as the EU13.
The EU15 (now EU14) camp consists of relatively prosperous Member States,
including the Netherlands, which make a substantial financial contribution to the EU
budget. Although their interests will be served by a solid budget for Horizon Europe,
they are apprehensive about paying more to compensate for the departure of the
British. By contrast, the second camp, the EU13, does not want to put a cap on the
overall budget because this would rapidly lead to cuts in the Cohesion Fund. They
will therefore only agree to a cap on the MFF if other budget items are scaled back,
including research and innovation. Dutch academic organisations are therefore
calling on the Dutch Government to defend Horizon Europe in their negotiations,
citing its major societal impact and positive contribution to Dutch research
capacity.
23
4.3 Excellence versus widening of participation
One of the points of disagreement between Member States concerning Horizon
Europe’s budget is the focus on excellence on the one hand and a more equitable
distribution of resources on the other. For years now, the newer Member States
(EU13) have derived relatively little benefit from the EU framework programmes for
research and innovation. That is because knowledge-intensive industry is on a
smaller scale in these countries and because they have fewer truly excellent
academic organisations, less experience working on international projects, and only
modest links to European networks (STOA, 2018). Receiving a larger share of the
Horizon Europe budget would help the EU13 Member States retain talented
researchers. Past framework programmes already included a number of
instruments aimed at a more balanced distribution of available funds across the
Member States and at supporting the EU13 countries in scientific and technological
capacity-building. They have now demanded a significant increase in these
instruments under Horizon Europe. Ultimately, the Member States agreed to
earmark 3.3% of the framework programme budget for ‘Widening Participation and
Spreading Excellence’ measures, i.e. projects or programmes that promote an even
distribution of the budget across Europe. Conversely, ‘excellence’ and ‘impact’ will
continue to be the main award criteria for all proposals, in line with the EU14’s
preference.

23 VSNU (2020). Europese financiering van onderzoek en innovatie van belang voor Nederland.
https://vsnu.nl/files/documenten/Domeinen/Internationaal/VSNU%20inbreng%20-
%20Horizon%20Europe%20en%20MFK%20onderhandelingen%20tbv%20AO%20Eurogroep-Ecofinraad.pdf.
For an English text on the VSNU position on Horizon Europe, see https://www.vsnu.nl/en_GB/fp-9

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 27
5 Final considerations: added value
of European cooperation
This study shows that the EU is mobilising its R&I policy towards achieving partly
new strategic targets, and also in response to geopolitical developments. The
European Commission wishes to use Horizon Europe to:
1. boost the EU’s competitiveness
2. attain technological sovereignty
3. promote research and science as European core values
4. combat climate change.

The Commission is also drawing on associated policy instruments, such as the
European Defence Fund and the European Research Area, for the same purposes.

While there is sufficient support within the EU for Horizon Europe’s new strategic
agenda and for investment in R&I in general, the Commission is having trouble
persuading Member States to make the major, targeted investment this requires
because they tend to focus on their national interests. Negotiations within the
European Council remain difficult. With the Member States stressing their national
interests, appreciation of the added value of European integration in R&I appears to
be fading into the background. Two camps are battling over the excellence criterion
versus widening of participation. In the meantime, Member States appear to be
intent on securing enough cash for their own researchers and enterprises.

Achieving strategic targets with the aid of research and innovation requires not only
a major investment but also support for a shared vision of the added value of
European cooperation. For example, why should we tackle this together and not
separately? Is the EU primarily a competitive arena or a concentration of forces?
What’s the added value of devoting EU resources to capacity-building in the new
Member States? And how will this impact the EU’s citizens?

As a common strategic investment plan, Horizon Europe must be underpinned by a
vision of European cooperation. While the European Research Area is being
redefined, Member States have an opportunity to reaffirm the added value of
European integration and joint investment in R&I. A common research area makes
it possible to coordinate the efforts of different Member States. For example, given
the EU’s strategic targets, countries could specialise in different, complementary
areas. One sensitive issue in this discussion is the extent to which the EU should
seek a better geographical distribution of research capacity. Does improving R&I

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 28
capacity in less developed countries mainly benefit those countries, or will more
developed countries ultimately also profit? Unrestricted researcher mobility across
Europe fosters knowledge-sharing throughout the continent. One of the aims of the
ERA is to promote ‘brain circulation’ within the EU and avoid asymmetric mobility
flows resulting in a brain drain from the less developed to the most developed
Member States. Can closer integration of Europe’s research systems help to
mobilise more research capacity for the EU’s strategic targets?

The recent opinion on the future of the ERA echoes a vision of inclusiveness:
achieving the EU’s strategic targets involves mobilising the potential of the whole
continent, including countries that currently participate only marginally in the
framework programmes for research and innovation.
24 The opinion also proposes
making public awareness of research and innovation successes a new ERA priority.
Having tangible examples of such successes (referred to as ‘ERA lighthouses’) will
help EU citizens to better understand the significance of science for the economy
and society.

The Rathenau Instituut is tracking these developments closely. As a follow-up to
this study, we will delve deeper into two areas of science, climate change and AI,
and, in particular, explore the value of EU policies for society. What do Horizon
Europe and the ERA do for the EU’s citizens? What roles do the EU, national
governments and parliaments play in this respect? And how can the European
Parliament monitor whether and how promises are being kept?

24 ERAC (2020). ERAC opinion on the future of the ERA. https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-
1201-2020-INIT/en/pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 29
Bibliography
Clingendael Institute. (2019). The multilateral system under stress: charting
Europe's path forward. Den Haag.

EPSC. (2019). Rethinking strategic autonomy in the digital age. Brussels.

Rathenau Instituut. (2014). Contested science: public controversies about science
and policy. The Hague (authors: Blankesteijn M., G. Munnichs & L. van Drooge).

Rathenau Instituut. (2016). The Dutch science system in the European Research
Area. The Hague (authors: Dorst, H., J. Deuten & E. Horlings).

Rathenau Instituut. (2017). A never-ending race: on cyberthreats and strengthening
resilience. The Hague (authors: Munnichs, G., Kouw, M. & L. Kool).

Rathenau Instituut. (2018). Public trust in science. The Hague (authors: Broek-
Honingh van den, N. & J. de Jonge).

Rathenau Instituut. (2019). Kennis in het vizier: de gevolgen van de digitale
wapenwedloop voor de publieke kennisinfrastructuur. Den Haag (authors: Diercks,
G., J. Deuten & P. Diederen).

Rathenau Instituut. (2020). Totale Investeringen in Wetenschap en Innovatie
(TWIN) 2018-2024. Den Haag (authors: van den Broek-Honingh, N., Koens, L. & A.
Vennekens).

STOA. (2018). Overcoming innovation gaps in the EU-13 Member States.

Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid. (2017). Veiligheid in een wereld
van verbindingen: Een strategische visie op het defensiebeleid. Den Haag.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 30
Appendix: List of interviewees
Sebastiaan den Bak Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO)

Nynke Cornelissen Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science

Willemijn Dicke Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU)

Thomas Grosfeld Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers
(VNO-NCW)

Radhika van Hameren Permanent Representation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to the European Union

Pieter Hanson FME

Just van den Hoek Neth-ER

Marc Holtkamp European Commission

Ineke Hoving Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy

Kim Huijpen Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU)

Johannes Klumpers European Commission

Odilia Knap Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy

Joyce Kuipers Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO)

Erik van de Linde Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW)

Eduardo Maldonado Agência Nacional de Inovação (Portugal)

Koen de Pater Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy

Jurgen Rienks Neth-ER

Joep Roet Neth-ER

Wim van Saarloos Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW)

Jan Reint Smit Netherlands Enterprise Agency (RVO).

Robert-Jan Smits Eindhoven University of Technology

Talita Soares European Parliament

Auke Venema Dutch Ministry of Defence

Arie van der Zwan European Commission

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
European research and innovation in a new geopolitical arena 31
© Rathenau Instituut 2020
This work or parts of it may be reproduced and/or published for creative,
personal or educational purposes, provided that no copies are made or used for
commercial objectives, and subject to the condition that copies always give the
full attribution. In all other cases, no part of this publication may be reproduced
and/or published by means of print, photocopy, or any other medium without
prior written consent.
Open Access
The Rathenau Instituut has an Open Access policy. Reports, background studies,
research articles and software are all open access publications. Research data
are made available pursuant to statutory provisions and ethical research
standards concerning the rights of third parties, privacy, and copyright.
Contact details
Anna van Saksenlaan 51
P.O. Box 95366
2509 CJ The Hague
070-34215 42
info@rathenau.nl
www.rathenau.nl

Rathenau Instituut Board
Ms Gerdi Verbeet
Prof. Noelle Aarts
Prof. Roshan Cools
Dr Hans Dröge
Prof. Erwin Muller
Prof. Peter-Paul Verbeek
Prof. Marijk van der Wende
Dr Melanie Peters – official secretary

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
The Rathenau Instituut stimulates public and political opinion forming on social
aspects of science and technology. We perform research and organise debate
relating to science, innovation and new technologies.
