
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan
Title Policy Consultation on the Promotion of Technology Transfer and Commercialization
in Azerbaijan (2nd Year): South Korea’s Public Procurement Policy (Appendix)
Institute Science and Technology Policy Institute (STEPI)
Partner Country Republic of Azerbaijan
In Cooperation with Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences - High Technologies Park (ANAS HTP)
Program
Investigators
Inkyoung Sun, Head, the Office of Development Cooperation Research, STEPI
Wangdong Kim, Chief Director, Division of Global Innovation Strategy, STEPI
Project Manager Wangdong Kim, Chief Director, Division of Global Innovation Strategy, STEPI
Senior Advisor Myungdo Oh, Professor, University of Seoul
Researchers Jong Hwa Choi, Head, Office of Future Industry Research, STEPI
Byoung Gun, Kim, Research Fellow, Korea Institute of Procurement
Project Coordinator Yeojin Yoon, Researcher , Division of Global Innovation Strategy, STEPI
Policy Consultation on the Promotion of Technology Transfer and
Commercialization in Azerbaijan (2nd Year): South Korea’s Public
Procurement Policy (Appendix)
Published on 30 December 2020
Copyright ⓒ2020 by Science and Technology Policy Institute (STEPI). All Rights Reserved.
5th-7th Flrs., Building B, Sejong National Research Complex, 370 Sicheong-daero, Sejong-si,
30147. Republic of Korea
Tel: +82-44-287-2000 Fax: +82-44-287-2068
www.stepi.re.kr
For more information, visit
iicc.stepi.re.kr
Printed by Mirae Media
Tel: +82-2-815-0407 Fax: +82-2-822-1269
ISBN 978-89-6112-737-0 93300
Survey Research 2020-05-04-02

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contents
i
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea........................3
1. Overview of Public Procurement.............................................................3
2. Key Features of Public Procurement in South Korea from the Perspective of
Policy Support .........................................................................................5
3. Size and Status of Public Procurement in South Korea........................11
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement......................17
1. SME Support System ...........................................................................17
2. Venture and Startup Support System ...................................................23
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement...................29
1. Priority Purchase System for Technology Development Products........29
2. Innovation-Oriented Public Procurement Policy ...........................................37
Chapter 4. Conclusion and Implications..................................................45
1. Summary of the Study ..........................................................................45
2. Implications...........................................................................................46
REFERENCES.................................................................................................47

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
ii
List of Tables
[Table 1-1] Classification of South Korea’s Public Procurement System .........................5
[Table 1-2] Key Priority Purchase Systems in South Korea .............................................8
[Table 1-3] Trend of Public Procurement Market Size in South Korea ..........................13
[Table 1-4] No. of Public Institutions Mandated to Submit Public Procurement Records
and Plans by Year ....................................................................................14
[Table 2-1] Systems for Supporting SMEs in South Korea’s Public Procurement
Framework..............................................................................................21
[Table 3-1] Technology Development Products Certified or Designated for Priority
Purchasing System ..................................................................................34
List of Figures
[Figure 1-1] Size of Public Procurement in OECD Economies........................................11
[Figure 2-1] Operating Mechanism of SME Competition System..................................20

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
1
Public Procurement
System in South Korea
1

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
2

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
3
1. Overview of Public Procurement
Public procurement or government procurement is defined as “an official procedure for
acquiring goods and services, including facility construction services and public projects,
through government agencies.”
It can also be described as an administrative act by government ministries, local
governments, and public institutions of procuring necessary supplies through the national
budget and implementing public services. Public procurement may also serve different
functions depending on a country’s economic environment and the conceptual
explanations of public procurement vary across countries depending on their
development stage and political and administrative systems.
In the 1960s, for example, South Korea received a large supply of international aid to
rebuild the devastated nation after the war, and the country’s public procurement began
with the aim of efficiently allocating such aid supplies. In the US, on the other hand, public
procurement was first established to efficiently allocate military supplies, and, to this day,
the U.S. public procurement market is dominated by the defense sector.
Currently, however, most countries view public procurement as a process of
“procurement” or “acquisition” of goods, services, construction, and military munitions
needed by government agencies (including local governments), while some countries
consider R&D also as a part of public procurement. This perspective sees any government-
funded development or utilization as a realm of public procurement. Of course, the scope
and scale may vary according to the country’s administrative system.
Chapter 1. Public
Procurement System
in South Korea

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
4
To explain South Korea's public procurement in relation to its administrative system, the
first element to be considered is the contract administration function for purchasing goods,
services, and construction used by government agencies including central government,
public institutions, local governments, and related local public agencies for administrative
purposes. The second element is the policy support function reflecting various
government policies through the B2G (Business-to-Government) market, where the
government, not general consumers, is the buyer and companies are vendors.
These two functions are closely interconnected in their cooperation. While the former
mainly deals with the market trading rules, the latter handles issues related to
qualifications and preferential treatments.
It is difficult to set a clear theoretical definition of public procurement as related policies
vary between countries. In South Korea, however, this dichotomous distinction is possible
because different government administrative agencies oversee the two different functions.
While contract administration exists in virtually all government agencies, albeit in
departmental form, if a country has a separate contract administrative agency (i.e. central
procurement agency) like South Korea, many of those contract administration related
activities necessary for the country will be carried out by this central agency. The prime
goal of the central procurement agency is to ensure reasonable prices for quality
procurement and transparency in the contract processes.
Additionally, given that public procurement is a market directly controlled and operated
by the government, the market is sometimes used to achieve the government's political
agendas. For example, it can be used to secure certain bids for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) or to give them competitive advantages in the bidding process. For this
purpose, it is common that government agencies in charge of supporting SMEs oversee
the relevant laws and systems.
The following classifications are a simplified conceptual description of South Korea’s public
procurement system, which will assist a better understanding of South Korean cases and
related systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
5
[Table 1-1] Classification of South Korea’s Public Procurement System
Perspective Description Related laws Related agencies
Finance and
Contract
A prime objective is to
purchase quality goods,
services, and construction used
by the government (including
government agencies) at
reasonable prices in a timely
manner.
Act on Contracts to which
the State is a Party (“State
Contract Act” in short)
Act on Procurement
Ministry of Economy
& Finance
Public Procurement
Service
Policy
Support
A prime objective is to support
the development of certain
industries (e.g. SMEs or
companies run by female CEOs
or the disabled) and the
implementation of key national
policies by using the public
procurement market’s
purchasing power
Act on Facilitation of
Purchase of SME-
Manufactured Products
and Support for
Development of Their
Markets
Act on Green Purchase
Ministry of SMEs and
Startups
Ministry of
Environment
The purpose of this study is to explain South Korea's case in terms of utilizing public
procurement for national growth. As such, key features of public procurement will be
examined from the perspective of policy support.
2. Key Features of Public Procurement in South
Korea from the Perspective of Policy Support
The basic principle of public procurement is competitive contracting, in which the quality
standards and price evaluation of the purchase items serve as the key criteria. To support
government policies, certain companies or products are preferred over others in
government purchasing. An approach called the “Priority Purchase System” is applied to
ensure a policy link to public procurement and the “single tender contract” method is
often used to effectively implement this priority purchase system.
Priority purchasing can be explained as a concept of giving a priority to a product produced
by a specific company or to a commodity recognized by the government for preferential

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
6
consideration among similar products. In other words, although competition should be the
principle, single tender contracts are permitted, and concentrated purchase of certain
products are institutionalized to realize this policy objective. This system is also used as a
means to promote policy implementation by giving additional points to some bidders in
the bidder selection process, providing incentives for buyer institutions who purchase
products from the preferred group or giving them extra scores in their institutional
evaluations. Priority purchasing is a compelling policy also for companies participating in
this public market as it will create immediate sales increase and thus enhance their
business performance.
The specific practices may be divergent not only within South Korea but also in other
countries when the policy is implemented in the field. One thing in common, though, is
that they all make efforts to link policy support measures to public procurement by taking
advantage of the key features of this government-operated market.
2.1 Types and Key Features of the Priority Purchase System in
South Korea
The priority purchase system does not pursue the common values of general procurement.
In the context of public procurement, this system instead offers discriminatory treatment
to certain suppliers or products qualified for receiving policy support.
This priority purchasing method provides preferential treatment for certain companies
and favors the purchase of specific products. Its implementation begins with determining
the scope of target vendors or target products to be purchased. The priority purchase
system can be categorized into various types according to the features of vendors and the
ways the target products are selected.
The preferential treatment of certain vendors according to their company features, not
the products, supports the selected vendor company by purchasing its products. The
following are the types of policy support for priority purchase practiced in South Korea.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
7
2.1.1 Policy Support by Company Feature
A classification by company feature refers to a categorization of policy support types by
company size (e.g. large company, or SME), CEO’s characteristics, and business objectives.
A preferred treatment of SMEs and especially small companies, when they compete
against their bigger rivals, falls into the category of policy support by company size.
Additionally, the purchase of products produced by companies run by female CEOs is
encouraged to promote women's social engagement in South Korea. This is a type of
policy support categorized by top management’s characteristics.
These priority purchasing programs based on these company features is closely related to
the government’s social, economic and welfare policies as well as policies for women. The
priority purchase system reflects the government’s intention to actively utilize its
procurement market in achieving the maximum impact of these policies.
2.1.2 Policy Support by Product Feature
The policy support based on the product features is designed to preferentially treat
products containing certain technologies or those recognized by the government,
regardless of the company types. In South Korea, such products are often called
“technology development products” that generally refer to products certified or
designated by government agencies. In addition, products containing eco-friendly
elements are included within the scope of the priority purchasing policy, which must be
approved by government agencies. Such purchase of “technology development products”
is a typical method of supporting technology innovation using public procurement in South
Korea.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
8
[Table 1-2] Key Priority Purchase Systems in South Korea
Classification
by feature Type of priority purchase system Relevant laws
Company
feature
Mandatory purchase of products from
SMEs
Act on Facilitation of Purchase of SME-
Manufactured Products and Support
for Development of Their Markets
Mandatory purchase of products from
companies run by female CEOs
Act on Promoting Companies Run by
Female CEOs
Mandatory purchase of products from
companies hiring the disabled
Act on Supporting Companies Hiring
the Disabled
Mandatory purchase of products from
social enterprises Act on Promoting Social Enterprises
Product feature
Preferred purchase of technology
development products
Act on Facilitation of Purchase of SME-
Manufactured Products and Support
for Development of Their Markets
Preferred purchase of green products Act on Promoting Green Products
2.2 Priority Purchasing System and Procurement Contract
To enhance the policy efficacy of priority purchasing, mandatory quotas can be imposed
on buyers, in this case, government agencies. Some products can be subject to single
tender contracts so that they can bypass the competitive bidding process and rapidly
finalize the contracts.
As a means to provide stronger incentives for buyers from the public sector to actively
participate in the mandatory purchase program and increase the ratio of mandatory
purchase in their total purchase, public institutions’ mandatory purchasing records are
positively reflected in their performance evaluation. This is another example of promoting
priority purchasing in South Korea.
According to the country’s public procurement regulations, buyer institutions are required
to buy more than 50% of their total product purchase from SMEs, of which technology
development products need to account for at least 15%.
Though the enforcement of mandatory purchase has some binding power as it is clearly

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
9
stipulated in the law, there are no separate provisions for punishment when they are not
observed. However, the practice of reflecting this element into the performance
evaluation of buyer institutions and requiring them to submit their annual mandatory
purchasing records and plans to the government ministry supervising the mandatory
purchase system serves as an effective means to promote this system.
South Korea's public procurement system and methods have benchmarked the U.S.
system to a considerable extent. As such, the American public procurement system also
offers preferential treatment to companies run by female CEOs, socially disadvantaged
companies, and SMEs and it also sets mandatory purchase ratios. Although the methods
may vary in other developed countries, priority purchase is often considered as a viable
option from the perspective of the operation of the public procurement market. However,
the enforcement of priority purchase system including mandatory purchase may vary
depending on respective countries’ industrial structure, the distribution of their companies,
and their public procurement principles. In some cases, priority purchase can be used for
the purpose of protecting their own industries.
With joining the World Trade Organization (WTO), South Korea is required to open its
public procurement market to the member countries of the Government Procurement
Agreement (GPA), when the purchase is greater than a certain level. This implies that a
principle of competitive bidding is generally applied to ensure foreign companies’ equal
participation in the bidding process. However, single tender contracts for technology
development products can be exceptionally signed with SMEs when they are qualified for
the SME support policy.
As mentioned above, to execute priority purchasing, the scope of purchase items must be
specified. For example, to identify companies that fall into the category of priority
purchasing, government agencies issue certificates for qualified companies based on their
key features. In the case of items for priority purchasing, a government-run certification
system can designate applicable products in the law.
As such, when applying priority purchasing methods to execute government policies, other

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
10
systems that can help identify the purchase items must be accompanied. In some cases,
the government can operate them directly while it can sometimes entrust these functions
to private institutions.
In South Korea, these policies and systems have been maintained for a long time, and,
accordingly, the industries related to the certification have developed side by side. In fact,
prospering e-marketplaces in the public sphere driven by the advancement of e-
commerce technology also contribute to the expansion of the priority purchasing system.
If the size of its public procurement market is relatively small and its technology
development capacity is not so advanced, a country can implement the priority purchasing
system at a manageable level as the scope of priority purchase would be also limited.
However, as the size of the public procurement market grows, the effective
implementation of the priority purchasing system becomes possible only when the
administrative infrastructure is in place. Uniquely in South Korea’s public procurement
system, purchasing needs mostly come from public corporations and local governments,
rather than government ministries. In addition, as the government runs a system for
evaluating and managing these public corporations and local governments, it can easily
incentivize them to comply with the priority purchasing program by reflecting their priority
purchasing compliance into their performance evaluation through rewards or reprimand.
This can serve as effective motivational factors for purchasing. However, it may create a
bias towards certain products or an overemphasis of corporate performance, so it is
necessary to consider measures to preemptively address these problems.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
11
3. Size and Status of Public Procurement in
South Korea
Since the size of public procurement is often determined by the government budget, it
varies by country. However, it generally accounts for about 30 percent of the government
budget and 8-10 percent of national GDP.
According to the OECD report, the average size of public procurement among the OECD
member economies is approximately 29 percent of government expenditure and about 12
percent of GDP. In the case of South Korea, the size of its public procurement is estimated
at 8 percent of its GDP, or about KRW 150 trillion, which is about 30 percent of South
Korea's annual budget of 500 trillion won.
[Figure 1-1] Size of Public Procurement in OECD Economies
Source: SMEs in Public Procurement, OECD, 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
12
Especially in crisis situations like the current COVID-19 pandemic, governments tend to
increase their spending significantly and the size of public procurement also grows in
proportion to the increases in government spending. Since economic growth comes along
with government budget expansion, policy priorities should be placed on institutions and
policies related to public procurement for effective control of government spending in the
process of economic growth.
The size of public procurement in South Korea is estimated at around KRW 134 trillion as
of 2019, which implies an increase of about 10% from the previous level of KRW 120
trillion. The country’s public procurement has increased by more than 30% over the past
eight years.
In 2019, South Korea's public procurement market accounted for about 7.3% of its real
GDP, which stood at KRW 1,848 trillion. Considering its government budget has now
increased to a record high level of almost KRW 500 trillion, it is clearly shown that the size
of government procurement has steadily claimed 25 percent to 30 percent share of the
total government budget.
Currently, South Korea is planning to further increase its budget to about KRW 555 trillion
won for 2021 to boost the stagnated economy inflicted by the pandemic. This increase is
likely to be translated into a solid expansion of its public procurement to KRW 150 trillion.
In fact, this implies the country’s public procurement market has grown by almost 50
percent over the past ten years.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Chapter 1. Public Procurement System in South Korea
13
[Table 1-3] Trend of Public Procurement Market Size in South Korea
(unit: trillion KRW, %)
Classification 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Public
procurement
performance
Total
procurement 106.3 113 111.5 119.2 116.9 123.4 123.4 134.9
Total
procurement
from SMEs
71.9 78.8 78.3 85.4 86.1 92.2 93.9 104.9
Procurement of
SME products 23 27.8 27.9 30.5 31 33 33.1 37.6
Procurement of technology
development products 2.1 2.5 2.6 3.1 3.7 4.5 4.5 5.3
Ratio of technology development
products procurement in
procurement SME products (%)
9.1 9.0 9.3 10.2 11.9 13.6 13.7 14.5
Source: Public e-Procurement Information
Since policies such as priority purchasing are implemented by presenting target rates,
purchases from SMEs are on the rise and the share of technology development products is
also growing in tandem. Compared to 2012, the share of technology development
products in public procurement has more than doubled.
Over the years, South Korea has implemented its priority purchasing policy by mandating
public sector buyers to comply with the 10% purchase quota of SME products in their total
purchase. Now, the government has revised relevant laws to increase this ratio to 15%
from the year 2020. As result, SMEs’ sales are expected to rise continuously.
Since the public purchasing system is aimed at supporting an expanded purchase of
certain product items (e.g. products of SMEs), the government has asked public
institutions to submit their purchase records and plans to prove their purchase of SMEs’
products. The number of public institutions committed to this priority purchasing program
has steadily increased, helping SMEs expand their markets.
As of 2018, there are total 837 public institutions, 46 under the central government, 260

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
14
under the local governments including district offices of education and municipal
parliaments, 339 public agencies, 151 public enterprises located in local provinces, 6
special corporations (e.g. Farmers’ Cooperatives, Fishermen’s Cooperatives, and Chamber
of Commerce), and 35 regional medical centers. These institutions are required to report
their current year purchase records and next year’s purchase plans as an evidence of their
commitment to the mandatory purchasing quota.
Currently, according to the Act on Facilitation of Purchase of Small and Medium
Enterprise-manufactured Products and Support for Development of their Markets, these
public institutions are required to report their mandatory purchasing performance to the
Minister of SMEs and Startups, which is also reflected in the evaluation of their overall
performance.
[Table 1-4] No. of Public Institutions Mandated to Submit Public Procurement Records and Plans by
Year
Classification ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10 ’11 ’12 ’13 ’14 ’15 ’16 ’17 ’18
No. of institutions 156 163 210 204 282 495 516 745 765 775 788 837
Source: Public e-Procurement Information
Of course, the increasing number of public institutions participating in the priority
purchasing program reflects their close linkage to the changes in the government’s
organizational structure. In fact, the expanding scope of public sector activities along with
the increased government budget has resulted in the increase of newly established public
institutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
15
Support for SMEs and
Public Procurement
2

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
16

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
17
1. SME Support System
Uniquely in South Korea, public procurement is used to support SMEs. Regardless of their
types, priority purchasing systems in South Korea’s public procurement are all targeting
SMEs. So, it would not be an exaggeration to say that public procurement-related systems
in South Korea are mostly designed to support SMEs. Besides priority purchasing system,
South Korea’s public procurement has other types of support systems for SMEs, which will
be reviewed in this section in detail.
1.1 Competition between SMEs
Of various methods for supporting SMEs through public procurement market, priority
purchasing program is frequently used as a universal and convenient procedure. There are,
however, other methods of support that can be implemented from the perspective of the
contract system.
In the process of rapid economic growth, South Korea has formed an industrial structure
centered around large corporations, so the growth of SMEs has been rather unbalanced.
In fact, widely known large corporations in South Korea that have now become global
companies such as Samsung, Hyundai, and LG also started their business as SMEs. The
government's industrial development policies during the early stage of the country’s
development made intensive investments in these companies possible, which helped
them grow rapidly in a short period of time. However, there have been strong criticisms
Chapter 2.
Support for SMEs and
Public Procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
18
that the unbalanced industrial structure tilted towards these large corporation would
hinder national competitiveness.
To alleviate the structural imbalance tilted towards large corporations, laws have been
enacted to restrict the participation of large corporations in the public procurement
market, allowing only SMEs to compete in the market. The purpose of these laws is to lay
the foundation for protecting SMEs and leading their growth in the public procurement
market. In South Korea, this system is referred to as the “Competition System among
SMEs”, which has been implemented since 2007.
From a contract perspective, the competition between SMEs can be considered as a type
of limited competition among various competitive bidding mechanisms and is legally
based on the “Act on Facilitation of Purchase of Small and Medium Enterprise-
manufactured Products and Support for Development of their Markets” (hereinafter
referred to as the ``SME Market Development Support Act'') administered by the Ministry
of SMEs and Startups. This law stipulates as follows:
[Act on Facilitation of Purchase of Small and Medium Enterprise-Manufactured Products and
Support for Development of Their Markets (“SME Market Development Support Act”)]
Article 6 (Designation of Competing Products among SMEs)
① The Minister of SMEs and Startups may designate any products, directly manufactured
and supplied by SMEs, which are deemed necessary to expand SMEs’ markets, as competing
products among SMEs (hereinafter referred to as "competing products").
Article 7 (Contracting Method of Competing Products)
① The heads of public institutions shall conclude procurement contracts of competing
products through a limited competitive tendering procedure open only to SMEs or a
designated competitive tendering procedure open only to invited SMEs (hereinafter referred
to as "competitive tendering among SMEs"), except in extenuating circumstances prescribed
by the Presidential Decree.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
19
If the laws that regulate the governments’ contract practices fall into the category of a
general law, the “SME Market Development Support Act” can be considered as a special
law for government procurement contracts. Although this Act stipulates various standards
for operating SME supporting systems, it prohibits purchasing and contracting outside the
scope of the statute.
Relevant clauses of the Act require that not all but certain products manufactured by SMEs
be designated as the products in scope and contracts be finalized to purchase these
products through limited or designated competition.
In other words, contracts of products in scope should follow the procedures stipulated in
the contract law such as limited or specified competition and the products in scope should
meet the following two conditions.
• Condition 1: Products directly produced and supplied by SMEs.
• Condition 2: Products whose markets need to be developed and expanded
Based on the above requirements, the current operating system of the SME Market
Development Support Act consists of two main tasks of i) designating the products in
scope and ii) verifying SMEs’ direct production.
The figure below shows the current operating mechanism, in which the Ministry of SMEs
and Startups oversees the operation and execution of the SME competition system while
the Ministry entrusts the Korea Federation of SMEs with the tasks of recommending and
designating candidate products and verifying SMEs’ direct production.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
20
[Figure 2-1] Operating Mechanism of SME Competition System
Source: Research Team
Among the buyer institutions, public institutions complying with the SME Market
Development Support Act should purchase designated competitive products through
limited competition among SMEs and these SMEs should be certified of their direct
production.
1.2 Other SME Support Systems
SMEs in South Korea's public procurement system are supported through various
measures, of which the above-mentioned priority purchasing system and SME
competition system are the most representative ones. The latter limits the participation in
the bidding only to SMEs. These two measures are linked to the country’s overarching
public procurement policy. In fact, there are various related systems for supporting SMEs
within a large framework of the nation’s public procurement system. However, it is not in
the scope of this study to explain all these systems in detail. Instead, a brief description of
these related systems is presented in [Table 2-1].

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
21
[Table 2-1] Systems for Supporting SMEs in South Korea’s Public Procurement Framework
Classification Description
Competition
between
SMEs
Designating SME
competitive products
• SME competitive products designated by the
Minister of SMEs and Startups are purchased
through a competitive bidding among SMEs (limited
or designated tender) or a single tender contract
Direct (separate)
purchasing of
construction materials
• When placing a construction order, public
institutions place separate orders of construction
materials that belong to the category of SME
competitive products. They purchase these materials
directly from the SME vendors and supply the
purchased materials to the construction vendor.
Verifying qualified SME
cooperatives
• To promote collective sales activities of small
companies incapable of participating in the
competitive bidding for SME competitive products,
qualified SME cooperatives are invited to participate
in the bidding.
Verifying direct
production by SMEs
• On-stie verification of SMEs’ production facilities and
manufacturing processes is conducted to prevent
selected SMEs form delivering their orders using
imported products or products manufactured by
large corporates or third party contractors.
Screening contract
execution capacity
• When signing a contract to purchase SME
competitive products through a competitive bidding
procedure, a lower limit for bidding (85% of the
average standard market price) is applied instead of
the lowest bid selection.
- Selection criteria: bidder’s order fulfillment capacity,
bidding price, credibility, and clearance from
disqualification issues
Technology
Development
Products
Purchase
Priority purchasing of
technology development
products
• Public institutions are required to preferentially
purchase SMEs’ technology development products,
helping SMEs develop their markets.
- Scope: EPC (performance certified), NEP, NET, GS,
best certified products for procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
22
Classification Description
Purchasing certified and
insured technology
development products
- Purchasing support is provided for public institutions
when they purchase products certified in the
government’s performance test
- Buyers are exempted from liabilities caused by
purchased products when the products are
performance-insured products.
Others
Public
Purchase
System
Setting purchase targets
for SMEs
• Mandatory public purchasing quota is applied for
SME products and technology development
products.
- SME products: more than 50% of the total purchase
- Technology development products: more than 10%
of SME product purchase
Priority purchasing of
small companies’
products
• Limited competition only between small companies
or businesses is introduced to protect their interest
in the competitive bidding by designating some of
SME competitive products to be subject to this type
of limited competition.
Operating “Public
Purchasing Information
Network”
• Information network between buyers (public
institutions) and vendors of public purchase is
established to promote their information exchanges.
Offering “Public
Purchasing Loan”
• SMEs are financially supported as they are allowed
to borrow loans from banks to fund their production
and operation activities using their contracts with
public institutions as evidence.
Operating public
purchasing officers
• Officers from the Ministry of SMEs and Startups or
accounting experts from public institutions are
designed as public purchasing officers to facilitate
the purchase of SME products and support public
institutions’ purchasing activities.
Source: Public e-Procurement Information, Summarized by the Korea Institute of Procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
23
2. Venture and Startup Support System
The above-mentioned priority purchasing method can also be applied to support ventures
and startups in South Korea’s public procurement system. Besides this priority purchasing
system, other indirect supporting channels can also be used to promote and recommend
products from ventures and startups.
The government ministry in charge of providing policy support for these ventures and
startups is the Ministry of SMEs and Startups, which provides support by setting a target
purchase quota for products from startup companies in addition to the existing priority
purchase of technology development products.
The South Korean government revised the Enforcement Decree of the ”SME
Establishment Support Act” in 2020 to support ventures and startups and set the target
purchase quota of 8% in public procurement for products from startups.
[SME Establishment Support Act]
Article 5-2 (Public Institutions’ Priority Purchasing) ① The head of a public institution shall
promote its purchase of goods, services, and constructions produced or supplied by
startups (hereinafter referred to as “startup products”).
② The purchase plan prepared by the head of a public institution pursuant to Article 5-1
of the “Act on Facilitation of Purchase of Small and Medium Enterprise-Manufactured
Products and Support for Development of Their Markets” should include plans for
purchasing startup products.
③ The purchase plan prepared pursuant to Article 5-2 should include a target purchase
quota for startup products that is equal to or higher than as prescribed by the Presidential
Decree. The head of a public institution shall endeavor to achieve its planned purchase of
startup products by purchasing more than the plan.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
24
- Omitted Below –
[Enforcement Decree of the SME Establishment Support Act]
Article 5-8 (Target Purchase Quota for Startup Products) ① The head of a public
institution shall include a target purchase quota of 8 percent or more when preparing a
purchase plan for startup products pursuant to Article 5-2 ② of the Act. However, if it is
difficult to set the target purchase quota at more than 8 percent, the target may be set
differently in consultation with the Minister of SMEs and Startups.
② When calculating the ratio of the target purchase quota pursuant to the above clause
①, the purchase of a product that has undergone simple processing such as packaging or
other additional work to sustain the product quality shall not be considered as a purchase
of a startup product.
As the relevant regulations show, what is common in the support systems of the country’s
public procurement is that they all require setting the target purchase quota and
stipulating it in the support polies and related laws. This approach is intended to promote
the impact of the support policy by presenting such target openly to the public
However, as in the above regulations, there is no extra means to regulate public
institutions if they fail to achieve their target purchase quota. Moreover, public institutions
can easily adjust such target when the products they purchase are not compatible with
their policy purpose. As result, the effectiveness of venture and startup support system
cannot be guaranteed. Failure to comply with the purchase target stipulated in laws,
however, may be criticized as a misconduct in the National Assembly audit. When
necessary, public institutions’ compliance with the system can be reflected in their
performance evaluation as a means to improve the efficacy of the system.
On the other hand, in addition to achieving the purchase target as prescribed by law, there
are cases where the central procurement agency’ system is effectively used to support
ventures and startups.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
25
The Public Procurement Service, South Korea’s central procurement agency, has been
supporting the initial sales of startup products through a purchasing platform called
“VENTURENARA” over the recent years and is now extensively involved in fostering
corporate participation in this platform and its connection to public institutions in a bid to
support the implementation of the national agenda.
When selecting bidders, the Public Procurement Service, as a lead procurement agency
who oversees the overall bidding system, frequently provides incentives to benefit
startups by giving them extra points. However, when reflecting the element of policy
support in selection process for successful bidders, it is necessary to carefully examine how
this element is related to other evaluation criteria. If there are other incentivizing factors,
for example, the bidder’s contribution to job creation or export, this incentive favoring
startups can easily be substituted, thus reducing the impact of the startup support policy.
The more alternatives companies have in receiving additional points from, the lower the
influence of the relevant indicators on the possibility of a successful bid.
In South Korea’s bidding system, applying additional points may be difficult to act as a
decisive factor in successful bidding as the proportion assigned to quality and price is still
higher than that of other additional considerations.
This is because of South Korea’s unique industrial structure and corporate distribution.
When there are a limited number of companies participating in the bidding and their
quality and price differences are not big enough, the impact of the additional points can be
considerable and thus can be used to effectively support the startups.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
26

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Chapter 2. Support for SMEs and Public Procurement
27
Technology Innovation
and Public Procurement
3

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
28

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
29
1. Priority Purchase System for Technology
Development Products
South Korea first introduced technology innovation into its public procurement system as
an important factor to drive the quality improvement of SME products. For this purpose,
the certification system was also introduced. Later, it has been institutionalized to better
support the priority purchase system and purchase target-setting. These institutional
changes enabled an early model of innovative procurement and encouraged vendor
companies to accelerate their technology development by taking advantage of the
government's purchasing power in public procurement.
This study also examines the institutional background and history of South Korea’s
technology development product procurement and the key features of the relevant
certification systems.
1.1 Background of the Introduction of the Priority Purchase
System for Technology Development Products
As afore-mentioned, the priority purchasing system plays an important role in using the
government-controlled market like the public procurement market for the purpose of
promoting the implementation of government policies and maximizing their impact. In
1994, to support technology improvement efforts of SMEs, not the market dominant
conglomerates, the South Korean government enacted the “SME Market Development
Support Act” and laid the legal foundation for implementing the priority purchasing
Chapter 3. Technology
Innovation and Public Procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
30
system for technology development products. Based on this Act, the South Korean
government began to provide direct support for the procurement of technology
development products by separately classifying them from general products of SMEs.
In the early stages of this system, products subject to priority purchase were limited to
technology development products and quality certified products produced by SMEs. Back
then, technology development products referred to products of excellent “quality.” This
notion is closely related to the unique process of South Korea's economic growth, as the
government policies at that time were specifically aimed at manufacturing high quality
products that could boost local companies' exports in the era of globalization.
In the case of quality-certified products, the priority purchase policy was first applied to
standardized products in 1993, when the Industrial Standardization Act, enacted in 1961,
was completely revised for systematically regulating industrial standards.
The essence of this policy has been maintained till today. An initial form of priority
purchasing required the state, local governments, government-invested institutions, and
public organizations to purchase marked- products over non-marked products in
accordance with relevant regulations. When marked products were not available in the
market, the buyers were required to first purchase products with marks of quality
certification.
In other words, when the priority purchase was introduced, the industrial policy climate
aimed to increase productivity through standardization and secure quality and
competitiveness in an export-oriented economy.
In 2009, the “Act on the Promotion of SMEs and the Purchase of Their Products” was
amended into the “SME Promotion Act,” while sections related to the promotion of
procurement from SMEs and development of SME markets were separately enacted into
the “Act on Facilitation of Purchase of Small and Medium Enterprise-Manufactured
Products and Support for Development of their Markets.” This Act included the newly
written clauses on the priority purchase of SME products and expanded the application of
certification-related regulations.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
31
1.2 Priority Purchase of Technology Development Products and
Product Certification and Designation
Oftentimes, South Korea's early policies on technology innovation were implemented in
conjunction with industrial policies. In this process, the certification systems also evolved
accordingly. Certification is usually divided into statutory mandatory certification and
arbitrary certification. For example, in case where the certification of safety and hygiene,
which is a prerequisite for a product to be introduced in the market, is considered as
statutory mandatory certification, either domestic or international certification systems
(similar to standards) can be utilized. If a particular country’s economic environment does
not allow for its own certification system, overseas certifications are applied. In such cases,
certifications of the U.S. or Europe are often preferred over those of other countries. If the
local companies of the country lacking its own certification system are certified in the U.S.
or European system, they do not need to obtain additional certification when they enter
overseas markets. So, the borrowing the American or European certification system can be
an efficient option because the arbitrary certification of a particular country is rarely
recognized unless a separate provision exists in another country.
In South Korea, the “New Excellence Product (NEP)” and the “New Excellence Technology
(NET)” certifications are frequently used arbitrary certifications for technology innovation.
The Industrial Technology Innovation Promotion Act in 2006 stipulates mandatory
purchases in public procurement be promoted to facilitate and disseminate the
certification system. These certified products could also be purchased under single tender
contracts without going through the competitive bidding process.
Launched by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy, these certifications were
intended to promote innovative industrial technologies. In this context, these certifications
now serve two functions of preferentially treating new technologies and products and
having companies to obtain these certifications, so that they can be preferentially treated
in the public procurement market.
Currently, there are 19 types of certifications that are favored in the public procurement
market. One of the most unique features of the South Korea’s certification system is that

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
32
the county is now operating multiple certifications by area depending on the government
agencies’ roles in the respective areas of construction, transportation, environment, and
healthcare.
While the ministries in charge of industry mainly use certification to induce technological
development of industries concerned, other ministries in charge of general administration
can also designate their own certifications.
One of the prime examples of widely adopted certification systems is the “System for
Designating Excellent Procurement Products” run by the Public Procurement Service (PPS),
South Korea's central procurement agency. An effective operation of this certification is
possible because PPS conducts quality control of products delivered in the public
procurement market.
The priority purchase products designated by PPS are those from SMEs who have obtained
many of the above-mentioned certifications. The priority purchase system based on
certification intends to support the market development of these products through
priority purchase and single tender contracts. This certification-based priority purchase
system was first introduced in 1996. It was reflected in the law in 2000, when the
Enforcement Decree of the “Act on Procurement Business” introduced a clause on the
designation of excellent procurement products. In 2009, the clause was expanded into the
“Government Procurement Act.”
The excellent procurement products are designated among SME products of high quality
and with excellent technologies through a separate screening process. Though this process
is called a designation, not certification, of excellent procurement products, the
designation is granted by the PPS head. As such, relevant laws stipulate that these
excellent procurement products along with other certified products be subject to priority
purchasing and single tender contract.
The designation of an excellent procurement product requires the product be certified by
other government ministries as NEP or NET and acquire technical rights such as patents or
utility models to prove its technical excellence. Additional quality certification may be

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
33
needed for some products to meet certain quality criteria.
In South Korea, a category of designated products with the highest performance in the
public procurement market is called the “Excellent Procurement Product” category
because PPS is currently operating a separate purchase system for this category. If
designated as an excellent procurement product, the product is registered in a separate
procurement system called "General Shopping Mall" operated by PPS. PPS also provides
various promotional and sales support benefits. The “General Shopping Mall” is a model
that applies private e-commerce to the public procurement. PPS enters into a contract in
advance that does not require delivery in the form of a provisional contract and registers
the product in the “General Shopping Mall,” and it also supports the purchasing
institutions to make payments with a simple click without a separate contract process. In
particular, the purchase of excellent procurement products is considered as fulfilling
government-mandated priority purchase, which incentivizes many public institutions to
buy these items.
In terms of contract methods, it is relatively easy to make the purchase of these items
using the “General Shopping Mall,” which helps enhance the administrative convenience
of buyer institutions.
Unlike the certification systems of other ministries which require the review and
evaluation of the technological details, the PPS designation system of Excellent
Procurement Products ensures the ease of evaluation and operation by setting the
certification by other ministries as a prerequisite for being selected as excellent products
among those pre-certified applicants.
Therefore, in environments where separate certification systems are difficult to operate,
selecting excellent products by utilizing existing certification systems that are being
adopted overseas as global standards can be a feasible short-term solution.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
34
1.3 Linkage between R&D and Public Procurement
In the previous section which described the product-based certification, the term
“technology development product” was used to refer to products related to certification.
However, technology development products are not merely certified or designated
products, but they include all products that are recognized to be qualified for the priority
purchase system. Among these products, some are linked to the government R&D
programs, which will be briefly explained in this section.
The table below describes a list of products collectively referred to as technology
development products in the South Korean public procurement market. Currently, there
are 19 types of technology development products certified or designated for priority
purchasing. Considering that the NET certification of the 5th category has 11 different kinds
run by 11 different ministries, the total number now increases to 30.
The technology development products of the 7th and 19th categories are those related to
innovation procurement which will be discussed in detail in the following section.
Technology development products of the 8th and 9th categories are those related to
national R&D programs.
[Table 3-1] Technology Development Products Certified or Designated for Priority Purchasing System
Category Product name
(Responsible ministry) Legal basis Description
1
Performance Certification
(Ministry of SMEs and
Startups)
Article 15 of the SME
Market Development
Support Act
The performance of SME products is
advanced enough to be certified as
priority purchasing products.
2 Excellent Procurement
Products (PPS)
Article 18 of the Act
on Procurement
Business
To improve the quality of procured
products, technologically excellent
SME-manufactured products are
selected and designated as “Excellent
Procurement Products.”
3
GS Test Certification
(Ministry of Science, and
ICT)
Article 13 of the
Software Industry
Promotion Act
The government guarantees the
software quality to support market
development of software companies
4 New Excellent Product
(NEP) (Ministry of Trade,
Article 16 of the Act
on Industrial
Products that are three years old or
less after the market release with

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
35
Category Product name
(Responsible ministry) Legal basis Description
Industry and Energy) Technology Innovation newly developed local technologies or
substitute technologies embedded
5
New Excellent Technology
(NET)
(Ministry of Trade,
Industry and Energy)
Article 15-2 of the
Industrial Technology
Innovation Promotion
To discover new technologies in the
early stage, certify their excellence, and
promote their commercialization and
technology transactions
6
Joint Trademark Product
for Excellent Procurement
(PPS)
Article 18-2 of the
Enforcement Decree
of the Procurement
Promotion Act
Joint trademark products jointly
developed and owned by 5 or more
SMEs
7 R&D Project Development
Products
The Framework Act
on Science and
Technology
Among products developed through
R&D projects, projects whose
technological innovativeness has been
recognized
8
Successful Products from
New Product
Development Project
Conditioned on
Purchasing (Ministry of
SMEs and Startups)
Article 9 of the SME
Technology Innovation
Promotion Act
To support R&D conditioned on
purchase by buyer institutions (large
corporates, medium-ranked
companies, public institutions, and
foreign companies)
9
Successful Products from
Jointly invested
Technology Development
Projects between
Government and Private
Sector (Ministry of SMEs
and Startups)
Article 9 of the SME
Technology Innovation
Promotion Act
To support R&D by raising joint
technology development fund (i.e.
cooperation fund) between the
government and investment
companies
10
Selected Products
Developed by Public
Institutions (Ministry of
Economy and Finance)
Article 8 of the
Regulations on the
Contract Activities of
the Public Companies
and Semi-
Government
Institutions
Products jointly developed by public
institutions and manufacturing
companies for the purpose of
promoting localized production
11
Projects Successful in
Sharing Outcomes
(Ministry of SMEs and
Startups)
Article 8 of the Act on
the Promotion of
Mutually Beneficial
Cooperation
A contract system for fair distribution
of the outcomes of the joint efforts
between companies through pre-
defined methods

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
36
Category Product name
(Responsible ministry) Legal basis Description
12
Successful Products from
SME Convergence and
Combined Technology
Development Project
(Ministry of SMEs and
Startups)
Article 9 of the SME
Technology Innovation
Promotion Act
R&D projects supporting joint
technology development between
SMEs or between research institutes
and SMEs
13
Green-Certified Products
(Ministry of Trade,
Industry and Energy)
Article 32 of the
Framework Act on
Green Growth
Products adopting energy saving
technologies that minimize
greenhouse gas emissions and
pollutants
14
Industrial Convergence
Products (Ministry of
Trade, Industry and
Energy)
Article 3 & 24 of the
Industrial
Convergence
Promotion Act
Products selected as industrial
convergence items resulting from
industrial convergence between SMEs
and medium-ranked companies
15
Certified Products
Suitable for New
Industrial Convergence
Products
(Ministry of Trade,
Industry and Energy)
Article 12 of the
Industrial
Convergence
Promotion Act
When the products do not meet the
existing certification standards or when
there are no such standards, support
the market development of these
products by designating them as fast-
track products
16
ICT Convergence Certified
Products (Ministry of
Science and ICT)
Article 17 of the
Information and
Communication
Convergence Act
Verified or certified products through
certification screening like on-site
evaluation and testing aimed at
securing the credibility of ICT
convergence technologies and services
17
Excellent Industrial Design
Products (Ministry of
Trade, Industry and
Energy)
Article 6 of the
Industrial Design
Promotion Act
Products whose design excellence is
recognized through a comprehensive
evaluation of product appearance,
performance, materials, and
affordability
18
Products Designated as
Excellent Materials for
Water Industry
Article 10 of the Act
on the Promotion of
Water Industry
Excellent products or technologies
whose performance has been verified
to contribute to the enhancement of
water industry’s technological
competitiveness
19 Innovative Pilot Products
Article 7-3 of the
Enforcement Decree
of the Procurement
Promotion Act
Innovative products recognized by the
government in line with the
innovation-oriented public
procurement policy

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
37
These products are usually developed in the government R&D projects aimed at
supporting SMEs, not through certification or designation, so these products can be
understood as the outcomes of the demand-driven R&D projects. They are subject to
single tender contracts and priority purchase in the public procurement. They are
considered as key components of South Korea’s pioneering demand-driven innovation
procurement that are often emphasized in technology innovation policy.
2. Innovation-Oriented Public Procurement Policy
It has been a while since South Korea introduced the innovation procurement policy
through the priority purchasing of technology development products.
While the priority purchasing of technology products first kicked-off for the purpose of
creating superior quality products, the introduction of the priority purchasing based on
new technology or product certifications in relation to industrial technology innovation
policies served as the starting point of innovation procurement.
Over the past 10 years, South Korea has operated an innovation procurement program
similar to PCP (Pre-Commerce Procurement), whose concept has been fully developed in
Europe, under the name of the “R&D Program Conditioned on Purchase”.
In fact, South Korea’s innovation procurement system has evolved in two stages. In terms
of time-period, the first stage corresponds to the period of the President Roh Moo-hyun
government, when the R&D projects conditioned on purchasing and target priority
purchasing quota were introduced. Now, the second stage is in progress under the current
President Moon Jae-in government, which attempts to redefine the roles of public
procurement and pursues rather aggressive innovation procurement policies through its
policy of innovative growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
38
2.1 Background of Innovation-Oriented Public Procurement Policy
As explained above, South Korea's innovation procurement has mainly relied on the
priority purchasing of certified products. In this practice, only government-certified
products are allowed in single tender contracts and the public institutions’ priority
purchasing records of these government-certified products are reflected in the
performance evaluation of these institutions, which incentives buyer institutions to
comply with the mandatory purchase of the government-certified products.
A prolonged operation of the system has created some side effects like a heavy
concentration on certain products or vendor companies, which makes it difficult to
achieve the initial policy goal of driving innovation as critics point out. To benefit from the
public procurement, vendor companies are often concentrated on obtaining certifications.
However, this does not necessarily guarantee successful bidding results, often increasing
social costs.
Additionally, since demands in the public procurement are often created for materials
needed by the buyer institutions when fulfilling their public responsibilities, there is a high
level of concentration on certain companies or products in the product markets with high
demand. Unfortunately, such concentration has limited purchasing opportunities for new
innovative products.
In the early stages of government support policies such as the priority purchasing program,
forming an initial market centering on a small number of products can be advantageous. If
such circumstances continue for a long time, however, it creates an unbalanced market
formed around specific industries or sectors. Though some policy adjustments were
needed to correct such market situation in South Korea, it has remained unaddressed.
In particular, when targets such as a purchase quota are set, a blind purchase occurs in
public institutions merely to achieve the corresponding goal. In this case, the initial goal of
the policy can be distorted, making its operational management critical.
In the process of reviewing the accumulated problems, the Ministry of Public

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
39
Administration and Security set “Innovative Public Procurement” (September 26th, 2019)
as one of the six major areas of government innovation in 2019. As a result, a joint inter-
ministerial scheme called the “Innovation-Oriented Public Procurement Plan'' (July 19th,
2019) was announced i) to improve the existing priority purchase system for technology
development products and ii) to establish a fast track that can help innovative products at
pre-commercial stages enter the public procurement market.
This plan is designed to address the shortcomings of the existing priority purchase system
and the fragmented certification systems, introduce a new method of innovation
procurement called fast track, and introduce related incentives and liability exemption for
purchasing officers of buyer institutions.
The fast track procurement of innovative products can take two approaches. The first
approach is granting single tender contracts to national R&D outcomes and the second is
conducting test purchasing of prototypes.
One of the most important and urgent institutional improvements is the establishment of
a public procurement control tower as a pan-ministerial entity. Due to the nature of public
procurement, consultations and coordination between ministries occur frequently as
various regulations are scattered throughout the public procurement framework. In this
context, a control tower in public procurement needs to be newly established in the form
of a government committee who can play the role of overall planning and coordination to
improve the effectiveness of public procurement.
2.2 Establishment of the Fast Track and Test Purchase
The fast track, one of the representative programs of South Korea’s innovation-oriented
public procurement policy, reflects the country’s unique circumstances.
In the past, the operation of “Technology Development Product Purchase” was linked to
the certification system, which caused a prolonged process for companies to develop new
products and introduce these products into the public procurement market.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
40
Of course, some products with high public demand are easy to enter the market. But if a
new product that has never been used by public institutions is introduced in the market, it
is difficult to proceed with its procurement contracts without pre-defined test standards,
purchase specifications, and standardization for certification.
This is because the buyers of public procurement are public institutions who spend the
government budget to purchase the products. If quality issues arise with the purchased
products in the future or the purchase price turns out to be higher than that of similar
grade products, these public institutions may end up in being scrutinized in the audit.
Consequently, procurement officers of public institutions tend to prefer products that they
have experienced before, making very conservative purchases.
In order for a new product to satisfy buyers, user test is an important procedure before
the product is verified in the market. South Korea's R&D support, however, has focused on
the development process, while purchase support is possible only after a complete
verification process. This dichotomous support system requires a plan to fill this gap. A
test-purchase program, often called as “Innovative Product Fast Track,” has been under
discussion as it allows the government to purchase early stage prototypes and test it with
buyers in the public sector.
To be operated as a purchase program rather than an R&D program, the fast track
program needs to ensure compatibility with the current contract laws. As such, innovative
products have been selected to be applied to a purchasing procedure called “fast track.”
This fast track is generally applied in two different modes. The first mode is to use it to
verify the outcomes of national R&D projects. In the second approach, PSS receives
technology and product proposals from vendor companies and gathers public institutions’
demands, which will then be addressed by the selected private technologies or products.
Of course, not all selected products are initially purchased by the government. In the case
where products are matched with the public institutions who conduct field tests, they are
supported within the specified budget. In the fast track, PSS becomes the initial buyer of
selected products, which will then be transferred to the public institutions performing the

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Chapter 3. Technology Innovation and Public Procurement
41
tests in the future.
Canada is the first country who introduced and operated this fast track method. While
Canada’s current system has been partially modified, the BCIP (Build in Canada Innovation
Program) was benchmarked by South Korea before it was applied in a partially modified
form.
To further promote the purchase of innovative products, the South Korean government
has set a goal of supplying one percent of its purchase with these innovative products,
separately from the already existing priority purchase of technology development
products.
Some countries in Europe currently set the purchase target of innovative products while
the EU Commission actively reviews the innovation procurement performance and seeks
for cooperation in this matter.
The OECD also recognizes the importance of innovation procurement, so it runs a separate
working group to share cases of innovation procurement among OECD member
economies and publish related reports.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
42

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Chapter 4. Conclusion
43
Conclusion and
Implications
4

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
44

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Chapter 4. Conclusion
45
1. Summary of the Study
Policy support measures using public procurement in South Korea can be broadly
categorized into certification/designation, priority purchasing, purchase target ratio, and
performance evaluation. In addition, uniquely in South Korea, single tender contract and
limited competition are used in the public procurement contract system.
The core elements of South Korea’s public procurement system is i) the identification of
vendor companies or their products eligible to receive policy support through certification,
designation or verification of vendor companies and ii) the stipulation of mandatory
purchasing of target products by public institutions in the relevant laws. These elements
are in accordance with the policy focus aimed at promoting purchases of target products
in the public procurement framework. In addition, effective implementation methods can
be applied such as i) reflecting public institutions’ purchase records in their performance
evaluation as a means to incentivize them to comply with various support policies and ii)
allowing single tender contracts to expedite the contract process.
If a policy support system is prolonged, however, there could be some side effects that
may deviate from the policy objectives and rationale. Therefore, it is necessary to
continuously analyze the management system and performance when introducing policy
support systems.
Chapter 4. Conclusion
and Implications

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
2020 K-Innovation ODA Program with Azerbaijan: Appendix
46
2. Implications
A case analysis of the South Korean public procurement policies has revealed how they
support SMEs and drive innovation in the country.
Different countries may adopt different ways to utilize the government's purchasing
power like public procurement. Relative to other countries, South Korea’s public
procurement system tends to be more centralized, systematic, and goal-oriented.
Though the US and Europe have central procurement agencies in place, their public
procurement system tends to guarantee individual buyers’ (e.g. public institutions)
autonomous purchase to a great extent. On the other hand, South Korea uses public
procurement as means to support the government’s specific policies, so the country sets
clear goals and mandates them at the government level. It also uses incentives or
reprimand to ensure an effective policy implementation.
Given the rapid economic growth of South Korea over the past 50 years, the country offers
policy implementation systems that can be readily adopted by developing countries. As
South Korea is now approaching to the ranks of developed countries, however, the
country’s systems also have some improvement needs.
Another important aspect of South Korean policies is that they can be effectively used for
understanding both institutional strengths and weaknesses of the country’s systems. In
fact, the country has actively benchmarked best practices of developed countries and
tailored them to fit its policy environment. In this context, South Korean public
procurement system has important implications for concerned parties as it presents both
strengths and weaknesses.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
REFERENCES
47
REFERENCES
김병건(2016), ｢국내 공공혁신조달(PPI) 도입과 시사점｣, 한국구매조달학회, 제 15 권 제 2 호, 1-9.
김병건(2018), ｢공공테스트베드 사업 세부실행방안 연구｣, 한국조달연구원.
Ministries (2019), Innovation-oriented public procurement policy
Ministry of SMEs and Startups, Act on Facilitation of Purchase of Small and Medium enterprise-
Manufactured Products and Support for Development of Their Markets (2017)
SMEs Product Purchase Promotion and Market Support Act
OECD(2018) SMEs in Public Procurement
Public e-Procurement Information (SMPP), www.smpp.go.kr
