
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Building a
National
AI Research
Resource:
A Blueprint for
the National
Research Cloud
Daniel E. Ho
Jennifer King
Russell C. Wald
Christopher Wan
WHITE PAPER
OCTOBER 2021

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Principal Authors
Daniel E. Ho, J.D., Ph.D., is the William Benjamin Scott and Luna M. Scott Professor of Law,
Professor of Political Science, and Senior Fellow at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
Research at Stanford University. He directs the Regulation, Evaluation, and Governance Lab
(RegLab) at Stanford, and is a Faculty Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral
Sciences and Associate Director of the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence (HAI). He received his J.D. from Yale Law School and Ph.D. from Harvard University
and clerked for Judge Stephen F. Williams on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit.

Jennifer King, Ph.D., is the Privacy and Data Policy Fellow at the Stanford HAI. Dr. King
completed her doctorate in Information Management and Systems (information science) at
the University of California, Berkeley School of Information. Prior to joining HAI, Dr. King was the
Director of Consumer Privacy at the Center for Internet and Society at Stanford Law School from
2018 to 2020.

Russell C. Wald is the Director of Policy for the Stanford HAI, leading the team that advances
HAI’s engagement with governments and civil society organizations. Since 2013, Wald has held
various government affair roles representing Stanford University. He is a Term Member with the
Council on Foreign Relations, Visiting Fellow with the National Security Institute at George Mason
University, and a Partner with the Truman National Security Project. Wald is a graduate of UCLA.

Christopher Wan is a JD/MBA candidate at Stanford University and was Teaching Assistant for
the Stanford Policy Practicum: Creating a National Research Cloud. He also serves as a Research
Assistant for the Stanford HAI and as an investor at Bessemer Venture Partners. He received his
B.S. in Computer Science from Yale University and worked as a software engineer at Facebook
and as a venture investor at In-Q-Tel and Tusk Ventures.

The Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Cordura Hall, 210 Panama Street, Stanford, CA 94305-4101
October 2021, V1.0
2

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Contributors
Many dedicated individuals contributed to this White Paper. To acknowledge these contributions,
we list here the contributors for each chapter and section.

Executive Summary and Introduction
Daniel E. Ho, Tina Huang, Jennifer King, Marisa Lowe, Diego Núñez, Russell Wald, Christopher Wan,
Daniel Zhang

The Theory for a National Research Cloud
Nathan Calvin, Shushman Choudhury, Tina Huang, Daniel E. Ho, Kanishka Narayan, Diego Núñez,
Frieda Rong, Russell Wald, Christopher Wan

Eligibility, Allocation, and Infrastructure for Computing
Daniel E. Ho, Krithika Iyer, Tyler Robbins, Jasmine Shao, Russell Wald, Daniel Zhang

Securing Data Access
Nathan Calvin, Shushman Choudhury, Daniel E. Ho, Ananya Karthik, Jennifer King, Christopher Wan

Organizational Design
Sabina Beleuz, Drew Edwards, Daniel E. Ho, Jennifer King, Christopher Wan

Data Privacy Compliance
Simran Arora, Neel Guha, Jennifer King, Sahaana Suri, Sadiki Wiltshire, Christopher Wan

Technical Privacy and Virtual Data Safe Rooms
Neel Guha, Jennifer King, Christopher Wan

Safeguards for Ethical Research
Daniel E. Ho, Jennifer King, Diego Núñez, Russell Wald, Daniel Zhang

Managing Cybersecurity Risks
Neel Guha, Diego Núñez, Frieda Rong, Russell Wald

Intellectual Property
Sabina Beleuz, Daniel E. Ho, Ananya Karthik, Diego Núñez, Christopher Wan

Case Studies
Daniel E. Ho, Krithika Iyer, Jennifer King, Marisa Lowe, Kanishka Narayan, Tyler Robbins

We also would like to thank Jeanina Casusi, Celia Clark, Shana Lynch, Kaci Peel, Stacy Peña,
Mike Sellitto, Eun Sze, and Michi Turner for their help in preparing this White Paper.

3

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
External Participants
Erik Brynjolfsson
Stanford University

Isabella Chu
Population Health
Sciences
Stanford University

Jack Clark
Anthropic

John Etchemendy
Stanford University

Fei-Fei Li
Stanford University

Marc Groman
Groman Consulting
Group LLC

Eric Horvitz
Microsoft
Sara Jordan
The Future of
Privacy Forum

Vince Kellen
U.C. San Diego,
CloudBank

Ed Lazowska
University of
Washington

Naomi Lefkovitz
National Institute of
Standards and
Technology (NIST)
Brenda Leong
The Future of
Privacy Forum

Amy O’Hara
Georgetown Federal
Statistical Research
Data Center
Georgetown University

Wade Shen
Actuate Innovation

Suzanne Talon
Compute Canada

Lee Tiedrich
Covington & Burling LLP

Evan White
California Policy Lab
U.C. Berkeley
In our process, we also engaged many civil society leaders and advocates who have expressed many
perspectives about building a National Research Cloud. We are grateful for their shared thoughts and
helping us shape a better White Paper and have incorporated their feedback where possible.
Guest Lecturers and Interviewees
We relied on extraordinary outside expert reviewers for feedback and guidance. We are grateful to
Jack Clark, Leisel Bogan, John Etchemendy, Mark Krass, Marietje Schaake, and Christine Tsang for
their thoughtful review of the full White Paper, and thank Isabella Chu, Kathleen Creel, Luciana Herman,
Sara Jordan, Vince Kellan, Brenda Leong, Ruth Marinshaw, Amy O’Hara, and Lisa Ouellette for their
subject expertise on specific chapters.
Reviewers
4

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Taka Ariga
Government Accountability
Office

Kathy Baxter
Salesforce

Leisel Bogan
Belfer Center
Harvard University

Jeffrey Brown
IBM

Miles Brundage
Open AI

L. Jean Camp
University of Indiana
at Bloomington

Dakota Cary
Center for Security and
Emerging Technology
Georgetown University

Shikai Chern
Veritas Technologies

Isabella Chu
Population Health Sciences
Stanford University
Jack Clark
Anthropic

Meaghan English
Patrick J. McGovern
Foundation
Cyrus Hodes
The Future Society
Sara Jordan
The Future of Privacy Forum

Vince Kellen
U.C. San Diego, CloudBank

Michael Kratsios
Scale AI

Samantha Lai
Brookings Institution

Brenda Leong
The Future of Privacy Forum

Ruth Marinshaw
Stanford Research
Computing Center

Joshua Meltzer
Brookings Institution

Sam Mulopulous
U.S. Senate

Dewey Murdick
Center for Security and
Emerging Technology
Georgetown University

Hodan Omaar
Center for Data Innovation

Calton Pu
Georgia Tech
Asad Ramzanali
U.S. House of
Representatives

David Robinson
Upturn

Saiph Savage
Northeastern University

Michael Sellitto
Stanford HAI

Ishan Sharma
Federation of
American Scientists

John Smith
IBM

Brittany Smith
Data and Society

Victor Storchan
JP Morgan Chase

Keith Strier
AI Compute Task
Force Organisation
for Economic
Co-operation and
Development (OECD)

Lee Tiedrich
Covington & Burling LLP

Evan White
California Policy Lab
U.C. Berkeley

On August 5, 2021, the co-authors hosted a feedback session to hear from a variety of stakeholders
in academia, civil society, government, and industry. We are thankful for the time and helpful
advice participants offered. Workshop attendee affiliations are listed for identification purposes
only. Individuals from Microsoft and AI Now also attended the workshop but did not want to be
personally identified.
Workshop Participants
5

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Disclosures
Stanford University actively engaged with Congress and lobbied for the National Artificial Intelligence
Research Resource Task Force Act. Co-author Russell Wald built a coalition of academic, civil society,
and industry stakeholders and lobbied Congress to pass the National Artificial Intelligence Research
Resource Task Force Act.
HAI Co-Director Fei-Fei Li, who served as a guest lecturer in the class, was an early supporter of a
task force to study the National Research Cloud. Dr. Li has been appointed to serve as a member of
the National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource (NAIRR) Task Force.
Co-author Daniel Ho directs the Stanford RegLab, which has received compute support from HAI’s
cloud credit program (AWS and GCP); Microsoft’s AI for Earth Azure compute credit grant program;
and Google’s Cloud credit grant for COVID-19 research.
Co-author Jennifer King received unrestricted gift funding for research from Mozilla, Facebook,
and Accenture in her previous role at the Center for Internet and Society.
The Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) receives financial and cloud
computing support from A121 Labs, Amazon Web Services, Google, IBM, Microsoft, and OpenAI.
About HAI
About the SLS Policy Lab
Stanford University’s Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) applies rigorous
analysis and research to pressing policy questions on artificial intelligence. A pillar of HAI is to inform
policymakers, industry leaders, and civil society by disseminating scholarship to a wide audience.
HAI is a nonpartisan research institute, representing a range of voices. The views expressed in this
White Paper reflect the views of the authors.
The Policy Lab at Stanford Law School offers students an immersive experience in finding solutions
to some of the world’s most pressing issues under the direction of Stanford faculty and researchers.
Directed by former SLS Dean Paul Brest, the Policy Lab reflects the school’s belief that systematic
examination of societal problems, informed by rigorous research, can generate solutions to society’s
most challenging public problems.
Academic Independence
This White Paper was developed independently by the research team. While we solicited feedback from a
wide range of stakeholders, no HAI donors, corporations, or other stakeholders had any involvement with
the research and production of this White Paper. Per HAI policy, “Donors cannot dictate research topics
pursued by HAI researchers” nor “control permission to publish research results.” For more information,
please see HAI’s policy: https:/ /hai.stanford.edu/about/fundraising-policy.
6

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
7
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Creating a National Research Cloud 9
INTRODUCTION 15
CHAPTER 1: A Theory for a National Research Cloud 17
CHAPTER 2: Eligibility, Allocation, and Infrastructure for Computing 22
CHAPTER 3: Securing Data Access 35
CHAPTER 4: Organizational Design 48
CHAPTER 5: Data Privacy Compliance 53
CHAPTER 6: Technical Privacy and Virtual Data Safe Rooms 61
CHAPTER 7: Safeguards for Ethical Research 66
CHAPTER 8: Managing Cybersecurity Risks 70
CHAPTER 9: Intellectual Property 76
GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS 82
APPENDIX 84
ENDNOTES 90

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
8
COMPUTE MODELS
NSF CloudBank 27
NSF XSEDE 29
Fugaku 32
Compute Canada 34
DATA MODELS
Coleridge Initiative 42
Stanford Population Health Sciences 43
The Evidence Act 46
ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS
Science and Technology Policy Institute 50
Alberta Data Partnerships 51
OTHER MODELS
Administrative Data Research UK 58
California Policy Lab 64
Case Studies

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
9
Artificial intelligence (AI) appears poised to transform the economy across sectors ranging from healthcare and finance,
to retail and education. What some have coined the “Fourth Industrial Revolution”1 is driven by three key trends: greater
availability of data, increases in computing power, and improvements to algorithm design. First, increasingly large amounts
of data have fueled the ability for computers to learn, such as by training an algorithmic language model on all of Wikipedia.2
Second, better computational capacity (often termed “compute”) and compute capability have enabled researchers to build
models that were unimaginable merely 10 years ago, sometimes spanning billions of parameters (an exponential increase
in scope from previous models).3 Third, basic innovations in algorithms are helping scientists to drive forward AI, such as the
reinforcement learning techniques that enabled a computer to defeat the world champion in the board game Go.4
Historically, partnerships between government(s), universities, and industries have anchored the U.S. innovation
ecosystem. The federal government played a critical role in subsidizing basic research, enabling universities to undertake
high-risk research that can take decades to commercialize. This approach catalyzed radar technology, the internet, and
GPS devices. As the economists Ben Jones and Larry Summers put it, “[e]ven under very conservative assumptions, it is
difficult to find an average return below $4 per $1 spent” on innovation, and the social returns might be closer to $20 for
every dollar spent.5 Industry in turn, scales and commercializes applications.
CHALLENGES TO THE AI INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM
Yet this innovation ecosystem faces serious potential challenges. Computing power has become critical for the
advancement of AI, but the high cost of compute has placed cutting edge AI research in a position accessible only to key
industry players and a handful of elite universities.6 Access to data—the raw ingredients used to train most AI models—is
increasingly limited to the private sector and large platforms7, since government data sources remain largely inaccessible
to the AI research community.8 As the National Security Commission on AI (NSCAI) has determined, “[t]he consolidation
of the AI industry threatens U.S. technological competitiveness. ”9
Four interrelated challenges illustrate this finding: First, we are seeing a significant brain drain of researchers
departing universities.10 In 2011, AI Ph.D.s were roughly equally likely to go into industry vs. academia.11 Ten years later,
two- thirds of AI Ph.D.s go to industry, and less than one quarter go into academia.12 Second, these trends indicate that
many university researchers struggle to engage in cutting-edge science, draining the field of the diverse set of research
voices that it needs. Third, the fundamental research that would guarantee the United States stays at the helm of AI
innovation is being crowded out. By one estimate, 82 percent of algorithms used today originated from federally funded
nonprofits and universities, but “U.S. leadership has faded in recent decades. ”13 Fourth, government agencies have faced
challenges in building compute infrastructure,14 and there are societal benefits to reducing the cost of core governance
functions and improving government’s internal capacity to develop, test, and hold AI systems accountable.15 In short,
a growing imbalance in AI innovation tilts towards industry, leaving academic and non-commercial research behind.
Given the longstanding role of academic and non-commercial research in innovation, this shift has substantial negative
consequences for the American research ecosystem.
Executive Summary:
Creating a National Research Cloud

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
10
THE NATIONAL AI RESEARCH
RESOURCE TASK FORCE ACT
Responding to these challenges, Congress enacted
the National AI Research Resource Task Force Act as
part of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
in January 2021.16 The Act forms part of the National
Artificial Intelligence Initiative, which identifies further
steps to increase research investments, set technical
standards, and build a stronger AI workforce. The Act
created a Task Force—the composition of which was
announced on June 10, 202117—to study and plan for
the implementation of a “National Artificial Intelligence
Research Resource, ” (NAIRR) namely “a system that
provides researchers and students across scientific
fields and disciplines with access to compute resources, co-located with publicly available, artificial intelligence-ready
government and non-government data sets. ”18 This research resource has also been referred to as the National Research
Cloud (NRC) and was strongly endorsed by the NSCAI, which wrote that the NRC “will strengthen the foundation of
American AI innovation by supporting more equitable growth of the field, expanding AI expertise across the country, and
applying AI to a broader range of fields. ”19
While other initiatives have sought to improve access to compute or data in isolation,20 the NRC will generate distinct
positive externalities by integrating compute and data, the two bottlenecks for high-quality AI research. Specifically, the
NRC will provide affordable access to high-end computational resources, large-scale government datasets in a secure
cloud environment, and the necessary expertise to benefit from this resource through a close partnership between
academia, government, and industry. By expanding access to these critical resources in AI research, the NRC will support
basic scientific AI research, the democratization of AI innovation, and the promotion of U.S. leadership in AI.
THEMES
Stanford Law School’s Policy Lab program convened a multidisciplinary research team of graduate students, staff,
and faculty drawn from Stanford’s business, law, and engineering schools to study the feasibility of, and considerations for
designing the NRC. Over the past six months, this group studied existing models for compute resources and government
data, interviewed a wide range of government, computer science, and policy experts, and examined the technical, business,
legal, and policy requirements. This White Paper was commissioned by Stanford’s Institute for Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence (HAI), which originated the proposal for the NRC in partnership with 21 other research universities.21
Throughout our research, we observed three primary themes that cut across all areas of our investigation. We have
integrated these themes into each section of our White Paper and drawn on them to explain our findings.
• Complementarity between compute and data. As we evaluated the existing computing and data-sharing ecosystems,
one of the systemic challenges we observed was a decoupling of compute resources from data infrastructures.
The NRC directs more resources
toward AI development in the public
interest and helps ensure long-term
leadership by the United States in the
field by supporting the kind of pure,
basic research that the private sector
cannot undertake alone.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
11
High-performance computing can be useless
without data; and a major impediment to data
sharing, particularly for high-value government
data, lies in requirements for a secure, privacy-
protecting computing environment.
• Rebalancing AI research toward long-term,
academic, and non-commercial research. Presently,
AI innovation is disproportionately dependent on
the private sector. Public investment in basic AI
infrastructure can both support innovation in the
public interest and complement private innovation
efforts. The NRC directs more resources toward
AI development in the public interest and helps
ensure long-term leadership by the United States in the field by supporting the kind of pure, basic research that the
private sector cannot undertake alone.
• Coordinating short-term and long-term approaches to creating the NRC. Our research considers many near-term
pathways for standing up a working version of the NRC by spelling out how to work within existing constraints. We
also identify the structural, legal, and policy challenges to be addressed in the long term for executing the full vision
of the NRC.
We summarize our main recommendations here.
COMPUTE MODEL
• The “Make or Buy” Decision. The main policy choice will be whether to build public computing infrastructure or
purchase services from existing commercial cloud providers.
 ° It is well established that, based solely on hardware costs, it is more cost-effective to own infrastructure when
computing demand is close to continuous.22 The government also has experience building high-performance
computing clusters, typically built by contractors and operated by national laboratories.23 The National Science
Foundation (NSF) has also supported many supercomputing initiatives at academic institutions.24
 ° The main countervailing concerns are that existing commercial cloud providers have software stacks and usability
that AI researchers have widely adopted and may consider to be a more user-friendly platform. Commercial cloud
providers offer a way to expand capacity expeditiously, although scale and availability will still be constrained by
the availability of current graphics processing unit (GPU) computing resources.
 ° We recommend a dual investment strategy:
 ■ First, the compute model of the NRC can be quickly launched by subsidizing and negotiating cloud
computing for AI researchers with existing vendors, expanding on existing initiatives like the NSF’s
CloudBank project.25
 ■ Second, the NRC should invest in a pilot for public infrastructure to assess the ability to provide similar
resources in the long run. Such publicly owned infrastructure would still be built under contract or
One of the systemic challenges
[to basic AI research is] a decoupling
of compute resources from data
infrastructures . . . [A] secure,
privacy-protecting computing
environment [will be critical].

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
12
grant, but could be operated much like national laboratories (e.g., Sandia National Laboratories,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory) that own sophisticated supercomputing facilities or academic
supercomputing facilities.
• Researcher Eligibility. While some have argued the NRC should be open for commercial access, for the purposes of
this White Paper, we adhered to the spirit of the legislation forming the NAIRR Task Force and only reviewed the use
of an NRC for academic and non-profit AI research. We recommend that the NRC eligibility start with academics who
hold “Principal Investigator” (PI) status (i.e., most faculty) at U.S. colleges and universities, as well as to “Affiliated
Government Agencies” willing to contribute previously unreleased, high-value datasets to the NRC in return for
subsidized compute resources. PI status should be interpreted expansively to encompass all fields of AI application.
Students working with PIs should presumptively gain access to the NRC. Scaling the NRC to meet the demand of all
students in the United States may be challenging, but we also recommend the creation of educational programs as
part of the new resource to help train the next generation of AI researchers.
• Mechanism. In order to keep the award processing costs down, we recommend a base-level of compute access to
meet the majority of researcher computing needs. Base-level access avoids high overhead for grant administration
and may meet the compute demands for the supermajority of researchers. For researchers with exceptional needs,
we recommend a streamlined grant process for additional compute access.
DATA ACCESS MODEL
• Focus on Government Data. We focus our recommendations for data provision/access to government data
because: (1) there are already a wide range of platforms for sharing private data,26 and (2) distribution by the NRC
of private datasets would raise a tangle of thorny IP issues. We recommend that researchers be allowed to compute
on any datasets they themselves contribute, provided they certify they have the rights to that data, and the use of
such data is for academic research purposes.
• Tiered Access. We recommend a tiered access model: by default, researchers will gain access to government data
that is already public; researchers can then apply through a streamlined process to gain access at higher security
levels on a project-specific basis. It will be critical for the NRC to ultimately displace the current fragmented, agency-
by-agency relational approach. By providing secure virtual environments and harmonizing security standards (e.g.,
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)27), the NRC can collaborate with proposals for a
National Secure Data Service28 to provide a model for accelerating AI research, while protecting data privacy and
prioritizing data security.
• Agency Incentives. To incentivize federal agencies to share data with the NRC and improve the state of public
sector technology, we recommend the NRC permit federal agency staff to use the NRC’s compute resources. In
keeping with the practices of existing data-sharing programs, such as the Coleridge Initiative,29 we also recommend
that the NRC provide training and support to work with agencies to modernize and harmonize their data standards.
• Strategic Investment for Data Sources. In the short term, we recommend that the NRC focus its efforts on making
available non-sensitive, low- to moderate-risk government datasets, rather than sensitive government data (e.g.,
data about individuals) or data from the private sector, due to data privacy and intellectual property concerns.
Researchers can still use NRC compute resources on private data, but should rely on existing mechanisms to acquire
data for their own private buckets on the NRC. For example, images taken from Earth observation satellites, such as

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
13
Landsat imagery, provide a promising low-risk, high-reward government dataset, as making such satellite imagery
freely available to researchers has generated an estimated $3-4 billion in annual economic benefits, particularly
when combined with high-performance computing.30 Agencies such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, the U.S. Geological Survey, the Census Bureau, the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, and
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, for instance, also have rich datasets that can more readily be deployed. In the long
run, access to high-risk datasets, such as those owned by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA), will depend on the tiered access model.
ORGANIZATIONAL FORM
Where to institutionally locate the NRC poses a tradeoff between ease of coordination to obtain compute and ease
of data access. For instance, locating the NRC within a single agency would make coordination with compute providers
easier, but would make data access across agencies more difficult, absent further statutory authority. Many efforts to
make data access to government data easier, most notably the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
2018, have proven to be among the most daunting challenges of government modernization.31 Building on those insights,
we ultimately recommend that the NRC be instituted as a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC)
in the short run, and a public-private partnership (PPP) in the long run.
• FFRDC. FFRDCs at Affiliated Government Agencies would reduce the significant costs of securing data from those
host agencies. This approach will also cohere with the greater reliance on commercial cloud credits in the short run,
making compute and data coordination less central. In the long run, however, streamlined coordination between
data and compute may be more difficult with FFRDCs hosted at specific agencies when (1) the NRC moves away
from commercial cloud credits and towards its own high-performance computing cluster, and (2) a greater number
of inter-agency datasets become available.
• PPP . In the long run, we recommend the creation of a PPP model, governed by officers from Affiliated Government
Agencies, academic researchers, and representatives from the technology sector, which can house both compute
and data resources.
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
• Data Privacy. As an initial matter, an NRC where sensitive or individually identifiable administrative data from
multiple agencies are used to build and train AI models will face challenges from the Privacy Act of 1974.32 The Act is
intended to put a check on interagency data sharing and disclosure of sensitive data without consent.
 ° In order to avoid conflicts with non-consensual interagency data sharing, we recommend that the NRC should
not be instituted as its own federal agency, nor should federal agency staff be allowed access to interagency
data.
 ° To avoid conflicts with the Act’s “no disclosure without consent” requirement, any data released to the NRC
must not be individually identifiable. Despite these constraints, the majority of AI research will likely fall under
the Act’s statistical research exception, contingent on proposals aligning with an agency’s core purpose.
 ° Given concerns about the potential privacy risks, federal agencies may desire to share data, contingent on
the use of technical privacy measures (e.g., differential privacy). While useful in many instances, technical

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
14
approaches are no panacea and should not
substitute for data access policies.
 ° The NRC should explore the design of virtual
“data safe rooms” that enable researchers to
access data in a secure, monitored, and cloud-
based environment.
 ° Additional legislative interventions could
also facilitate data sharing with the NRC (e.g.,
requiring IT modernization to include data
sharing plans with the NRC).
• Ethics. Rapid innovation in AI research raises a
host of potential ethical challenges. Given the
scope of the NRC, it will be infeasible to review
every single research proposal for potential ethical
violations, particularly since ethical standards are still in flux. The NRC should adopt a twofold approach.
 ° First, for default PI access to base-level data and compute, the NRC should establish an ex-post review process
for allegations of ethical research violations. Access may be revoked when research is shown to manifestly and
seriously violate ethical standards. We emphasize that the high standard for a violation should be informed
by the academic speech implications and potential political consequences of government involvement in
administering the NRC and determining academic research directions.
 ° Second, for applications requesting access to restricted datasets or resources beyond default compute, which
will necessarily undergo some review, researchers should be required to provide an ethics impact statement.
One of the advantages of beginning with PIs is that university faculty are accountable under existing IRBs for
human subjects research, as well as to the tenets of peer review.
 ° We urge non-NRC parties (e.g., universities) to explore a range of measures to address ethical concerns in AI
compute (e.g., an ethics review process33 or embedding ethicists in projects34).
• Security. We recommend that the NRC take the lead in setting security classifications and protocols, in part to
counteract a balkanized security system across federal agencies that would stymie the ability to host datasets. The
NRC should use dedicated security staff to work with Affiliated Government Agencies and university representatives
to harmonize and modernize agency security standards.
• Intellectual Property (IP). While the evidence on optimal IP incentives for innovation is mixed, we recommend
that the NRC adopt the same approach to allocating patent rights, copyrights, and data rights to NRC users
that apply to federal funding agreements. The NRC should additionally consider conditions for requiring NRC
researchers to disclose or share their research outputs under an open-access license.
• Human Resources. Given its ambition, significant human resources – from systems engineers to data officers, and
from grants administrators to privacy, ethics, and cybersecurity staff – will be necessary to make the NRC a success.
Given its ambition, significant
human resources – from systems
engineers to data officers, and
from grants administrators to
privacy, ethics, and cybersecurity
staff – will be necessary to make
the NRC a success.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
15
Introduction
In March 2020, Stanford’s Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI) published an open-letter,
co-signed by Presidents and Provosts of 22 top universities in the country, to the President of the United States and
Congress urging adoption of a National Research Cloud (NRC).1 The NRC proposal aims to close a significant gap in
access to computing and data that, proponents argue, has distorted the long-term trajectory of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
research.2 Without access to such critical resources, AI research may be dominated by short-term commercial interests
and undermine the historical innovation ecosystem where basic, fundamental, and non-commercial research have laid
the foundations for applications that may be decades away, not yet marketable, or promote the public interest.
In January 2021, the U.S. Congress enacted the National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Task Force Act
(NAIRR), constituting a Task Force to consider the design of the NRC.3 The Task Force was announced in June of this year
and includes one of the original proponents of the NRC and Co-Director of HAI (Fei-Fei Li).4
This White Paper is the culmination of a two-quarter, independent policy practicum at Stanford Law School’s Policy
Lab program, co-taught by three of us (Ho, King, Wald) and a teaching assistant (Wan), which brought together law,
business, and engineering students to contemplate key design dimensions of the NRC. We interviewed and convened
a wide range of stakeholders, including privacy attorneys, cloud computing technologists, government data experts,
cybersecurity professionals, potential users, and public interest groups. Students researched governing legal provisions,
policy options, and avenues for the institutional design of the NRC. The practicum team worked independently to shape
its recommendations.
The proposal for an NRC is an ambitious one, and this White Paper covers a lot of ground. We begin with the
fundamental question—why build the NRC (Chapter One)?—and spell out what we view as a cogent theory of impact.
We then cover who should have access to the NRC (Chapter Two), what comprises the NRC (Chapter Two), how access to
restricted data may (or may not) be granted (Chapter Three), and where the NRC should be located (Chapter Four). We
spend extensive time on the data access portion (Chapters Three, Five, and Six), due to the complexities of government
data sharing under the Privacy Act of 1974.5 As we note in those chapters, the data portion of the NRC is complementary
to longstanding efforts to enable greater research access to administrative data under, for instance, the Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 20186 and the National Secure Data Service Act proposal.7 Such sharing must be
carried out securely and in a privacy-protecting fashion. We also consider questions of ethical standards (Chapter Seven),
cybersecurity (Chapter Eight), and intellectual property (Chapter Nine) that inform the design of the NRC.
We recognize the complexity of the enterprise and that there are many questions not answered herein. The
contemplated scale of the NRC may be to AI what the Human Genome Project was to genomics (or what particle
accelerators were to physics): public investment for ambitious, non-commercial fundamental scientific research to
ensure the long-term flourishing of a critical area of innovation for the United States. There are many areas where we
wish we had had the opportunity to engage in more extensive research. We hope this White Paper, nonetheless, will
provide a useful contribution for the NAIRR Task Force, Congress, the Administration, and all those interested in the AI
innovation ecosystem.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Building a National AI Research Resource:
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
16
We owe gratitude to many people who contributed time, feedback, and insights. Most importantly, we thank the
extraordinary students who shaped this White Paper: Simran Arora, Sabina Beleuz, Nathan Calvin, Shushman Choudhury,
Drew Edwards, Neel Guha, Krithika Iyer, Ananya Karthik, Kanishka Narayan, Tyler Robbins, Frieda Rong, Jasmine Shao,
and Sadiki Wiltshire. We benefited from too many individuals to name, but special thanks go to Taka Ariga, Kathy Baxter,
Miles Brundage, Jean Camp, Shikai Chern, Bella Chu, Jack Clark, Kathleen Creel, John Etchemendy, Deep Ganguli, Eric
Horvitz, Sara Jordan, Vince Kellen, Mark Krass, Sebastien Krier, Ed Lazowska, Brenda Leong, Fei-Fei Li, Ruth Marinshaw,
Michelle Mello, Amy O’Hara, Hodan Omaar, Saiph Savage, Marietje Schaake, Mike Sellitto, Wade Shen, Keith Strier,
Suzanne Talon, Lee Tiedrich, Christine Tsang, and Evan White for helpful insights and feedback. HAI staff and research
assistants who were essential in helping us during the final stages of editing and compiling the White Paper include Tina
Huang, Marisa Lowe, Diego Núñez, and Daniel Zhang.
As we spell out in this White Paper, the NRC is an idea worth taking seriously. It is worth being clear, however, what
it would and would not solve. The NRC would enable much greater access to—and in that sense, democratize—forms
of AI and AI research that have increased in computational demands; but it would not categorically prevent or shift
the centralization of power within the tech industry. The NRC would shift the attention of current AI efforts into more
public and socially driven dimensions by providing access to previously restricted government datasets, addressing
longstanding efforts to improve access to high-value public sector data; but it would not create a system to prevent all
unethical uses of AI. The NRC would facilitate audits of large-scale models, datasets, and AI systems for privacy violations
and bias; but it would not be tantamount to a regulatory requirement for fairness assessments and accountability. It
is neither a tool of antitrust nor a certification body for ethical algorithms, which are areas worth taking seriously in
independent policy proposals.8 These broader considerations, however, do play into key areas of design, and have very
much informed our recommendations below on the design of the NRC.
While it alone cannot solve all that ails AI, the NRC promises to take a major affirmative step forward.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 1
This chapter articulates a theory of impact for the NRC. In conventional policy
analytic terms,1 what problem (or market failure) does the NRC address? From
one perspective, AI innovation is vibrant in the United States, with major advances
occurring in language, vision, and structured data and applications developing across
all sectors. Yet from another perspective, current commercialization of past innovation
masks systematic underinvestment in basic, non-commercial AI research that could
ensure the long-term health of technological innovation in this country.
Chapter 1:
The Theory for a
National Research Cloud
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 The federal government
will play a central role in
shaping, coordinating, and
enabling the development
of AI.
 AI research and
development is
increasingly dependent
on access to large-scale
compute and data, causing
migration of AI talent from
the academic to private
sector and limiting the
range of voices able to
contribute to AI research.
 Noncommercial and basic
AI research is critical to the
long-term health of the
innovation ecosystem.
 An NRC that provides data
and compute access will
help to promote the long-
term, national health of the
AI ecosystem and mitigate
the risks of widening
inequalities in the nation’s
AI landscape.
Current commercialization of past innovation masks
systematic underinvestment in basic, non-commercial
AI research that could ensure the long-term health of
technological innovation in this country.
Our case for the NRC is grounded in both efficiency and distributive rationales.
First, the NRC may yield positive externalities, particularly over time, by supporting
investments in basic research that may be commercialized decades later. Second, it
may help to level the playing field by broadening researcher access to both compute
and data, ensuring that AI research is feasible for not just the most elite academic
institutions or large technology firms. Given the scale of economic transformation AI
is posited to initiate over the next few decades, the stakes are potentially significant.
While the largest private interests like platform technology companies and certain elite
academic institutions continue to design, develop, and deploy AI systems that can be
readily commercialized, a different story is playing out for the public sector and the vast
majority of academic institutions, which lack access to core inputs of AI research. The
rising costs associated with carrying out research and development are exacerbating the
disconnect between current winners and losers in the AI space.
This chapter proceeds in three parts. First, we survey the current landscape of
AI research. Second, we articulate shifting trends in AI research and the academic-
industry balance. Third, we spell out the risks of federal inaction and the benefits to an
investment strategy that couples data and compute resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 1
THE AI RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
The field of AI research, as we consider it in this White
Paper, is broadly construed. It includes not only academics who
identify themselves as researchers in artificial intelligence or
machine learning, but the broader community of researchers
who use applied AI in their work, as well as those who
examine its impacts on society and the environment.
Many believe, consistent with the legislation calling for
the NAIRR Task Force, that AI will have dramatic impact on
society. Nine of the world’s ten current largest companies
by market capitalization are technology companies that
place AI at the core of their business models.2 Recent
figures from the AI Index demonstrate the growing amount
of investment AI companies have drawn. The most recent
2021 iteration of the Index details how global private
investment in AI has grown by 40 percent since 2019
to a total of $67.9 billion, with the United States alone
accounting for over $23.6 billion.3 While multiple private
sector predictions of the economic impact of AI emphasize
the potential for AI to drive significant economic growth
through a strong increase in labor productivity, others
worry about the pace of structural change in the labor
market and economic dislocation for workers automated
out of their jobs or impacted by the gig economy.4
Such impacts are expected across domains. AI holds
substantial promise to transform healthcare and scientific
research: AI-related progress in the field of protein folding
is poised to dramatically expedite vaccine development
and pharmaceutical drug development.5 The integration
of AI-related systems into agriculture may improve
crop yields through targeted use of pesticides and soil
monitoring.6 And national security experts have identified
AI as a key driver of novel defense capabilities,7 including
cyberwarfare and intelligence collection.
Many countries have recognized the significance
of AI as a driver of progress in economic, scientific, and
national security, releasing national plans coordinating
investment for continued progress in AI.8 China’s national
plan announced billions of dollars in funding aimed at
making China the international leader in AI by 2030.9 The
Japanese government partnered with Fujitsu to build
the world’s fastest supercomputer (Fugaku).10 Compute
Canada has similarly provided research computing access
to academics across Canada. The UK’s national high end
computing resource, HECToR, launched in 2007 at a cost
of $118 million, was used by nearly 2,500 researchers from
over 250 separate organizations who produced over 800
academic publications.11
The U.S. government initially presented a more
decentralized approach, providing support for AI
development through National Science Foundation
grants and defense spending, but refrained from releasing
a unified national plan to coordinate resources across
government, private industry, and universities.12 The
creation of a National AI Initiative Office,13 the updating
of the National Strategic Computing Initiative,14 and the
release of the National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence’s (NSCAI) final report15 introduced a more
comprehensive and coordinated approach. Within the
United States, the closest model to the NRC may be the
COVID-19 HPC consortium which quickly provisioned
compute of 50K GPUs and 6.8 million cores for close to
100 projects across 43 academic, industry, and federal
government consortium members united by the common
goal of combating the COVID-19 pandemic.16
Historically, partnerships between government,
universities, and industry have anchored the U.S. innovation
ecosystem. The federal government played critical roles
in subsidizing basic research, enabling universities to
undertake high-risk research that can take decades to
commercialize. This approach catalyzed radar technology,17
the internet, 18 and GPS devices.19 This history informed the
NSCAI’s recommendation for substantial new investments in
AI R&D by establishing a national AI research infrastructure
that democratizes access to the resources which fuel AI.
Many policymakers believe that substantial investment
will be needed over the next several years to support these
efforts, with returns on such investments could potentially
transforming America’s economy, society, and national
security.20
To be sure, some may challenge the theory of impact.
First, some studies dispute the premise that AI will be
economically transformative. Some economists argue that

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 1
many of the optimistic assessments fail to consider how
constrained the uptake of AI innovation may be due to AI’s
inability to change essential, yet hard-to-improve tasks.21
Others similarly critique the evidence for a fourth industrial
revolution.22 Second, some suggest that the provisioning
of the NRC may strengthen the position of large platform
technology companies (which of course provokes debates
over antitrust in the technology sector23), as the NRC may
be hard to launch without some involvement of hardware
or cloud providers in the procurement process. Third, some
would argue that the NRC would generate large negative
externalities in the form of energy footprints. For instance,
one study found that the amount of energy needed to train
GPT-3, a leading natural language processing (NLP) model,
required the greenhouse emissions equivalent of 552.1
tons of carbon dioxide,24 approximately thirty-five times
the yearly emissions of an average American.25 Expanding
access to compute without appropriate controls may
contribute to wasteful computing.26 Finally, some critics
argue that any advances in AI are inherently too risky for
further investment,27 given widely documented risks of
bias,28 unintended consequences,29 and harm.30
We are cognizant of these critiques and take them
seriously. This White Paper proceeds on the operative
premise animating the NRC legislation: that it will be
important for the country to maintain leadership in AI—
including rigorous interrogation of its uses, limits, and
promises—and that this requires supporting access to
compute and data. Public investment in AI research for
noncommercial purposes may help to address some of
the issues of social harm we see presently in commercial
contexts31, as well as contribute to shifting the broader
focus of the field toward technology developed in the
public interest by the public sector and civil society,
including academia. The preceding considerations,
however, have shaped our views in key respects, such as
the sequential investment strategy, given the uncertainty
of AI’s potential; the serious consideration of publicly
owned infrastructure, the provisions for ethical review
of compute and data access, and, most importantly,
the enablement of independent academic inquiry into
the potential harms of AI systems. The NRC is not an
endorsement of blind and naïve AI adoption across the
board; it is a mechanism to ensure that a greater range of
voices will have access to the basic elements of AI research.
SHIFTING SOURCES OF
AI RESEARCH
We now articulate how and why AI research has
migrated away from basic, long-term research into
commercial, short-term applications.
First, many current advances fueled by large-scale
models are costly to train, relative to the size of typical
academic budgets. For example, the estimated cost
of training Alphabet subsidiary DeepMind’s AlphaGo
Zero algorithm, capable of beating the human world
champion of the game Go, was more than $25 million.32
For reference, the total annual 2019 budget for Carnegie
Mellon University’s Robotics Institute, one of the premier
academic research institutions in the nation, was $90
million.33 A white paper from the Bipartisan Policy Center34
and the Center for a New American Security noted that the
FY2020 budget for non-defense AI R&D announced by the
White House was $973 million. In contrast, the combined
spending on R&D in 2018 by five of the major technology
platform companies was $80 billion. In sum, research
universities cannot keep pace with private sector resources
for compute. This is not to say that large-scale compute is
necessary for all academic AI research, or that academic
research is in competition with industry research, but it
does illustrate why certain sectors of AI research are no
longer accessible to the academic researcher.
The NRC is not an endorsement
of blind and naïve AI adoption
across the board; it is a mechanism
to ensure that a greater range of
voices will have access to the basic
elements of AI research.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 1
Second, the academic-industry divide masks
significant disparities between academic institutions.
Using the QS World University Rankings since 2012,
Fortune 500 technology companies and the top 50
universities have published five times more papers
annually per AI conference than universities ranked
between 200 and 500.35 Private firms also collaborate
six times more with top 50 universities than with those
ranked between 301 and 500.36 This internal compute
divide across universities poses significant challenges
for who is at the table.

Third, basic AI research has lost human capital.37
When this is combined with decreased access to
compute and data in the academy, the prospect of
conducting basic research at universities becomes
less attractive. Top talent in AI now commands private
sector salaries far in excess of academic salaries.38 The
departure of AI faculty from American universities has
led to what some analysts have dubbed the AI Brain
Drain: while AI Ph.D.s in 2011 were roughly equally
likely to go into industry as opposed to academia, two-
thirds of AI Ph.D.s now go to industry and less than a
quarter go into academia.39 One study suggests that
the departure of AI faculty also has a negative effect on
startup formation by students.40
Fourth, as large-scale AI research migrates to industry,
the focus of research inevitably shifts. While academic
researchers in AI may lack access to the volume of data
needed to train AI models,41 large-platform companies
have access to vast datasets, including those about, or
created by their customers. This data divide in turn distorts
AI research toward applications that are focused on private
profit, rather than public benefit.42 Put more colorfully by
Jeff Hammerbacher, “The best minds of my generation are
thinking about how to make people click ads. ” 43 The NRC
can play a key role in unlocking access to public sector
data, which may help to reorient the focus of AI research
away from private sector datasets.44
The hollowing out of academic AI capacity can be
seen in OpenAI’s analysis of the relationship between
compute and 15 relatively well-known “breakthroughs”
in AI between 2012 and 2018.45 Although the analysis was
meant to emphasize the role of computing power, it also
illustrates an emerging gap between private sector and
academic contributions over time. Of the 15 developments
examined, 11 were achieved by private companies, while
only four came from academic institutions. Furthermore,
this imbalance increases over time: though private sector
research has continued accelerating since 2012, academic
output has stagnated. The last of the major compute-
intensive breakthroughs in OpenAI’s analysis stemming
from academia was Oxford’s 2014 release of its VGG image
recognition program; NYU’s work on Convolutional Neural
Networks dates back to 2013. From 2015 to 2018, all eight
breakthroughs included in OpenAI’s analysis came out
of private companies. All of this together leads observers
to argue that academic researchers are increasingly
unable to compete at the frontier of AI research.46 While
academic researchers have continued to make important
contributions in AI, these are increasingly restricted to
less compute-intensive problems. With fewer compute-
intensive academic breakthroughs, AI innovations have
focused on private interests (e.g., online advertising) as
opposed to long-term, non-commercial benefits. To be
sure, the private sector has, of course, been central to AI
research, but the concern is about the long-term balance
of the AI innovation ecosystem.
While AI Ph.D.s in 2011 were
roughly equally likely to go into
industry as opposed to academia,
two-thirds of AI Ph.D.s now go to
industry and less than a quarter
go into academia.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 1
SCOPING FEDERAL INTERVENTION
IN DATA AND COMPUTE
How can we achieve a more balanced approach
towards research and development? We first consider the
risks of federal inaction and discuss some of the unique
advantages of addressing data and compute together.
Risks of Federal Inaction
The risks of federal inaction are twofold. First, basic
AI research that has to date paved the way for advances
in AI and machine learning will slow. According to a recent
study, approximately 82 percent of the algorithms used
today originated from nonprofit groups and universities
supported by government spending.47 Even when industry
research is successful, it is typically product-focused
or incremental, harder to reproduce, and may not be
published or open-sourced. An interesting case lies in
recent breakthroughs in protein folding. In late 2020,
the Alphabet subsidiary DeepMind announced that it
had developed a program called AlphaFold, an AI-driven
system capable of accurately predicting the structure of
a vast number of proteins, using only the sequence of
nucleotides contained in its DNA. Whether out of concern
for the privatization or to accelerate adoption of related
systems, a consortium of academics, led by scientists at
the University of Washington, developed an open source
competitor called, RoseTTaFold.48 DeepMind did make
AlphaFold available to a broad audience, but the concerns
illustrate the risks of science posed by exclusively private
AI research, reminiscent of the race to sequence the
human genome, where public investment into the Human
Genome Project preempted concerns about a private firm
patenting of the human genome.49
Second, federal inaction could widen significant
inequalities in the AI landscape. Without increased access
to computing, education, and training, large parts of the
economy may be unable to adapt—whether that be in
financial services, healthcare, education, or government.
Diversifying the range of AI research may also promote
progress and productivity. One study suggests that the
diversity of AI research trajectories—that is, the specific
questions, topics, and problems researchers choose to
investigate—has become more constrained in recent
years and that private sector AI research is less diverse
than academic research.50 Smaller academic groups
with lower private sector collaboration appear to bolster
the diversity of AI research.51 From the standpoint of
underdeveloped avenues of research, such as ethics and
accountability in AI, increasing the range of research topics
and methods in the field raises the likelihood of finding
breakthroughs that make additional progress possible in
the long term possible.52 Recent evidence suggests that
just five metro areas in the U.S. shared 90 percent of the
growth in innovation sector jobs, between 2005 and 2017.53
According to Stanford economist Erik Brynjolfsson, the
likely impact of geographic concentration is that: “there
are a whole lot of people—hundreds of millions in the U.S.
and billions worldwide—who could be innovating and who
are not because they do not have access to basic computer
science skills, or infrastructure, or capital, or even culture
and incentives to do so. ”54 AI technologies can be hard to
diagnose and interpret and be prone to substantial bias.55
Broadening the set of voices that can interrogate such
systems will be critical to an inclusive and equitable future.
In sum, federal investment in public AI infrastructure
may promote a more equitable distribution of
participation in and gains to AI innovation broadly, bolster
U.S. competitiveness, and support fundamental research
into noncommercial and public sector applications.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
This chapter discusses eligibility, resource allocation, and computing
infrastructure for the NRC: who should get access to what and how?
First, when determining who should get access, it is critical to bear in mind the
broad goals of the NRC. As discussed in Chapter One, there is a large resource gap
in academia as compared to private industry. In the interest of supporting basic
research and democratizing the field, this section will focus on identifying a target
group for eligibility. As we articulate below, we refrain from considering expansion
to a broader set of commercial, non-academic parties because of the NRC’s focus
on long-term, fundamental scientific research. One of the narrowest approaches
would be a specialty faculty model which would target researchers engaged in core
AI work. But, the difficulties with defining AI and the rapidly expanding domains in
which AI is being applied make this model too constrained to realize the full impact
of the NRC. Instead we recommend tracking the most common criterion for federal
research funding and advocate that eligibility hinge on “Principal Investigator” (PI)
status at U.S. universities.1 One of the tradeoffs is that PIs may be less diverse than a
broader segment of researchers,2 so a longer-term expansion could consider moving
beyond this group. While the NRC aims to train the next generation of AI researchers,
we caution that an immediate expansion to all graduate and undergraduate students
would pose considerable challenges in scaling. Therefore, we recommend that
students primarily gain access by participation in faculty sponsored AI research,
instead of blanket student access, and that they gain training through the creation of
educational programs.
Second, we discuss three models for allocating computing credit: development
of a new grant process, delegating block compute grants to universities for internal
allocation among faculty, or universal access. Each of these models trades off the ease
of administration against tailoring for specific NRC goals. We recommend an approach
used by other national research clouds: namely a hybrid approach of universal default
access for the majority of researchers, with a grant process for excess computing
beyond the default allocation. Such an approach would keep administrative costs low
for the vast majority of researchers, while enabling tailoring through a competitive
grant process for the highest-need users.
Chapter 2:
Eligibility, Allocation,
and Infrastructure
for Computing
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 Researcher eligibility
for NRC access should
begin with “Principal
Investigator” status at U.S.
universities.
 The NRC should adopt
a hybrid approach of
universal default access for
the majority of researchers
and a grant process when
requests for compute or
data exceed base levels.
 The NRC should adopt a
dual investment strategy
by developing programs
for expanding access to
existing cloud services
and piloting the ability to
provide publicly owned
resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
Third, we consider the “make-or-buy” decision for
the NRC. One option would be for the NRC to provide
research grants for the use of commercial cloud services
that many researchers already rely on (the “buy” decision).
Alternatively, the NRC could create and provision access
to a publicly high-performance computing cluster (the
“make” decision). It is well-established that, based
solely on hardware costs, it is more cost-effective to
own infrastructure when computing demand is close to
continuous. On the other hand, existing commercial cloud
providers have developed highly usable software stacks
that AI researchers have widely adopted. Commercial
cloud providers offer a way to quickly expand capacity.
We hence recommend a dual investment strategy to (a)
quickly launch the NRC by subsidizing and negotiating
cloud computing for AI researchers with existing vendors,
expanding on existing initiatives like the National Science
Foundation’s CloudBank project; and (b) invest in a pilot
for public infrastructure to assess the ability to provide
similar resources in the long run. Such publicly owned
infrastructure would likely be built under contract or grant,
but could be operated much like national laboratories
that own sophisticated supercomputing facilities, as is the
case for other national research resources (e.g., Compute
Canada, Japan’s Fugaku).
Our recommendations are informed by a series of
case studies that are presented throughout this chapter,
as well as through the remainder of the White Paper.
Table 1 summarizes how different existing models
compare on the three key design decisions. At the outset,
we note that few existing initiatives have attempted to
provide compute power at the scale of the NRC. At the
same time, we view the NRC as complementary to more
traditional areas of scientific computing.3
ELIGIBILITY ALLOCATION OWNERSHIP
Existing
Program
PI
only
Any
Faculty Students
Existing
Grant
Process
University
Allocation
New
Process
Default
Access
w/Tiers
Private Public
CloudBank X X X X
Stanford
HAI-AWS
Cloud Program
X X X
Stanford
Sherlock Cluster X X X
Google Colab X X X X
Compute
Canada X X X
Fugaku X X X
XSEDE X X X X
DOE INCITE X X X
Table 1: Key design differences between computing case studies. “Other faculty” indicates an eligibility set for faculty other than PI status
(e.g., requiring Stanford affiliation for the Sherlock cluster) and “new process” is used to indicate the creation of any other process other than
those currently listed (e.g., Fugaku is currently soliciting proposals with research facilities).

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
Eligibility
The first task is identifying which researchers should
be eligible for the NRC. Chapter One discussed the need
to support AI innovation in universities. Therefore, this
section will scope eligibility within academia by analyzing
the access-resource trade-offs in alignment with the NRC
goals.
At the outset, we note that we do not analyze eligibility
in depth beyond academic researchers. The legislation
constituting the NRC task force specifically contemplates
“access to computing resources for researchers across the
country. ”4 The NRC is defined as “a system that provides
researchers and students across scientific fields and
disciplines with access to compute resources. ”5 The most
natural interpretation of this language suggests a core
focus on scientific and academic research.6
Introducing commercial access to the NRC, particularly
for under-resourced firms such as small businesses
and startups may very well benefit the U.S. innovation
ecosystem. But the challenges of incorporating commercial
access to the NRC are enormously complex. First, including
software developers at start-up companies as “researchers”
within the meaning of the NDAA would raise a wide
range of boundary questions that the NRC may be poorly
equipped to adjudicate. According to the Small Business
Administration (SBA), there are over 31 million small
businesses in the United States.7 Over 627,000 businesses
open each year.8 Should all such businesses be eligible to
compute on the NRC? How would one avoid gaming (e.g.,
strategic subsidiaries/spinoffs) eligibility? And, how would
this advance the scientific mission of the NRC? Second,
while potentially valuable, it is less clear how the inclusion
of start-ups and small businesses meets the theory of
impact of the NRC. As currently construed, the concern
animating the NRC lies in the importance of long-term,
non-commercial fundamental research that can ensure AI
leadership for decades to come. Commercialization is not
the element of the AI innovation ecosystem that faces the
structural challenges articulated in Chapter One. Finally,
scaling the NRC to allow meaningful commercial access
would pose serious practical challenges. Because the
Task Force must also consider the feasibility of the NRC,
we have not considered in depth here, a conception that
would extend the term “researcher” to encompass large
portions of the commercial private sector. Expansion to
non-academic non-profit organizations may be a more
reasonable consideration, as the objective of some entities
(e.g., not-for-profit investigative journalism, civil society
organizations) may be closer to the core of the NRC’s
mission of empowering long-term beneficial research that
cannot currently occur.9 In the long term, the NRC should
consider the tradeoffs to such an expansion.
Even if the NRC adopts a broader computing model
down the road, we believe that focusing on academic
researchers is an important starting point, as it illuminates
some of the main operational considerations for NRC
access.
SPECIALTY FACULTY MODEL
One of the narrowest approaches to NRC eligibility
would be to restrict it narrowly to faculty engaged in AI
research. Under this approach, policymakers would direct
computing resources exclusively toward faculty working
on identifiable AI projects, which often need large amounts
of compute power. A benefit of this approach is that
researchers’ familiarity with the infrastructure would likely
mean that fewer funds would be devoted to cloud service
training for novice users.
Yet the set of self-identified core AI faculty remains
relatively small and concentrated in a smaller number
of universities, which are already more likely to gain
access to large-scale computing. Limiting access to
core AI faculty would hence undermine the mission of
democratizing AI research. In addition, the application of
AI is expanding rapidly across domains. Interdisciplinary
research deploying AI in new domains will be just as vital
for maintaining American leadership in AI, as well as for
animating basic research questions. Restricting eligibility
to core AI faculty (however defined) could jeopardize the
ability of researchers from all academic disciplines (e.g., in
the physical sciences, social sciences, and humanities) to
contribute to realizing AI’s full potential.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
25
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL FACULTY MODEL
A more natural starting point for NRC eligibility is with
Principal Investigators (PIs) at U.S. colleges and universities,
the most commonly deployed criterion for federal grants.
Requirements for PI status are set by individual universities
and include a broad range of researchers certified by their
university as qualified to lead large research projects.10
While PI certification may vary from institution to institution,
an important baseline criterion of PI status is that the
researcher is subject to their institution’s training and
certification processes, which in turn clarify a researcher’s
responsibilities regarding the management and execution
of their research proposals. Existing programs for allocating
computing power typically set eligibility based on PI
status as it ensures the researcher has the infrastructure
to carry out a large-scale research project. CloudBank, an
NSF program that distributes funds for commercial cloud
computing resources, awards grants to PIs, who may
distribute funds to other co-researchers and students on
the project.11 Compute Canada allows all faculty granted PI
status by their university to automatically receive a pre-set
amount of computing credits and apply for further credit
as needed. The PI may then sponsor others to access the
credit.12
We recognize that PI status does not include all
university-affiliated researchers. In 2013, of the over
200,000 self-identified academic researchers, a little
under 60,000 were employed in a role other than full-time
faculty, a position that may not be eligible for PI status.13
From 1973 to 2013, the percentage of full-time faculty
among engineering doctorate holders decreased by 2
percent, while the percentage of “other” academic jobs
(including research associates) increased by 12 percent14
But, the reliance on PI status would not prevent PIs from
allocating access to non-PI status researchers on a project,
and administrative ability weighs strongly in favor of
consistency with current grant eligibility criteria.
STUDENTS
Should graduate and undergraduate students be
able to access the NRC? One of the principal challenges
here lies in scale and administrability. One estimate
is that there are nearly 20 million college students
in the U.S.15 Second, PI-oriented eligibility does not
preclude university students from accessing resources
to undertake AI research under the direction of PIs. The
Compute Canada model, for example, restricts eligibility
to faculty, but allows faculty to sponsor collaborators,
including any student researcher. An access model for the
NRC that allows PIs to sponsor students provides further
research and training opportunities for students. Third, a
number of existing cloud services already provide limited
access to computing credits for educational purposes.
Google Colaboratory, for instance, provides free, but not
reliably guaranteed, access to cloud services. 16 Amazon
Web Services provides up to $35 of AWS credits for free
to all university faculty and students. Despite existing
resources, students may need more resources. The
Google subsidiary and online community, Kaggle, for
example, provides 30 hours of GPU access per week for
free and found that 15 percent of users exceeded the
limit.17
While the exact scope of student computing power
needs is unclear, we recommend funding an educational
resource, once researcher needs and resource limitations
are gauged. Currently, the NSF’s CloudBank is piloting a
Community & Education Resource to earmark a small set
of credits for educational purposes.18 This resource allows
a university professor to request a small number of credits
for student coursework or small-scale research.
Regardless of which eligibility model the NRC adopts,
there will also be a significant need for support staff,
training documentation, and educational materials so
that researchers can effectively make use of the compute
and data resources (see Appendix D). The reason why
some students and researchers may not take advantage
of all available cloud credits could, for instance, stem from
the difficulty in using cloud platforms. If the NRC serves
academics from a range of disciplines, this question of
human capital will be especially relevant to serve different
models of research. A robust training program for users of
the NRC will ensure ease of use and encourage appropriate
utilization of the cloud.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
Resource Allocation
Models
We now consider three resource allocation models: (1) a
new grant process; (2) block grant allocation to universities;
and (3) universal—but potentially tiered—access.
NRC GRANT PROCESS
Establishing a new grant process for compute access
would have one main advantage. The program could
be built specifically for the purpose of AI research, with
reviewers who are familiar with AI concepts, practices, and
trends. Such a process might therefore enable improved
allocation decisions and provide the NRC with greater
control over its investments.
That said, establishing a peer-review process for
all applications would be resource-intensive, requiring
the establishment of a grant administration program
akin to those at the National Science Foundation (NSF)
or the National Institutes of Health (NIH). For instance,
to implement peer review required for the merit review
process, the NSF annually needs a community large
enough to conduct nearly 240,000 reviews per year.19 Since
the contemplated reach is broad, we are mindful of adding
a significant service burden for faculty conversant in AI
for every application for compute access. Peer review for
compute access would require significant overhead and
delays in compute allocation.
UNIVERSITY ACCESS
To reduce administrative costs, an alternative scheme
would be to allocate credits to universities based on the
number of eligible researchers. The NRC could allocate
resources to universities as block grants, and in turn, rely
on the university to distribute computing access. (For
example, the NRC could purchase significant amounts of
compute from cloud providers, create virtual credits that
are convertible into appropriate cloud resources, and
delegate allocation to universities.) This approach would
have the advantage of tapping into the universities’ local
expertise for reviewing and distributing resources. It would,
however, lead to a highly decentralized process, providing
little oversight to understand the distribution of usage, and
give the NRC little control over resource allocation. While
we do not recommend this route as the principal allocation
scheme, we do believe that some allocation to university-
based IT support teams may be warranted to support
researchers in using the NRC. XSEDE’s “Campus Champions”
program, for instance, provides university employees access
to the system to support the computational transition.20
UNIVERSAL ACCESS
The last potential model would provision universal
access to base-level compute to all eligible PIs. The closest
model is Compute Canada’s national research cloud,
which provides base-level compute access to all faculty
in Canada. This would significantly reduce administrative
overhead, both for an institution running the review
process, and academics seeking NRC access. The primary
downside is that base-level compute may be insufficient
for specialized needs.
We recommend combining a universal baseline model
with a grant process for compute needs beyond base-level
access. The reduced complexity in administering a universal
baseline access compute model makes it an attractive
option for the NRC in allocating compute resources,
especially with respect to the NRC’s goal of opening access
to compute resources.21 XSEDE, for instance, uses a similar
model of streamlined “Startup Allocations” (issued for
one-year terms, typically within two weeks of application)
and “Research Allocations” for more significant compute
requests. Compute Canada provides access to 15 percent
of PIs to increased compute capacity based on a merit
competition. A critical question will, of course, be the level
of baseline computing which will determine overall costs,
physical space requirements, and the like. To benchmark
this, we recommend an in-depth study of the anticipated
computing needs, based on existing academic computing
centers.22
The grant process for additional compute could
take multiple forms; for example, while one could allow
individual PIs to apply directly to the NRC for excess

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
27
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
compute, the NRC could also allocate “blocks” of resources
at the university level and allow universities to oversee
their administration. In any case, due to the size of such
requests, grant reviews should be conducted on a merit
basis and administered by a combination of NRC staff and
an external advisory board of university faculty. In 2021,
Compute Canada, for instance, completed its review of
650 research submissions in about 5 months, with only 80
volunteer reviewers from Canadian academic institutions
to assess the scientific merit of the proposal.23 In order
to avoid conflicts of interest, we strongly recommend
against the participation of any faculty or private sector
advisors who have conflicts of interest with any vendors
that provide services to the NRC. Ideally, proposal review
should be independent, blinded, and based on scientific
merit to the extent possible.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Built into existing
grant process:
Researchers eligible
for certain existing
NSF grants can
simply request
access to CloudBank
through the same
grant application.
 Single point of entry
for compute access:
The CloudBank
portal provides a
single point of entry
for researchers to
access funds to
use on whichever
commercial cloud
provider they prefer.
 Cost reduction: No
overhead costs are
associated with using
CloudBank.
 Student access:
Limited funds are set
aside for grants to
students and classes.
CASE STUDY: CLOUDBANK
In 2018, the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) created the Cloud Access Solicitation
to provide funding for AI-related research endeavors.24 A platform initially created to
meet the needs of the NSF funding recipients to access public clouds, CloudBank,
is an interesting case study for exploring resource allocation models. Accessible
through a portal, CloudBank aids researchers in using cloud resources fully by
facilitating the process of “managing costs, translating and upgrading computing
environments to the cloud, and learning about cloud-based technologies.”25
CloudBank is a collaboration project established via an NSF Cooperative
Agreement with the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) and the Information
Technology Services Division at UC San Diego, the University of Washington
eScience Institute, and UC Berkeley’s Division of Data Science and Information.26
Each of these institutions handles an area, according to its comparative advantage.27
For example, SDSC is responsible for building the online portal, and UC San Diego is
in charge of managing the accounts of the users.28
CloudBank also aims to reduce the cost of cloud computing: it uses both
the ongoing discounts with cloud providers from the University of California and
the discounts that come with bulk cloud purchase from the cloud procurement
consulting firm, Strategic Blue, which regularly partners with the likes of AWS,
Microsoft, and Google.29 Furthermore, there is no overhead cost associated with
the cloud allocations through CloudBank, since the terms of the NSF cooperative
agreement prohibit indirect costs.30 With these cost-saving mechanisms, researchers
can afford more computing capacities from a variety of major cloud vendors.
By requesting the use of CloudBank during their application to the selected
NSF projects,31 researchers can gain access not only to various advanced hardware
resources, but also to a variety of services to make the process more supported and
monitored.32 CloudBank also gives research community members access to its
education and training information.33

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
Computing
Infrastructure
Cloud computing environments connect local
computing devices such as desktop computers to large,
typically geographically distributed servers containing
physical hardware. This hardware, in turn, is responsible for
storing data and performing computation over computer
networks—all of which is mediated through a collection
of software services. This model centralizes the usual
operational management for those using the network and
provides adjustable units of computation and data storage
to allow for fluctuations in demand. Users interact with the
cloud by launching virtual connections to the server—cloud
instances—and running containerized processes remotely.
These operations are managed by the cloud and available
for monitoring through dashboards. Cloud computing
may be serviced through on-premises clusters, via external
vendors, or some combination thereof, and accessed over
networks with varying security and connectivity, from
internet-accessible to air-gapped regions.
The infrastructure to the NRC could be developed
with two general approaches: (1) the NRC could use
commercial cloud platforms as its infrastructure backbone;
or (2) the federal government could engage a contractor
to build a high-performance computing (HPC) public
facility specifically for the NRC. This section addresses
some advantages and disadvantages of both. (We provide
an estimated cost comparison of these two approaches
in Appendix A.) The two approaches discussed here are
not mutually exclusive, and we ultimately recommend
a hybrid investment strategy. In the short run, the NRC
should scale up cloud credit programs (similar to NSF’s
CloudBank program) to provide both streamlined base-
level access and merit review for applications going beyond
base-level access. In the long run, the NRC should invest
in a pilot to develop public computing infrastructure. Even
with public infrastructure, it will be critical to meet “burst
demand” (to expand resources when compute demand
peaks). The success of the initial investments should guide
the prospective model as to whether to rely on publicly
or privately owned infrastructure in the longer term. We
note that in order to scale successfully to either resource
will require building institutional capacity at academic
institutions.
COMMERCIAL CLOUD
The greatest advantage of using commercial cloud
services for the NRC is that significant infrastructure
already exists.34 Under this model, the NRC would simply
subsidize credits for using commercial cloud services
(similar to NSF’s CloudBank program). Thus, rather
than spending years building new computing resources,
policymakers could launch the NRC soon after they
determine the program’s administrative details. (We note,
however, that there may still be significant GPU shortages
in the short run; with the contemplated scale of the NRC,
significant infrastructure would need to be built.) Since
many researchers already use commercial cloud services
for their AI research, the transition into the NRC program
could be relatively seamless. Furthermore, commercial
cloud platforms offer the NRC greater flexibility to change
the size and scope of the program. Commercial cloud
platforms charge for the amount of compute actually
used.35 Thus, the size of the NRC could expand or retract
in line with shifting demand. In contrast, a dedicated HPC
system would have a set amount of hardware that costs
the same, no matter how effectively it’s being used.
Working directly with commercial cloud providers also
offers several advantages for the NRC. The commercial
cloud services market is highly competitive and features
numerous providers capable of meeting the NRC’s needs.
The NRC would have the option of using one provider or
multiple providers. If opting to use just one provider, the
government’s bargaining power may be at its strongest
in helping to drive down prices for the NRC. Alternatively,
using multiple providers gives the NRC greater flexibility in
available services and hardware. Either way, policymakers
would have the opportunity to negotiate contracts and
prices with commercial cloud providers every few years,
which will be critical to cost containment.36 The NRC would
also not be locked into using the same provider or set of
providers for the duration of the program. Rather, NRC
staff could reevaluate which commercial cloud provider’s
infrastructure would best meet the NRC’s needs at the
start of each new contract.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
29
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Federally-funded
infrastructure:
XSEDE is an NSF-
funded initiative
that integrates and
coordinates shared
supercomputing and
data analysis resources
with researchers.
 Tiered access to
compute: For baseline
access to compute,
XSEDE leverages a
fast, low-hurdle review
process. For access
beyond the baseline,
XSEDE has its own
resource allocations
committee that
reviews applications
every quarter.
 “Campus Champions
Program:” XSEDE
partners with
employees and
affiliates at colleges,
universities, and
research institutions
to help researchers
get access to compute
resources.
 Collaboration: XSEDE
collaborates with
the private sector in
acquiring, operating,
and managing
compute resources.
CASE STUDY: XSEDE
The Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE) is an NSF-funded organization that
integrates and coordinates the sharing of advanced digital
services such as supercomputers and high-end visualization
and data analysis resources.37 XSEDE is a collaborative
partnership of 19 institutions, or “Service Providers,” many
of which are nonprofits or supercomputing centers at
universities and provide computing facilities for XSEDE
researchers.38 XSEDE supports work from a wide variety
of fields, including the physical sciences, life sciences,
engineering, social sciences, the humanities, and the
arts.39 XSEDE allocations are available to any researcher
or educator at a U.S. academic, nonprofit research, or
educational institution, not including students.40 However,
researchers can share their allocations by establishing user
accounts with other collaborators, including students.41
Researchers have two different paths to requesting
allocations: Startup Allocation and Research Allocation.
Startup Allocations apportion XSEDE resources for small-
scale computational activities.42 Startup Allocations are one
of the fastest ways to gain access to and start using XSEDE
resources, as requests are typically reviewed and awarded
within two weeks.43 Startup Allocation requests also
require minimal documentation: the project’s abstract and
the researchers’ curriculum vitae (CV).44 Startup Allocations
typically last for one year, but requests supported by merit-
reviewed grants can ask for allocations that last up to three
years. Researchers can also submit renewal requests, if
their work needs ongoing low-level resources.45
For research needs that go beyond the computational
limits under a Startup Allocation, researchers must
submit a Research Allocation request.46 XSEDE strongly
encourages its users to request a Startup Allocation, prior
to requesting a Research Allocation, in order to obtain
benchmark results and more accurately document their
research needs in the Research Allocation.47 Research
Allocation requests must include a host of documents,
such as a resource-use plan, a progress report, code
performance calculations, CVs, and references.48
Requests are accepted and reviewed quarterly by the
XSEDE Resource Allocations Committee (XRAC), which
assesses the proposals’ appropriateness of methodology,
appropriateness of research plan, efficient use of
resources, and intellectual merit.49
XSEDE abides by a “one-project rule,” whereby each
researcher only has one XSEDE allocation for their research
activities.50 For instance, if a researcher has several grants
that require computational support, those lines of work
should be combined into a
single allocation request. This
minimizes the effort required
by the researcher to submit
requests and reduces the
overhead in reviewing those
requests.
XSEDE also uses
a “Campus Champion
Program” to streamline
access to resources.51 The
Campus Champion Program
is a group of over 700
Campus Champions, who
are employees or affiliates
at over 300 U.S. colleges,
universities, and research-
focused institutions.52
These Campus Champions
facilitate and support use of
XSEDE-allocated resources
by researchers, educators,
and students on their
campuses. For instance, the
Campus Champions host
awareness sessions and
training workshops for their
institutions’ researchers while
also capturing information
on problems and challenges
that need to be addressed by
XSEDE resource owners.53
Finally, XSEDE
welcomes collaboration
opportunities with other
members of the research
and scientific community.54
For example, XSEDE assists
other organizations in
acquiring and operating
computing resources and
helps to allocate and manage
access to those resources.
Recently, XSEDE worked
with academics and private
industry to form the COVID-19
High Performance Computing Consortium, which
provides researchers with powerful computing resources
to better understand COVID-19 and develop treatments
to address infections.55

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
Commercial cloud platforms also provide other
advantages to the NRC. The labor of managing,
maintaining, and upgrading the hardware behind the
NRC would be handled by private parties that already
have expertise in running cloud services at scale and
have invested billions of dollars into doing it. This
arrangement allows researchers access to a greater
variety of hardware that is constantly being expanded
and upgraded.56 With a strong economic incentive to keep
improving cloud offerings, commercial cloud services
offer an assortment of instance types—i.e., the various
permutations and combinations of GPU/CPU, memory,
storage, and networking specifications that constitute a
compute instance—with different hardware at a range of
price points. Thus, researchers would have the flexibility
to choose both what hardware would best fit the needs of
their projects and how to best allocate their limited cloud
credits. Researchers could also have access to cutting-edge
technology specially designed for AI research, such as
chips optimized for training and inference, developed and
exclusively used by commercial cloud providers.
Using commercial cloud services for the NRC comes
with significant tradeoffs, however. While the initial costs
of subsidizing cloud credits might be less than building
public infrastructure, many studies show that relying on
commercial cloud services would likely be much more
expensive in the long term.57 For example, a study of
Purdue University’s Community Cluster Program shows
that the amortized cost of its on-prem cluster over five
years is 2.73 times cheaper than using AWS, 3.24 times
cheaper than using Azure, and 5.54 times cheaper than
using Google Cloud.58 A similar study at Indiana University
estimates that the total investment into its locally owned
supercomputer, Big Red II, is about $10.1 million, while
the total cost of a 3-year reservation on AWS about $24.9
million.59 Cost comparisons in other studies are even more
dramatic. For instance, a study of the Advanced Research
Computing clusters at Virginia Tech shows that the 5-year
cost for its on-premises cloud is about $15.5 million, while
the 5-year cost for reserved AWS instances using the same
workloads would be about $136.3 million.60
What explains these cost disparities? Estimates
comparing commercial cloud services to a dedicated HPC
cluster show that commercial cloud services are more
expensive per compute cycle.61 At least in part, this is due
to the fact that commercial services are optimized for
commercial applications. Compute Canada, for example,
found that building their own infrastructure was cheaper
than using commercial services, because they did not
have the same core use needs as commercial customers, a
tradeoff that gained their system more computing power
at the expense of availability.62 Although the analysis was
published in 2016, Compute Canada’s own benchmarking
of costs concluded:

Currently, it is far more cost effective for the
Compute Canada federation to procure and
operate in-house cyberinfrastructure than to
outsource to commercial cloud providers. . .
Cloud-based costs ranged from 4x to 10x more
than the cost of owning and operating our own
clusters. Some components were dramatically
more expensive, notably persistent storage which
was 40x the cost of Compute Canada’s storage.63
Ultimately, the cost difference between commercial
cloud services and HPC systems depends on how often
and how efficiently the HPC system is used. We provide a
cost calculation that updates Compute Canada’s below,
arriving at cost differentials of comparable magnitude.
Commercial cloud instances with comparable hardware
under constant usage, even with substantial discounts,
While the initial costs of subsidizing
cloud credits might be less than
building public infrastructure,
many studies show that relying on
commercial cloud services would
likely be much more expensive in the
long term.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
31
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
would be significantly more expensive over time for
the NRC than a dedicated HPC system. Bringing the
cost of commercial cloud services under that of an HPC
system would require policymakers to either negotiate
exceptionally high discounts with commercial cloud
providers or make major sacrifices in hardware speed or
overall scale of the NRC. A similar cost calculation is also
what led Stanford University to simultaneously invest
in both on-premises hardware and a commercial cloud-
based solution for its Population Health Sciences initiative
(see box case study in Chapter Three). The most common
practice across NSF centers, such as the XSEDE initiative
(see box case study below), is also to build infrastructure
instead of relying on commercial cloud credits, due to
these cost considerations.
Finally, relying on the commercial cloud may raise
questions about industry consolidation. There are two
main answers to this question. One is that building a
dedicated, publicly owned HPC clusters would require
purchasing sophisticated hardware from existing industry
players, which also exist in concentrated industries. In
other words, it is difficult to imagine no involvement
of private industry under either option. Another is that
a major constraint lies in time: a fully mature, public
infrastructure NRC could not be stood up overnight.
Moreover, a publicly owned cloud would still likely require
a major technology company to build the infrastructure
under contract, as is the case for National Labs, or using a
grant, as is the case for XSEDE.
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
Building a new HPC cluster would be a bespoke
solution, tailored to fit the NRC’s specific compute needs.
This approach would be relatively well-explored territory
for the federal government.64 The U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD),
already regularly contract with a handful of companies
to build HPC clusters every few years.65 The Department
of Energy itself already uses two of the three fastest HPC
clusters in the world and recently funded the development
of two new supercomputers that, when completed,
will be the world’s fastest by a significant margin.66 The
National Science Foundation commonly issues grants
for the construction of high-performance computing
infrastructure.67 Given this familiarity, policymakers would
have reasonable estimates for how much a new HPC
cluster for the NRC would cost and would already have
relationships with the companies that would submit bids
for the contract.
The hardware cost for such compute scale are, of
course, substantial.68 For example, the IBM supercomputer
used at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) known as,
“Summit” , cost $200 million.69 At the time of its completion
in 2018, Summit was the fastest supercomputer in the
world, and as of 2020, is still the second fastest.70 Frontier,
the new Cray supercomputer being built at ORNL in 2021,
cost $500 million. When completed, it is anticipated to
be the fastest supercomputer in the world at “up to 50
times” faster than Summit.71 Nonetheless, these large
up-front costs could come with the benefit of computing
infrastructure specifically designed for AI research and the
NRC’s needs. Such a system would be more efficient in cost
per cycle over the long term, than subsidizing commercial
cloud services. The NRC could also expand and upgrade
multiple clusters over time to meet the changing needs
and scope of the program.
In addition, a dedicated cluster for the NRC has the
advantage of giving the federal government greater control
over computational resources (e.g., reducing uncertainty
over the products and platforms, such as the sudden
deprecation of required APIs). This level of control over
the hardware also allows policymakers greater flexibility
with NRC operations. Taking the public infrastructure
approach (i.e., “making” , not “buying”) comes with several
significant tradeoffs to weigh against the policy goals of
the NRC. First, building a new HPC cluster would take
about two years, in addition to the time it takes to solicit
and evaluate proposals from potential contractors.72 If
the NRC hopes to quickly stimulate and help democratize
AI research in the U.S., such a timeline for the program
would not be ideal, given how quickly AI discoveries
advance. Of course, contracting with cloud vendors or
issuing grants for the construction of supercomputers
would also require a process. Yet, building a cluster could
raise more challenging contracting issues, such as budget
overruns and project delays.73 Contractors’ experience with
building this type of hardware may help mitigate some
of these concerns, as well as their self-interest in being

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
considered for future government contracts. But the risks
are nonetheless still present.
Second, the usability and the feature set of the
software stack for public infrastructure is by no means
proven. One of the most common hurdles to researcher
adoption of cloud computing lies in the usability of
systems,74 and public infrastructure has less of a track
record of easing that onboarding path at the contemplated
scale. This is why we recommend a pilot to assess whether
a national HPC center can be administered in a way to
ensure the ease of cloud transition and software stack that
researchers have gotten used to with private providers.
Third, policymakers would also need to account for
costs of maintaining and administering the system.75 They
would need to find facilities to house and manage the
hardware and need to account for the high energy costs
of running an HPC cluster, as well as disaster prevention
and recovery cost.76 These costs are significant. In 2021,
the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility requested
$225 million to operate all of its systems.77 The Argonne
Leadership Computing Facility, in turn, requested $155
million.78 Furthermore, the lifecycle of DOE HPC systems
has traditionally been about seven years, after which new
systems are built and old ones decommissioned.79 While
it is uncertain what the lifespan of newer systems will be,
this seven-year figure would lead us to argue that the NRC
should expect to either upgrade its systems or build new
ones with some degree of regularity.
Last, giving the federal government greater control
over the computing resources would not immediately
make the NRC safe from attacks.80 As with using
commercial cloud infrastructure, security will primarily be
contingent on the NRC’s implemented data access model.81
We discuss security issues in depth in Chapter Eight.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Significant compute
power: The Fugaku
was the fastest
supercomputer in
2020.
 New application
process for
compute power:
Applications were
solicited to test out
the supercomputer
on a host of tasks
and have control
over who received
compute power.
CASE STUDY: FUGAKU
In 2014, Japan’s Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology launched a public-private partnership between the government-
funded Riken Institute, the Research Organization for Information Science and
Technology (RIST), and Fujitsu, to create the supercomputer successor to the K
computer that supports a wide range of scientific and societal applications.82 The
result was Fugaku, which was named the world’s fastest supercomputer in 2020.83
The technical aim of Fugaku was to be 100 times faster than the previous
K computer, with a performance of 442 petaFLOPS in the TOP500’s FP64 high
performance LINPACK benchmark.84 It currently runs 2.9 times faster than the
next fastest system (IBM Summit)85 and is composed of slightly over 150,000
connected CPUs, with each CPU using ARM-licensed computer chips.86 Despite
having around 1.9 times more parts than its K computer predecessor, the Fugaku
was finished in three fewer months.87 The 6-year budget for the Fugaku was
around $1 billion.88
RIST solicited proposals for usage through the “Program for Promoting
Research on the Supercomputer Fugaku.” Under the program, the Fugaku has
already been used to study the effect of masks and respiratory droplets in order
to inform Japanese policy during the COVID-19 pandemic.89 For FY 2021, 74 public
and industrial projects were selected for full-scale access to Fugaku.90 Currently,
RIST is still requesting proposals that fall under specific categories of usage, and
any interested researcher may apply.91

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
33
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
COST COMPARISON
To conclude this chapter, we provide a rough cost
comparison between a leading commercial cloud
service and a dedicated government HPC system (IBM
Summit) (see Appendix A for details). We refer the reader
to substantial work that has been published on the
economics of cloud computing for a fuller analysis, much
of which emphasizes the variance in computing demand.92
Building standalone public infrastructure is projected
to be less expensive than implementing the NRC through
a vendor contracting arrangement over five years. At a
10 percent discount on standard rates over five years,
and under constant usage, AWS’s more powerful cloud
computing option (known as P3 instances) could cost 7.5
times as much as Summit’s total estimated costs, using
comparable hardware. We use a 10 percent discount that
was negotiated by a major research university with a
commercial cloud provider. In contrast, the government
would need to negotiate an 88 percent discount for AWS
to be cost-competitive with a dedicated HPC cluster in the
long run. Even in a scenario where NRC usage fluctuates
dramatically, commercial cloud computing could cost 2.8
times Summit’s estimated cost. (While variability in usage
factors heavily into these estimates, the use of schedulers
can contribute to a smoothening out of demand.93)
These cost estimates have important limitations. First,
government may be able to negotiate the cost down. We
have used as a benchmark one major university’s enterprise
agreement with AWS, which provides a 10 percent discount,
relative to market rates. But, unless the negotiated discount
is orders of larger magnitude, the commercial cloud will
remain significantly more expensive. Second, these cost
estimates primarily focus on computing.94 As Compute
Canada’s analysis showed, the cost difference in storage
was even greater. Third, the use of commercial rates is
likely more favorable to cloud vendors, as government
security standards typically increase rates due to
regulatory requirements. For instance, a “data sovereignty”
requirement for data and hardware to reside within the
United States, or private cloud requirements for certain
agency datasets, may increase the cost of commercial cloud
computing significantly. Fourth, this simple cost comparison
is static, and does not reflect changes in hardware costs
and pricing structures that are likely to occur over a five-
year period, with rapidly changing market conditions.
But, if the NRC in fact scales, systems would be procured
incrementally over time, upgrading available resources
and providing options at different price points, similar to
current commercial options. Last, as noted above, these
cost estimates take into account maintenance as budgeted
for the Summit, but may not take into account all such
non-hardware costs, which is why we recommend a pilot
to explore the ability to open up government computing
facilities to NRC users.
In short, we offer this simple comparison to highlight
some of the salient cost considerations to the make-or-buy
decision, which arrives at a very similar conclusion to the
analysis done by Compute Canada.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 2
CASE STUDY: COMPUTE CANADA
Compute Canada formed in 2006 as a partnership between Canada’s regional
academic HPC organizations to share infrastructure across Canada.95 The
organization’s stated mission is to “enable excellence in research and innovation
for the benefit of Canada by effectively, efficiently, and sustainably deploying a
state-of-the-art advanced research computing network supported by world-class
expertise.”96
Compute Canada’s infrastructure includes five HPC systems that are hosted
at research universities across Canada.97 From 2015-2019, Compute Canada
used about $125 million (CAD) in funding to build four of these systems.98 They
also investigated using commercial cloud resources instead of building these
new systems.99 However, they ultimately concluded relying on commercial
cloud providers would be significantly more expensive and could not provide
the desired latency for large-scale, data-intensive research.100 In 2018, Compute
Canada requested $61 million (CAD) to fund its operations, budgeting $41 million
(CAD) for operating its HPC systems and $20 million (CAD) on support, training,
and outreach.101 Demand for Compute Canada’s HPC resources far exceeds the
infrastructure’s current capacity and is expected to keep growing.102 In 2018,
Compute Canada estimated they would need about $90 million (CAD) per year
over five years to invest in expanding infrastructure to the point where it could
meet projected demands.103
About 16,000 researchers from all scientific disciplines use Compute Canada’s
infrastructure to support their work.104 Compute Canada distributes its resources
in two ways. First, Principal Investigators and sponsored users may request a
scheduler-unprioritized resource allocation for their research group.105 Compute
Canada finds that many research groups can meet their compute needs this way.106
Alternatively, researchers who need more or prioritized resources may submit a
project proposal to the annual “Research Allocation Competitions.”107 Submitted
proposals go through a scientific peer review and a technical staff review to
rate their merits.108 Scientific review examines the scientific excellence and
feasibility of the specific research project, the appropriateness of the resources
requested to achieve the project’s objectives, and the likelihood that the resources
requested will be efficiently used.109 This review is conducted on a volunteer
basis by 80 discipline-specific experts from Canadian academic institutions.110
Technical review is conducted by Compute Canada staff itself, who verify the
accuracy of the computational resources needed for each project, based on the
technical requirements outlined in the application, and makes recommendations
about which resources should be allocated to meet the project’s needs.111 In
2021, Compute Canada received 651 applications to the Research Allocation
Competition and fully reviewed all applications in the span of 5 months.112
One of the challenges Compute Canada has faced stems from the
decentralization into regional organizations.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Default access
with tiers: All
PIs are eligible
for access to
a scheduler-
unprioritized
compute resource
allocation with
an application
process built in for
requesting more.
Most researchers
find the default
allocation sufficient
for their needs.
 Widely used
and increasing
demand: Compute
Canada’s
infrastructure
is widely used
across academic
disciplines, with
demand constantly
exceeding
resources.
Compute Canada
intends to
invest heavily in
infrastructure to
meet increasing
demands.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
35
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
After compute resources, the next critical design decision for the NRC is how to
both store and provide its users access to datasets: the “data access” goal of the NRC.
Indeed, as articulated in the original NRC call to action, government agencies should
“redouble their efforts to make more and better quality data available for public
research at no cost, ” as it will “fuel” unique breakthroughs in research.1 Investigating
some of the most socially meaningful problems hinges on large, but inaccessible
datasets in the public sector. From climate data housed by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), health data from the country’s largest integrated
health care system in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), or employment data
in the Department of Labor (DOL), such data could fuel both fundamental research
using AI and refocus efforts away from consumer-focused projects (e.g., optimizing
advertising), to more socially pressing topics (e.g., climate change).
As noted in the Congressional charge, facilitating broad data access is a crucial
pillar of the NRC. Importantly, as we discuss below, we limit the scope of our
recommendations to facilitating access to public sector government data, which as
a condition of accessing government administrative data, NRC researchers should
only use for academic research purposes. NRC users should also be able to compute
on any private dataset available to them. There are available mechanisms for sharing
such datasets, but we identify the NRC’s major challenge as providing access to
previously unavailable government data.
Government data is intentionally decentralized. By design of the Privacy Act of
1974, there is no centralized repository for US government data, or a core method for
linking data across government agencies.2 The result is a sprawling, decentralized
data infrastructure with widely varying levels of funding, expertise, application of
standards, and access and sharing of policies. Thus, the NRC will have to develop a
unified data strategy that can work with a wide range of agencies, unevenly adopted
security standards, and within existing data privacy legislation.
Previous efforts have sought to improve the access to and sharing of federal
data, both between agencies and with external researchers, but there are still
significant barriers to enabling AI research access of the kind that the NRC demands.3
By linking data governance policies with access to compute, building on existing
successful models, and working with agencies to create interoperable systems that
satisfy security and privacy concerns, the NRC can enable increased access to data
that will aid AI researchers in answering pressing scientific and social questions and
increase AI innovation.4

Chapter 3:
Securing Data Access
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 The NRC should adopt a tiered
model for access to and storage
of federal agency datasets.
Tiers should correspond to the
sensitivity of the data.
 The NRC can help to harmonize
the fragmented federal data-
sharing landscape.
 The NRC should consider
incentivizing agency
participation by granting
agencies that contribute data
the right to use NRC compute
resources.
 The NRC should strategically
sequence data acquisition
by focusing first on low- to
moderate-risk datasets that are
currently inaccessible.
 Due to legal constraints and
many outside options, the
NRC should focus its efforts
on streamlining access
to government datasets.
Researchers should still
be permitted to use NRC
compute resources on
private datasets, as long as
researchers certify they have
rights to use such data.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
We will first explain why the NRC should focus its efforts
on facilitating federal government data sharing rather than
private sector data sharing. We then examine how and why
the status quo for federal data sharing fails to realize the
massive potential of government data. While the concept
of centralizing disparate data sources to unlock research
insights is not new,5 there are unique challenges for doing so
within the context of the NRC. We will also discuss the key
elements of our proposed model: (1) The use of FedRAMP as
a system for categorizing datasets based on their sensitivity,
and for modifying access to them through tiered credentials
for NRC users; (2) Promotion of inter-agency standardization
and harmonization efforts to modernize data-sharing
practices; and (3) Strategic considerations regarding how
to sequence efforts in streamlining access to particular
datasets.
The case studies included throughout this White Paper
were chosen as exemplars of successful data-sharing
initiatives6 and to illustrate the range of available design
decisions. While each individual case study provides a
unique glimpse into different approaches, some common
themes emerge. First, many of the data-sharing entities
we studied not only have a single point of entry for
researchers to request access, but also allow government
agencies to retain some control over access requirements
to their data. As we discuss below, this conception of the
NRC as a data intermediary would provide real benefits
in streamlining data access while still maintaining trust
among agencies that wish to protect their data. Second,
some initiatives use funding and personnel training as
carrots to incentivize agencies to engage in data sharing.
The NRC can learn from these initiatives in formulating its
own set of incentives for agencies.
PRIVATE DATA SHARING
Should the NRC affirmatively facilitate private dataset
sharing? While there are definite benefits to providing
researchers with access to private data,7 the NRC will
have its largest impact by focusing its efforts first on
mechanisms to access and share government data.
As an initial matter, a variety of mechanisms for
general data sharing already exist.8 Private sector
stakeholders, moreover, can and have often built their
own in-house platforms to allow access to approved data
sets while minimizing intellectual property concerns,9 or
provide access to their application programming interfaces
(APIs) to make open-source data more easily accessible.10
By focusing on providing access to public sector
data, notably administrative data that is traditionally
inaccessible to most researchers,11 the NRC would play a
unique and pertinent role for researchers across disciplines
without having to deal with complex private-sector data
concerns or the need to incentivize participation by non-
government actors.
Complex intellectual property
concerns would arise from the NRC
permitting, facilitating, or even
requiring private sector stakeholders
and independent researchers to
share their private data freely
alongside public sector data.
Complex intellectual property concerns would arise
from the NRC permitting, facilitating, or even requiring,
private sector stakeholders and independent researchers
to share their private data freely alongside public sector
data. First, this would involve complex questions regarding
what licenses should be available or mandated for
NRC users in order to encourage data sharing, despite
apprehensions of how such sharing may affect future
profitability and commercialization. While mandating
an open-source (e.g., Creative Commons) license would
benefit researchers most by providing the broadest access
to data and would benefit NRC administrators by removing
some possible IP infringement concerns, private sector
stakeholders may feel deterred from uploading as a result.
Conversely, if users have a choice to adopt a license that

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
37
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
allows them to preserve their IP rights, private sector
stakeholders may feel more comfortable with sharing their
data, but this would shift some liability to users—or to the
NRC itself—by relying on users to abide by the license. This
would involve an emphasis on enforcement, ranging from
explanations and user disclaimers to the industry standard
of a full-blown notice-and-takedown system.
Data owners may want to prevent the uploading
of copyrighted works by, for instance, having the NRC
itself assess whether private data is already protected
by copyright. Industry standards for conducting data
diligence, using either manual or automated tools, would
either be very labor intensive12 or prohibitively expensive.13
Even if these industry standards were met, researchers
may find an NRC data-sharing platform duplicative.
None of the above would prevent researchers from
using NRC compute resources on their own private
datasets. Like current cloud providers, the NRC can
stipulate in an End User Licensing Agreement (EULA)
that researchers must agree they own the intellectual
property rights on the data they are using.14 This EULA can
also assign liability to the end user, rather than the NRC
itself, for any use of data that is encumbered by existing
IP provisions. Additionally, the discussion above pertains
to whether researchers should be required to share
their private data, not to whether researchers should be
required to share the outputs of their research conducted
on the NRC. The latter is discussed in Chapter Nine.
THE CURRENT PATCHWORK
SYSTEM FOR ACCESSING
FEDERAL DATA
The NRC could play a pivotal role streamlining
access to government data in a system that is currently
decentralized.15 In some cases, agencies may simply
lack a standardized method for sharing data.16 Due to
perceived legal constraints, risks, or security concerns,
agencies often have little practical incentive to share their
data.17 Successful examples of researchers gaining access
to government data from individual agencies frequently
rely on the researchers having personal relationships
with administrators, and a willingness on the part of the
administrator to push against these constraints, in service
of the research project.18 While this relationship-based
process has produced some successes,19 the far more
common outcome is that data is simply not shared or
accessed at all by researchers.20 Indeed, one government
official indicated that overcoming the obstacles to making
certain government data available for research was the
greatest challenge in a lengthy career.
One government official
indicated that overcoming the
obstacles to making certain
government data available
for research was the greatest
challenge in a lengthy career.
Agencies typically require the recipient of the data
to abide by a data-use agreement (DUA). These DUAs
prescribe such limitations on data usage as the duration
of use, the purpose of use, and guarantees on the privacy
and security of data.21 However, DUAs suffer from a
central problem: the process for negotiating DUAs is
highly fragmented and inconsistent across government
agencies, drastically increasing the complexity in obtaining
approvals for them.22 Some agencies have a designated
office or process to handle DUAs, but other agencies rely
on extemporaneous processes and ad hoc, quid-pro-quo
arrangements.23 One such example is the Research Data
Assistance Center, a centralized unit within the Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) dedicated to
supporting data access requests.24 In contrast, DUAs within
the Department of Housing and Urban Development and
the Department of Education are handled in decentralized
business units, each with different routing channels and
legal teams, which can confuse reviewers when multiple

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
data requests between the same parties are routed
simultaneously, but separately.25 Indeed, university DUA
negotiators in one survey complained that the process was
a game of “bureaucratic hot potato” and wondered, “Why
isn’t there just one template for everything?”26 Ultimately,
the lack of standardization means that DUAs often require
extensive review and revision, creating substantial delays.
Agency-by-agency requirements also impede data
sharing. These requirements can range from mandating
that researchers only access data at an onsite facility, using
government-authorized equipment, to capping the amount
of computational cycles that can be used to analyze data,
or restricting the amount of data available simultaneously.27
These restrictions are particularly problematic, given that
modern AI models can require massive amounts of data and
computation to be most effective.
Broadly, the reasons for this dysfunction range
from valid concerns about security and liability to the
mundane and prosaic. Information technology systems
within some agencies operate literally decades behind the
technological frontier; a 2016 report from the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) detailed examples of these
legacy systems, discussing how several agencies were
dependent on hardware and software that were no longer
updateable, and required specialized staff to maintain.28
A lack of incentives, a risk-averse culture, and an agency’s
statutory authority also all play an important role in
enabling or obstructing data sharing.29
We are by no means the first observers to note
these problems. Advocates have been working for years
to standardize and modernize government practices
around data and technology.30 For example, the Federal
Data Strategy is the culmination of a multi-year effort to
promulgate uniform data-sharing principles to address
the fact that the United States “lacks a robust, integrated
approach to using data to deliver on mission, serve the
public, and steward resources. ”31 However, substantial
challenges remain, particularly since the bulk of the efforts
focused on opening access to government data have
not been undertaken with the specific needs of machine
learning and AI in mind.
TIERED DATA ACCESS AND STORAGE
The decentralized nature of government data has
cascading implications across many aspects of the
government data ecosystem. One key area that will affect
the NRC is a lack of consistent storage and authentication
access protocols across government agencies.
Because many government datasets contain sensitive
data (e.g., high risk due to individual privacy concerns),32
a crucial component of the NRC’s data model will consist
of a tiered storage taxonomy that distinguishes between
datasets based on their sensitivity and correspondingly
restricts access to different research groups. Interpreting
tiered storage and access as two sides of the same coin,
we reference existing models that are based on dataset
risk levels and propose a framework for the NRC that
aims to achieve the dual goals of streamlining the process
of enabling research access to government data while
maintaining privacy and security.
FedRAMP: A tiered framework for data storage
on the cloud
One type of tiered storage taxonomy already exists for
third party government cloud services in one of the federal
government’s major cybersecurity frameworks, the Federal
Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP).33
Enacted in 2011, the framework was designed to govern
all federal agency cloud deployments, with certain
exceptions detailed in Chapter Eight of this White Paper.
FedRAMP offers two paths for cloud services providers to
receive federal authorization. First, an individual agency
may issue what is known as an authority-to-operate (ATO)
to a cloud service provider after the provider’s security
authorization package has been reviewed by the agency’s
staff and the agency has identified any shortcomings that
need to be addressed.34 These types of ATOs are valid for
each vendor across multiple agencies, as other agencies
are permitted to reuse an initial agency’s security package
in granting ATOs. The second option available to cloud
services providers is to obtain a provisional ATO from the
FedRAMP Joint Authorization Board, which consists of
representatives from the Department of Defense (DOD),
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and the

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
39
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
General Services Administration (GSA). These provisional
ATOs offer assurances to agencies that DHS, DOD, and the
GSA have reviewed security considerations, but before
any specific agency is allowed to use a vendor’s services,
that agency must issue its own ATO.28 In both the first and
second cases, FedRAMP categorizes systems into low,
moderate, or high impact levels (see Table).
Because FedRAMP requirements apply to all federal
agencies when federal data is collected, maintained,
processed, disseminated, or disposed of on the cloud,
the NRC itself will need to be compliant with FedRAMP
security standards irrespective of the organizational form
it takes.35 Every dataset brought on to the NRC would
need to be reviewed under FedRAMP with appropriate
access levels. If a cloud service has already been evaluated
under FedRAMP because it was used in the past to house
federal data, the service can inherit the same FedRAMP
compliance level in the NRC without an additional
evaluation.36
Besides classifying datasets, the other function of
FedRAMP is to identify a comprehensive set of “controls, ”
i.e., requirements and mechanisms that the cloud service
providers must implement before the government dataset
can be housed on them.37 They are based on the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special
Publication 800-53, which provides standards and security
requirements for information systems used by the federal
government.38
These controls range widely and include requirements
such as ensuring that the organization requesting
certification “automatically disables inactive accounts, ”
“establishes and administers privileged user accounts
in accordance with a role-based access scheme that
organizes system access and privileges into roles, ”
“provides security awareness training on recognizing
and reporting potential indicators of insider threat, ” or
develops regular security plans in the event of a breach.39
Requirements get more strenuous for FedRAMP “high
impact” data (e.g., creating system level air-gaps to protect
sensitive data).40
LEVEL TYPE OF DATA IMPACT OF DATA BREACH NUMBER OF
CONTROLS
Low-impact risk
- Low baseline
- Low-impact SaaS
Data intended
for public use
Limited adverse effects; Preserves the safety,
finances, reputation, or mission of an agency 125
Moderate-impact risk
- E.g. Personally
identifiable information
Controlled
unclassified data
not available to
the public
Can damage an agency’s operations 325
High-impact risk
- E.g. law enforcement,
healthcare, emergency
services
Sensitive federal
information
Catastrophic impacts, like shutting down an
agency’s operations, causing financial ruin, or
threatening property or life
421
Table 2: FedRAMP levels are designated based on the degree of risk associated with the breach of an information system. The security baseline levels
are based on confidentiality, availability, and integrity, as defined in Federal Information Processing Standard 199.41

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
There can be significant costs with obtaining these
certifications and creating compliance plans, even if the
underlying technical specifications can be addressed or
already exist. A key issue for structuring the NRC is that the
principal burdens of ensuring FedRAMP compliance should
fall with NRC institutional staff, not originating agencies or
individual academic researchers. As part of the FedRAMP
certification process, NRC staff will have to consider how to
give access to PIs in compliance with FedRAMP rules, but
that process can and should avoid requiring originating
agencies or individual universities to incur substantial
expenses associated with hiring consultants and attorneys
to certify FedRAMP compliance.42
While FedRAMP sets out common standards for
cloud storage of government data within agencies,43 it
is an exception to an otherwise balkanized federal data-
sharing standards landscape,44 though it does not facilitate
data exchange. The NRC needs to maintain compliance
with not only FedRAMP requirements, but also the
requirements of any agency it is partnering with for data
access.45 Advocates interested in increasing government
data availability have long fought to establish a universal
FedRAMP equivalent across different agencies that
provides shared standards for data sharing based on data
sensitivity.46 As we discuss in Chapter Eight, establishing
such universal, “centralized” security standards not only
ensures internal uniformity, but also removes barriers to
data sharing.
The NRC’s implementation of FedRAMP standards can
also provide partnering agencies an important opportunity
to re-examine their own standards and share best practices
with one another.47 This could involve raising or lowering
requirements that are out of date,48 given the current
threat to the environment and research needs. The NRC
can take inspiration from agencies’ best practices, as well
as from FedRAMP to develop a common NRC standard for
determining data to be high, moderate, or low risk, as well
as what consequences should flow from that assessment.
In the later section on strategic considerations, we discuss
how to enable this process by incentivizing agencies to
participate in the NRC and selecting datasets that present
a lower privacy and security risk.
In addition, given the diversity of data types and
sources that could be stored on the platform, NRC
policy should ensure that standards and protections
exist for data storage in areas where FedRAMP has
blind spots. FedRAMP is in part animated by risks from
malicious actors like cybercriminals or adversarial foreign
governments, but as we discuss in Chapter Six, privacy
risks may arise even for the intended use case of analysis
by NRC researchers. Of particular concern are instances
where disparate datasets are combined, which may allow
new inferences that make previously anonymous data
individually identifiable, even when the data itself did not
contain identifiable information. 49 Such combinations
may also alter the original risk level of the data, creating
an output that merits a higher risk classification.
Furthermore, machine-learning models and
representations may unintentionally reveal properties of
the data used to train them, 50 and dissemination of these
models could pose privacy risks.
This is not a challenge unique to the NRC; the U.S.
Census Bureau and other government agencies engaged
in data linkage have also had to develop means to
address this issue. 51 One solution involves applying
methods of additional noise to the data (differential
privacy) in order to obfuscate individual data while
preserving the data’s utility for research. We discuss it
and other privacy-enhancing technologies in greater
detail in Chapter Seven. 52 However, privacy-enhancing
technologies are no panacea, and depending on the
nature of the particular dataset, the goals of ensuring
anonymization, while also enabling researchers to access
fine-grained data can conflict.

The NRC can also draw from the “Five Safes” data
security framework used by the UK Data Service, 53 the
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers Network,
and the Coleridge Initiative, a model centered on data,
projects, people, access settings, and outputs. 54 The
implementation of the 2019 Evidence Act is already
using a similar Five Safes framework in making
determinations around data linkage. 55 Through a
combined framework, the NRC could place different
anonymization requirements on datasets, depending
on the circumstances of their access and the privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
41
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
agreements through which they were collected. Similarly,
the NRC could control the dissemination scope of models,
code, and data, depending on the sensitivity. Theoretical
identifiability is less likely to be a concern when access
and dissemination is restricted and the data is of a less
sensitive nature or is not about individuals at all. 56
Facilitating Researcher Access with a Tiered
Access Model
How should researchers gain access to specific data
resources? Currently, approval proceeds on an agency-
by-agency basis. 57 Just as the value of the NRC for
supporting AI research will depend, in part, on the extent
to which it can bring together datasets from different
agencies, it will also depend on the extent to which it can
streamline the process for accessing data. One way to
achieve this streamlining will be through a tiered access
system for the NRC users, similar to FedRAMP’s tiered
system for storing federal data on the cloud, where higher
tiers would enable access to higher-risk data, subject
to the other requirements on compute and data use.
We discuss this access system in more depth in Chapter
Seven.
Chapter Two made the case that compute access
should start with PIs at academic institutions. This
authorization can also serve as the baseline, where all
NRC-registered PIs can freely access and use low-risk
datasets on the NRC. Additional tiers would impose more
requirements, such as citizenship, security clearance,
distribution restrictions, or compute and system
restrictions. These access tiers will be similar to those
used for determining FedRAMP classification for data
storage, but while access and storage sensitivity may
invoke similar considerations; they might not necessarily
be the same.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Balances providing
consistent restricted
data access with agency
requirements: The ADRF
balances building in each
restricted data set’s access
and export review form in
a consistent manner into
the data portal with agency
requirements for data
access and export. This
allows agencies to control
access to their data, while
providing a single point
of entry for researchers.
Currently, the platform only
supports data consistent
with a FedRAMP Moderate
certificate.
 Standardized for both users
and data stewards: Along
with each data access for
users, a point of contact at
the agency providing the
data is given access to the
platform as well. This allows
easy access to approve and
track projects, and work
with the ADRF on access
requirements.
 Five Safes’ data security
framework: The ADRF
ensures data security by
focusing on five aspects—
data, projects, people,
settings of access, and
outputs.
 Training as a core function:
the ADRF hosts workshops
and trains government
employees and other
researchers on data use.
CASE STUDY: COLERIDGE INITIATIVE
(ADMINISTRATIVE DATA RESEARCH
FACILITY)
In partnership with the Census Bureau and funding from the Office
of Management and Budget, the nonprofit organization, Coleridge
Initiative, launched the Administrative Data Research Facility (ADRF),
a secure computing platform for governmental agencies to share and
work with agency micro-data.58 The ADRF is available on the Federal
Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) Marketplace
and has a FedRAMP Moderate certification. Currently, the platform
supports over 100 datasets from 50 agencies.59
The ADRF provides access to agency-sponsored researchers and
agency-affiliated researchers going through the ADRF training programs
for free. Over the past 3 years, over 500 employees from around 100
agencies have gone through ADRF training programs.60
The ADRF provides a shared workspace for projects and the
Data Explorer, a tool to view an overview and metadata (name, field
description, and data type) of available datasets on the ADRF.61 In
order to access restricted data, users must meet review requirements
set by the agency providing the data. In order to export data, users
must go through a unique “Export Review” process.62 The ADRF has a
highly involved default review process, requiring researchers to submit
all code and output for the project for approval to the data steward
and generating additional charges, if requesting export of more than
10 files.63 The agency providing the data can also amend the default
review process, if it wishes to do so.
Prior to transferring data files, the ADRF provides an application for
data hashing to safely transmit data.64 The ADRF also follows the “Five
Safes” security model used by other government agencies, such as the
UK Data Service.65
Data stewardship for the ADRF is defined in compliance with
the Title III of the Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018.66 Once
a restricted dataset is shared with the ADRF, one person within the
agency will be assigned the data steward for all project requests.
From there, procedures are developed with the agency, in terms of
expectations for how the data will be protected, authorized users, and
audit procedures for continued compliance.
Data stewards have access to an online portal in the ADRF. All
project requests for specific data are routed to the data steward
through this proposal. Once access has been granted, the data steward
also has options to monitor the project for compliance.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
43
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
The NRC can
emulate both the
Coleridge Initiative
and Stanford’s
Center for Population
Health Sciences
(PHS), for instance,
which serve as data
intermediaries, in
facilitating access to
government data.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Mixed data architecture, yet consistent user
experience: PHS utilizes a mix of on-premise
and cloud data services, but still seeks to
provide a consistent user experience.
 Restricted data access has a single point
of entry: The PHS Data Portal standardizes,
centralizes, and simplifies data access
requirements and trainings, rather than pointing
users to a time-consuming process working with
each data steward directly.
 Reduces costs and time associated with
procuring data: PHS leverages existing
relationships with agencies to consolidate
datasets in a single portal, saving researchers
the time and money necessary to gain access
through individual agency requests.
Existing models for researcher access to sensitive datasets can help paint a
picture of how the NRC might maintain and monitor a tiered access system. The
NRC can emulate both the Coleridge Initiative and Stanford’s Center for Population
Health Sciences (PHS),67 for instance, which serve as data intermediaries, in
facilitating access to government data. Indeed, these intermediaries have been
documented as effective means to overcome barriers to data-sharing because they,
at their core, negotiate and streamline relationships between data contributors and
users.68 For example, as a trusted intermediary, the NRC could centralize the DUA
intake process by promulgating a universal standard form for agency DUAs.69
Furthermore, similar to the Coleridge Initiative example, a designated
representative(s) within the agency could be assigned as the data steward for all
project requests for a certain restricted dataset. Any project requiring access to data
in higher tiers could commence only after its proposal was reviewed and approved
by a relevant representative. Because NRC access begins with PIs, researchers would
also have to obtain approval from their university Institutional Review Boards (IRBs),
as needed. After project approval and NRC researcher clearance, data would be
made available through the NRC’s secure portal. Any violations of the terms of use
or subject privacy could result in penalties ranging from a demotion of access tier to
removal of NRC privileges or professional, civil, or criminal penalties, as relevant.
CASE STUDY: STANFORD
CENTER FOR POPULATION
HEALTH SCIENCES
The Stanford Center for Population Health
Sciences (PHS) provides a growing set of population
health-related datasets and access methods to
Stanford researchers and affiliates.70 The PHS Data
Ecosystem hosts high-value datasets, data linkages
and filters, and analytical tools to aid researchers.
The PHS partners with a wide range of public,
nonprofit, and private entities to license population-
level datasets for university researchers, ranging from
low-risk, public datasets to restricted data containing
Protected Health Information (PHI) and Personally-
Identifiable Information (PII), such as Medicare,
commercial claims such as Optum and Marketscan
data,71 and electronic medical records.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
CASE STUDY: STANFORD CENTER FOR POPULATION
HEALTH SCIENCES (CONT’D)
In addition to secure data storage and computational tools for researchers, PHS provides standardized
and well-documented data access and management protocols, which increases data proprietor comfort
with sharing data. PHS also has full-time staff who cultivate and maintain relationships with organizations
holding data. This allows PHS to work with these groups to centralize data hosting and provide secure
access to a wide array of researchers.
The PHS Data Portal is hosted on a third-party platform which enables data discovery, exploration, and
clearly delineated, standardized steps for data access. The third-party platform, Redivis, utilizes a four-tier
access system: (1) overview of data and basic documentation, (2) metadata access, including definitions,
descriptions, and characteristics, (3) a 1 or 5 percent sample of the dataset, and (4) full data access.72
If data is classified as public, researchers can access it using specialized software, or simply download
it directly.73 For restricted data, the portal has forms integrated to easily apply for access.74 After identifying
the dataset, the researcher must apply for membership in the organization hosting the data.75 An
administrator of the organization owning the dataset can set member and study requirements that must
be met, including training and institutional qualification, in order to access the data. Member applications
can be set to auto-approval or require administrative approval. Once access has been granted to a data
set, researchers can manipulate the data using specialized software. Usage restrictions are also specified
individually on each dataset to control whether full, partial, or no output can be exported, and what review
level is required for exporting. All applications for data and export are handled directly on the Data Explorer
platform.
Currently, the PHS Data Portal is primarily for Stanford faculty, staff, students, or other affiliates.76 Even
with affiliate status, certain commercial datasets may require further data rider agreements for access.
Non-Stanford collaborators must complete all of the same access requirements as Stanford affiliates, plus
any requirements imposed by their own institution. Additionally, a “data rider” agreement on the original
DUA is frequently necessary.77
To work with restricted data, the PHS provides two computing services for high-risk data: (1) Nero,
with both an on-premise and Google Cloud Platform (GCP) platform versions and (2) PHS-Windows
Server cluster.78 Both are managed by the Stanford Research Computing Center (SRCC). Both services are
HIPAA compliant.79 Unrestricted data can be used on any of Stanford’s other computational environments
(Sherlock, Oak) or simply downloaded to the researcher’s local machine.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
45
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
PROMOTING INTER-AGENCY
HARMONIZATION AND ADOPTION
OF MODERN DATA ACCESS
STANDARDS
The federal data-sharing landscape suffers from
divergent standards and practices, and individual
agencies, left alone, have traditionally faced high hurdles
to harmonizing and modernizing their data access
standards.80 As we have discussed, this state of affairs
presents formidable barriers to AI R&D from a researcher
perspective, but is also problematic, both from an agency
and societal perspective. As a report by the Administrative
Conference of the United States finds from surveying the
use of AI in the federal government, nearly half of agencies
have experimented with AI to improve decision-making
and operational capabilities, but they often lack the
technical infrastructure and data capacity to use modern
AI techniques and tools.81 The lack of a modern, uniform
standard for data sharing in AI research, therefore, makes it
harder for agencies to realize gains in accuracy, efficiency,
and accountability, which subsequently impacts citizens
downstream, who are affected by agency decisions.82
The lack of a modern, uniform
standard for data sharing in
AI research makes it harder
for agencies to realize gains
in accuracy, efficiency, and
accountability, which subsequently
impacts citizens downstream, who
are affected by agency decisions.
The NRC can help overcome agency reluctance to
share data by enabling access to agencies to compute
on their own data. This would solve at least two crucial
problems for government agencies. First, access to the
NRC’s collective computing resources would overcome
some difficulties that agencies have traditionally faced
in setting up their own compute resources.83 Second,
facilitating agency access to modern data and compute
resources would attract and build further in-house
government AI expertise.84 From a societal perspective,
this could increase the government’s capabilities in the
responsible adoption of AI, help reduce the cost of core
governance functions, and increase agency efficiency,
effectiveness, and accountability.85
The NRC can also learn from and align with other
initiatives to harmonize and modernize standards. The
Evidence Act––which requires agencies to appoint Chief
Data and Evaluation Officers––is one example. The
legislation authorizing the creation of the NRC could
provide a federal mandate to encourage adoption of
sharing best practices.86 However, as we discuss in Chapter
Five, a federal mandate alone, without any additional
aid or incentives, may not be enough to incentivize
harmonization of data access and sharing standards.87
The Task Force should therefore consider bundling the
mandate with additional benefits, such as providing
funding to assist agencies in expanding their technical
or staff capabilities in furtherance of the NRC and the
National AI Strategy. The NRC is aligned with the existing
bipartisan case for the National Secure Data Service
(NSDS) (described in the case study below), a service
that would facilitate researcher access to data with
enhanced privacy and transparency, recommended by
the Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking in 2018.
Both the NRC and NSDS are complementary data-sharing
initiatives that have the potential to considerably improve
public service operational effectiveness. We elaborate
further on the NSDS proposal in Chapter Five. Lastly,
training programs are promising avenues to increase NRC
adoption and agency support. For example, as described
in the case study above, the Coleridge Initiative has hosted
workshops to train over 500 employees from around 100
agencies on data use over the past 3 years.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
CASE STUDY: THE EVIDENCE ACT
In pursuit of greater, more secure access to and linkage of
government administrative data, a bipartisan Commission on Evidence-
Based Policymaking was set up by Congress in March 2016. The
Commission’s final report88 included 22 recommendations for the federal
government to build infrastructure, privacy-protecting mechanisms,89
and institutional capacity to provide secure access to public data for
statistical and research purposes. One recommendation was to create
a ‘National Secure Data Service’ (NSDS) to facilitate access to data
for the purpose of building evidence, while maintaining privacy and
transparency. Through this service, the NSDS could help researchers by
temporarily linking existing data and providing secure access, without
itself creating a data clearinghouse.
The Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of
201890 created some of the legislative footing for the Commission’s
recommendations. In particular, it created new roles for Chief Data,
Evaluation, and Statistical Officials and sought to increase access and
linkage of datasets previously in scope of the Confidential Information
Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA).91
Finally, the 2020 Federal Data Strategy and associated Action Plan92
sought to put those legislative provisions into action. The Strategy
included plans to improve data governance, to make data more
accessible, to improve government use of data and to boost the use and
quality of data inventories, metadata and data sensitivity.
The central remaining step envisioned by the initial Evidence-Based
Policymaking Commission is a National Secure Data Service (NSDS)
modelled on the UK’s Data Service.93 The UK’s Data Service provides
access to a range of public surveys, longitudinal studies, UK census
data, international aggregate data, business data, and qualitative
data. Alongside access, it provides guidance and training for data use,
develops best practices and standards for privacy, and has specialized
staff who apply statistical control techniques to provide access to data
that are too detailed, sensitive, or confidential to be made available
under standard licenses.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Priority data sharing where
there is a public service
operational case: there is
precedent in large-scale
administrative data-sharing
initiatives justified on
grounds of improvements
to public service
operational efficiency, and
effectiveness.
 National Secure Data
Service (NSDS) initiative:
the NSDS is bolstered by
bipartisan support.
 Institutional models
that balance external,
innovative talent and
internal, cross-agency
influence: a Federally
Funded Research and
Development Center
(FFRDC) model, housed
within an existing agency
(NSF), may balance the
ability to bring in external
talent with internal agency
influence.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
47
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 3
SEQUENCING INVESTMENT INTO
DATA ASSETS
Given the significant hurdles in negotiating data
access, the NRC will need to strategically sequence which
agencies and datasets to focus on for researcher use.
The federal government collects petabytes of data,94
each with varying degrees of restrictions or openness.
In considering which datasets to prioritize, the NRC can
draw from the example of other data- sharing initiatives,
as well as focus on data sets in the short term that do not
pose complex challenges with regards to data privacy
or sharing. One private sector example is Google Earth
Engine, which aggregated petabytes (approx. 1 million
gigabytes) of satellite images and geospatial datasets,
and then linked that access to Google’s cloud computing
services to allow scientists to answer a variety of crucial
research questions.95 This process of aggregating complex
data and hosting it in a friendly computing infrastructure
to facilitate research, demonstrates the compelling value
of coupling compute and data. As another example,
ADR UK identifies specific areas of research that are of
pressing policy interest, such as “world of work, ”96 and
prioritizes data access for researchers working on those
topics. The UK Data Service offers datasets derived
from survey, administrative and transaction sources,
including productivity data from the Annual Respondents
Database,97 innovation data from the UK Innovation
Survey,98 geospatial data from the Labour Force Survey,99
Understanding Society,100 and sensitive data about
childhood development.101

When prioritizing datasets and agencies for NRC
partnership, we recommend the following criteria:
• Data that is valuable to AI researchers, but is not
currently available in a convenient form. For example,
in a July 2019 request for comments, the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) asked members
of the public to provide input on characteristics of
models that make them well suited to AI R&D, what
data are currently restricted, and how liberation
of such data would accelerate high-quality AI
R&D.102 In one response, the Data Coalition argued
that controlled release of private but structured
indexed data in data.gov would be valuable for
research.103 The Coalition also urged agencies to
consider releasing raw, unstructured datasets, such
as agency call center logs, consumer inquiries and
complaints, as well as regulatory inspection and
investigative reports.104 Another example of data that
is currently challenging to access, but is a matter of
public record, are, electronic court records housed
in a system by the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts.105
• Data housed within agencies that have statutory
authority to share data and/or that have previous
data-sharing experience. The Census Bureau, for
instance, has greater existing statutory inter-agency
linkage than other agencies, and has pre-existing
substantial in-house data analysis expertise.106
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics has an existing
process for sharing restricted datasets (in the
categories of employment and unemployment,
compensation and working conditions, and prices
and living conditions) with researchers.107
• Data with limited privacy implications. For example,
agencies whose data concerns natural phenomena,
rather than individuals, may be easier to manage
from a privacy perspective – e.g., NASA, the US
Geological Service, and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. Datasets like those
housed in NASA’s Planetary Data System,108 but that
are not easily available to researchers may serve as
a valuable starting point for the NRC. Increasing the
availability and interoperability of datasets from
these agencies would advance the core mission of
the NRC and could be done without jeopardizing
individual privacy.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 4
Chapter 4:
Organizational Design
What institutional form should the NRC take? Two overarching considerations
are: (1) Ease of access to data; and (2) Ease of coordination with compute resources.1
As we discussed in Chapter Three and will detail in depth in Chapter Five, the federal
data-sharing landscape among agencies is highly fragmented, with many agencies
reluctant to or legally constrained from sharing their data. The NRC will need to
coordinate between the entities supplying compute infrastructure and researchers
themselves. As the NRC’s goal is to provide researchers with access to government
data and high-performance computing power; one without the other will fall short
of achieving the NRC’s mission.
Drawing on extensive work in support of the Evidence Act, we recommend
the use of Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs) and
private-public partnerships (PPPs) as possible organizational forms for the NRC. We
recommend the creation of an FFRDC at affiliated government agencies in the short
term, as we believe this path allows for the easiest facilitation of both the compute
infrastructure and access to government data. In the longer term, the establishment
of a PPP could facilitate greater data sharing and access between the public and
private sectors. Importantly, other options include creating an entirely new federal
agency or bureau within an existing agency. While these options might simplify
coordination with compute resources, both pose challenges, with respect to data
accessibility and inter-agency data sharing.
FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT CENTER
FFRDCs are quasi-governmental nonprofit corporations sponsored by a
federal agency, but operated by contractors, including universities, other nonprofit
organizations, and private-sector firms.2 The FFRDC model confers the benefits of
a close agency relationship, alongside independent administration, in facilitating
access to data. Due to their intimate subcontracting relationships with their parent
agency, all FFRDCs benefit from data access that goes “beyond that which is
common to the normal contractual relationship, to Government and supplier data,
including sensitive and proprietary data. ”3
A recent report by Hart and Potok on the National Secure Data Service (NSDS)
(see case study in Chapter Three) also supports the FFRDC model as an optimal way
to facilitate access to, and linkage of government administrative data.4 The report
considered FFRDCs, alongside such other institutional forms as creating an entirely
new agency, housing the NSDS in an existing agency, and developing a university-
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 In the short term, the NRC
should be instituted as a
Federally Funded Research
and Development Center
(FFRDC), which reduce the
significant costs of securing
data from federal agencies.
 In the longer term, a well-
designed, public-private
partnership (PPP), governed
by officers from Affiliated
Government Agencies,
academic researchers, and
representatives from the
technology sector, could
increase the quantity and
quality of R&D, and reduce
maintenance costs.
 Instituting the NRC as a
standalone federal agency or
bureau would face numerous
challenges, notably in securing
access to data housed in other
agencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
49
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 4
led, data-sharing service, but the report ultimately
recommended the FFRDC model for several reasons. An
FFRDC can scale quickly, because it can access government
data and high-quality talent more easily than other
options.5 An FFRDC can also leverage existing government
expertise. The NSF, for instance, already sponsors five
separate FFRDCs and has extensive experience cultivating
and maintaining networks of researchers.6
However, the FFRDC model comes with a few
limitations. First, an FFRDC’s role is restricted to research
and development for their sponsoring agency that “is
closely associated with the performance of inherently
governmental functions. ”7 Thus, it would be important to
ensure alignment during the contracting phase with the
NRC’s core functions.
Second, the success of an FFRDC model for the NRC
will depend on the ability of the sponsoring agency to gain
cooperation across the federal government to provide
data needed for research. One way to do this would be
for multiple agencies to co-sponsor the FFRDC, reducing
contracting friction for datasets.8 Another option would
be to create multiple FFRDCs housed in different agencies,
incentivizing each of those agencies to share their data
with the respective FFRDC. An analogous example could
include the National Labs as a network, where each
National Lab would be an instantiation of the NRC within
its own relevant agency.9
Third, multiple FFRDCs would require separate
processes for compute resources. In the short term,
the NRC may alleviate this problem by contracting for
commercial cloud credits, which is likely already the short-
term solution for the NRC to provide compute access. As
discussed earlier, private sector cloud providers already
have extensive experience in providing compute resources
to the government10 and to academic institutions.11
Familiarity with these private cloud providers may reduce
the friction in allocating compute among researchers at
multiple FFRDCs.
In the longer term, the FFRDC model may not be the
most efficient. From a cost and sustainability perspective,
FFRDCs have traditionally suffered from significant
overruns, as they “operate under an inadequate,
inconsistent patchwork of federal cost, accounting and
auditing controls, whose deficiencies have contributed
to the wasteful or inappropriate use of millions of federal
dollars. ”12 Another concern is that, historically, FFRDC
infrastructure has not been routinely updated. A 2017
Department of Energy report highlighted that FFRDC
infrastructure was inadequate to meet the mission.13
NASA’s Inspector General also highlighted that more
than 50 percent of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (a NASA
FFRDC) equipment was at least 50 years old.14 If an FFRDC
version of the NRC experiences these same challenges,
we recommend for the NRC in the long run, to switch to a
public-private partnership model.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 4
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Multiple agency
co-sponsors: While
STPI’s primary
sponsor is the
National Science
Foundation, a
number of other
agencies also
co-sponsor STPI,
reducing difficulties
in accessing data
across agencies.
 Expertise: While
STPI is staffed with
its own employees,
it can also tap into
expertise from
the hundreds of
employees at the
Institute for Defense
Analyses (IDA), the
organization that
manages STPI. As
an FFRDC, STPI can
also contract for
additional expertise
as required.
CASE STUDY: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
POLICY INSTITUTE (STPI)
STPI is a FFRDC chartered by Congress in 1991 to provide rigorous objective
advice and analysis to the Office of Science and Technology Policy and other
Executive Branch agencies.15 STPI is managed by the Institute for Defense Analyses
(IDA), a nonprofit organization that also manages two other FFRDCs: the Systems
and Analyses Center and the Center for Communications and Computing.16 IDA has
no other lines of business outside the FFRDC framework.17
STPI’s primary federal sponsor is the National Science Foundation, but
research at STPI is also co-sponsored by other federal agencies, including the
National Institute of Health (NIH), Department of Energy (DOE), Department of
Transportation (DOT), Department of Defense (DOD), and Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS).18 Due to the “unique relationship” between an FFRDC and its
sponsors, STPI “enjoys unusual access to highly classified and sensitive government
and corporate proprietary information.”19
NSF appropriations provide the majority of funding for STPI, including $4.7
million in Fiscal Year 2020,20 but a limited amount of funding is also provided from
other federal agencies.21 STPI has approximately 40 full-time employees and has
access to the expertise of IDA’s approximately 800 other employees.22 As an FFRDC,
STPI may also contract for expertise, as required for a particular project.23 The
statute specifying STPI’s duties also directs it to consult widely with representatives
from private industry, academia, and nonprofit institutions, and to incorporate those
views in STPI’s work to the maximum extent practicable.24
STPI is also required to submit an annual report to the President on its
activities, in accordance with requirements prescribed by the President,25 which
provides additional accountability for the FFRDC. According to STPI’s 2020 report,
STPI worked across multiple federal agencies, supporting them on 48 separate
technology policy analyses throughout 2020.26
A PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP (PPP)
A Public-Private Partnership (PPP) would create a
partnership between federal agencies and private-sector
organizations to jointly house and manage data-sharing
efforts and run compute infrastructure. Because different
agencies and private-sector members may have different
contracting preferences, intellectual property goals, and
security allowances for data access, creating a data-sharing
partnership within this patchwork framework could be
challenging in the immediate future. Nonetheless, PPPs
can provide a number of long-term benefits, as they have
been used successfully as data clearinghouses to produce,
analyze, and share data between the public and private
sector.27 Indeed, recognizing the benefits of the PPP model,
the European Union has launched a new initiative called
the Public Private Partnerships for Big Data that will offer
a secure environment for cross-sector collaboration and
experimentation using both commercial and public data.28
In general, PPPs for data-sharing can increase the quality
and quantity of R&D, increase the value and efficiency
of sharing public sector data, and reduce the long-run
cost necessary to manage and maintain the data-sharing
infrastructure.29

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
51
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 4
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Utilizing joint ventures:
The ADP PPP uses
a joint venture
agreement to set the
terms and conditions
for the partnership,
whereby one partner
is the custodian for
government data,
and the other is the
operator that builds and
maintains the software
that facilitates data-
sharing.
 Revenue-sharing
agreements: A shared
revenue model assures
contributions from,
and realization of value
to, each stakeholder.
The ADP subsequently
reinvests its profits into
improving the system.
 Significant efficiencies:
According to the
ADP , there are lower
costs to creating
and maintaining the
ADP than under a
conventional approach.
CASE STUDY: ALBERTA DATA PARTNERSHIPS
(ADP)
Founded in 1997, the ADP PPP is designed to provide long-term
management of comprehensive digital data sets for the Alberta market.30
The PPP is structured as a joint venture between ADP , a nonprofit, and Altalis
Ltd. whereby the ADP is the “custodian” of government data and Altalis is
the “operator.”31 More specifically, geospatial data is owned by the provincial
government, but exclusive licensing arrangements are granted to ADP to
allow for sales.32 Meanwhile, Altalis, under the direction and oversight of
ADP , builds software to securely load and distribute these provincial spatial
datasets to users. Altalis also provides training to end users and is responsible
for cleaning, updating, and standardizing datasets.33
In choosing its “operating partner” (i.e., Altalis) for the joint venture, the
ADP Board initially issued a “Request for Information” that solicited proposals
from private-sector companies whose core business was the improvement,
maintenance, management, and distribution of spatial data.34 The ADP
Board ultimately chose Altalis; not only because it had the superior offering
and existing capabilities, but also because Altalis was willing to take on all
the investment required, at its risk, to build and operate the ADP system in
accordance with ADP specifications.35
Today, all Altalis and ADP costs are covered by the operations of the
joint venture.36 The joint venture earns revenues through, for instance,
directed project funding and data access fees from stakeholders, which
include municipalities, regulatory agencies, energy, forestry, and mining
organizations.37 Any profits from the joint venture are split roughly 80/20
between Altalis and ADP , respectively, and ADP subsequently uses its profit
share to reinvest in data and system improvements.38
The ADP PPP claims to have generated efficiencies for data sharing. For
instance, the ADP estimates that a traditional government-only approach to
maintaining and distributing datasets would have ranged between $65 million
and $120 million cumulatively since ADP’s inception, and ADP claims to have
provided its users with $6.8 million in cost savings.39

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 4
A PPP model could reduce the friction of coordination
between data and compute. One example of using a PPP
for compute resources is the COVID-19 High-Performance
Computing Consortium, spearheaded by the Office of
Science and Technology Policy, DOE, NSF, and IBM.40
Drawing on the experience of XSEDE, the Consortium
has 43 members from the public and private sectors that
volunteer free compute resources to researchers with
COVID-19-related research proposals.41 The voluntary
nature of compute provisioning, in this instance, provides
benefits to both the researchers, who gain immediate
access to compute, and the Consortium members, who
contribute to innovation and reap public relations benefits.
We also acknowledge that the evidence around the
efficacy of PPPs is contested.42 Indeed, there is no one-
size-fits-all PPP model; PPPs differ vastly, according to the
responsibilities allocated between the private sector and
the public sector, and the success of a PPP can depend
on its structure.43 According to a RAND Report of 30 case
studies of successful public-private data clearinghouses,
these clearinghouses have widely different organizations,
access requirements, and strategies for managing data
quality.44 Such decision points are crucial. For example,
some scholars emphasize the need for a trusted
environment for the private and public sectors to handle
privacy and ethics violations in sensitive industries.45
Similarly, in the siloed federal data-sharing context, a PPP
must consider how to divide functions in tackling these
additional considerations in privacy, ethics, security, and
intellectual property.
THE NRC AS A GOVERNMENT
AGENCY
The NRC could also be constructed as a new
government agency or bureau. The main advantages
to this model would be the development of a distinct
public-sector institution, devoted to AI compute and
data. The NRC could be to cloud and data what the U.S.
Digital Service is to government information technology.
Such an agency would have to be established by statute
or executive mandate. Enabling legislation could create
dedicated, professional staff to build and develop the NRC,
vest the NRC with authority to mandate inter-agency data
sharing, and create a long-term plan that is informed by
the National AI Strategy.
There are, however, significant disadvantages to
creating a new agency or bureau. First, the NRC could
lay claim to no government datasets at all, and could
subsequently encounter significant headway with having
to negotiate with each originating agency for data, not to
mention the constraints under the Privacy Act, discussed
in Chapter Five. That said, enabling legislation could
exempt the agency from the Privacy Act’s data linkage
prohibitions and transfer litigation risk for data leakages
to the new agency. Second, a new agency may face greater
challenges in recruiting top-flight talent.46 According to
the 2020 Survey on the Future of Government Service, a
majority of respondents at federal agencies agreed that
they often lose good candidates because of the time it
takes to hire, and less than half agreed that their agencies
have enough employees to do a quality job.47 Moreover,
many respondents highlighted inadequate career growth
opportunities, inability to compete with private-sector
salaries, and lack of a proactive recruiting strategy as
major factors contributing to an inadequately skilled
workforce in federal agencies.48 FFRDCs, in contrast, can be
negotiated with existing organizations, making the startup
costs potentially lower. Third, while national laboratories
have expertise contracting with entities to construct high-
performance computing facilities, it is unclear how a new
federal agency/office would approach such a task. It is
one thing for an entity like the U.S. Digital Service to help
develop IT platforms for U.S. agencies; it is another to
simultaneously build a very large supercomputing facility
and solve longstanding challenges with data access.
Finally, it will be important to isolate the research mission
of the NRC from political influence. To the extent that a
new agency might provide less isolation from changes
in presidential administrations and politically appointed
administrators, is an important consideration.
While these disadvantages are considerable,
ambitious legislative action could, in fact, make a new
government agency a viable option.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
53
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
Chapter 5: Data
Privacy Compliance
The vision motivating the NRC is to support academic research in AI by opening
access to both compute and data resources. Federal data can fuel basic AI research
discoveries and reorient efforts from commercial domains toward public and social
ones. As stated in the NRC’s original call, “[r]esearchers could work with agencies to
develop and test new methods of preserving data confidentiality and privacy, while
government data will provide the fuel for breakthroughs from healthcare to education
to sustainability. ”1
But is an NRC seeded with public sector data, particularly administrative data
from U.S. government agencies, even possible given the legal constraints? Research
proposals that sweep broadly across agencies for personally identifiable or otherwise
sensitive data2 will rightly trigger concerns about potential privacy risk. The Privacy
Act of 1974, the chief federal law governing the data collected by government
agencies, fundamentally challenges the notion of an NRC as a one-stop shop for
federal data. Its research exceptions leave some uncertainty about open-ended
research endeavors that go beyond statistical research or policy evaluation supporting
an agency’s core mission. Even if agencies deemed such research possible, researchers
would be subject to access constraints and the data itself may potentially require
technical privacy treatments.
We make the following recommendations regarding data privacy and the NRC.
First, agencies may be able to share anonymized administrative data with the NRC
within the boundaries of the Privacy Act for the purposes of AI research, based on the
Act’s statistical research exemptions. Second, the NRC will require a staff of privacy
professionals that include roles tasked with legal compliance, oversight, and technical
expertise. These professionals should build relationships with peers across agencies
to facilitate data access. Third, the NRC should explore the design of virtual “data safe
rooms” that enable researchers to access raw administrative microdata in a secure,
monitored, and cloud-based environment. Fourth, we recommend the NRC Task Force
engage the policy and statistical research communities, and consider coordination
with proposals for a National Secure Data Service which has grappled extensively with
these issues.
This chapter proceeds as follows. We first review the existing laws that apply to
government agencies and the restrictions they impose on data access and sharing. We
then describe current agency practices for sharing data with researchers and agencies
under the Privacy Act. Last, we assess the implications of current legal constraints on
NRC data sharing and the most important cognate proposal to promote data sharing
under the Evidence Act.
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 Agencies may share
anonymized administrative
data with the NRC under
the statistical research
exemption of the Privacy
Act.
 An agency’s willingness and
ability to share data may
depend on the extent to
which a proposed research
project aligns with an
agency’s core purpose.
 The NRC will require a staff
of privacy professionals for
legal compliance, oversight,
and technical expertise.
 Individually identifiable
or sensitive data will face
obstacles to release and
may warrant technical
privacy and/or tiered access
measures.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
Even when authorized or
mandated to share data in limited
circumstances, federal agencies
are often reluctant to do so due to a
myriad of factors, most prominently
a lack of adoption of consistent
data security standards, as well
as difficulties with measuring and
assessing privacy risks.
We note at the outset that this Chapter largely takes
existing statutory constraints as a given. At a macro level,
however, the challenges in data sharing also suggest that
an ambitious legislative intervention could overcome many
existing constraints, such as by statutorily (a) exempting
the NRC from the Privacy Act’s prohibition on data linkage;
(b) granting the NRC the power to assume agency liabilities
for data breaches; (c) mandating that agencies transfer any
data that has been shared under a data use agreement or
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request to the NRC; and
(d) requiring IT modernization plans to include provisions
for data-sharing plans with the NRC.3
THE PRIVACY ACT
Data privacy issues are at the core of debates about
sharing data, and the NRC will be no exception. Most data
privacy debates in the U.S. today focus on the consumer
data sector where data protection laws in the U.S. are
limited to nonexistent. In contrast, many U.S. government
agencies are subject to a robust privacy law, the Privacy
Act of 1974, that was passed in response to concerns
about government abuses of power.4 For nearly 50 years,
this legislation has been effective in its primary goal of
preventing the U.S. government from centralizing and
broadly linking data about individuals across agencies.
However, this approach has come at a cost, which is that
most government agencies are prevented from freely
sharing and linking data across agency boundaries,
which in turn hampers agency operational and research
efforts.5 According to one government privacy expert, even
when authorized or mandated to share data in limited
circumstances, federal agencies are often reluctant to do
so due to a myriad of factors, most prominently a lack of
adoption of consistent data security standards, as well as
difficulties with measuring and assessing privacy risks.6 To
that end, many agencies see promise in adopting technical
privacy measures, such as differential privacy, or the
creation of synthetic data sets as proxies for actual data,
as a necessary precursor for enabling data sharing for both
research purposes, as well as for inter-agency goals.7
In the nearly 50 years since the Privacy Act’s
passage, there have been periodic efforts to address
the government’s approach to data management,
while preserving data privacy. Examples include the
E-Government Act of 2002, 8 the Confidential Information
Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002,9 and most
recently, the Foundations for Evidence Based Policymaking
Act10 and the National Data Strategy.11 Most of these efforts
have been aimed at sharing government data for statistical
analysis and policy evaluation, and the scope of provisions
may need to be broadened to support AI research. We view
these efforts to be complementary: the NRC should build
on these efforts, while bringing increased attention to the
compute resources that enable both AI development, as
well as advanced data analysis.
STATUTORY CONSTRAINTS ON
DATA SHARING
One vision of the NRC is for it to act as a data
warehouse for all government data. But that vision collides
with fundamental constraints from laws designed to
hamper broad and unconstrained data sharing between
U.S. government agencies. Lacking an overarching,
comprehensive privacy regime, similar to the European
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the
US landscape is fragmented between a mix of sector-
specific consumer laws and certain government-specific
laws, such as the Privacy Act of 197412 and limited-scope
federal guidance, such as the Fair Information Practice

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
55
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
Principles.13 In particular, the Privacy Act, which focuses
broadly on data collection and usage by federal agencies,
and restricts sharing between them, poses challenges
to the ambitions of the NRC’s goal to make otherwise
restricted government datasets more widely available.
Existing efforts, buttressed by such bills as the
E-Government Act of 2002 and the Foundations of
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act, have attempted to
increase access by researchers to government data assets.
Yet, these approaches were animated by the primary
purposes of policy evaluation, not basic AI research. Nor
do they consider any ambitions on the part of agencies
themselves to pursue AI research and development.14
Application of these laws and regulations to the NRC,
in part, hinge on three factors: (1) the institutional form
of the NRC, as we discuss in Chapter Four; (2) whether
NRC users can invoke the Privacy Act’s existing statistical
research exception; and (3) whether researchers are
accessing data from multiple federal agencies. Here we
briefly discuss the legal obligations of federal agencies.
Even if the NRC does not take the form of a new standalone
federal agency, agencies contributing data will remain
subject to these constraints.
THE PRIVACY ACT’S LIMITATIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
The Privacy Act was enacted in response to growing
anxiety about digitization, as well as the Watergate
scandal during the Nixon Presidency. The Act was
motivated by concerns about the government’s ability
to broadly collect data on citizens and centralize it into
digital databases, an emergent practice at the time. It
is the primary limiting regulation for government data
sharing, and has consequences for the NRC for both itself,
but more directly, for any government agency wishing to
share data with the NRC.
Data Linkage
The Privacy Act applies to systems of records, which
are defined as: “a group of any records under the control of
any agency from which information is retrieved by the name
of the individual or by some identifying number, symbol,
or other identifying particular assigned to the individual. ”15
Importantly, the Act places strict limits on “record
matching, ” or linking between agencies, for the purposes of
sharing information about individuals.16 Matching programs
are only allowed when there is a written agreement in place
between two agencies defining the purpose, legal authority,
and the justification for the program; such agreements
can last for 18 months, with the option of renewal.17 These
limits were put in place in order to prevent the emergence
of a centralized system of records that could track U.S.
citizens or permanent residents across multiple government
domains, as well as to limit the uses of data for the purposes
it was collected. Indeed, while linkage across datasets may
be important for AI research,18 it could potentially enable
abuse, surveillance, or the infringement of such rights such
free speech, by enabling persecution across the many areas
in which a U.S. citizen or resident interacts with the federal
system.19
Because the restriction on data linkages applies
to linkages between agencies, the restriction applies in
two particular scenarios for the NRC. First, if the NRC is
instituted as a federal agency, then agency data-sharing
with the NRC would run against the data linkages
limitation of the Privacy Act. Second, federal agency
staff access to the NRC could raise questions about inter-
agency data linkage under the Privacy Act. However, the
recommendation in Chapter Three is focused on granting
agencies streamlined access to the computing resources
on the NRC and their own agency data, not to any multi-
agency data hosted on the NRC. If the NRC is not designed
as a federal agency and does not grant agency members
access to inter-agency data, the Privacy Act’s restrictions
on data linkages may not apply.
We note that this approach to data management
is both unusual and out of step with the private sector,
as well as AI research specifically. The ability for both
industry20 and researchers21 to associate multiple data
sources and data points with a specific (anonymized)
individual is common practice outside of government. In
fact, this limitation is not one that many governments22
or U.S. states23 place on their data systems. However,
the Privacy Act’s restrictions on data linkage remains
uncontested, even in the various reform efforts we discuss

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
below. It is worth noting that the federal government’s
broad bar against data linkages does incur welfare costs.
For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the inability
to share and link public health data created difficulties
tracking the spread and severity of the virus.24 While
projects like Johns Hopkins’ Coronavirus Research Center25
and the COVID Tracking Project26 attempted to aggregate
available data, the lack of data integration slowed
important operational and research responses.27 Other
countries, for instance, integrated immigration and travel
records to triage cases and prevent hospital outbreaks.28
We acknowledge the potential for data linkage
to tackle important societal problems, without
recommending wholesale, unencumbered data linkage.
Broad or unrestricted data linkage raises legitimate
concerns about both individual privacy and widespread
government surveillance,29 made concrete by the
disclosures of government whistle-blower Edward
Snowden,30 among others. An initiative to link Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) data with other agency
data for COVID-19 response, for instance, would meet
resistance from the Privacy Act. The Task Force should
appreciate these tensions and tradeoffs. Indeed, agencies
view technical measures for privacy preservation a
necessary component of any government data strategy, as
methods such as multiparty computation or homomorphic
encryption (which we discuss in Chapter Eight) may allow
for some forms of data linkages between agencies, without
violating the Privacy Act.
No Disclosure Without Consent
Another core restriction of the Privacy Act is the
“No Disclosure Without Consent” Rule, which prohibits
disclosure of records to any agency or person without
prior consent from the individual to whom the record
pertains.31 Because the NRC would disclose federal agency
data to researchers (i.e., to “person[s]”), this rule––unlike
the restriction on record linkage––is legally relevant and
unavoidable.
The Privacy Act, however, contains a number of
exceptions to this rule. Most pertinent to the NRC’s data-
sharing efforts are exemptions for: (1) “routine use”; (2)
specified agencies; and (3) statistical research. Under
the first exemption, the Privacy Act permits agencies to
disclose personally-identifiable administrative data when
such disclosure is among one of the “routine uses” of the
data.32 A dataset’s “routine use” is defined on an agency-
to-agency basis, and is simply a specification filed with
the Federal Register on the agency’s plan to use and share
its data.33 As a result, the more broadly an agency defines
“routine use” of its data, the more broadly that agency can
share its data with other agencies without disclosure.34
While courts have limited how broadly an agency can
describe “routine uses, ”35 a large number of use cases can
still be covered by a short, general statement.36 Further
research should be conducted on the conditions for when
data sharing for research purposes constitutes routine use.
Implications For Data Sharing with Researchers
Much will rest on the interpretation of the “statistical
research” exception, as applied to AI research. Despite
the Privacy Act’s constraints on data sharing, researchers
have conventionally been able to access data directly from
agencies, based on the statistical research exception to
the Privacy Act. This exception allows disclosure of records
“to a recipient who has provided the agency with advance
adequate written assurance that the record will be used
solely as a statistical research or reporting record, and the
record is to be transferred in a form that is not individually
identifiable. ”37 Doing so requires either access to an approved
research dataset, or for the researcher to negotiate an MOU
directly with the agency, a role we suggest the NRC may be
able to fill as an intermediary, acting as a negotiating partner
to facilitate access requests between multiple researchers
and agencies (discussed in Chapter Three).
While the Privacy Act does not define “statistical
research, ” subsequent laws and policies have elaborated
on the definition. For example, the E-Government Act
defines “statistical purpose” to include the development
of technical procedures for the description, estimation, or
analysis of the characteristics of groups, without identifying
the individuals or organizations that comprise such
groups.38 Meanwhile, a “nonstatistical purpose” includes
the use of personally-identifiable information for any
administrative, regulatory, law enforcement, adjudicative,
or other purpose that affects the rights, privileges or
benefits of any individual.39 That is, while researchers may

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
57
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
use personally identifiable data for the broad purpose of
analyzing group characteristics, they cannot use such data
for targeted purposes to aid agencies with, for instance,
specific adjudicative or enforcement functions.
The precise meaning of “statistical purpose, ” however,
remains “obscure and the evaluation criteria may be
difficult to locate. ”40 Yet, “statistical purpose” may well
encompass data sharing for certain AI applications. The Act
explicitly designates the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bureau
of Economic Analysis, and the Census Bureau as statistical
agencies that have heightened data-sharing powers for
statistical purposes.41 These agencies regularly use AI in
conducting their statistical activities.42 While definitions
of AI are themselves contested, statistical research may
encapsulate at least some forms of machine learning and
AI, if such research analyzes group characteristics43 and
does not identify individuals.
To be sure, the NRC should not enable researchers or
agencies to conduct an end-run around the Privacy Act.
To that end, the NRC will require staff devoted to privacy
compliance and oversight to ensure compliance. Key
questions regarding individual identifiability, sensitivity of
the data, or the potential for linkage and reidentification
will need to be assessed by such staff.
Implications for agency data sharing with the NRC
Notwithstanding the above avenues, agencies may
nonetheless be reluctant to share data with the NRC and
its researchers. Instances abound where federal agencies
face constraints to sharing data, even if it is entirely legal
or even federally mandated. For example, the Uniform
Federal Crime Reporting Act of 1988 requires federal law
enforcement agencies to report crime data to the FBI.44
Yet, no federal agencies appear to have shared their data
with the FBI under this law.45 Similarly, the Census Bureau
is enabled by legislation that authorizes it to obtain
administrative data from any federal agency and requires
it to try to obtain data from other agencies, whenever
possible.46 However, the statute does not similarly require
the program agencies to provide their data to the Census
Bureau. That is, although the Census Bureau is required
to ask other agencies for data, those agencies are not
required to, and often do not, provide it.47
Failure to engage in data sharing, even in the face of
a statutory authorization, can stem from risk aversion.
According to a GAO report, agencies choose not to share
data because they tend to be “overly cautious” in their
interpretation of federal privacy requirements.48 Because
legal provisions authorizing or mandating data sharing
are often ambiguous,49 agencies may err on the side of
caution and choose not to share their data for fear of the
downside risk that recipient use of the data may violate
privacy or security standards.50 To make matters worse,
because agencies need to devote significant resources
to facilitate data sharing, they may simply choose not to
prioritize data sharing at all. The lack of resources poses a
significant problem; according to a Bipartisan Policy Center
study on agency data sharing, about half of agencies cited
inadequate funding or inability to hire appropriate staff as
their “most critical” barrier to data sharing.51
The NRC may overcome these hurdles by clarifying
legal provisions, ensuring that the benefits to agencies of
data sharing outweigh the risks and costs, and advocating
for resources. For instance, O’Hara and Medalia describe
how the Census Bureau was able to obtain food stamp and
welfare data from state agencies. In the face of ambiguous
statutes authorizing the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA) and the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) to perform data linkages across federally
sponsored programs, states originally arrived at different
statutory interpretations. Some states agreed to share their
data only after (1) the Office of General Counsel at both the
USDA and HHS issued a memo clarifying that data sharing
with the Census Bureau for statistical purposes was legal
and encouraged, and (2) the states were convinced that data
sharing would also enable evidence building that could help
them administer their programs.52
[T]he NRC should not enable
researchers or agencies to
conduct and end-run around
the Privacy Act.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
Broader data sharing with the NRC that combines
multiple agency or external data sources may be facilitated
by the passage of additional law requiring agencies to
share their data, subject to specific limitations on how
that data is used in the NRC. Even then, the effect of that
requirement is hardly a foregone conclusion. More is
needed by way of both clarifying the extent to which data
sharing is permitted and providing benefits that incentivize
agencies to share their data.
CASE STUDY: ADMINISTRATIVE
DATA RESEARCH UK
Administrative Data Research UK (ADR UK) is a new body, set up
in July 2018, to facilitate secure, wide access to linked administrative
datasets from across government for the purpose of public research.53
ADR UK was set up as a central, coordinating point between four
national partnerships – ADR England, ADR Northern Ireland, ADR
Scotland, and ADR Wales – as well as the UK-wide national statistics
agency, Office for National Statistics (ONS). ADR UK labels itself as
a ‘UK-wide Strategic Hub’: a central point that promotes the use of
administrative data for research, engages with government departments
to facilitate secure access to data, and funds public good research that
uses administrative data.54

Funding for ADR UK came from a research council (Economic and
Social Research Council, ESRC) and was initially committed from July
2018 to March 2022. A total of £59m was provided.55
ADR UK serves three core functions. First, the promotion of the value
and availability of government administrative datasets for research. ADR
UK acts as a general advocate for the use of administrative datasets
from across the British government. It also acts as a specific driver of
research for public good: it has identified specific areas of research that
are of pressing policy interest (e.g., ‘world of work’56), and is focusing
on creating access to linked datasets for researchers who tackle those
priority themes.
The second core function is serving as a coordination point
to encourage government data sharing, standards, and linkage of
administrative datasets. Especially for its research calls, ADR UK is able
to highlight multiple datasets, often spanning different government
departments’ scope areas that can be linked and used in research. In
doing so, ADR UK plays an important role in facilitating research.
Finally, to ensure compliance with the Privacy Act, as
well as to facilitate the NRC’s role as a data intermediary,
the NRC will require a staff of privacy professionals that
include positions tasked with legal compliance, oversight,
and technical methods expertise. These professionals
should build relationships with peers across agencies to
facilitate data access.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Proactive advocacy for data
use and linkage: Given the
range of agencies and data
sources in government,
having a single, coordinated
voice of advocacy for data
use and linkage of public
datasets for public good is an
important function.
 Bringing external talent
into government data use:
ADR UK has two schemes—
Research Fellowships and
Method Development
Grants—that target
exceptional, external talent
with the intention of building
awareness and use of public
datasets in cutting-edge
research.
 Small grant funding to
accelerate research methods
that use large datasets:
By putting out calls for
research that answers broad
themes, ADR UK is able to
corral a range of datasets
in answering research
questions and avoids a single
disciplinary focus.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
59
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
Third, ADR UK has a strategic funding approach to further the use of administrative datasets in research
that has comprised of three categories of funding:
 • Building new research datasets: ADR UK’s Strategic Hub Fund initially solicited invitation-
only bids for researchers who would build new research datasets of public significance in the
course of their work.57 These new, research-ready datasets are now accessible to a wide range of
researchers.58
 • Research Fellowship Schemes: A major funding focus now is on funding research through
competitive open-bid invitations under a Research Fellowship Scheme.59 Specific researchers are
identified through the competition. They are accredited for secure data access and placed right
at the heart of government (with 10 Downing Street), with access to linked datasets to answer
questions of public significance.60
 • Methods Development Grants: Separately, ADR UK invites research proposals that further
methodological progress for the use of large-scale administrative datasets, such that the wider
social science community can draw on developed methods in research.61
Privacy and security
The UK’s 2017 Digital Economy Act62 created a legal gateway for research access to secure government
data. Deidentified data held by a public authority in connection with the authority’s functions could be
disclosed for research, under the assurance that individual identities would not be specified.
Any data shared with researchers is anonymized: personal identifiers are removed, and checks are
made to protect against re-identification.63 A rigorous accreditation process—for both the researcher and
proposed research—is undertaken to ensure public benefit. Data access primarily takes place via a secure
physical facility, or a secure connection to that facility, provided by ADR UK’s constituent partners.64 There is
close monitoring of researcher activity and outputs, and any output is checked before release.65
From a researcher’s point of view, access to ADR UK datasets requires the following steps:66
 • Researcher submits proposal for project to ADR UK
 • Project is approved by relevant panels
 • Researcher engages in training and may take assessment (e.g., access to linked data held by ONS
required accreditation to ONS’ Secure Research Service,67 and can access data either in person or,
where additionally accredited, through remote connection)
 • Required data is determined by ADR UK (through one of the four regional partners, or ONS), then
ingested by the relevant data center
 • De-identified data is made available through a secure data service (either at the ONS, or one of the
four regional partners)
 • Researcher conducts analysis; activity and outputs are monitored
 • Outputs are checked for subject privacy. Research serving the public good is published
CASE STUDY: ADMINISTRATIVE DATA RESEARCH UK (CONT’D)

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 5
COMPLEMENTARY EFFORTS TO
IMPROVE THE FEDERAL APPROACH
TO DATA MANAGEMENT
The barriers to data sharing created by the Privacy
Act have long posed a challenge to researchers interested
in using government data to evaluate or inform policy.68
The policy and statistical research communities, both
within and outside the federal government, have engaged
in admirable reform efforts to facilitate data sharing for
policy evaluation.69
The Foundations for Evidence Based Policymaking
Act (EBPA) of 2018, which enacted reforms to improve
data access for evidence-based decision-making, is a key
achievement of these efforts to date. However, several of
the provisions in the Act that helped to address some of
the barriers to data linking and sharing were not passed
by Congress. These provisions—known collectively as
the National Secure Data Service (NSDS)—remain a high
priority for facilitating further progress for sharing data
for research purposes. According to the nonprofit Data
Foundation, one of the major supporters of the NSDS, its
passage will “create the bridge across the government’s
decentralized data capabilities with a new entity that
jointly maximizes data access responsibilities with
confidentiality protections. ”70
The NSDS is envisioned as an independent legal
entity within the federal government that would have
the legal authority to acquire and use data. However, this
authority is currently conceived of as emanating from the
EBPA, which focuses on using statistical data for evidence-
building purposes. A broader source of authority may be
necessary for AI research purposes under the NRC, which
may be distinct from agency obligations. One clear area of
overlap is the proposal’s call for the Service to facilitate its
own computing resources which could be harmonized with
the compute needs of the NRC. Similar to Chapter Four’s
discussion of organizational options, NSDS supporters
identify a fundamental need for both a reliable funding
source as well as thoughtful placement of the Service
either within an existing agency, or as an independent
agency or FFRDC. The areas of common ground
between the NRC and NSDS, as well as the expertise and
momentum behind the proposal, strongly suggest that the
NRC engage and coordinate with these efforts.
Another complementary initiative is the Federal Data
Strategy (FDS), launched in 2018 by the executive branch
and led by the OMB. FDS is a government-wide effort
to reform how the entire federal government manages
its data. The plan both calls out the need for “safe data
linkage” through technical privacy techniques,71 as well as
incorporates a directive from the 2019 Executive Order on
Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence
to “[e]nhance access to high-quality and fully traceable
federal data, models, and computing resources to increase
the value of such resources for AI R&D, while maintaining
safety, security, privacy, and confidentiality protections,
consistent with applicable laws and policies. ”72 The
Strategy directs OMB to “identify barriers to access and
quality limitations” and to [p]rovide technical schema
formats on inventories, ” with a focus on open data sources
(i.e., non-sensitive or individually identifying data).73
Datasets identified by this process could be key candidates
for populating the NRC.
While both the NSDS and the FDS may promote data
sharing, these efforts are presently focused primarily on
furthering policy evaluation purposes. Fortunately, there
is much overlap and complementarity between these
initiatives and the NRC, illustrating the broad importance
of more effective mechanisms to share federal data
securely and in a privacy-protecting way.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
61
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 6
Chapter 6: Technical
Privacy and Virtual
Data Safe Rooms
We now discuss the role of technical privacy methods for the NRC. In the past
several decades, researchers have devised a variety of computational methods that
enable data analysis while preserving privacy. These methods hold considerable
promise for enabling the sharing of government data for research purposes. We note
at the outset that technical methods are merely one mechanism to strengthen privacy
protections. While effective, such methods may be neither sufficient nor universally
appropriate. The application of any particular method does not obviate the need
to inquire into whether the data itself adheres to articulated privacy standards. The
methods discussed here are not “replacements” for the recommendations discussed
earlier and never themselves justify the collection of otherwise problematic data.
Use of data from the NRC introduces two threats to individual privacy. The
first type involves accidental disclosure by agencies (agency disclosure): an agency
uploads a dataset to the NRC which lacks sufficient privacy protection and contains
identifying information about an individual. A researcher—either analyzing this
dataset alone or in conjunction with other NRC datasets—discovers this information
and re-identifies the individual.1 The second type involves accidental disclosure by
researchers (researcher disclosure). Here, a researcher releases products computed on
restricted NRC data (e.g., trained machine learning models, publications). However,
the released products lack sufficient privacy protection, and an outside consumer of
the research product learns sensitive information about an individual or individuals in
the original dataset used by the researcher.2
We recommend that, due to the infancy and uncertainty surrounding uses of
privacy-enhancing technologies, privacy should primarily be approached via access
policies to data. While there will be circumstances that suggest, or even mandate,
technical treatments, access policies, discussed in Chapter Three, are the primary line
of defense: they ensure sensitive datasets are protected by controlling who can access
the data. We recommend a tiered access policy, with more sensitive datasets placed
in more restricted tiers. For instance, highly restricted access data may correspond
to individual health data from the VA, while minimally restricted access data may
correspond to ocean measurements from NOAA. Proposals requesting access to highly
restricted data would face heightened standards of review, and researchers may
be limited to accessing only one restricted access dataset at a time. This approach
mirrors current regimes where researchers undergo special training to work with
certain types of data.3
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 Technical privacy measures
are useful, but not substitutes
for securing data privacy
through access policies.
 In some instances, the NRC or
agencies may wish to make
access to data conditional
on use of technical privacy
measures.
 Contributing agencies and
the NRC should collaborate to
determine technical privacy
measures based on dataset
sensitivity, dataset utility, and
equity implications.
 The NRC must have technical
privacy staff to administer
technical privacy treatments,
as well as to support
adversarial privacy research.
 The NRC should explore
adopting virtual “data
safe rooms” that enable
researchers to access
raw administrative data
or microdata in a secure,
monitored, and cloud-based
environment.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 6
Technical treatments are a different line of defense:
they significantly reduce the chances of deanonymizing
a dataset. There are a range of technical methods which
can enable analysis while ensuring privacy:
• Techniques like k-anonymity and ℓ -diversity
attempt to offer group-based anonymization by
reducing the granularity of individual records in
tabular data.4 While effective in simple settings and
easy to implement, both methods are susceptible
to attacks by adversaries who possess additional
information about the individuals in the dataset.
• One of the most popular techniques is differential
privacy,5 which provides provable guarantees
on privacy, even when an adversary possesses
additional information about records in the dataset.
However, differential privacy requires adding
random amounts of statistical “noise” to data and
can sometimes compromise the accuracy of data
analyses. Although differential privacy has become
a point of contention with respect to the Census
Bureau’s new disclosure avoidance system, 6 the
technique remains a powerful defense against bad
actors seeking to take advantage of public data for
the purposes of re-identification.
• Researchers have also identified other promising
methods. Recent work has demonstrated that
machine learning can be used to generate
“synthetic” datasets, which mirror real world
datasets in important ways, but consist of entirely
synthetic examples. 7 Other work has focused on
the incorporation of methods from cryptography,
including secure multiparty computation 8 and
homomorphic encryption. 9
Methods that obscure data introduce fundamental
tensions with the way machine-learning researchers
develop models. For example, when considering
questions of algorithmic fairness, in some instances
privacy protections can undercut the power to assess
whether such a technical method as differential privacy
results in demographic disparities, particularly for small
subgroups.10 Similarly, “error analysis”––the study of
samples over which a machine-learning model performs
poorly––is central to how researchers improve models. It
requires understanding the attributes and characteristics
of the data in order to better understand the deficiencies
of an algorithm. Therefore, such methods as differential
privacy, which make raw data more opaque, will invariably
impede the process of error analysis. Synthetic data
typically captures relationships between variables, only
if those relationships have been intentionally included
in the statistical model that generated the data,11 and
thus, may be poorly suited to certain AI models that
discover unanticipated relationships among data.
While homomorphic encryption may not require similar
assumptions on data structure, existing methods are
computationally expensive.
While promising, understanding and applying these
methods is an evolving scientific process. The NRC is
poised to contribute to their evolution by directly
supporting research into their application.
CRITERIA AND PROCESS FOR
ADOPTION
The NRC will contain a rich array of datasets, each
presenting unique privacy implications over different
types of data formats (e.g., individual tabular records,
unstructured text, images). Including a dataset on the
NRC raises a question of choice: which technical privacy
treatment should be applied (e.g., k -anonymity vs.
differential privacy), and how should it be applied? This
question often requires technical determinations about
different algorithmic settings, but such technical choices
can also have important substantive consequences. 12
First, we recommend that these determinations are
made with respect to the following factors:
 • Dataset sensitivity: Different datasets will
pose privacy risks that range in type and
magnitude. Health records, for instance, are
more sensitive than weather patterns. The
privacy method chosen should reflect this
sensitivity. As we discuss in Chapter Three, these
privacy methods should correspond and be tiered

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
63
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 6
to the appropriate FedRAMP classification for the
dataset.
 • Dataset utility: As discussed above, applying
a privacy method can distort the original data,
diminishing the accuracy and utility of analysis.
Because different methods affect different levels
of distortion, the choice of method should be
informed by the perceived utility of the data.
High-utility datasets—where accurate analyses
are highly important (e.g., medical diagnostic
tools)—may necessitate methods which produce
less distortion.
 • Equity: Certain privacy measures can
disproportionately impact underrepresented
subgroups in the data.13 In determining which
method to apply, the presence of sensitive
subgroups and their relation to the objectives of
the dataset should be evaluated.
For any given dataset, we recommend that agencies
providing the data collaborate with NRC staff to identify and
recommend any privacy treatments. Originating agencies
and NRC staff will possess domain and research expertise
to make evaluations on the balance of privacy, utility, and
equity, but should consult with NRC staff and researchers
on the most appropriate treatments. Given the cost of
review, such privacy treatments should be much less widely
considered for low-risk datasets.
VIRTUAL DATA SAFE ROOMS
For individual research proposals that would be greatly
hampered by technical privacy measures, the NRC should
explore the use of virtual “data-safe rooms” that enable
researchers to access raw administrative microdata in a
secure, monitored environment. Currently, the Census
Bureau implements these safe rooms in physical locations
and moderates access to raw inter-agency data through
its network of Federal Statistical Research Data Centers
(FSRDCs). However, the NRC should not adopt the FSRDC
model wholesale. Indeed, the barriers to using FSRDCs
are high, and “only the most persistent researchers are
successful. ”14 For instance, applying for access and gaining
approval to use an FSRDC takes at least six months, requires
obtaining “Special Sworn Status” , which involves a Level
Two security clearance, and is limited to applicants who
are either U.S. citizens or have been U.S. residents for
three years.15 To further complicate matters, agencies
have different review and approval processes for research
projects that wish to access agency data using an FSRDC.16
Finally, even after approval is granted, researchers can only
access the data in person by going to secure locations, such
as the FSRDC itself.17
To be clear, some of these restrictions are unique to the
Census Bureau. U.S. law provides that any Census datasets
that do not fully protect confidentiality may only be used
by Census staff.18 Researchers trying to access such data
therefore must go through the rigorous process of becoming
a sworn Census contractor. The extent that these restrictions
apply to the NRC will depend on whether the NRC
institutionally houses itself in the Census Bureau, which we
ultimately do not recommend.19 Other problems, however,
such as the lack of inter-agency uniformity in granting
access to datasets is not a problem unique to Census, but a
common problem throughout the federal government (see
Chapter Three).
Another common problem––not necessarily tied to
FSRDCs or the Census Bureau––is the use of a physical data
room to access raw microdata. The NRC should explore a
virtual safe room model, whereby researchers can remotely
access such microdata. For instance, in the private sector,
the nonpartisan and objective research organization, NORC,
located at the University of Chicago, is a confidential,
protected environment where authorized researchers can
securely store, access, and analyze sensitive microdata
remotely.20 Some federal government agencies have also
implemented their own virtual data safe rooms. The Center
for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Virtual Research Data
Center (VRDC), for instance, grants researchers direct
access to approved data files through a Virtual Private
Network.21 In a 2019 Request for Information (RFI), the
National Institute of Health also solicited input for its own
administrative data enclave and whether such an enclave
should be physical or virtual.22 As articulated in responses
to the RFI from the American Society for Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology and the Federation for of American

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 6
Societies for Experimental Biology, a virtual enclave would
greatly facilitate researcher access to data and can be
designed and administered in a way to preserve privacy
and security.23
A National Research Cloud cannot function effectively
if access to certain datasets is ultimately tied to a National
Research Room.
CASE STUDY:
CALIFORNIA POLICY LAB
The California Policy Lab (“CPL”) is a University
of California research institute that provides
research and data support to help California state
and local governments craft evidence-based
public policy.24 CPL offers a variety of services to
governments, including data analysis services and
secure infrastructure for hosting and linking the vast
amounts of data collected by government entities.25
These services help bridge the gap between
academia and government by helping policymakers
get access to researchers and providing researchers
a secure way to access administrative data. CPL
aims to build trusting partnerships with government
entities and enable them to make empirically
supported policy decisions.
CPL enters data-use agreements with various
government entities around California, including, for
example, the California Department of Public Health
and Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority.26
These agreements allow CPL to store administrative
data in a linkable format, promoting broad
longitudinal analyses across various public sector
domains.
To help manage the requirements of the various
data-use agreements and simplify compliance,
CPL applies the strictest requirements for any
individual data across all data it stores.27 Each set of
administrative data is thus subject to strict technical
restrictions and thorough audits.28 CPL manages the
data in an on-premises data hub at UCLA. This data
hub uses “virtual enclaves” modeled after air-gapped
clean rooms typically used for sensitive government
data.29 Virtual enclaves are virtual machines that
forbid any outbound connections.
CPL creates a
new virtual enclave for
each research project
and only gives specific
researchers access
to specific datasets
for each project.30
Researchers can only
work with the data in
the enclave and can
only use tools provided
in the environment.
Data access processes
vary, based on the
requirements for the
government entities, and
most of CPL’s data-use
agreements are purpose
limited and thus, require
approval from the
relevant government
entity, before being used
in a project.31
Generally, CPL helps researchers understand how
to gain access to various types of administrative data.
For some datasets, CPL has formalized applications
on its website.32 CPL prescreens project proposals and
sends promising projects to its government partners
for final approval. Researchers then conduct these
approved projects on CPL’s secure infrastructure. For
other datasets without formalized access processes,
CPL directs researchers towards individuals within
the government entities.33 CPL can then take over
management of approved projects that aim to use
data stored on its hub under their standing data-use
agreements. Alternatively, the government entities
and researchers themselves may craft new data-use
agreements for specific projects.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 Virtual enclaves:
The CPL heavily
utilizes secure
virtual enclaves
for researchers to
access, work with,
and perform data
linkages across
sensitive datasets.
 Acting as an
intermediary: CPL
facilitates and
streamlines access
to administrative
data by acting as
an intermediary
between researchers
and relevant state
agencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
65
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 6
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE NRC
DEDICATED STAFF
As discussed above, it will be critical for the NRC to
maintain a dedicated professional staff who specialize in
privacy technologies. First, not all agencies or departments
which seek to place data into the NRC will have the expertise
to both determine the privacy method that meets data
utility expectations and data privacy demands, and apply
it to the dataset of interest. Specialized NRC staff will be
essential to assisting such agencies and departments.
Second, even where agencies and departments do
possess the requisite expertise, NRC staff will bring a
unique perspective from their collaborations across the
government. Where a specific department’s staff may
only foresee risks specific to the dataset, NRC staff will
be able to foresee instances where the presence of other
data in the NRC may raise other concerns. In fact, by
working with Affiliated Government Agencies and agency
representatives, the NRC staff can also help these agencies
internalize such benefits as helping them understand the
full range of privacy risks with respect to their data.34 Such
collaborative governance will be necessary to ensure that
privacy assessments consider the full implications of access
and privacy technologies. Finally, it must not be overlooked
that while data management in general requires technical
expertise, these various privacy-enhancing technologies
also require very specific, highly skilled expertise. Using
synthetic data sets as an example, NRC staff could be asked
to build synthetic data on an agency’s behalf, or need
to validate the work performed at an agency to ensure
it is done properly and well. Whatever the task, there
are cascading effects downstream through the research
ecosystem, if not carefully managed and executed.
A FOCUS ON EVALUATING AND RESEARCHING PRIVACY
ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIES
It will be necessary to continually evaluate the
state of privacy protections on the NRC, either by NRC
staff members or by supporting privacy and security
researchers at academic institutions. Technical privacy
and security research is by nature adversarial: researchers
adopt the posture of adversaries in order to probe the
weaknesses of a system/dataset. In the context of the
NRC, this will require simulating attacks as researchers
try to reidentify individuals within specific NRC datasets.
This type of research is necessary to advance the field,
and the NRC may be specially positioned to support a
research center devoted to researching privacy-enhancing
technologies. Doing so would allow the research
community to build stronger privacy methods to ensure
anonymity, identify flaws, and self-regulate an evolving
data ecosystem.
A National Research Cloud cannot
function effectively if access to
certain datasets is ultimately tied
to a National Research Room.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
66
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 7
Chapter 7: Safeguards
for Ethical Research
The pace of advances in AI has sparked ample debate about the principles that
should govern its development and implementation. Despite the technology’s promise
for economic growth and social benefits, AI also poses serious ethical and societal risks.
For example, studies have demonstrated AI systems can propagate disinformation,1
harm labor and employment,2 demonstrate algorithmic bias along age, gender, race, and
disability,3 and perpetuate systemic inequalities.4
This chapter considers how the NRC should ensure its resources are deployed
responsibly and ethically. A growing body of research on AI fairness, accountability, and
transparency has raised serious and legitimate questions about the values implicated by
AI research and its impact on society.5 The NRC’s focus on increasing access to sources of
public data and fostering non-commercial AI research is intended to help address these
concerns by enabling broader opportunities for academic research. At the same time,
broadening access to resources is not enough to assure that academic AI research does
not exacerbate existing inequalities or perpetuate systematic biases. In addition, the NRC
must also be prepared to handle and act upon complaints of unethical research practices
by researchers.
While there is an abundance of proposed ethics frameworks (see Appendix C for those
published by federal agencies) for AI, there is not a set of accepted principles enshrined
into law, like the Common Rule for human subjects research, that clearly establishes the
boundaries for ethical research with AI.6 Lacking such guidance, a core question for the
NRC is how to institutionalize the consideration of ethical concerns. This chapter starts by
discussing two potential approaches for research proposals: ex ante review at the proposal
stage for access to NRC resources (e.g., compute, dataset), and ex post review after
research has concluded. Separately, we discuss guidance for the NRC on issues related to
research practices. One of the virtues of starting with access by Principal Investigator (PI)
status (Chapter Two) is that researchers will (a) often have undergone baseline training by
their home institutions in research compliance, privacy, data security, and practices for
research using human subjects; and (b) be subject to research standards and peer review
(e.g., through IRB review when applicable). These mechanisms are insufficient to cover
many AI research projects, such as when human subjects review is deemed inapplicable.
Thus, we tailor our recommendations to the institutional design of the NRC.
First, we recommend that the NRC require including an ethics impact statement for PIs
requesting access beyond base-level compute, or for research using restricted datasets.
This provides a layer of ethical review for the highest resource projects that are already
required to undergo a custom application process. Second, for other categories of research
(e.g., research conducted under base-level compute access, where no custom review is
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 Researchers requesting
access to compute
beyond the default
allocation and/or
restricted data (i.e.,
those undergoing a
custom application
process) should be
required to provide an
ethics impact statement
as part of their
application.
 The NRC should
establish a process
to handle complaints
about unethical research
practices or outputs.
 Eligibility based on
Principal Investigator
status will ensure
some review under the
Common Rule as well
as through peer review,
but we recommend
universities consider
more comprehensive
models for assessing the
ethical implications of AI
research.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
67
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 7
contemplated), we recommend that the NRC establish
a process for handling complaints that may arise out of
unethical research practices and outputs. Third, given
the limitations of the prior mechanisms, we recommend
the exploration of a range of measures to address ethical
concerns in AI compute, such as the approach taken by the
National Institutes to Health to incentivize the embedding
of bioethics in ongoing research.
ETHICS REVIEW MECHANISMS
EX ANTE
Ex ante review assesses research yet to be performed.7
Funding agencies and research councils worldwide rely on
ex ante peer reviews to evaluate the intellectual merit and
potential societal impact of research proposals, based on
set criteria.8 Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) commonly
assess academic research involving human subjects prior
to its initiation.9 However, much AI-related research may
not fall under IRB oversight, as the research may not use
human subjects or rely on existing data (not collected by
the proposers) about people that is publicly available,10
used with permission from the party that collected the
data, or is anonymized. Potential ethical issues may,
therefore, escape IRB review.11
Creating an across-the-board ex ante ethics review
process, however, would be challenging. First, as we
discuss in Chapter Two, we recommend against case-by-
case review for all PI requests for access to NRC compute
and data, as such a process would require substantial
administrative overhead. At the stage when researchers
are simply applying for compute access, the research
may be so varied and early stage, that there is not much
concrete to review. And to the extent that every PI would
require project-specific review, such a process would be
onerous.
Second, ex ante review is unlikely to grapple with the
many ethical implications of design decisions that take
place after research commences. 12 Research design can
change substantially from initial proposals as projects
progress. Ex ante review could identify some concerns,
but unlikely all. 13 The nature of machine learning itself is
inherently uncertain—and predictions can be challenging
to explain—as well as highly dependent on the data used
to build and train models. 14 Ex ante proposal review alone
may not be sufficient to identify biased outcomes, and
may in fact require extensive documentation and review
of the data used in a specific project to assess with any
reliability.15
Third, there are unique academic speech concerns
about government assessment of research. Authorizing the
government to conduct an ethics review (separate from
IRB review under the Common Rule, which is typically
delegated to academic institutions) with vague standards
may implicate academic speech concerns, as well as
subject proposals to politically driven evaluation that can
shift from administration to administration.
If the NRC were to create a review process for ex ante
review of research proposals for ethical concerns, such
a board would likely need to be composed of scientific
and ethics experts, similar to how the NSF conducts their
process, though perhaps with the addition of members
from civil society organizations that focus on countering
AI harms. The NSF convenes groups of experts from
academia, industry, private companies, and government
agencies as peer reviewers, led by NSF program officers
and division directors.16 However, the scope and range
of NRC research proposals are likely to be both broad, as
well as highly interdisciplinary in nature, making ethics
assessments challenging.
EX POST
Ex post evaluations provide an assessment after
research has concluded.17 In academia, researchers
submit research results to journals or conferences for ex
post peer-review; it is at this pre-publication stage that
ethical issues not identified by ex ante processes may be
surfaced by reviewers or editors. In the public sector, for
example, the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
(PCLOB) conducts ex post reviews on counterterrorism
practices by executive branch departments and agencies
to ensure they are consistent with governing laws,
regulations, and policies regarding privacy and civil
liberties.18 PCLOB has also recently begun to evaluate the

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
68
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 7
use of new technologies in foreign intelligence collection
and analysis,19 and identify legislative proposals might
strengthen its oversight of AI for counterterrorism.20
RECOMMENDATIONS
While we do not recommend across-the-board ex
ante review of research proposals, we do recommend that
the NRC establish a process to handle complaints about
ethical research practices and outputs. On that point,
we recommend the NRC collaborate with the Office of
Research Integrity (ORI) at the Department of Health and
Human Services to model their processes and procedures
for managing issues of research misconduct.21 The ORI
has substantial experience overseeing concerns about
ethical research practices. Parties could petition the NRC
to revoke access when research is shown to manifestly
violate general ethical research standards or practices
applicable to a researcher’s disciplinary domain. We note
that the NRC may want to adopt a high standard for such
a violation, given the academic speech considerations. For
example, federal agencies or external parties that wish to
revoke compute or data access from PIs would need to file
a written complaint, with supporting evidence. Decisions
to revoke access should require input from NRC executive
leadership and legal counsel.
For PIs requesting access beyond base-level compute
or for restricted datasets, we recommend requiring the
completion of ethics impact statements to be submitted
with research proposals. A recent proposal to address
the lack of “widely-applied professional ethical and
societal review processes” in computing piloted such a
requirement in a grant process, requiring a description of
the potential social and ethical impacts and mitigation
efforts by researchers. 22 We limit this approach to
proposals for compute access beyond default allocation
or requests for access to restricted datasets, as the
administrability concerns are weaker for researchers
that are already applying for compute or data access
beyond the default levels. For those applications, a
review process of a specific proposal will already occur
by an external review panel of experts (Chapter Two),
and, much like the NSF requires statements of “Broader
Impacts;”23 statements about the ethical considerations
of the work could easily be included. It is important
to note that ethics impact statements would be only
one component to NRC applications and should be
weighed in conjunction with other application materials.
In addition to requiring researchers to carefully think
through and document the potential impacts of their
own work, the statements may also serve as useful
documentation of potential negative impacts and be of
use to NRC staff when determining whether to provide
access to specific types of data. Such assessments may
also be helpful for journals, conferences, or universities
addressing ex post concerns about ethical impacts.
Next, we recommend that the NRC employ a
professional staff devoted to ethics oversight, similar
to what we propose regarding data privacy in Chapters
Five and Six. In addition to staff devoted to handling
legal compliance issues, the NRC needs staff with
specialized training in AI ethics (as well as expertise in
other subdomains) to provide expert internal consulting
to NRC applicants, as well as to aid in evaluating ethics
impact statements. Similarly, data privacy experts can
identify ethical privacy issues specifically related to data,
such as whether consent has been properly obtained
and documented. To ensure that decisions are based on
the merits, the NRC staff overseeing these issues must
operate independently of other federal agencies and be
insulated from political interference.
[E]mbedded ethics approaches
may . . . identify[] and address[]
issues as the research proceeds,
in contrast to ex ante review,
where it may be too early to spot
an issue, and ex post review,
which may be too late.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
69
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 7
We acknowledge that these ethics review mechanisms
may not identify all instances where researchers use
the NRC in a way to conduct research that raises ethical
questions. Few review mechanisms could, particularly in
light of considerable ambiguity, present in ethics standards
(see Appendix C). Nonetheless, these mechanisms can
augment key academic checkpoints (IRB review and peer
review) in an administrable fashion that does not raise
serious concerns about academic speech.
Lastly, we recommend that non-NRC parties explore
a range of measures to address ethical concerns in AI
compute. These may include an ethics review process or
approaches widely deployed in bioethics by the National
Institutes of Health, namely to incentivize the embedding
of ethicists in research projects.24 Such embedded
ethics approaches may have the particular advantage
of identifying and addressing issues as the research
proceeds, in contrast to ex ante review, where it may be
too early to spot an issue, and ex post review, which may
be too late. We expect this to be an active area of inquiry
as new approaches are validated. The NRC, potentially in
conjunction with the NSF, should consider offering funding
for projects that embed ethics domain experts into teams,
in order to support this proposal.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
70
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 8
Chapter 8: Managing
Cybersecurity Risks
While the NRC has the potential to level the
playing field for AI research, it will also create an
alluring target for a vast array of bad actors.
Cybersecurity – the practices to protect
systems against incidents that may compromise
operations or cause harm to relevant assets
and parties – will be a critical focus of the NRC.
It will require a cybersecurity framework that
manages potential incidents throughout their
lifecycle, spanning: (1) preparation; (2) detection
and analysis; (3) containment, eradication, and
recovery; and (4) post-incident activity, which
collectively encompasses incident monitoring,
detection, recovery, and reporting.1 Effective
cybersecurity practices complement risk
assessment based on impact, immediacy, and
likelihood, and will help gain the trust of users and thwart subversion and interference
from foreign actors or other adversarial parties. Careful administrative design of the
NRC with cybersecurity at the forefront will set a high standard as information systems
become more central to our national infrastructure.
In this chapter we address these cybersecurity concerns. We first provide an
overview of common types of vulnerabilities and attacks, and assess their relevance
to the NRC. Next, we provide an overview of the federal government’s regulatory
landscape, as it pertains to cybersecurity, with a special focus on the FISMA and
FedRAMP frameworks. Finally, we close with a discussion of the security and system
design measures best suited to ensure that the integrity of the NRC is not compromised.
MOTIVATIONS FOR POTENTIAL ATTACKS
Possible attacks against the NRC could take a number of approaches, each
of which would entail substantial consequences for the NRC.2 First, adversaries
could launch an attack against the NRC with the intention of disrupting the NRC’s
operations or its ability to aid research. For example, adversaries could attack the
NRC’s infrastructure directly by disabling or interfering with NRC servers. As a result,
researchers would be unable to access NRC servers or effectively utilize them. By
launching such attacks, adversaries may throttle the NRC, thereby raising costs for
the federal government.3 Alternatively, adversaries could seek to attack specific
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 Deterring malicious actors
from attacking the NRC will
require more than adhering
to current FISMA and
FedRAMP standards.
 The NRC should centralize
security responsibilities for
datasets with the program’s
staff rather than deferring
to originating agencies.
 Technical measures the
NRC should investigate
include confidential
clouds, federated learning,
and cryptography-
based measures such as
homomorphic encryption
and secure multi-party
computation.
While the NRC
has the potential
to level the
playing field for AI
research, it will also
create an alluring
target for a vast
array of bad actors.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
71
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 8
research projects on the NRC, thereby slowing the pace of
that research or compromising the quality of the research
findings. They may also initiate “data-poisoning” attacks
on NRC datasets, thereby compromising the quality of
research findings.
Second, bad actors could also launch cyber operations
against the NRC, intending to steal computational
resources. In this case, the purpose would not be to disrupt
the NRC, but to repurpose computational power toward
illicit purposes (e.g., cryptocurrency mining).4 For instance,
individuals could pretend to be researchers, claiming to
use cloud credits for legitimate research purposes while
actually using them for alternative ends. Individuals
could also infiltrate the NRC’s network, siphoning off
computational resources from other projects and reducing
the functionality for legitimate users.
Third, adversaries might pose a threat to the NRC out
of a desire to steal or make use of the data and research
products housed within the system. The NRC promises
to be an attractive target because it will house data from
a range of different agencies. If the adversary wanted to
steal equivalent data from the agencies themselves, they
would need to break into each agency independently.
However, the potential combination of datasets on the
NRC, including researcher-owned datasets, may increase
the potential gains from accessing this information.
Additionally, adversaries may attempt to break into
the NRC in order to steal products generated by NRC
researchers. This could include trained machine-learning
models or specific research findings.
Relatedly, bad actors could determine that executing
intrusions into the NRC is an effective way to target
Affiliated Government Agencies. Because a participation
incentive for agencies is the computing support that
the NRC will offer, one of the biggest cyber risks is of
malicious actors attempting to use the NRC to hack into
their systems. For that reason, the cybersecurity risk to
the government may be substantial. On the other hand, as
we discussed in Chapter Three, the NRC also presents an
opportunity to enhance and harmonize security standards
compliance, as agencies move into the cloud.
A range of other motivations may exist. As a federal
entity, successful operations against the NRC would carry
symbolic value and capture attention. Ransomware
attacks could result in significant payoffs. The NRC could
also be a target for espionage, both on the part of nation-
state actors seeking to acquire sensitive datasets (e.g.,
energy grid infrastructure), and on the part of private
sector entities, looking to steal intellectual property or to
monitor the latest technological advances.
If successful, any of the attacks could undermine the
NRC. For example, researchers would be deterred from
using the NRC and may invest their efforts in alternate
private clouds. This could occur because researchers
believe the NRC would be ineffective to use (e.g., on
account of frequent server outages), or because they
believe their research products would be inadequately
protected. Federal agencies and departments could be
deterred from entrusting the NRC with sensitive datasets.
Federal entities could risk embarrassment and face
obstacles executing their policy objectives if datasets were
accidentally leaked. If the NRC is insufficiently secure, such
entities may prefer to avoid sharing data altogether.
FISMA, FEDRAMP , AND EXISTING
FEDERAL STANDARDS
As a federal entity, the NRC will be subject to federal
standards and regulations. In this section, we provide a
high-level overview of the two most relevant regulations:
the Federal Information Systems Management Act (FISMA)
and the Federal Risk and Authorization Management
Program (FedRAMP).5 FISMA traditionally applies to non-
cloud systems that support a single agency, whereas
FedRAMP authorization is required for cloud systems.6
We finish by discussing critiques of these regulations.
FISMA
The Federal Information Systems Management Act
(FISMA) was first passed in 2002, with the purpose of
providing a comprehensive framework for ensuring the
effectiveness of security controls for federal information
systems.7 The law was later amended in 2014, and has

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
72
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 8
since been augmented through other individual legislative
and executive actions, and our discussion focuses on the
collective impact of FISMA compliance regulations.8
FISMA applies to all federal agencies, contractors,
or other sources that provide information security for
information systems that support the operations and
assets of the agency.9 It invests responsibility in several
different entities. First, the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) is tasked with developing uniform
standards and guidelines for implementing security
controls, evaluating the riskiness of different information
systems, and other methodologies.10 Second, the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) is tasked with overseeing
agency compliance with FISMA and reporting to Congress
on the state of FISMA compliance.11 Third, the Department
of Homeland Security is tasked with administering the
implementation of agency information security policies
and practices.12 Finally, federal agencies are required
to develop and implement a risk-based information
security program in compliance with NIST standards and
OMB policies.13 Agencies are further required to conduct
periodic assessments to ensure continued efficiency and
cost effectiveness.14
Several NIST requirements are worth mentioning
here. Pursuant to NIST SP 800-18, agencies are required
to identify relevant information systems falling under the
purview of FISMA. Agencies must also categorize each of
these systems into a risk level, following the guidance laid
out in FIPS 199 and NIST 800-60.15 NIST 800-53 outlines
both the security controls that agencies should follow
and the manner in which agencies should conduct risk
assessments.16 Agencies must further summarize both
the security requirements and implemented controls
in “security plans” , as outlined in NIST 800-18.17 Finally,
organization officials are required to conduct annual
security reviews in accordance with NIST 800-37.
FEDRAMP
In the late 2000s, federal agencies began expressing
security concerns as a barrier to cloud computing
adoption.18 In response, Congress passed the 2011 Federal
Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)
in order to provide a cost-effective, risk-based approach
for the adoption and use of cloud services by the federal
government.19 FedRAMP approval is exempted where: (i)
the cloud is private to the agency, (ii) the cloud is physically
located within a federal facility, and (iii) the agency is not
providing cloud services from the cloud-based information
system to any external entities.20 Like FISMA, FedRAMP
security requirements are governed by NIST standards,
including NIST SP 800-53, FIPS 199, NIST 800-37, and
others.21 However, unlike FISMA, FedRAMP’s two tracks
to receiving an authority-to-operate means that vendors
working with multiple agencies do not necessarily need to
undergo the full approval process with each agency. This
means that cloud services providers and agencies alike are
able to save significant time and money.
CRITICISMS OF FISMA AND FEDRAMP
These regulations are not without fault. Most notably,
critics point to the fact that despite their existence, cyber
intrusions on government infrastructure are common
and accelerating.22 A 2019 report by the U.S. Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs, investigating eight agencies, noted that the
federal government is failing its legislative mandate
from FISMA.23 The errors identified included a failure to
protect personally identifiable information, inadequate
IT documentation, poor remediation of bugs, a failure
to upgrade legacy systems, and inadequate authority
vested in agency chief information officers.24 Reports by
the Government Accountability Office (GAO) have reached
similar conclusions.25 In turn, some have criticized the
government’s approach to cybersecurity wholesale,
arguing it places too much emphasis on merely detecting
intrusions.26 They argue for a framework of “zero trust, ”
which assumes that intruders will penetrate a network and
instead focus on security controls which limit the ability of
those intruders to navigate the network.27
FedRAMP faces its own criticisms. A recent study noted
that securing authorization can be time-consuming and
expensive—taking up to two years and costing millions
of dollars in some cases.28 Even though parts of FedRAMP
are designed to be reusable across agencies, agencies
often delay the process by imposing separate, additional

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
73
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 8
requirements. A variety of reasons for these deficiencies
have been noted, including an understaffed Joint
Authorization Board, a lack of trust between agencies,
with regards to Authorization to Operate (ATOs), and
overly complex authorization process that leads to errors
by agencies and Cloud Services Providers.29 Proposed
recommendations to address these deficiencies include
increased funding for FedRAMP’s Joint Authorization
Board, incentives to encourage reuse of ATOs, and
mechanisms to improve the efficiency of the authorization
process.30
On May 12, 2021, the Biden administration released
an Executive Order (EO) on Improving the Nation’s
Cybersecurity,31 and OMB published a draft federal strategy
for public comment on September 7, 2021.32 Signed
in the aftermath of the breach of the software vendor,
SolarWinds, and the ransomware attack on Colonial
Pipeline, the EO presents several new initiatives. First, it
calls on the federal government to embrace “zero-trust
architecture” and improve post-attack investigation
processes. Second, it seeks to improve collaboration
between the public and private sectors by improving
disclosure requirements and establishing a private-
public Cybersecurity Safety Review Board (modeled
after the National Transportation Safety Board). Finally,
it seeks a more cohesive government-wide approach
to cybersecurity, calling for the creation of a playbook
to standardize cyber response across federal agencies,
alongside a government-wide detection and response
system for attacks.
Though it is too soon to determine whether the EO
and the proposed strategy will be effective, it appears to
address deficiencies identified in the existing landscape.
It seeks to improve documentation and responsiveness
to attacks and suggests a shift in cybersecurity thinking.
It is unclear, however, whether it will address the
underlying procurement issues and lack of inter-agency
trust that critics believe have hampered the effectiveness
of FedRAMP . But given the potential for highly sensitive
data to be stored on the NRC, embracing a zero-trust
architecture at the outset is a crucial consideration for
ensuring its integrity.
NRC SECURITY STANDARDS AND
SYSTEM DESIGN MEASURES
Here, we present recommendations on cybersecurity
policy for the NRC informed by the landscape of the
existing federal regulations and unique considerations that
a national research cloud will pose.
PROCESS FOR RISK AND SECURITY DETERMINATIONS
Under the current regulatory landscape, agencies
are responsible for determining the appropriate risk
categorizations and security controls for the datasets
located on their servers. However, this raises a potential
challenge as agencies begin to share their data with the
NRC—making it unclear who will maintain authority for
categorizing the risk of these datasets and determining
appropriate security controls.
On the one hand, agencies themselves could continue
to retain discretion over the security classification
and controls for datasets they place into the NRC. In
this decentralized approach, much of the security
responsibilities assigned by FISMA would remain with
the agencies, irrespective of whether the data existed
on NRC servers. On the other hand, the NRC could take
responsibility for all security decisions. Datasets added to
the NRC would then be classified according to the NRC’s
assessment of risk, and protected with controls that the
NRC staff deems appropriate. This approach “centralizes”
security responsibilities by vesting it with the NRC after the
one-time negotiation for each dataset.
Though both approaches have their merits, we
recommend the centralized approach for several reasons.
First, the centralized approach ensures internal uniformity.
The paradox of federal cybersecurity regulation is that
though NIST has articulated a set of standards pertaining
to risk and controls, agencies interpret these standards
differently, leading to discrepancies in implementation and
classification across the federal government. Following
each agency’s security classifications for data on the NRC
would produce unnecessarily complex and incoherent
classifications for a single system. This threatens
to diminish the usability of the NRC, and the added

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
74
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 8
complexity could arguably weaken security by increasing
the likelihood of errors. Permitting the NRC to impose its
own classifications allows for uniformity within the NRC
and alignment with the access tiers suggested in Chapter
Three of this White Paper. This approach may also simplify
managing security practices across a potential mix of
cloud compute providers.
Second, the NRC represents a valuable opportunity
to harmonize federal cybersecurity standards across
different agencies. The assessments and implementations
adopted by the NRC must generalize to the full diversity of
federal datasets. Hence, the NRC’s practices can serve as
a template for NIST’s guidelines, which any agency is free
to adopt.
Third, the centralized approach will remove hurdles
for data sharing. Security concerns often impede agency
data sharing. In a scheme where agencies retain control
over all security determinations, agencies could demand
security classifications that are excessively high or
impractical to implement. The centralized approach
would place the burden on agencies to articulate with
specificity why the NRC’s security policies or classification
guidelines are inadequate for a particular dataset.
Finally, researchers should also have a voice in
determining the appropriate security controls, since a
public resource of this magnitude that cannot attract users
is bound to fail. As security controls implicate usability,
the NRC should not opt for controls which substantially
inhibit or disincentivize researchers from leveraging its
resources. The NRC needs to strike the right balance
between usability and security.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The federal government already possesses a range of
technical options and countermeasures to cyber attacks.
Cybersecurity threats and defenses are, of course, actively
evolving, so we discuss these only as a starting point—
robust, long-term cybersecurity comes through continued
vigilance and prioritization that recognizes the shifting
nature of the field.
DATA STORAGE
Data storage mechanisms should ensure proper
protection from outside access. Encryption can be used
to protect sensitive data at rest, to be later unencrypted
when needed. Physical isolation through air-gapped
environments is another design feature that can remove
the possibility of wireless network interfaces from being
used to connect the data to malicious outside threats.
However, even air gapping is not a foolproof solution: there
are ways to “jump” air gaps such as through hiding in USB
thumb drives (which is allegedly how the Stuxnet malware
famously compromised Iranian nuclear centrifuges).33 More
recent attacks bypass the need for electronic transmission
altogether by leveraging other signals that leak data
such as FM frequencies, audio, heat, light, and magnetic
fields. These kinds of threats bring home the need for a
comprehensive and evolving approach to cybersecurity.
NETWORKING PROTOCOLS
Data packets sent over networks are transmitted
according to a set of internationally standardized internet
protocols. Following the Open Systems Interconnection
(OSI) model, the conceptual layers involved in computer
networking can be categorized into seven dimensions:
physical, data link, network, transport, session,
presentation, and application layers.34
RUNTIME SECURITY
When considering runtime security technologies,
three design features that are relevant for the cloud
environments are the use of confidential clouds,
federated learning, and cryptography-based measures
such as homomorphic encryption and secure multi-
party computation. A growing number of vendors offer
“confidential cloud” options as an emerging technical
solution to fully cyber secure cloud computation that is
secure throughout execution.35 Confidential clouds offer
high-security, end-to-end isolated operation by executing
workloads within trusted execution environments. For
example, virtualization enables an operating system
to run another operating system within it as a virtual
environment with additional firewall or other network

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
75
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 8
barriers, effectively simulating another device within the
host computer.
DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING AND FEDERATED LEARNING
Another computing paradigm, known as distributed
computing or federated learning, considers situations
where multiple parties have individual shards of data
which they are interested in leveraging in aggregate,
without sharing outright. Federated learning addresses
this situation, for example, demonstrating how users’
mobile phones can send information—possibly
differentially private—to central servers without exposing
the precise details of any one individual’s information.
A second scenario more relevant to the large-scale
decentralized nature of the NRC is distributed computing—
in which many institutions collectively share compute,
akin in some respects to crowd-sourced computing. These
approaches enable multiple parties to leverage existing
computational infrastructure, while retaining some
guarantees on privacy.
CRYPTOGRAPHY-BASED MEASURES
Finally, there are two types of cryptography-based
measures worth noting.
Cryptography researchers have developed ways of
computing mathematical operations over encrypted data,
known as homomorphic encryption. This impressive
feat has valuable implications because it obviates the
need for decryption, which can potentially expose the
intermediate values of computation, and grant access to
public and secret encryption keys during computation.
Initially, only partially homomorphic encryption schemes
that supported limited arithmetic operations like addition
and multiplication were possible. But fully homomorphic
encryption schemes have recently been developed which
enable what is known as “arbitrary” computation for
promising use cases in predictive medicine and machine
learning. That said, standardization is still under way
to broader adoption, and homomorphic encryption (by
design) is malleable—a property in cryptography that
is usually undesirable, as it allows attackers to modify
encrypted ciphertexts without needing to know their
decrypted value. These and other limitations of any
technical approach are worth taking into account when
considering which technologies to adopt and for what
purpose.
Complementing the distributed, decentralized
computing model discussed throughout this White Paper
is the subfield known as secure multi-party computation
(also known as privacy-preserving computation), which
presents methods for multiple parties to jointly compute
a function over all their respective inputs, while keeping
those inputs private from any other party. These methods
have matured in their origins from a theoretical curiosity
to techniques with practical application in studies on tax
and education records, cryptographic key management
for the cloud, and more.36 This makes secure multi-
party computation methods a potential candidate
for applications pertaining to secure, distributed
computation.

Ultimately, it will be central for the NRC to
continuously learn about the most effective security
standards (including such other creative strategies as red
teaming or bug bounties37 to identify vulnerabilities) in this
rapidly evolving space.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
76
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 9
Chapter 9:
Intellectual Property
Who should own the IP rights to outputs developed using NRC resources?1 When
private research is funded, subsidized, or influenced by the federal government, the
laws and rules have evolved, so that both the researcher and the government have
certain rights in the intellectual property developed under the research. While IP
protection is theoretically designed to incentivize research and innovation, some signs
indicate that AI researchers in particular are already amenable to sharing the fruits
of their research. Indeed, over 2,000 researchers signed a 2018 petition to boycott
a new machine intelligence journal started by Nature, because it promised to place
its articles behind a paywall.2 The Open Science and Open Research movements
have also encouraged AI researchers to make their machine-learning software and
algorithms publicly available.3 Furthermore, as we discuss below, the advancement of
techniques like transfer learning depend on researchers being able to distribute the
fruits of their research freely.
This chapter surveys the existing IP-sharing agreements between researchers and
the government, and explores whether and to what extent the government should
retain IP rights over researchers’’ outputs, as a condition of using the NRC.4 While the
evidence on optimal IP rights varies, we recommend that: (1) academic researchers
and universities should retain the same IP rights as the Bayh-Dole Act provides for
patents developed under federally funded research, (2) the government should retain
its copyrights and data rights under the Uniform Guidance, but contract around
those rights where applicable to incentivize NRC usage and AI innovation, and (3)
the government should consider conditions for requiring researchers to share their
research outputs under an open-access license.
KEY
TAKEAWAYS
 To harmonize with the
federal grant process, the
NRC should adopt the same
approach to allocating
patent rights, copyrights,
and data rights to NRC
users as applies to federal
funding agreements.
 The NRC should contract
around government
intellectual property
rights where applicable to
incentivize NRC usage and
AI innovation.
 The NRC should consider
conditions for requiring
researchers to share
outputs under an open-
source license.
[A]cademic researchers and universities should retain
the same IP rights as the Bayh-Dole Act provides for
patents developed under federally funded research.
PATENTS RIGHTS
A core question is whether NRC users should retain patent rights in inventions
supported by the NRC. The Bayh-Dole Act regulates patent rights for inventions
developed under federal funding agreements and its applicability depends on the

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
77
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 9
nature of NRC access––for instance, if cloud credits are
apportioned using federal grants, as described in Chapter
Two, they may be considered federal funding agreements.5
In such cases, Bayh-Dole Act permits the researchers
to hold the title to the patent and to license the patent
rights.6 However, these patent rights come with certain
restrictions: for example, the funding agency has a free,
nonexclusive license to use the invention “for or on behalf
of the United States, ” and the agency may use “[m]arch-in
rights” to grant additional licenses.7
The broader policy question about the government’s
exercise of its patent rights is whether and how patents
stimulate innovation in AI. Some commentators have
argued that the U.S. suffers from over-patenting in
software,8 and AI is no exception.9 The total number of AI
patent applications received annually by the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office more than doubled from 30,000 in
2002 to over 60,000 in 2018,10 and some argue that this
proliferation of broad AI patents, especially those filed by
commercial companies, is hindering future innovation.11
In the Bayh-Dole context, researchers have also found that
the benefits of university patenting may justify the costs
only where industry licensees need exclusivity to justify
undertaking the costs of commercialization, as, for instance,
in the pharmaceutical context.12 For the substantial portion
of university patenting, including AI, this rationale may not
carry much weight.13
Some research shows that patents actually may not
have any net effect on the amount or quality of AI research
conducted in the university context. In an empirical study
of faculty at the top computer science and electrical
engineering universities in the United States, research
has found that the prospect of obtaining patent rights to
the fruits of their research does not motivate researchers
to conduct more or higher-quality research.14 Eighty-five
percent of professors reported that patent rights were
not among the top four factors motivating their research
activities, and fifty-seven percent of professors reported
that they did not know whether or how their university
shares licensing revenue with inventors.15 The patent
scheme adopted by the NRC, therefore, may not have a
strong influence on researcher adoption.
That said, as a practical matter, there is a virtue
to treating innovations stemming from NRC usage in a
fashion that is consistent with Bayh-Dole. Particularly
if cloud credits are awarded through the expansion of
programs like NSF CloudBank, it would be confusing to
have distinct patent rights out of the research and cloud
grant. In addition, many university tech transfer offices
appear to have strong preferences on patent rights.16 To the
extent that universities today view retaining patent rights
as a condition for using the NRC, aligning NRC patent
rights with Bayh-Dole may be preferred, but the evidence
underpinning this recommendation is not strong.
COPYRIGHT , DATA RIGHTS, AND
THE UNIFORM GUIDANCE
The Uniform Guidance (2 C.F.R. § 200) streamlines and
consolidates government requirements for receiving and
using federal awards to reduce administrative burden.17
Grants.gov describes it as a “government-wide framework
for grants management, ” a groundwork of rules for federal
agencies in administering federal funding.18 The Uniform
Guidance includes provisions on, for instance, cost
principles, audit requirements, and requirements for the
contents of federal awards.19
The Uniform Guidance is applicable to “federal
awards, ”20 but IP provisions do not require the government
to assert their rights over researcher outputs.21 Whether
and how the government allocates its IP rights under the
Uniform Guidance is therefore an important question.
This section first covers government copyright
and data rights to IP under the Uniform Guidance and
The government should . . .
consider conditions for requiring
NRC researchers to disclose or
share their research outputs under
an open-access license.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
78
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 9
discusses how sharing copyright and data rights might
impact the AI innovation landscape. We then examine
the extent to which the government should retain its
rights to research generated using the NRC. While the
evidence is mixed, we ultimately recommend that the
government retain its copyrights and data rights under
the Uniform Guidance, but contract around those rights
where applicable, to incentivize NRC usage and further AI
innovation.
COPYRIGHT
Under U.S. copyright law, NRC researchers can obtain
copyrights over various aspects of their work. For instance,
NRC researchers may wish to copyright the software they
used to build the model, since software is considered a
literary work under the Copyright Act.22 Researchers may
even obtain copyrights over various aspects of the model,
including the choices of training parameters, model
architectures, and training labels, if they can show that
those choices required creativity.23 Many scholars have
even opined, without reaching consensus, on whether
outputs such as text and art that are artificially generated
can be copyrighted.24
Under the Uniform Guidance,25 the recipient of
federal funds may copyright any work that was developed
or acquired under a federal award. However, even
if researchers are permitted to maintain copyrights,
the federal awarding agency reserves a “royalty-free,
nonexclusive and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish,
or otherwise use the work for federal purposes, and to
authorize others to do so. ”26 Notably, this right is limited to
“federal purposes, ” meaning that third parties who acquire
licenses to the researchers’ copyrighted works cannot use
them for exclusively commercial purposes.27
It is unclear to what extent copyrights over NRC
outputs should be fully vested in the researcher to
stimulate basic AI research. One class of AI research
and development output that has received significant
academic attention has been whether AI-generated
creative works like music from OpenAI’s Jukebox,28 can
or should receive copyright protection.29 However, the
technology and copyright community has hardly reached
a consensus on whether the public interest in AI research
requires granting copyright in these scenarios. On one
hand, in a survey of AI scientists, tech policy experts, and
copyright scholars, roughly 54 percent of respondents
agreed that copyright protection is an important incentive
for authors to make their work commercially available,
and 63 percent agreed that an increase in the number
of commercially available AI-produced works would
stimulate further AI growth and research.30 On the other
hand, in the same survey approximately 56 percent of
respondents agreed that the U.S. Copyright Office should
deny copyright protection to creative works produced
independently by AI, without creative intervention from a
human author.31
Notwithstanding the prominent debate about
copyright over creative works generated by AI models, such
works are only a subset of possible copyright protection
in the AI context. As discussed above, researchers could
theoretically seek additional copyright protection over,
among other things, their code, architecture, or model.
Here, AI innovation may depend on sharing these
copyrightable elements. For instance, transfer learning
uses existing ML models and “fine-tunes” those models for
a related target task,32 and various fine-tuning approaches
have emerged to perform transfer learning on different
classes of tasks.33
DATA RIGHTS
Under the Uniform Guidance, when “data” is
“produced” under a federal award, the government
reserves the right to: (1) obtain, reproduce, publish or
otherwise use such data; and (2) authorize others to
receive, reproduce, publish or otherwise use such data.34
Notably, this does not limit the use of such data for
federal government purposes. In other words, such data
can be promulgated for any use. The outstanding question,
therefore, is whether this “data, ” which is not explicitly
defined in the Uniform Guidance, covers data generated
for AI and machine-learning purposes. Below, we examine
two classes of data generated for AI purposes—synthetic
data and data labels—and how sharing this data could
impact AI innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
79
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 9
One class of data generated for AI purposes is
synthetic data. Researchers have turned to deep
generative models such as Variational Autoencoders35 and
Generative Adversarial Networks36 to generate synthetic
data to train their machine learning models. As noted by
the World Intellectual Property Organization, synthetic
data is an entirely new class of data that does not fit
neatly under existing IP law.37 While a researcher may seek
copyright protection over the subset of synthetic data that
is “creative, ” therefore implicating the copyright provisions
of the Uniform Guidance (described above), the broad
class of synthetic data, whether “creative” or not, may also
implicate the data rights provision. On one hand, training
data is often carefully guarded,38 so requirements to share
synthetic data, which is often used to train AI models, may
be a non-starter for NRC users. On the other hand, many
scholars have written about the promise of synthetic
data to actually enable further data sharing by preserving
privacy and researchers’ trade secrets.39 In fact, sharing
synthetic datasets would spur additional research and
innovation in fields such as healthcare, where data sharing
has limited.40
 Another class of data generated for AI is labeled data,
namely data that has been tagged and classified to provide
ground truth for supervised machine learning models.41
While techniques have been developed to decrease the
costs associated with data labeling,42 it nevertheless
remains a resource and time-intensive task. For example,
Cognilytics Research reports that 25 percent of the total
time spent building machine learning models is devoted to
data labeling.43 Researchers using the NRC may therefore
seek to protect their investment in data labeling, by
opting not to share their labels with others, especially if
the underlying data is proprietary.44 However, recognizing
the difficulty of data labeling, some researchers have built
online platforms for sharing data labels.45 In the case of
ImageTagger, a data labeling and sharing platform for
RoboCup Soccer, the developers wanted to solve the
problem that no single team, acting alone, could easily
build its own high-quality training sets.46 Similarly, in
the NRC’s case, the sharing of labeled government data
– where labeling may have been augmented by NRC
resources47 – could act as a rising tide that lifts all boats,
improving the quality of not only the government data
as a training dataset, but also all subsequent research
using that data. Furthermore, sharing data labels could
be instrumental in conducting bias and fairness of NRC
research outputs where necessary, as discussed in Chapter
Seven.48
RETAINING IP RIGHTS IN THE UNIFORM GUIDANCE
As the preceding discussion suggests, sharing AI
research output covered by copyrights and data rights
could be beneficial to AI innovation. We therefore
recommend that the NRC at least retain the same rights to
copyrights and data rights as under the Uniform Guidance,
yielding several additional benefits. First, similar to our
recommendation in Chapter Three that federal agencies
should be allowed to use the NRC’s compute resources,
retaining the same Uniform Guidance IP allocation scheme
could produce welfare benefits by improving government
decision-making using AI. For instance, federal agencies
can reduce the cost of core governance functions and
increase agency efficiency and effectiveness by using
data labels shared by NRC researchers or by fine-tuning
models generated by NRC researchers. Second, retaining
the Uniform Guidance IP allocation scheme would result
in more consistency across the federal award landscape.
Indeed, as mentioned above in the patent context, it
could be confusing to diverge from the Uniform Guidance,
especially if the cloud credit grant is apportioned through
programs like CloudBank, but the research grant is
administered as a federal award.
In sum, we recommend that the government at least
retain its copyrights and data rights under the Uniform
Guidance. However, we also reiterate that the Uniform
Guidance serves merely as a helpful framework, not as an
immutable rule. Where the Uniform Guidance IP allocation
would dissuade researchers from using the NRC or hinder
AI innovation in specific scenarios, the government
can and should explicitly modify its rights and contract
separately with researchers on what rights the government
retains, if any.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
80
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
CHAPTER 9
CONSIDERATIONS FOR OPEN-
SOURCING
Should the government go beyond its rights and
mandate that researchers share their NRC research
outputs with others under an open-source license? As
an initial matter, we note that agencies can modify the
IP allocation schemes under the Uniform Guidance, but
not under the Bayh-Dole Act. Some federal agencies
supplement and/or replace the IP rights set out in the
Uniform Guidance with restrictions that are more specific
to the IP being developed for that particular agency or
under a specific award.49 For instance, the Department of
Labor requires that intellectual property developed under
a federal award must not only comply with the terms
specified in the Uniform Guidance, but also be available
for open licensing to the public.50 NSF grantees are also
expected to share their data with others.51 However,
the government cannot change the allocation of patent
ownership under the Bayh-Dole Act, unless the Act itself is
modified or unless the NRC isn’t administered as a federal
award, rendering the Act inapplicable.
Requiring researchers to open-source their research
outputs may be possible, but the considerations around
it are complex. On one hand, an open-source requirement
could negatively affect downstream commercialization,
given the wide range of potential AI research.52 While the
NRC might protect commercialization to some degree
by adopting a restrictive open-source license,53 the mere
divergence from the Uniform Guidance or the Bayh-Dole
Act could be confusing for researchers in navigating
federal awards and understanding open-source licensing
interactions across multiple situations.54 Furthermore,
requiring researchers to share research outputs comes
with its own host of privacy and cybersecurity issues.55
If researchers are permitted to use the NRC to conduct
classified research,56 for instance, then keeping research
outputs proprietary would serve the national interest.57
In this case, however, the NRC should consider limiting
any open-source requirement to research that has fewer
privacy and security implications.
On the other hand, as discussed, sharing research
outputs with other NRC researchers could be beneficial,
and many scholars argue that AI researchers should
open-source their software to stimulate innovation.58 A
requirement to open-source software code, which can
be the subject of both copyrights and patent rights,59
may contravene Bayh-Dole, and face challenges from
universities that seek to retain their patent rights, but
software patent disclosures alone are often limited, over-
broad, and fail to enhance social welfare.60 Requiring fuller
disclosure of code generated on the NRC can therefore
decrease the risk of over-patenting and increase AI
innovation. The growth of the robust open-source and
open science movements also suggests that an open-
sourcing requirement for the NRC would not be a complete
barrier to NRC usage.61
A strong argument for mandating open-sourcing
also comes from the increasing private- sector reliance
on trade secrets for IP protection in AI.62 Some argue that
this heightened emphasis on trade secret protection
constitutes “artificial stupidity, ”63 as it has stifled
innovation in AI by preventing disclosure, providing
protection for a potentially unlimited duration, and
attaching immediately and broadly to any output with
perceivable economic value.64 The reliance on secrecy,
therefore, contravenes many of the principles described
above—which argue that sharing code and data is crucial
in AI—and results in significant AI industry consolidation
and sub-optimal levels of AI innovation.65 This harkens
back to the goal of the NRC discussed in Chapter One: To
address problems with AI research being concentrated
in the hands of a few private-sector players. Because the
NRC should explicitly avoid replicating these private-
sector challenges, this lends additional support to a
recommendation that the NRC should contemplate
requiring researchers to share their research outputs.
In sum, while AI raises a host of novel IP issues (e.g.,
whether AI output is itself eligible for IP protection), we
think that the government can steer clear of many of these
complications by tracking Bayh-Dole and the Uniform
Guidance. The government should also additionally
consider conditions for requiring NRC researchers to
disclose or share their research outputs under an open-
access license.

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
81
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
Conclusion 
As we have articulated in this White Paper, the ambitious call for an NRC has transformative potential for the AI
research landscape.
Its biggest promise is to ensure more equitable access to core ingredients for AI research: compute and data.
Leveling this playing field could shift the current ecosystem from one that focuses on narrow commercial problems to
one that fosters basic, noncommercial AI research to ensure long-term national competitiveness, to solve some of the
most pressing problems, and to rigorously interrogate AI models.
As we have spelled out in this White Paper, the NRC does raise a host of policy, legal, and normative questions. How
can such compute resources be provided in a way that is expeditious and user-friendly, but does not preclude the
potential cost savings from a publicly owned resource? How can the NRC be designed to adhere to the Privacy Act of
1974, which was animated by concerns about a national system of records that surveils on citizens? How can we ensure
that NRC mitigates, rather than heightens, concerns about the unethical use of AI? And how can one prevent the NRC
from becoming the biggest target for cyberattacks?
These are tough questions, and we hope to have sketched out our initial attempt at answers above. We are
hopeful that, if designed well, the NRC could help to realign the AI innovation space from one that is fixated with short-
term private profit, to one that is infused with long-term public values.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
82
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
ADP Alberta Data Partnerships
ADR UK Administrative Data Research UK
ADRF Administrative Data Research Facility
AI artificial intelligence
API application programming interface
ARPA Advanced Research Projects Agency
ARPANET Advanced Research Projects Agency
Network
ATO authority-to-operate
ATO Authorization to Operate
AWS Amazon Web Services
CaaS Compute as a Service
CIPSEA Confidential Information Protection
and Statistical Efficiency Act
CMS Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
CPL California Policy Lab
CPU central processing unit
DFARS Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation
Supplement
DHS U.S. Department of Homeland Security
DOD U.S. Department of Defense
DOE U.S. Department of Energy
DOT U.S. Department of Transportation
DUA Data Use Agreement
EBPA Foundations for Evidence Based
Policymaking Act or Evidence Act
EO Executive Order
ESRC Economic and Social Research Council
EULA End-User Licensing Agreement
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation
FDS Federal Data Strategy
FedRAMP Federal Risk and Authorization Management
Program
FFRDC Federally-Funded Research and Development
Center
FIPS Federal Information Processing Standards
FISMA Federal Information Security Modernization
Act
FSRDC Federal Statistical Research Data Center
GAO U.S. Government Accountability Office
GCP Google Cloud Platform
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
GPS Global Positioning System
GPU graphics processing unit
GSA U.S. General Services Administration
HAI Stanford Institute for Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence
HECToR High-End Computing Terascale Resource
HHS U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act
HPC high-performance computing
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
IC U.S. Intelligence Community
IDA Institute for Defense Analyses
IPTO Information Processing Techniques Office
IRB Institutional Review Board
JV joint venture
LIDAR Light Detection and Ranging
ML machine learning
MOU memorandum of understanding
Glossary of Acronyms
(Alphabetical order)

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
83
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
NAIRR National Artificial Intelligence Research
Resource Task Force Act
NASA National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
NDAA National Defense Authorization Act
NIH National Institutes of Health
NISE NSF’s Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering
NIST National Institute of Standards and
Technology
NIST SP NIST Special Publications
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
NORC National Opinion Research Center
NRC National Research Cloud
NSCAI National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence
NSDS National Secure Data Service
NSF National Science Foundation
ODNI Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development
OMB U.S. Office of Management and Budget
ONS Office for National Statistics
ORNL Oak Ridge National Laboratory
OLCF Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility
OSI Open Systems Interconnection
OT Other Transaction
PCLOB Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
PHI protected health information
PHS Stanford Center for Population
Health Sciences
PI principal investigator
PII personally identifiable information
PPP public-private partnership
R&D research and development
RFI Request for Information
RFP Request for Proposal
RIST Research Organization for Information
Science and Technology
SDSC San Diego Supercomputer Center
SRCC Stanford Research Computing Center
SSL Secure Sockets Layer
STPI Science & Technology Policy Institute
TLS Transport Layer Security
UC Berkeley University of California, Berkeley
UC San Diego University of California, San Diego
UCLA University of California, Los Angeles
USDA Department of Agriculture
VRDC CMS’ Virtual Research Data Center
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
84
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
Appendix
A. COMPUTING INFRASTRUCTURE
COST COMPARISONS
This Appendix provides a sample cost-estimate
comparison between a commercial cloud service, AWS, and
a dedicated government HPC system, Summit. In sum, our
estimations show that AWS P3 instances with comparable
hardware to Summit would be 7.5 times as expensive
as estimated costs under constant usage, and 2.8 times
Summit’s estimated costs under fluctuating demand.
Table 3 lists the three infrastructure models used
in this comparison. Summit was used as the reference
government HPC system because it is one of the DOE’s
newest systems and has hardware well-suited for AI
research.1 The other infrastructure model use is AWS EC2
P3.2 Both are commonly used in AI research and general
HPC applications. Other commercial cloud platforms,
such as GCP or Azure, could also feasibly provide the
infrastructure for the NRC. AWS EC2 P3 was used here
because AWS has a robust cost calculator that allows for
variable workloads.
The number of AWS instances were set such that those
models would have the exact same number of GPUs as
Summit. GPUs were the fixed variable because GPUs are
the most important hardware for AI research applications,
specifically deep learning. Both Summit and AWS P3
instances use NVIDIA V100 GPUs.
We conduct our cost comparison for the two
infrastructure models over five years, as Summit’s initial
RFP documents include a five-year maintenance contract.
AWS, however, only provides one-year or three-year pricing
plans, so we extrapolated the five-year cost based on its
three-year plan.
For the cost estimate of Summit, we based our
calculation on the budget details in the original
Department of Energy (DOE) Request for Proposal
(RFP) in January 2014.3 The RFP includes a $155 million
maximum budget for building Summit, an expected $15
million maximum for the non-recurring engineering cost,4
and around $15 million for-five year maintenance,5 plus
interest based on the U.S. Treasury securities at five-year
constant maturity as specified in the price schedule.6 Upon
calculation, we estimated Summit costs around $192
million in total, which is consistent with public reporting of
the cost of Summit.7
For the cost estimate of AWS, we used the AWS pricing
calculator, choosing U.S. East (N. Virginia) as the data
center and publicly available rates under the cheapest
possible pricing plan (EC2 Instance Savings Plans). To
approximate a negotiated discount, we applied a 10
percent discount based on the negotiated rate of one
major university.
Since commercial cloud platform costs scale with
how many instances are actually in use, two costs were
calculated for each AWS model representing usage
extremes: (1) with the infrastructure under constant usage;
(2) with the infrastructure under dramatically fluctuating
usage each day. For the daily spike traffic calculation, we
set the model to run five days a week with 8.4 hours of
each day at peak performance. The maximum number of
instances used is the same as one would use for constant
use while the minimum number is zero. This workload
setting is based on the assumption that GPUs used for
training AI models sit idle 30 percent of the time.8 These
estimates should provide hard upper and lower bounds on
costs for using each instance type.
Figure 1 plots costs on the y-axis over a five-year
period on the x-axis. The turquoise line indicates the
cost to a Summit-like system and the purple and blue
lines indicate the cost of the same AWS instances under
variable and constant usage. Overall, this simple analysis
corroborates the analysis conducted by Compute Canada,
which found that commercial cloud “ranged from 4x to
10x more than the cost of owning and operating our own
clusters. ”9 Over five years and under constant usage,
AWS P3 instances with comparable hardware to Summit
would be 7.5 times as expensive as estimated costs. Under
fluctuating demand, AWS P3 instances would cost 2.8
times Summit’s estimated costs.

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
85
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
We note that this simple analysis omits many potential factors (see discussion in Chapter Two), but provides a
starting point to understanding the considerable cost implications for the make-or-buy decision.
GPUs RAM Network
Bandwidth
Summit
IBM AC922
27,648
(NVIDIA V olta V100)
2.8 PB 200 Gb/s
AWS
p3dn.24xlarge
(3456 nodes)
27,648
(NVIDIA V olta V100)
2.6 PB 100 Gb/s
FIGURE 1 – ESTIMATED COST OF AWS INSTANCES COMPARED TO SUMMIT OVER 3 YEARS
TABLE 3 – SUMMIT & AWS COMPARISON
Summit IBM AC922
AWS p3dn.24xlarge
(3456 nodes)
GPUs RAM Network Bandwidth
27,648
(NVIDIA Volta V100)
27,648
(NVIDIA Volta V100)
2.8 PB
2.6 PB
200 Gb/s
100 Gb/s
$1,600
$1,400
$1,200
$1,000
$800
$600
$400
$200
$0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Millions
Months
AWS P3 (Constant Usage) AWS P3 (Daily Spike Traffic) Summit

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
86
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
B. FACILITATING PRIVATE DATASET
SHARING
Unique IP challenges arise if researchers are permitted
to share their own private datasets with the NRC. Indeed,
researchers who “upload” proprietary data may be
concerned about how other NRC users utilize that data.10
Through interviews conducted for this White Paper,
corporate stakeholders representing the entertainment
industry, as well as other creative industries, have further
expressed fear that researchers may upload and share data
to which they do not hold rights. However, if the NRC does
decide to facilitate private data-sharing, it should consider
adopting two requirements to address these concerns: (1)
The NRC should require all users to affirm that they either
have the original IP rights to the data or that the data is
already in the public domain; (2) The NRC should have a
scheme for its users to license their data.
(a) NRC users must own IP rights to the data they are
uploading
Researchers uploading data need to agree that they
own the intellectual property rights on the data prior to
upload, or that the data is already in the public domain.
This should be the case whether researchers share the data
broadly with other researchers or simply use their data for
their own private use.
Of course, despite mandating that uploaders
guarantee legitimate ownership or public domain status
of their uploaded IP , uploaders may nevertheless upload
data they don’t own the IP rights to. This may happen
because computer engineers and researchers are not
informed about IP law, anticipate that fair use will excuse
their behavior, or simply hope not to get caught.11 Industry
stakeholders were also concerned that AI researchers
would pull out “facts” from a copyrighted work (e.g.,
certain melodies in the chorus of a song) or apply certain
algorithms to the work and “wrongly” claim a copyright
over the transformed work. Whatever the case may
be, this assembly of protected input data the “clearest
copyright liability in the machine learning process”
because assembling protected data violates the right to
reproduction, and any preprocessing on the data could
violate the right to derivative works.12
In interviews, corporate stakeholders expressed a
desire to stymie the upload of copyrighted works by having
the NRC itself assess whether uploaded data is already
protected by copyright. Diligencing data can be completed
manually, or by using such automated systems as Content
ID, which is also used by corporations such as YouTube.13
The former option would be very labor intensive,14 whereas
the latter may be prohibitively expensive,15 so the value of
addressing these concerns must be weighed against these
burdensome costs.
Finally, it is unclear the extent to which uploading and
sharing copyrighted data for machine learning amounts
to fair use.16 The most analogous case is Author’s Guild
v. Google Books.17 In that case, Google scanned over 20
million books, many of which were copyright-protected,
and assembled a corpus of machine-readable texts to
power its Google Books service.18 The Second Circuit
held that Google Books’ unauthorized reproductions of
copyrighted works was transformative fair use, largely
because Google Books provided information about
books through small snippets, without threatening the
rightsholders’ core protectable expression in the books.19
While some have opined that the Author’s Guild holding
categorically protects using copyrighted material in
datasets for machine learning purposes,20 many legal
scholars are not so sure about such a broad holding,
especially because fair use is so fact-intensive.21 Indeed,
while Google Books used copyrighted works for a non-
expressive purpose, Sobel notes that machine learning
models may increasingly be able to glean value from a
work’s expressive aspects.22 Therefore, until courts and
legislators provide more clarity on the applicability of fair
use in the machine learning context, the NRC should still
require data uploaders to attest that they own the rights to
the data.
(b) Users must be able to license their data to other
users.

If the NRC enabled private data sharing, users would
need to make clear what rights other NRC users have over
the uploaders’ shared data. The NRC would have two basic

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
87
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
options for creating IP licensing schemes: (1) the NRC
could permit researchers to use whatever IP license they
wish when sharing their private data; (2) the NRC could
mandate a uniform license across the board for all data
that is uploaded.
(1) Researcher’s Choice of License
Allowing researchers to craft their own IP licensing
agreements when sharing private data with other
researchers would be the most frictionless solution from
the perspective of the uploader; it would allow them to
share exactly what they want and restrict use to only
certain contexts. This choice of license seems to be
important to data sharers.23 Indeed, many data scientists
and engineers have written guides advising members
of the open-source community on how they should go
about choosing specific licenses for their work.24 GitHub,
an open-source code-sharing platform, permits its users
to choose from dozens of licenses,25 and FigShare, a data-
sharing platform for researchers, likewise supports a host
of different Creative Commons licenses.26 Some datasets
even have their own custom IP licensing agreements.
The Twitter academic dataset, for instance, is licensed
according to Twitter’s own developer agreement and non-
commercial use policies, not to an existing open-source
license.27
However, there are also disadvantages to such
flexibility. Just because different licenses might be allowed
doesn’t mean that these licenses will be fully understood
by all users. Adopting multiple licenses may result in
increased accidental infringement. Indeed, a study
conducted by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers found that “although [software] developers
clearly understood cases involving one license, they
struggled when multiple licenses were involved, ”28 and
in particular, were found to “lack the knowledge and
understanding to tease apart license interactions across
multiple situations. ”29
In particular, researchers unfamiliar with the
allowances provided by different data licenses, in
contexts where more than one license is implemented,
may lead to certain licenses being violated. For example,
when researchers were surveyed regarding their
understanding of copyright transfer agreements in the IP
commercialization process, they only demonstrated an
average 33 percent score on a knowledge-testing survey.30
(2) Uniform Licensing Agreement

The second option available to the NRC would be to
mandate that all private data be licensed under a single
uniform license. For the NRC administration itself, this
may be the more straightforward option, since users
could be notified upon login about the appropriate use
of data. The disadvantage of this strategy is that it may
deter would-be researchers who would share data under
a narrower license.31 Given the desire to allow researchers
to innovate freely, there may be concerns about adopting
a restrictive licensing agreement. Nonetheless, several
options of licensing agreements would still be available
for adoption, and this pathway would require choosing a
uniform agreement from these options, with the possibility
of allowing potential opt-out of this default license.
If the NRC were to implement a uniform license,
it could look to the licensing agreements leveraged
by institutional research clouds, such as the Harvard
Dataverse as an analogy in determining best practices
for its own licensing agreements. The model adopted by
the Dataverse is a default use of the CC0 Public Domain
Dedication “because of its name recognition in the
scientific community” and its “use by repositories as well
as scientific journals that require the deposit of open
data. ”32 Like an unrestricted Creative Commons or Open
Data license, a public domain license would allow the data
it governs to be used in any context, even commercial
ones, and would also allow reproduction and creation of
derivatives from the data.
Alternatively, the NRC could have a default open
license while also permitting researchers to choose from
a handful of more restrictive licenses if they wish. For
example, the Harvard Dataverse notably allows uploaders
to optout of the CC0 if needed and specify custom terms
of use. The Australian Research Data Commons and data-
sharing platform FigShare33 also use a default CC0 license
but nevertheless permit researchers to use a conditioned

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
88
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
Creative Commons license. These conditioned licenses
can, for instance, require attribution to the original owner,
prevent exact reproduction, or only allow use for non-
commercial contexts. This may also help accommodate
researchers who seek to upload datasets incorporating
third-party data that holds a more restrictive license,
since a “combined dataset will adopt the most restrictive
condition(s) of its component parts. ”34
If the NRC goes down this route of giving users the
choice of a narrower license, it would also shift some
liability to users—or to the NRC itself—by relying on
users to abide by the license. Approaches to enforcement
would vary, depending on the amount of responsibility
in enforcement, and by extension liability the NRC seeks
to take on. For example, in the Harvard Dataverse, if an
uploader decides to opt out of a default open license
and pursue their own custom licensing agreement
over uploaded data, the Dataverse’s General Terms of
Use absolve this particular cloud from resource-heavy
enforcement responsibilities by stating that it “has no
obligation to aid or support either party of the Agreement
in the execution or enforcement of the Data Use
Agreement’s terms. ”35
C. CURRENT STATE OF AI ETHICS
FRAMEWORKS
AI ethics frameworks (or principles, guidelines)
attempt to address the ethical concerns related to
the development, deployment, and use of AI within
prospective organizations. We briefly discuss the current
landscape of AI ethics frameworks, while noting that this is
still an emergent topic without broad consensus.
Between 2015 and 2020, governments, technology
companies, international organizations, professional
organizations, and researchers around the world have
published some 117 documents related to AI ethics.36
These frameworks aim to tackle the disruptive potential
of AI technologies by producing normative principles
and “best practice” recommendations.37 Due to the
prominence of essentially contested concepts in AI ethics—
i.e., words that have different understandings to different
audiences—such as fairness, equity, privacy,38 as well as
the lack of binding professional history and accountability
mechanisms, those frameworks are often high level and
self-regulatory, posing little threat to potential breaches to
ethical conduct.39
Federal Frameworks
In the United States, there is not a central guiding
framework on the responsible development and
application of AI across the federal government. Some
government agencies have adopted or are in the process
of adopting their own AI framework, while others have not
published such guidelines. The following are all published
federal AI ethical frameworks as of August 2021:
 • After 15 months of deliberation with leading
AI experts, the Department of Defense (DOD)
adopted a series of ethical principles for the use
of AI in February 2020 that align with the existing
DOD mission and stakeholders.40
 • The General Services Administration (GSA),
tasked by the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) in the Federal Data Strategy 2020 Action
Plan, developed a Data Ethics Framework in
February 2020 to help federal personnel make
ethical decisions as they acquire, manage, and
use data.41
 • The Government Accountability Office (GAO)
developed an AI accountability framework
in June 2020 for federal agencies and other
entities involved in the design, development,
deployment, and continuous monitoring of
AI systems to help ensure accountability and
responsible use of AI.42
 • The Office of the Director of National Intelligence
(ODNI) released the Principles of AI Ethics for
the Intelligence Community in July 2020 to
guide the intelligence community (IC)’s ethical
development and use of AI to solve intelligence
problems.43
 • The National Security Commission on Artificial

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
89
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
Intelligence (NSCAI) published a set of best
practices in July 2020 (later revised and
integrated into the Commission’s 2021 Final
Report) for agencies critical to national security
to implement as a paradigm for the responsible
development and fielding of AI systems.44
While these frameworks can help guide the NRC’s
approach to ethics, we refrain from recommending a
specific framework for several reasons. First, despite
growing calls for applied ethics in the AI community,
developing an AI ethics framework is still an emerging
area. The lack of a unified government standard poses
challenges to the establishment of the NRC’s ethics review
process.
Second, there are, in fact, significant differences
among ethics frameworks published by various federal
agencies. For example, NSCAI laid out differences between
its recommended practices and those by DOD and IC.45
Moreover, among the five frameworks above, the GSA
Framework focused only on the ethical conduct of federal
employees when dealing with data while others focused
on the ethical development and application of AI systems
specifically.
Third, the ethics framework for adopting AI technology
may be different from a framework for assessing research.
Most federal agencies develop frameworks to guide the
use of AI-driven solutions for agency-specific tasks. For
example, DOD’s ethical principles only apply to defense-
specific combat or non-combat AI systems.46 In the
absence of a central federal guideline, the NRC should not
adopt a framework by a particular agency because these
frameworks are not necessarily designed for the wide
range of research contemplated for the NRC. The work on
frameworks may nonetheless provide a useful starting
point for NRC’s ethics process.
D. STAFFING AND EXPERTISE
As noted throughout this White Paper, the success of
the NRC will depend on human resources—both within
the NRC as well as across government— to solve the
many dimensions that the NRC promises to tackle. While
we refrain from providing an organizational chart, we
list the dimensions where staffing and expertise will be
critical to the success of the NRC. This list is not meant to
be exhaustive, but to highlight the importance of human
resources.
Human Resource Areas
 • Computing
 ° System administrators
 ° Data center engineers
 ° Research software engineers
 ° Research application developers
 • Data
 ° Data officers
 ° Agency liaisons
 ° Data architects
 ° Data scientists
 • Grant administrators
 • Contracting officers
 • Support and training staff
 • Privacy Staff (technical and legal)
 • Ethics Staff
 • Cybersecurity Staff

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
90
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
Executive Summary
1 Klaus Schwab, The Fourth Industrial Revolution (2016).
2 Tae Yano & Moonyoung Kang, Taking Advantage of Wikipedia in Natural Language Processing, Carnegie Mellon U. (2008), https://www.cs.cmu.
edu/~taey/pub/wiki.pdf.
3 See, e.g., Anthony Alford, Google Trains Two Billion Parameter AI Vision Model, InfoQ (June 22, 2021), https://www.infoq.com/news/2021/06/google-
vision-transformer/; Anthony Alford, OpenAI Announces GPT -3 AI Language Model with 175 Billion Parameters, InfoQ (June 2, 2020), https://www.infoq.
com/news/2020/06/openai-gpt3-language-model/.
4 AlphaGo, DeepMind (2021), https://deepmind.com/research/case-studies/alphago-the-story-so-far/.
5 Benjamin F. Jones & Lawrence H. Summers, A Calculation of the Social Returns to Innovation (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No.
27863, 2020); J.G. Tewksbury, M.S. Crandall & W.E. Crane, Measuring the Societal Benefits of Innovation, 209 Sci. Mag. 658-62 (1980); see also National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Returns to Federal Investments in the Innovation System (2017)
6 Stuart Zweben & Betsy Bizot, 2019 Taulbee Survey: Total Undergrad CS Enrollment Rises Again, but with Fewer New Majors; Doctoral Degree
Production Recovers From Last Year’s Dip (2019).
7 Jathan Sadowski, When Data is Capital: Datafication, Accumulation, and Extraction, 2019 Big Data & Soc’y 1 (2019).
8 Amy O’Hara & Carla Medalia, Data Sharing in the Federal Statistical System: Impediments and Possibilities, 675 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 138,
140-41 (2018).
9 Nat’l Security Comm’n on Artificial Intelligence, Final Report 186 (2021).
10 Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, 2021 Artificial Intelligence Index Report 118 (2021).
11 Id.
12 Id.
13 Neil C. Thompson, Shuning Ge & Yash M. Sherry, Building the Algorithm Commons: Who Discovered the Algorithms that Underpin Computing in the
Modern Enterprise?, 11 Global Strategy J. 17-33 (2020).
14 See, e.g., U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Federal Agencies Need to Address Aging Legacy Systems (2016); U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office,
Cloud Computing: Agencies Have Increased Usage and Realized Benefits, but Cost and Savings Data Need To Be Better Tracked (2019).
15 David Freeman Engstrom, Daniel E. Ho, Catherine M. Sharkey & Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Government by Algorithm: Artificial
Intelligence in Federal Administrative Agencies 6, 71-72 (2020).
16 William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 116-283, § 5106.
17 The Biden Administration Launches the National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Task Force, The White House (June 10, 2021), https://www.
whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/06/10/the-biden-administration-launches-the-national-artificial-intelligence-research-resource-task-force/.
18 William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 116-283, § 5107 (g).
19 Nat’l Security Comm’n on Artificial Intelligence, supra note 9, at 191.
20 See, e.g., Cloudbank, https://www.cloudbank.org; Fact Sheet: National Secure Data Service Act Advances Responsible Data Sharing in Government,
Data Coalition (May 13, 2021), https://www.datacoalition.org/fact-sheet-national-secure-data-service-act-advances-responsible-data-sharing-in-
government/.
21 Steve Lohr, Universities and Tech Giants Back National Cloud Computing Project, N.Y. Times (June 30, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/30/
technology/national-cloud-computing-project.html; John Etchemendy & Fei-Fei Li, National Research Cloud: Ensuring the Continuation of American
Innovation, Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, (Mar. 28, 2020), https://hai.stanford.edu/news/national-research-cloud-
ensuring-continuation-american-innovation.
22 Jennifer Villa & Dave Troiano, Choosing Your Deep Learning Infrastructure; The Cloud vs. On-Prem Debate, Determined AI (July 30, 2020), https://
determined.ai/blog/cloud-v-onprem/; Is HPC Going to Cost Me a Fortune?, InsideHPC (last visited July 23, 2021), https://insidehpc.com/hpc-basic-
training/is-hpc-going-to-cost-me-a-fortune/.
23 See, e.g., US Plans $1.8 Billion Spend on DOE Exascale Supercomputing, HPCwire (Apr. 11, 2018), https://www.hpcwire.com/2018/04/11/us-plans-1-
8-billion-spend-on-doe-exascale-supercomputing/; Federal Government, Advanced HPC (last visited July 23, 2021), https://www.advancedhpc.com/
pages/federal-government; United States Continues to Lead World In Supercomputing, U.S. Dep’t. Energy (Nov. 18, 2019), https://www.energy.gov/
articles/united-states-continues-lead-world-supercomputing.
24 See NSF Funds Five New XSEDE-Allocated Systems, Nat’l Sci. Found. (Aug. 10, 2020), https://www.xsede.org/-/nsf-funds-five-new-xsede-allocated-
systems.
25 Cloudbank, supra note 20.
26 See, e.g., National Data Service, http://www.nationaldataservice.org; The Open Science Data Cloud, https://www.opensciencedatacloud.org; Harvard
Dataverse, https://dataverse.harvard.edu; FigShare, https://figshare.com.
27 FedRAMP, https://www.fedramp.gov.
28 See Fact Sheet: National Secure Data Service Act Advances Responsible Data Sharing in Government, Data Coalition (May 13, 2021), https://www.
datacoalition.org/fact-sheet-national-secure-data-service-act-advances-responsible-data-sharing-in-government/.
29 See Administrative Data Research Facility, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/adrf/ (last visited July 26, 2021).
30 See Landsat Data Access, U.S. Geological Survey, https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/nli/landsat/landsat-data-access (last visited July 23,
2021); Fed. Geographic Data Comm., The Value Proposition for Landsat Applications (2014); Crista L. Straub, Stephen R. Koontz & John B. Loomis,
Economic Valuation of Landsat Imagery (2019).
Endnotes

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
91
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
31 See Bipartisan Pol’y Ctr., Barriers to Using Government Data: Extended Analysis of the U.S. Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking’s
Survey of Federal Agencies and Offices 18-20 (2018); see also U.S. Dep’t of Health & Human Services, The State of Data Sharing at the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services 4 (2018) (describing how data at the agency is “largely kept in silos with a lack of organizational awareness
of what data are collected across the Department and how to request access. ”).
32 Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552a (1974).
33 Michael S. Bernstein et al., ESR: Ethics and Society Review of Artificial Intelligence Research, Cornell. U. (July 9, 2021), https://arxiv.org/
pdf/2106.11521.pdf.
34 Courtenay R. Bruce et al., An Embedded Model for Ethics Consultation: Characteristics, Outcomes, and Challenges, 5 AJOB Empirical Bioethics 8
(2014).
Introduction
1 National Research Cloud Call to Action, Stan. U. Inst. For Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, https://hai.stanford.edu/national-re-
search-cloud-joint-letter.
2 See id.; John Etchemendy & Fei-Fei Li, National Research Cloud: Ensuring the Continuation of American Innovation, Stan. U. Inst. For Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence (Mar. 28, 2020), https://hai.stanford.edu/news/national-research-cloud-ensuring-continuation-american-innovation.
3 William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 116-283, § 5106.
4 The Biden Administration Launches the National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource Task Force, The White House (June 10, 2021), https://www.
whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/06/10/the-biden-administration-launches-the-national-artificial-intelligence-research-resource-task-force/.
5 Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a (2012).
6 Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2017, Pub. L. No. 115-435, 132 Stat. 5529 (2019).
7 See Fact Sheet: National Secure Data Service Act Advances Responsible Data Sharing in Government, Data Coalition (May 13, 2021), https://www.data-
coalition.org/fact-sheet-national-secure-data-service-act-advances-responsible-data-sharing-in-government/.
8 See, e.g., Facial Recognition and Biometric Technology Moratorium Act, S. 4084, 116th Cong. (2020); Bhaskar Chakravorti, Biden’s ‘Antitrust Revolution’
Overlooks AI—at Americans’ Peril, Wired (July 27, 2021), https://www.wired.com/story/opinion-bidens-antitrust-revolution-overlooks-ai-at-ameri-
cans-peril/.
Chapter 1
1 See Stephen Breyer, Regulation and Its Reform (1982); Clifford Winston, Government Failure Versus Market Failure (2006).
2 Largest Companies by Market Cap, Companies Market Cap (2021), https://companiesmarketcap.com.
3 Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, 2021 Artificial Intelligence Index Report 93 (2021).
4 See, e.g., Mary L. Gray & Siddarth Suri, Ghost Work: How to Stop Silicon Valley from Building a New Global Underclass (2019); Craig Webster &
Stanislav Ivanov, Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, and the Evolving Nature of Work 132-35 (2019); Weiyu Wang & Keng Siau, Artificial Intelligence,
Machine Learning, Automation, Robotics, Future of Work and Future of Humanity:
A Review and Research Agenda, 30 J. Database Mgmt. 61 (2019).
5 AlphaFold: A Solution to a 50-Year-Old Grand Challenge in Biology, DeepMind (Nov. 30, 2020), https://deepmind.com/blog/article/alphafold-a-solution-
to-a-50-year-old-grand-challenge-in-biology.
6 Tanha Talaviya et al., Implementation of Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture for Optimisation of Irrigation and Application of Pesticides and Herbicides, 4
Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture 58 (2020).
7 Greg Allen & Taniel Chan, Artificial Intelligence and National Security, Harv. Kennedy Sch. Belfer Ctr. (July 2017), https://www.belfercenter.org/
publication/artificial-intelligence-and-national-security.
8 Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, supra note 3.
9 Jeffrey Ding, Deciphering China’s AI Dream (2018).
10 Fugaku is being used extensively for AI research initiatives. See Atsushi Nukariya et al., HPC and AI Initiatives for Supercomputer Fugaku and Future
Prospects, Fujitsu (Nov. 11, 2020), https://www.fujitsu.com/global/about/resources/publications/technicalreview/2020-03/article09.html.
11 Eng’g & Physical Sciences Research Council, The Impact of HECToR (2014).
12 Joshua New, Why the United States Needs a National Artificial Intelligence Strategy and What it Should Look Like (2018).
13 Maggie Miller, White House Establishes National Artificial Intelligence Office, The Hill (Jan. 12, 2021), https://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/533922-
white-house-establishes-national-artificial-intelligence-office.
14 See Fast Track Action Comm. on Strategic Computing, National Strategic Computing Initiative Update: Pioneering the Future of Computing
(2019), https://www.nitrd.gov/pubs/National-Strategic-Computing-Initiative-Update-2019.pdf.
15 Nat’l Security Comm’n on Artificial Intelligence, Final Report (2021).
16 The COVID-19 High Performance Computing Consortium, COVID-19 HPC Consortium, https://covid19-hpc-consortium.org.
17 See Aaron L. Friedberg, Science, the Cold War, and the American State, 20 Diplomatic Hist. 107, 112 (1996); Sean Pool & Jennifer Erickson, The High
Return on Investment for Publicly Funded Research, Ctr. for Am. Progress (Dec. 10, 2012), https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/economy/
reports/2012/12/10/47481/the-high-return-on-investment-for-publicly-funded-research/.
18 Peter L. Singer, Federally Supported Innovations: 22 Examples of Major Technology Advances That Stem from Federal Research Support
14-15 (2014).
19 Nat’l Research Council, Government Support for Computing Research 136-55 (1999).
20 Nat’l Security Comm’n on Artificial Intelligence, supra note 15, at 185.
21 Philippe Aghion, Benjamin F. Jones & Charles I. Jones, Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth, in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An
Agenda 237 (2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
92
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
22 Ian Moll, The Myth of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, 68 Theoria 1 (2021); see also Tim Unwin, 5 Problems with 4th Industrial Revolution, ICT Works
(Mar. 23, 2019), https://www.ictworks.org/problems-fourth-industrial-revolution/.
23 See, e.g., Geoffrey A. Manne & Joshua D. Wright, Google and the Limits of Antitrust: The Case Against the Antitrust Case Against Google, 34 Harv. J.L. &
Pub. Pol’y 1 (2011); Lina M. Khan, Amazon’s Antitrust Paradox, 126 Yale L.J. 710 (2016).
24 David Patterson et al., Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training, Cornell U. (Apr. 23, 2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.10350.pdf. To be
clear, however, the study found that training other sophisticated but smaller NLP models such as Meena and T5 required approximately 96 and 48 tons
of carbon dioxide, respectively. Id. Another study found that the training state-of-the-art NLP models produced approximately 626,000 pounds (313
tons) of carbon dioxide, five times the lifetime emissions of the average car in the United States. Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh & Andrew McCallum,
Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP, Cornell U. (2019), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1906.02243.pdf.
25 Calculate Your Carbon Footprint, The Nature Conservancy, https://www.nature.org/en-us/get-involved/how-to-help/carbon-footprint-calculator/.
26 Economic studies in other fields also show that increasing access, supply, or quality of certain goods without appropriate pricing mechanisms or
regulatory interventions can lead to over-use and waste. See, e.g., Chengri Ding & Shunfeng Song, Traffic Paradoxes and Economic Solutions, 1 J. Urban
Mgmt. 63 (2012) (roads and traffic congestion); Ari Mwachofi & Assaf F. Al-Assaf, Health Care Market Deviations from the Ideal Market, 11 Sultan Qaboos
Univ. Med. J. 328 (2011) (doctors and quality of care).
27 See Emily M. Bender et al., On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?, 2021 Proceedings ACM Conf. on Fairness,
Accountability & Transparency 610 (2021).
28 See Joy Buolamwini & Timnit Gebru, Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification, 81 Proceeding Machine
Learning Res. 1 (2018); Inioluwa Deborah Raji & Joy Buolamwini, Actionable Auditing: Investigating the Impact of Publicly Naming Biased Performance
Results of Commercial AI Products, 2019 Proceedings AAAI/ACM Conf. on AI, Ethics & Soc’y 429 (2019).
29 See Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality (2018); Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction (2016).
30 See Christopher Whyte, Deepfake News: AI-Enabled Disinformation as a Multi-Level Public Policy Challenge, 5 J. Cyber Pol’y 199 (2020); Jeffrey Dastin,
Amazon Scrapes Secret AI Recruiting Tool that Showed Bias Against Women, Reuters (Oct. 10, 2018), https://www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-
jobs-automation-insight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-that-showed-bias-against-women-idUSKCN1MK08G; James Vincent, Google ‘Fixed’ its
Racist Algorithm by Removing Gorillas from its Image-Labeling Tech, The Verge (Jan. 12, 2018), https://www.theverge.com/2018/1/12/16882408/google-
racist-gorillas-photo-recognition-algorithm-ai;.
31 Kate Crawford, Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence 211 (2021) (“AI systems are built to see and
intervene in the world in ways that primarily benefit the states, institutions, and corporations that they serve. In this sense, AI systems are expressions
of power that emerge from wider economic and political forces, created to increase profits and centralize control for those who wield them. ”).
32 Elizabeth Gibney, Self-Taught AI is Best Yet at Strategy Game Go, Nature (Oct. 18, 2017), https://www.nature.com/news/self-taught-ai-is-best-yet-at-
strategy-game-go-1.22858.
33 Bill Schackner, Carnegie Mellon’s Prestigious Computer Science School has a New Leader, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Aug. 8, 2019), https://www.post-
gazette.com/news/education/2019/08/08/Carnegie-Mellon-University-computer-science-Martial-Hebert-dean-artificial-intgelligence-google-robotics/
stories/201908080096.
34 Bipartisan Pol’y Ctr, Cementing American Artificial Intelligence Leadership: AI Research & Development (2020).
35 Nur Ahmed & Muntasir Wahed, The De-Democratization of AI: Deep Learning and the Compute Divide in Artificial Intelligence Research, Cornell U.
(Oct. 22, 2020), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.15581.pdf.
36 Id.
37 Fei-Fei Li, America’s Global Leadership in Human-Centered AI Can’t Come From Industry Alone, The Hill (July 6, 2021), https://thehill.com/opinion/
technology/561638-americas-global-leadership-in-human-centered-ai-cant-come-from-industry?rl=1.
38 Cade Metz, A.I. Researchers Are Making More Than $1 Million, Even at a Nonprofit, N.Y. Times (Apr. 19, 2018), https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/19/
technology/artificial-intelligence-salaries-openai.html.
39 Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, supra note 3, at 118.
40 Michael Gofman & Zhao Jin, Artificial Intelligence, Education, and Entrepreneurship, SSRN (Sept. 17, 2019), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=3449440.
41 Jathan Sadowski, When Data is Capital: Datafication, Accumulation, and Extraction, 2019 Big Data & Soc’y 1 (2019).
42 For example, researchers have clamored for Facebook to share some of its proprietary data so they can better understand the effect of social media
on politics and societal discourse. Simon Hegelich, Facebook Needs to Share More with Researchers, Nature (Mar. 24, 2020), https://www.nature.com/
articles/d41586-020-00828-5.
43 Ashlee Vance, This Tech Bubble Is Different, Bloomberg (Apr. 14, 2011), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-04-14/this-tech-bubble-is-
different.
44 Amy O’Hara & Carla Medalia, Data Sharing in the Federal Statistical System: Impediments and Possibilities, 675 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 138,
140-41 (2018).
45 Dario Amodei & Danny Hernandez, AI and Compute, Open AI (May 16, 2018), https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/.
46 See, e.g., Ahmed & Wahed, supra note 35; Ian Sample, ‘We Can’t Compete’: Why Universities Are Losing Their Best AI Scientists, The Guardian (Nov. 1,
2017), https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/nov/01/cant-compete-universities-losing-best-ai-scientists.
47 Neil C. Thompson, Shuning Ge & Yash M. Sherry, Building the Algorithm Commons: Who Discovered the Algorithms that Underpin Computing in the
Modern Enterprise?, 11 Global Strategy J. 17-33 (2020).
48 Minkyung Baek, RoseTTAFold: Accurate Protein Structure Prediction Accessible to All, U. Wash. Inst. for Protein Design (July 15, 2021), https://www.
ipd.uw.edu/2021/07/rosettafold-accurate-protein-structure-prediction-accessible-to-all/; Minkyung Baek et al., Accurate Prediction of Protein Structures
and Interactions Using a Three-Track Neural Network, Sci. Mag. (July 15, 2021), https://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/early/2021/07/19/science.
abj8754.full.pdf.
49 How Diplomacy Helped to End the Race to Sequence the Human Genome, Nature (June 24, 2020), https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-
01849-w.
50 Joel Klinger et al., A Narrowing of AI Research?, Cornell U. (Nov. 17, 2020), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.10385.pdf.
51 Id.
52 Alex Tamkin et al., Understanding the Capabilities, Limitations, and Societal Impact of Large Language Models, Cornell U. (Feb. 4, 2021), https://arxiv.
org/pdf/2102.02503.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
93
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
53 Those 5 were Boston, San Francisco, San Jose, Seattle and San Diego. See Robert D. Atkinson, Mark Muro & Jacob Whiton, The Case for Growth
Centers: How to Spread Tech Innovation Across America, Brookings (Dec. 9, 2019), https://www.brookings.edu/research/growth-centers-how-to-spread-
tech-innovation-across-america/.
54 Interview with Professor Erik Brynjolfsson, Director, Stanford Digital Economy Lab (2021).
55 Solon Barocas & Andrew D. Selbst, Big Data’s Disparate Impact, 104 Cal. L. Rev. 671 (2016).
Chapter 2
1 “Principal Investigator” status may differ from university to university, but typically represents the core faculty that are eligible to oversee research
projects at their home institutions.
2 See Beth Jensen, AI Index Diversity Report: An Unmoving Needle, Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (May 3, 2021), https://hai.
stanford.edu/news/ai-index-diversity-report-unmoving-needle.
3 For a perspective, for instance, on the importance of modeling and simulation in physics, see Karen E. Wilcox, Omar Ghattas & Patrick Heimbach, The
Imperative of Physics-Based Modeling and Inverse Theory in Computational Science, 1 Nature Comp . Sci. 166 (2021).
4 15 U.S.C. § 9415 (emphasis added).
5 Id. (emphasis added).
6 Contemporaneous accounts corroborate this core focus. The National Security Commission on AI, for instance, describes the proposal as “provid[ing]
verified researchers and students subsidized access to scalable compute resources” with a specific reference to the “compute divide” that has left “middle-
and lower-tier universities [lacking] the resources necessary for cutting-edge AI research. ” Nat’l Security Comm’n on A.I., Final Report 191, 197 (2021)
(emphasis added). Upon the announcement of the NRC legislation, Jeff Dean, SVP of Google Research and Google Health, noted, “A National AI Research
Resource will help accelerate US progress in artificial intelligence and advanced technologies by providing academic researchers access to the cloud
computing resources necessary for experiments at scale. ” Brandi Vincent, Congress Inches Closer to Creating a National Cloud for AI Research, NextGov (July
2, 2020), https://www.nextgov.com/emerging-tech/2020/07/congress-inches-closer-creating-national-cloud-ai-research/166624/ (emphasis added). Others
have suggested that “researchers” under NRC could include individuals at small businesses, start-up companies, non-profits, and certain technology firms.
One co-sponsor of the legislation, for instance, suggested that NRC resources should be provided to “developers” and “entrepreneurs. ” Portman, Heinrich
Introduce Bipartisan Legislation to Develop National Cloud Computer for AI Research, Rob Portman, U.S. Senator for Ohio (June 4, 2020), https://www.
portman.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/portman-heinrich-introduce-bipartisan-legislation-develop-national-cloud.
7 Frequently Asked Questions About Small Businesses, U.S. Small Bus. Admin. Office of Advoc. (Oct. 2020), https://cdn.advocacy.sba.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2020/11/05122043/Small-Business-FAQ-2020.pdf.
8 Louise Balle, Information on Small Business Startups, Houston Chron., https://smallbusiness.chron.com/information-small-business-startups-2491.
html.
9 Such entities could potentially collaborate with academic partners, and the NRC would of course also need to set rules about collaborator eligibility.
10 PI status provides a level of standardization across faculty compared to other metrics, such as tenure-track or designation as research faculty. For
example, the University of Michigan appoints individuals focused on full-time research as “research faculty, ” which is not a tenure track position. In
contrast, research faculty at Purdue are eligible for tenure-track. Distinct from the categorization used by both universities, MIT designates full-time
researchers as “academic staff” rather than faculty. All three types of researchers, however, qualify for principal investigator status at their respective
universities. Some universities go further by providing temporary PI status to non-PI status individuals affiliated with the university for a single project
(including all three universities mentioned previously).
11 Community & Education Resource Requests, CloudBank, https://www.cloudbank.org/training/cloudbank-community#toc-eligibilit-36nfpcrS.
12 Apply for an Account, Compute Canada, https://www.computecanada.ca/research-portal/account-management/apply-for-an-account/.
13 Nat’l Sci. Bd., Science & Engineering Indicators 2016, Academic Research and Development 72 (2016).
14 Id.
15 College Enrollment in the United States from 1965 to 2019 and Projections up to 2029 for Public and Private Colleges, Statista (Jan. 2021), https://www.
statista.com/statistics/183995/us-college-enrollment-and-projections-in-public-and-private-institutions/.
16 Colaboratory – Frequently Asked Questions, Google, https://research.google.com/colaboratory/faq.html.
17 Weekly Maximum GPU Usage, Kaggle (2019), https://www.kaggle.com/general/108481.
18 Community & Education Resource Requests, supra note 11.
19 Merit Review: Why You Should Volunteer to Serve as an NSF Reviewer, Nat’l Sci. Found., https://www.nsf.gov/bfa/dias/policy/merit_review/reviewer.
jsp#1.
20 See XSEDE Campus Champions, XSEDE, https://www.xsede.org/community-engagement/campus-champions.
21 Compute Canada, for instance, provides access to 15% of PIs to increased compute capacity based on a merit competition. In 2021, Compute
Canada completed its review of 650 research submissions in about five months with only 80 volunteer reviewers from Canadian academic institutions
to assess the scientific merit of the proposal. Resource Allocation Competitions, Compute Canada, https://www.computecanada.ca/research-portal/
accessing-resources/resource-allocation-competitions/; 2021 Resource Allocations Competition Results, Compute Canada, https://www.computecanada.
ca/research-portal/accessing-resources/resource-allocation-competitions/rac-2021-results/. Compare this with CloudBank, which allocates compute
resources by leveraging NSF’s grant administration process: In 2019, NSF needed 30,000 volunteer reviewers to handle over 40,000 proposals, with
each proposal requiring about 10 months to process from start to finish. Nat’l. Sci. Found., Merit Review Process: Fiscal Year 2019 Digest (2020); NSF
Proposal and Award Process, Nat’l Sci. Found., https://www.nsf.gov/attachments/116169/public/nsf_proposal_and_award_process.pdf.
22 Another boundary question will be the resource allocation to PIs that are affiliated both with universities and with private companies. As a default,
NRC resources should go toward academic projects, and not subsidize work that is conducted in private researcher capacity.
23 Resource Allocation Competitions, supra note 21.
24 Enabling Access to Cloud Computing Resources for CISE Research and Education (Cloud Access), Nat’l Sci. Found., https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2019/
nsf19510/nsf19510.htm.
25 Simplifying Cloud Services, Sci. Node (Dec. 2, 2019), https://sciencenode.org/feature/An%20easier%20cloud.php.
26 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ), CloudBank, https://www.cloudbank.org/faq.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
94
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
27 Simplifying Cloud Services, supra note 25.
28 Id.
29 Id.
30 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ), supra note 26.
31 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for Budgeting for Cloud Computing Resources via CloudBank in NSF Proposals, Nat’l Sci. Found., https://www.nsf.
gov/pubs/2020/nsf20108/nsf20108.jsp.
32 Simplifying Access to Cloud Resources for Researchers: CloudBank, Amazon Web Serv. (Nov. 16, 2020), https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/publicsector/
simplifying-access-cloud-resources-researchers-cloudbank/.
33 Community & Education Resource Requests, supra note 11.
34 Larry Dignan, AWS Cloud Computing Ops, Data Centers, 1.3 Million Servers Creating Efficiency Flywheel, ZDNet (June 17, 2016), https://www.zdnet.
com/article/aws-cloud-computing-ops-data-centers-1-3-million-servers-creating-efficiency-flywheel/; Rich Miller, Ballmer: Microsoft Has 1 Million
Servers, Data Ctr. Knowledge (July 15, 2013), https://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2013/07/15/ballmer-microsoft-has-1-million-servers;
Daniel Oberhaus, Amazon, Google, Microsoft: Here’s Who Has the Greenest Cloud, Wired (Dec. 18, 2019), https://www.wired.com/story/amazon-google-
microsoft-green-clouds-and-hyperscale-data-centers/; Russell Brandom, Mapping out Amazon’s Invisible Server Empire, The Verge (May 10, 2019),
https://www.theverge.com/2019/5/10/18563485/amazon-web-services-internet-location-map-data-center.
35 See, e.g., AWS Pricing, Amazon Web Services, https://aws.amazon.com/pricing/; Overview of Cloud Billing Concepts, Google Cloud, https://cloud.
google.com/billing/docs/concepts; Azure Pricing, Azure, https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/pricing/#product-pricing.
36 Large research universities already negotiate enterprise agreements with cloud providers.
37 What We Do, XSEDE, https://www.xsede.org/about/what-we-do (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
38 XSEDE Overall Organization, XSEDE Wiki, https://confluence.xsede.org/display/XT/XSEDE+Overall+Organization (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
39 XSEDE Allocations Info & Policies, XSEDE, https://portal.xsede.org/allocations/policies (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
40 Id.
41 Id.
42 Startup Allocations, XSEDE, https://portal.xsede.org/allocations/startup (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
43 Id.
44 Id.
45 Id.
46 Research Allocations, XSEDE, https://portal.xsede.org/allocations/research (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
47 Id.
48 Id.
49 Id.
50 XSEDE Allocations Info & Policies, supra note 36.
51 XSEDE Campus Champions, supra note 20.
52 Id.
53 Id.
54 XSEDE as a Collaborator on Proposals, XSEDE, https://www.xsede.org/about/collaborating-with-xsede (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
55 COVID-19 HPC Consortium, XSEDE, https://www.xsede.org/covid19-hpc-consortium (last visited Sept. 19, 2021).
56 Amazon, for example, introduced its P4, P3, and P2 instances in 2020, 1997, and 1996, respectively. Frederic Lardinois, AWS Launches Its Next-Gen
GPU Instances with 8 Nvidia A100 Tensor Core GPUs, TechCrunch (Nov. 2, 2020), https://social.techcrunch.com/2020/11/02/aws-launches-its-next-gen-
gpu-instances/; Ian C. Schafer, Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud P3 Launched alongside NVIDIA GPU Cloud, SD Times (Oct. 26, 2017), https://sdtimes.com/
ai/amazon-elastic-compute-cloud-p3-launched-alongside-nvidia-gpu-cloud/; Jeff Barr, New P2 Instance Type for Amazon EC2 – Up to 16 GPUs, Amazon
Web Services (Sept. 29, 2016), https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/new-p2-instance-type-for-amazon-ec2-up-to-16-gpus/. The introduction years of
the P4 and P3 instances line up with the release of NVIDIA’s newest general purpose data center GPUs.
57 See, e.g., Sarah Wang & Martin Casado, The Cost of Cloud, a Trillion Dollar Paradox, Andreessen Horowitz (May 27, 2021), https://a16z.
com/2021/05/27/cost-of-cloud-paradox-market-cap-cloud-lifecycle-scale-growth-repatriation-optimization/.
58 Preston Smith et al., Community Clusters or the Cloud: Continuing Cost Assessment of On-Premises and Cloud HPC in Higher Education, 2019
Proceedings Practice & Experience Advanced Res. Computing on Rise of the Machines 1 (2019). The amortized cost includes the annual compute
cost, subsidized hardware cost, and power costs, but does not include personnel costs, as such costs are fixed and would be recurred regardless of
whether a cluster existed physically on-prem or on the cloud. Id.
59 Craig A. Stewart et al., Return on Investment for Three Cyberinfrastructure Facilities: A Local Campus Supercomputer; the NSF-Funded Jetstream Cloud
System; and XSEDE, 11 Int’l Conf. on Utility & Cloud Computing 223 (2018).
60 Srijith Rajamohan & Robert E. Settlage, Informing the On/Off-prem Cloud Discussion in Higher Education, 2020 Practice & Experience Adv. Res.
Computing 64 (2020). The cost sources include hardware, software services, software administration, electricity, and facilities but do not include
computational scientists support, scientific software licenses, and data transfer costs. The study is also limited to Virginia Tech’s particular cloud
workload.
61 Jennifer Villa & Dave Troiano, Choosing Your Deep Learning Infrastructure: The Cloud vs. On-Prem Debate, Determined AI (July 30, 2020), https://
determined.ai/blog/cloud-v-onprem/; Is HPC Going to Cost Me a Fortune?, insideHPC, https://insidehpc.com/hpc-basic-training/is-hpc-going-to-cost-
me-a-fortune/.
62 Interview with Suzanne Talon, Regional Director, Compute Canada (Jan. 14, 2021).
63 Compute Canada, Cloud Computing for Researchers 1 (2016), https://www.computecanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/CloudStrategy2016-
2019-forresearchersEXTERNAL-1.pdf.
64 US Plans $1.8 Billion Spend on DOE Exascale Supercomputing, HPCwire (Apr. 11, 2018), https://www.hpcwire.com/2018/04/11/us-plans-1-8-billion-
spend-on-doe-exascale-supercomputing/; Federal Government, Advanced HPC, https://www.advancedhpc.com/pages/federal-government; United
States Continues To Lead World In Supercomputing, Energy.gov, https://www.energy.gov/articles/united-states-continues-lead-world-supercomputing;
High Performance Computing, Energy.gov, https://www.energy.gov/science/initiatives/high-performance-computing.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
95
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
65 See, e.g., DOE Announces Five New Energy Projects at LLNL, LLNL (Nov. 13, 2020), https://www.llnl.gov/news/doe-announces-five-new-energy-
projects-llnl; New HPCMP System at the AFRL DSRC DoD Supercomputing Resource Center to Provide over Nine PetaFLOPS of Computing Power to
Address Physics, AI, and ML Applications for DoD Users, DOD HPC, https://www.hpc.mil/images/hpcdocs/newsroom/21-19_TI-21_web_announcement_
AFRL_DSRC.pdf; Public Announcement, DOD HPC, https://www.hpc.mil/images/hpcdocs/newsroom/awards_and_press/HC101321D0002_PUBLIC_
ANNOUNCEMENT_20210505.pdf.
66 Devin Coldewey, $600M Cray Supercomputer Will Tower Above the Rest — to Build Better Nukes, TechCrunch (Aug. 13, 2019), https://social.
techcrunch.com/2019/08/13/600m-cray-supercomputer-will-tower-above-the-rest-to-build-better-nukes/; CORAL-2 RFP, Oak Ridge Nat’l Laboratory
(Apr. 9, 2018), https://procurement.ornl.gov/rfp/CORAL2/.
67 See, e.g., NSF Funds Five New XSEDE-Allocated Systems, Nat’l Sci. Found. (Aug. 10, 2020), https://www.xsede.org/-/nsf-funds-five-new-xsede-
allocated-systems.
68 Timothy Prickett Morgan, Bending The Supercomputing Cost Curve Down, The Next Platform (Dec. 2, 2019), http://www.nextplatform.
com/2019/12/02/bending-the-supercomputing-cost-curve-down/; Ben Dickson, The GPT -3 Economy, TechTalks (Sept. 21, 2020), https://bdtechtalks.
com/2020/09/21/gpt-3-economy-business-model/.
69 Elijah Wolfson, The US Just Retook the Title of World’s Fastest Supercomputer from China, Quartz (June 9, 2018), https://qz.com/1301510/the-us-has-
the-worlds-fastest-supercomputer-again-the-200-petaflop-summit/.
70 November 2020, TOP500 (Nov. 2020), https://www.top500.org/lists/top500/2020/11/.
71 U.S. Department of Energy and Cray to Deliver Record-Setting Frontier Supercomputer at ORNL, Oak Ridge Nat’l Laboratory (May 7, 2019), https://
www.ornl.gov/news/us-department-energy-and-cray-deliver-record-setting-frontier-supercomputer-ornl.
72 Coury Turczyn, Building an Exascale-Class Data Center, Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (Dec. 11, 2020), https://www.olcf.ornl.
gov/2020/12/11/building-an-exascale-class-data-center/.
73 Don Clark, Intel Slips, and a High-Profile Supercomputer Is Delayed, N.Y. Times (Aug. 27, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/27/technology/
intel-aurora-supercomputer.html; Mila Jasper, 10 of 15 of DOD’s Major IT Projects Are Behind Schedule, GAO Found, Nextgov (Jan. 4, 2021), https://www.
nextgov.com/it-modernization/2021/01/10-15-dods-major-it-projects-are-behind-schedule-gao-found/171155/.
74 See Nattakarn Phaphoom et al., A Survey Study on Major Technical Barriers Affecting the Decision to Adopt Cloud Services, 103 J. Systems & Software 167,
171-72 (2015) (describing data portability, integration with existing systems, migration complexity, and availability as major barriers to cloud adoption);
Abdulrahman Alharthi et al., An Overview of Cloud Services Adoption Challenges in Higher Education Institutions, 2 Proceedings of the Int’l Workshop
on Emerging Software as a Service & Analytics 102, 107-08 (2015) (acknowledging the low rate of cloud computing adoption in higher education and
emphasizing that bolstering both the perceived ease of use and the actual usefulness of cloud computing can increase the adoption rate).
75 See Dep’t of Energy, FY 2021 Budget Justification Volume 4: Science (2020).
76 Joe Weinman, Cloudonomics: The Business Value of Cloud Computing (2012).
77 OLCF supports and manages ORNL’s supercomputing resources, including Summit and eventually Frontier. This figure accounts for “operations and
user support at the LCF facilities–including power, space, leases, and staff. Id. at 37-38.
78 ACLF supports and manages Argonne National Laboratory’s computing resources, including the Theta system and, later this year, the new Aurora
computer, another DOE exascale HPC system. Id.
79 OLCF operated its Titan HPC system for 7 years. See Coury Turczyn, supra note 72. ACLF also operated its Mira HPC system for 7 years. Argonne’s Mira
Supercomputer to Retire After Years of Enabling Groundbreaking Science, HPCwire (Dec. 20, 2019), https://www.hpcwire.com/2019/12/20/argonnes-
mira-supercomputer-to-retire-after-years-of-enabling-groundbreaking-science/. If still operational, these systems would rank about the 19th and 29th
fastest in the world, respectively. Compare November 2020, supra note 70, with TOP500 List - June 2019, TOP500 (June 2019), https://www.top500.org/
lists/top500/list/2019/06/.
80 See, e.g., Kim Zetter, Top Federal Lab Hacked in Spear-Phishing Attack, Wired (Apr. 20, 2011), https://www.wired.com/2011/04/oak-ridge-lab-hack/;
Natasha Bertrand & Eric Wolff, Nuclear Weapons Agency Breached amid Massive Cyber Onslaught, Politico (Dec. 17, 2020), https://www.politico.com/
news/2020/12/17/nuclear-agency-hacked-officials-inform-congress-447855 (last visited Mar. 2, 2021); Ryan Lucas, List Of Federal Agencies Affected By
A Major Cyberattack Continues To Grow, NPR (Dec. 18, 2020), https://www.npr.org/2020/12/18/948133260/list-of-federal-agencies-affected-by-a-major-
cyberattack-continues-to-grow (last visited Mar. 2, 2021).
81 We discuss data access models in Chapter Three.
82 See Ongoing Projects, RIKEN Ctr. for Computational Sci., https://www.r-ccs.riken.jp/en/fugaku/research/covid-19/projects/.
83 Fugaku Retains Title as World’s Fastest Supercomputer, HPCWire (Nov. 17, 2020), https://www.hpcwire.com/off-the-wire/fugaku-retains-title-as-
worlds-fastest-supercomputer/.
84 November 2020, supra note 70.
85 Id.
86 Behind the Scenes of Fugaku as the World’s Fastest Supercomputer, Fujitsu (Feb. 2, 2021), https://blog.global.fujitsu.com/fgb/2021-02-02/behind-
the-scenes-of-fugaku-as-the-worlds-fastest-supercomputer-1manufacturing/.
87 Id.
88 Don Clark, Japanese Supercomputer Is Crowned World’s Speediest, N.Y. Times (June 22, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/22/technology/
japanese-supercomputer-fugaku-tops-american-chinese-machines.html.
89 Justin McCurry, Non-Woven Masks Better to Stop Covid-19, Says Japanese Supercomputer, The Guardian (Aug. 26, 2020), http://www.theguardian.
com/world/2020/aug/26/non-woven-masks-better-to-stop-covid-19-says-japanese-supercomputer.
90 Fujitsu and RIKEN Complete Joint Development of Japan’s Fugaku, the World’s Fastest Supercomputer, Fujitsu (Mar. 9, 2021), https://www.fujitsu.com/
global/about/resources/news/press-releases/2021/0309-02.html.
91 Id.
92 See, e.g., Rolf Harms & Michael Yamartino, The Economics of the Cloud (2010); Srijith Rajamohan & Robert E. Settlage, Informing the On/Off-Prem
Cloud Discussion in Higher Education, 2020 Practice & Experience in Advanced Res. Computing 64 (2020); Byung Chul Tak et al., To Move or Not To Move:
The Economics of Cloud Computing, 3 USENIX Conf. on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing 1 (2011); Edward Walker, Walter Brisken & Jonathan Romney,
To Lease or Not To Lease from Storage Clouds, 43 Computer 44 (2010).
93 See, e.g., Di Zhang et al., RLScheduler: An Automated HPC Batch Job Scheduler Using Reinforcement Learning, Cornell U. (Sept. 2, 2020), https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1910.08925.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
96
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
94 For instance, we have not been able to identify good estimates of electricity and cooling costs for DOE supercomputers.
95 Hugh Couchman et al., Compute Canada — Calcul Canada: A Proposal to the Canada Foundation for Innovation – National Platforms Fund
58 (2006).
96 About, Compute Canada, https://www.computecanada.ca/about/.
97 National Systems, Compute Canada, https://www.computecanada.ca/techrenewal/national-systems/.
98 Compute Canada Technology Briefing, Compute Canada (Nov. 2017), https://www.computecanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Technology-
Briefing-November-2017.pdf.
99 Cloud Computing for Researchers, Compute Canada (Dec. 2016), https://www.computecanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/CloudStrategy2016-
2019-forresearchersEXTERNAL-1.pdf.
100 Id.
101 Budget Submission 2018, Compute Canada (2018), https://www.computecanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/UTF-8Compute20Canada20Budg
et20Submission202018.pdf at 5.
102 Compute Canada projected it had only met about 55% of total demand for CPU compute hours in 2018. Id.
103 Id.
104 Compute Canada, Annual Report 2019-2020 4 (2020).
105 Rapid Access Service, Compute Canada, https://www.computecanada.ca/research-portal/accessing-resources/rapid-access-service/.
106 Id.
107 Resource Allocation Competitions, supra note 21.
108 Id.
109 Id.
110 Id.
111 Id.
112 2021 Resource Allocations Competition Results, supra note 21.
Chapter 3
1 National Research Cloud Call to Action, Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (2020), https://hai.stanford.edu/national-
research-cloud-joint-letter.
2 We discuss the Privacy Act and privacy considerations in more detail in Chapter Five.
3 Amy O’Hara & Carla Medalia, Data Sharing in the Federal Statistical System: Impediments and Possibilities, 675 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 138,
140-41 (2018); see also President’s Mgmt. Agenda, Federal Data Strategy 2020 Action Plan (2020).
4 Improved data access would, as we describe below, also promote evidence-based policymaking and improve trust in science (as data access makes
replication efforts much easier).
5 See, e.g., Nick Hart & Nancy Potok, Modernizing U.S. Data Infrastructure: Design Considerations for Implementing a National Secure Data
Service to Improve Statistics and Evidence Building (2020).
6 These initiatives are successful in that they are sustainable and have been used by researchers to access multi-agency government data. The only
exception is the National Secure Data Service (NSDS), which has not yet been implemented. We discuss the NSDS alongside the Census Bureau and
the Evidence-Based Policy-Making Act of 2018 below. Importantly, our focus in these case studies is not to evaluate their efforts or measure their exact
levels of success but to identify and understand some of the differences and similarities in the range of data-sharing efforts.
7 For instance, private sector data may facilitate research regarding social media use, internet behavior, or fill in gaps for federal statistics research
through big data analysis. See Robert M. Groves & Brian A. Harris-Kojetin, Using Private-Sector Data for Federal Statistics, Nat’l Ctr. for Biotechnology
Info. (Jan. 12, 2017), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK425876/.
8 See, e.g., National Data Service, Nat’l Data Serv., http://www.nationaldataservice.org; The Open Science Data Cloud, Open Sci. Data Cloud, https://
www.opensciencedatacloud.org, Harvard Dataverse, Harv. Dataverse, https://dataverse.harvard.edu, FigShare, https://figshare.com.
9 Facebook Data for Research provides access to a variety of libraries, via in-house platforms. See, e.g., Facebook Data For Good, Facebook (2020), https://
dataforgood.fb.com/; What is the Facebook Ad Library and How do I Search it?, Facebook (2021), https://www.facebook.com/help/259468828226154;
Facebook Disaster Maps Methodology, Facebook (May 15, 2019), https://research.fb.com/facebook-disaster-maps-methodology/.
10 For example, Twitter has a Developer Portal that provides access to their API to allow researchers to use user data for noncommercial purposes.
See Twitter Developers, Twitter (2021), https://developer.twitter.com/en/portal/petition/academic/is-it-right-for-you; Take Your Research Further with
Twitter Data, Twitter (2021), https://developer.twitter.com/en/solutions/academic-research. Thus, uploading Twitter data to a separate Cloud may
provide few incentives to researchers who can use the API route.
11 See Nat’l Acad. of Sci., Innovations in Federal Statistics 31-42 (2017).
12 See Jennifer M. Urban, Joe Karaganis & Brianna M. Schofield, Notice & Takedown in Everyday Practice 39 (2017) (illustrating the difficulty
that online service providers face in manually evaluating a large volume of data for potential infringement; for example, one online service provider
explained that “out of fear of failing to remove infringing material, and motivated by the threat of statutory damages, its staff will take “six passes to try
to find the [identified content]. ”); see also Letter from Thom Tillis, Marsha Blackburn, Christopher A. Coons, Dianne Feinstein et. al, to Sundar Pichai,
Chief Executive Officer, Google Inc. (Sept. 3, 2019), https://www.ipwatchdog.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/9.3-Content-ID-Ltr.pdf (“We have
heard from copyright holders who have been denied access to Content ID tools, and as a result, are at a significant disadvantage to prevent repeated
uploading of content that they have previously identified as infringing. They are left with the choice of spending hours each week seeking out and
sending notices about the same copyrighted works, or allowing their intellectual property to be misappropriated. ”).
13 To illustrate the costs of implementing Content ID on a large-scale platform, Google announced in a report in 2016 that YouTube had invested more
than $60 million in Content ID. See Google, How Google Fights Piracy 6 (2016).
14 See, e.g., AWS Customer Agreement, Amazon (Nov. 30, 2020), https://aws.amazon.com/agreement/.
15 For instance, across the 29 distinct agencies in the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), data “are largely kept in silos with a lack of
organizational awareness of what data are collected across the Department and how to request access. Each agency operates within its own statutory

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
97
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
authority and each dataset can be governed by a particular set of regulations. ” U.S. Dep’t of Health & Human Services, The State of Data Sharing at
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 4 (2018).
16 See, e.g., id. at 8 (“HHS lacks consistent and standardized processes for one agency to request data from another agency. ”).
17 O’Hara & Medalia, supra note 3, at 140-41.
18 See id. at 142 (“Most [data-sharing] agreements rely heavily on interpersonal relationships and informal quid pro quo arrangements, handling data
requests in a less centralized fashion. ”).
19 Jeffrey Mervis, How Two Economists Got Direct Access to IRS Tax Records, Sci. Mag. (May 22, 2014), https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2014/05/how-
two-economists-got-direct-access-irs-tax-records.
20 See Robert M. Groves & Adam Neufeld, Accelerating the Sharing of Data Across Sectors to Advance the Common Good 17 (2017).
21 See, e.g., Data Use Agreement, Dep’t Health & Human Services, https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ocio/eplc/EPLC%20Archive%20
Documents/55-Data%20Use%20Agreement%20%28DUA%29/eplc_dua_practices_guide.pdf.
22 O’Hara & Medalia, supra note 3, at 138, 141.
23 Bipartisan Pol’y Ctr., Barriers to Using Government Data: Extended Analysis of the U.S. Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking’s
Survey of Federal Agencies and Offices 18-20 (2018).
24 See Research Data Assistance Center (ResDAC), Ctr. for Medicare & Medicaid Services (Aug. 30, 2018), https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-
Data-and-Systems/Research/ResearchGenInfo/ResearchDataAssistanceCenter.
25 O’Hara & Medalia, supra note 3, at 141.
26 Michelle Mello et al., Waiting for Data: Barriers to Executing Data Use Agreements, 367 Sci. Mag. 150 (Jan. 10, 2020), https://www.
sciencemagazinedigital.org/sciencemagazine/10_january_2020/MobilePagedArticle.action?articleId=1552284#articleId1552284.
27 Interview with Amy O’Hara, Executive Director, Georgetown Federal Statistical Research Data Center (Apr. 22, 2021); see also Special Sworn Research
Program, Bureau of Econ. Analysis, https://www.bea.gov/research/special-sworn-researcher-program; Nat’l Ctr. for Educ. Stat., Restricted-Use
Data Procedures Manual (2011).
28 See U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Federal Agencies Need to Address Aging Legacy Systems (2016).
29 O’Hara & Medalia, supra note 3, at 140-41.
30 See, e.g., id.; U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, supra note 28.
31 President’s Mgmt. Agenda, supra note 3, at 11.
32 Groves & Neufeld, supra note 20, at 12-13. For a precise definition of sensitive data, see Glossary: Sensitive Information, Nat’l Inst. Standards &
Tech., https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/sensitive_information.
33 Shanna Nasiri, FedRAMP Low, Moderate, High: Understanding Security Baseline Levels, Reciprocity (Sept. 24, 2019), https://reciprocity.com/fedramp-
low-moderate-high-understanding-security-baseline-levels/.
34 Michael McLaughlin, Reforming FedRAMP: A Guide to Improving the Federal Procurement and Risk Management of Cloud Services, Info. Tech. &
Innovation Found. (June 15, 2020), https://itif.org/publications/2020/06/15/reforming-fedramp-guide-improving-federal-procurement-and-risk-
management.
35 Frequently Asked Questions, FedRAMP, https://www.fedramp.gov/faqs.
36 Do Once, Use Many - How Agencies Can Reuse a FedRAMP Authorization, FedRAMP (May 7, 2020), https://www.fedramp.gov/how-agencies-can-reuse-
a-fedramp-authorization/.
37 FedRAMP , FedRAMP Low, Moderate, and High Security Control Baselines (2021).
38 Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech. (Sept. 23, 2020), https://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/detail/sp/800-53/rev-5/final.
39 See, e.g., id.; NIST Risk Management Framework AC-2: Account Management, Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech., https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/risk-
management/sp800-53-controls/release-search#!/control?version=4.0&number=AC-2; NIST Risk Management Framework AC-3: Access Enforcement,
Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech., https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/risk-management/sp800-53-controls/release-search#!/control?version=5.1&number=AC-3.
40 See Mark Bergen, Google Engineers Refused to Build Security Tool to Win Military Contracts, Bloomberg (June 21, 2018), https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2018-06-21/google-engineers-refused-to-build-security-tool-to-win-military-contracts.
41 See Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech., Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems (2004).
42 Partnering with FedRAMP, FedRAMP, https://www.fedramp.gov/cloud-service-providers/. While it may cost cloud service providers between $365,000
and $865,000 and take 6-12 months to receive FedRAMP compliance, Adam Isles, Securing Your Cloud Solutions: Research and Analysis on Meeting
FedRAMP/Government Standards 21 (2017), such costs are borne by the cloud service providers themselves, not the providers’ customers. Indeed,
FedRAMP uses a “do once, use many” model: Once a cloud service provider obtains an authorization to operate (ATO), that ATO can be leveraged and
reciprocated across multiple customers, eliminating duplicative efforts and inconsistencies that would come from requiring multiple re-authorizations.
Id. at 11.
43 Even within FedRAMP there are substantial amounts of variation in how different organizations ensure compliance with the relevant controls
and standards, with many of the controls written broadly enough to give room for substantial interpretation. However, it does lay out a variety of
considerations and requirements that are consistent across domains and allows a degree of predictability and reliance that is not present in other
aspects of federal data governance.
44 O’Hara & Medalia, supra note 3, at 141 (“Data sharing is taking place on a mandatory or voluntary basis, and data requests are managed through a
designated staff/process or diffusely through an organization. ”).
45 Bipartisan Pol’y Ctr., supra note 23, at 17 (“The lack of standard procedures or guidelines for sharing data across federal agencies that fund
research makes efforts to link and share data difficult or inefficient. ”).
46 See, e.g., Amy O’Hara, US Federal Data Policy: An Update on The Federal Data Strategy and The Evidence Act, 5 Int’l J. Population Data Sci. 5 (2020).
47 While existing federal efforts and initiatives are already aimed at harmonizing data sharing best practices, see, e.g., 2020 Action Plan, Federal Data
Strategy (May 14, 2020), https://strategy.data.gov/action-plan/, the NRC can accelerate these efforts. Indeed, the development of clear, consistent
standards is crucial in facilitating data-sharing. David Crotty, Ida Sim & Michael Stebbins, Open Access to Federally Funded Research Data 7 (2020).
48 These requirements are inconsistent and out-of-date due to difficulties in defining risk as well as risk aversion on the parts of agencies. See O’Hara
& Medalia, supra note 3, at 140-41; see also David S. Johnson et al., The Opportunities and Challenges of Using Administrative Data Linkages to Evaluate
Mobility, 657 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 252-53 (2015).
49 For a discussion of inference threats, see Nat’l Acad. of Sci., Eng’g & Med., Federal Statistics, Multiple Data Sources, and Privacy Protection:
Next Steps 68 (2017).

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
98
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
50 Congzheng Song & Ananth Raghunathan, Information Leakage in Embedding Models, Cornell U. (Mar. 31, 2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00053.
51 See, e.g., Statistical Safeguards, Census Bureau (July 1, 2021), https://www.census.gov/about/policies/privacy/statistical_safeguards.html.
52 Alexandra Wood et al., Differential Privacy: A Primer for a Non-Technical Audience, 21 Vand. J. Ent. & Tech. L. 209 (2018).
53 Regulating Access to Data, UK Data Serv., https://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk/manage-data/legal-ethical/access-control/five-safes.
54 Administrative Data Research Facility, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/adrf/.
55 See O’Hara, supra note 46.
56 For additional discussion of the privacy implications of the NRC, see Chapter Five.
57 See U.S. Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Barriers to Using Administrative Data for Evidence-Building 7 (2016).
58 Administrative Data Research Facility, supra note 54.
59 Id.
60 Training, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/training/.
61 ADRF User Guide: Data Explorer, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/adrf/documentation/using-the-adrf/data-explorer/.
62 ADRF User Guide: Exporting Results, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/adrf/documentation/using-the-adrf/exporting-results/.
63 Id.
64 ADRF User Guide: Data Hashing Application, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/adrf/documentation/adrf-overview/data-hashing-
application/.
65 ADRF User Guide: Security Model and Compliance, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/adrf/documentation/adrf-overview/security-
model-and-compliance/.
66 Overview for Collaborators, Coleridge Initiative, https://coleridgeinitiative.org/collaborators/.
67 Data, Stan. Med. Ctr. for Population Health Sci., https://med.stanford.edu/phs/data.html.
68 Stanford Ctr. for Philanthropy & Civ. Soc’y, Trusted Data Intermediaries 2-3 (2018).
69 Others have also recognized the benefit of universal DUA templates. See Mello et al., supra note 26, at 150; Guidance for Providing and Using
Administrative Data for Statistical Purposes, Office of Mgmt. & Budget (Feb. 14, 2014), https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
memoranda/2014/m-14-06.pdf.
70 Data | Center for Population Health Sciences | Stanford Medicine, Stan. Med. Ctr. for Population Health Sci., https://med.stanford.edu/phs/data.
html.
71 See Stanford PHS – Datasets, Redivis, https://redivis.com/StanfordPHS/datasets?orgDatasets-tags=109.medicare.
72 Access Levels, Redivis (July 2020), https://docs.redivis.com/reference/data-access/access-levels.
73 Step 1: Getting Access, Stan. Med. PHS Documentation, https://phsdocs.developerhub.io/start-here/getting-data-access.
74 Id.
75 Id.
76 PHS Data-Use Workflow, Stan. Med. PHS Documentation, https://phsdocs.stanford.edu/start-here/phs-data-use-workflow.
77 Id.
78 PHS Computing Environment, Stan. Med. PHS Documentation, https://phsdocs.stanford.edu/computing-environment.
79 Id.
80 See U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Federal Agencies Need to Address Aging Legacy Systems 15 (2016) (noting that from 2010-2015, many
federal agencies increased their spending on operations and maintenance due to legacy systems).
81 David Freeman Engstrom, Daniel E. Ho, Catherine M. Sharkey & Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Government by Algorithm: Artificial
Intelligence in Federal Administrative Agencies 6, 71-72 (2020).
82 Id. at 6-7.
83 Id. at 71-72.
84 Id. at 73.
85 Id. at 6.
86 See Results for America, The Promise of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act and Proposed Next Steps (2019)
87 For example, the Uniform Federal Crime Reporting Act of 1988 requires federal law enforcement agencies to share crime data with the FBI. See 34
U.S.C. §§41303(c)(2), (3), (4). Unfortunately, though, no federal agencies apparently currently share their data with the FBI under this law. Nat’l Acad. of
Sci., supra note 11, at 41 (2017).
88 Katharine G. Abraham & Ron Haskins, The Promise of Evidence-Based Policymaking; Comm’n on Evidence-Based Policymaking (2018).
89 These privacy-preserving mechanisms are especially important in light of ongoing legal and political challenges in differential privacy application to
Federal data. See, e.g., Dan Bouk & danah boyd, Democracy’s Data Infrastructure (2021).
90 Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-435.
91 Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347.
92 Overview, Federal Data Strategy (2020), https://strategy.data.gov/overview/.
93 UK Data Service, UK Data Serv., https://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk/ (last visited Jun. 21, 2021).
94 For example, the Social Security Administration alone has over 14 petabytes of data, stored in roughly 200 databases. Engstrom, Ho, Sharkey &
Cuéllar, supra note 81, at 72.
95 Google Earth Engine, Google Earth Engine, https://earthengine.google.com (last visited Aug. 15, 2021).
96 World of Work, ADR UK, https://www.adruk.org/our-work/world-of-work/.
97 Annual Respondents Database, 1973-2008: Secure Access, UK Data Serv. (2020), https://beta.ukdataservice.ac.uk/datacatalogue/studies/
study?id=6644.
98 UK Innovation Survey, UK Data Serv. (2021), https://beta.ukdataservice.ac.uk/datacatalogue/studies/study?id=6699.
99 Quarterly Labour Force Survey, 1992-2021: Secure Access, UK Data Serv. (2021), https://beta.ukdataservice.ac.uk/datacatalogue/studies/
study?id=6727.
100 Understanding Society: Waves 1-10, 2009-2019 and Harmonised BHPS: Waves 1-18, 1991-2009: Secure Access, UK Data Serv. (2021), https://beta.
ukdataservice.ac.uk/datacatalogue/studies/study?id=6676.
101 These datasets have helped researchers tackle some specific, public good questions. See, e.g., Francisco Perales, Why Does the Work Women Do Pay
Less Than the Work Men Do?, UK Data Serv. (Dec. 8, 2011), https://beta.ukdataservice.ac.uk/impact/case-studies/case-study?id=62; Eva-Maria Bonin, Do
Parenting Programmes Reduce Conduct Disorder?, UK Data Serv. (Apr. 4, 2012), https://beta.ukdataservice.ac.uk/impact/case-studies/case-study?id=93.

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
99
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
102 Identifying Priority Access or Quality Improvements for Federal Data and Models for Artificial Intelligence Research and Development (R&D), and
Testing; Request for Information, 84 Fed. Reg. 32962 (July 10, 2019).
103 Nick Hart, Data Coalition Comments on AI Data and Model R&D RFI, Data Coalition (Aug. 9, 2019), http://www.datacoalition.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/Comment.RFI_.OMB_.2019-14618.DataCoalition.pdf.
104 Id.
105 See Adam R. Pah et al., How to Build a More Open Justice System, 369 Sci. 134 (2020); see also Seamus Hughes, The Federal Courts Are Running an
Online Scam, Politico (Mar. 20, 2019), https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2019/03/20/pacer-court-records-225821/.
106 Legal Authority and Policies for Data Linkage at Census, Census Bureau (Apr. 4, 2018), https://www.census.gov/about/adrm/linkage/about/
authority.html.
107 BLS Restricted Data Access, U.S. Bureau of Lab. Stat., https://www.bls.gov/rda/restricted-data.htm (last updated May 20, 2021).
108 Welcome to the PDS, NASA, https://pds.nasa.gov.
Chapter 4
1 While we believe that these are the primary axes for consideration, some secondary considerations include organizational clout, talent retention, and
bureaucratic overhead.
2 Congressional Research Serv., Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDCs): Background and Issues for Congress 1 (2020).
3 Id. See also About IDA, Inst. Defense Analyses, https://www.ida.org/about-ida (emphasizing that IDA, the private sector subcontractor that oper-
ates the Science & Technology Policy Institute and several other FFRDCs, “enjoys unusual access to classified government information and sensitive
corporate proprietary information. ”); U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Federally Funded Research and Development Centers: Improved Oversight
and Evaluation Needed for DOD’s Data Access Pilot Program 6 (2020) (discussing how the Department of Defense was able to establish a three-year
pilot program that allowed its FFRDC researchers to forgo having to obtain nondisclosure agreements with each data owner in order to streamline the
data-access process).
4 Nick Hart & Nancy Potok, Modernizing U.S. Data Infrastructure: Design Considerations for Implementing a National Secure Data Service to
Improve Statistics and Evidence Building (2020).
5 Id. at 26.
6 Id. at 26-27, 29-30.
7 U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, supra note 3, at 6. Note that while the FFRDC must operate to serve its sponsors, in establishing an FFRDC, the
sponsor must ensure that it operates with substantial independence; the FFRDC must be “operated, managed, or administered by an autonomous or-
ganization or as an identifiably separate operating unit of a parent organization. ” See Federal Acquisition Regulations [hereinafter “FAR”] § 35.017(a)(2).
8 One example of this is the Science & Technology Policy Institute, which we discuss in a case study below.
9 U.S. Dep’t of Energy, The State of the DOE National Laboratories 11-13 (2020).
10 See, e.g., More Federal Agencies Head to the Cloud With Azure Government, Applied Info. Sci. (Feb. 23, 2018), https://www.ais.com/more-federal-
agencies-head-to-the-cloud-with-azure-government/; see also AWS GovCloud, Amazon, https://aws.amazon.com/govcloud-us/. Microsoft was also
previously awarded a $10 billion contract from the Pentagon. See Kate Conger, Microsoft Wins Pentagon’s $10 Billion JEDI Contract, Thwarting Amazon,
N.Y. Times (Sept. 4, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/25/technology/dod-jedi-contract.html. However, this contract was recently canceled “due
to evolving requirements, increased cloud conservancy and industry advances. ” Ellie Kaufman & Zachary Cohen, Pentagon Cancels $10 Billion Cloud
Contract Given to Microsoft Over Amazon, CNN (July 6, 2021), https://www.cnn.com/2021/07/06/tech/defense-department-cancels-jedi-contract-am-
azon-microsoft/index.html. The Pentagon will now instead seek new bids for an updated Joint Warfighting Cloud Capability (JWCC) contract from
Amazon and Microsoft. Id.
11 See, e.g., Bram Bout, Helping Universities Build What’s Next with Google Cloud Platform, Google (Oct. 25, 2016), https://blog.google/outreach-ini-
tiatives/education/helping-universities-build-whats-next-google-cloud-platform; Cloud Computing for Education, Amazon, https://aws.amazon.com/
education/.
12 Congressional Research Serv., supra note 2, at 11-12 (2020).
13 U.S. Dep’t of Energy, Annual Report on the State of the DOE National Laboratories 87 (2017).
14 Congressional Research Serv., supra note 2, at 19.
15 Congressional Research Serv., Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP): History and Overview 9 (2020). STPI’s duties are also specified
in 42 U.S.C. § 6686.
16 What are FFRDCs?, Inst. Defense Analyses, https://www.ida.org/ida-ffrdcs.
17 Id.
18 Sponsors, Inst. Defense Analyses, https://www.ida.org/en/about-ida/sponsors.
19 Id.
20 Congressional Research Serv., supra note 15, at 9-10.
21 For instance, from 2008-2012, these other federal agencies contributed a total of $9.8 million of funding to STPI while NSF contributed about $24
million. U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Federally Funded Research Centers: Agency Reviews of Employee Compensation and Center Perfor-
mance 43-44 (2014).
22 Congressional Research Serv., supra note 15, at 9-10.
23 Id.
24 42 U.S.C. § 6686(d).
25 42 U.S.C. § 6686(e).
26 Sci. & Tech. Pol’y Inst., Report to the President Fiscal Year 2020 (2020).
27 See, e.g., Open Government, Millennium Challenge Corp ., https://www.mcc.gov/initiatives/initiative/open; Nat’l Geospatial Advisory Comm.,
Advancing the National Spatial Data Infrastructure Through Public-Private Partnerships and Other Innovative Partnerships (2020); Nat’l
Aeronautics & Space Admin., Public-Private Partnerships for Space Capability Development 33-36 (2014).
28 Big Data Value Public-Private Partnership, European Comm’n (Mar. 9, 2021), https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/big-data-value-pub-
lic-private-partnership.

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
100
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
29 RAND, Public-Private Partnerships for Data-Sharing: A Dynamic Environment 33, 99 (2000).
30 See Homepage - Alberta Data Partnerships, Alberta Data Partnerships, http://abdatapartnerships.ca (last visited Aug. 15, 2021).
31 Alberta Data Partnerships, A P3 Success Story 1 (2017).
32 Id.
33 Id. at 19, 35.
34 Id. at 15.
35 Id.
36 Id. at 1.
37 Nat’l Geospatial Advisory Comm., Public-Private Partnership Use Case: Alberta Data Partnerships 1 (2020).
38 Alberta Data Partnerships, supra note 31, at 15.
39 Id. at 16.
40 The COVID-19 High Performance Computing Consortium, COVID-19 HPC Consortium, https://covid19-hpc-consortium.org.
41 Id.
42 See, e.g., David Hall, Why Public-Private Partnerships Don’t Work (2015); Disadvantages and Pitfalls of the PPP Option, APMG Int’l, https://
ppp-certification.com/ppp-certification-guide/54-disadvantages-and-pitfalls-ppp-option.
43 Graeme A. Hodge, Carsten Greve & Anthony E. Boardman, International Handbook on Public–Private Partnerships, 187-90 (2012).
44 For example, on one end of a spectrum, the California Teale Data Center creates, owns, maintains, and archives its own datasets for private sector
use. In contrast, the Pennsylvania Spatial Data Access houses metadata, requiring users to ask the actual data sources for access. RAND, supra note 29,
at 102-03. We encourage the Task Force to examine this comprehensive report to assess the various organizational options for a PPP data clearinghouse
model.
45 Angela Ballantyne & Cameron Stewart, Big Data and Public-Private Partnerships in Healthcare and Research, 11 Asian Bioethics R. 315, 315 (2019).
46 See Gov’t Accountability Office, Human Capital: Improving Federal Recruiting and Hiring Efforts; see also Catch and Retain: Improving Recruit-
ing and Retention at Government Agencies, Salesforce, https://www.salesforce.com/solutions/industries/government/resources/government-recruit-
ment-software/.
47 Partnership for Public Service, Survey on the Future of Government Service 2 (2020).
48 Id.
Chapter 5
1 National Research Cloud Call to Action, Stan. U. Inst. for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (2020), https://hai.stanford.edu/national-re-
search-cloud-joint-letter.
2 Sensitive information, as defined by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, is information where the loss, misuse, or unauthorized
access or modification could adversely affect the national interest or the conduct of federal programs, or the privacy to which individuals are entitled
under 5 U.S.C. § 552a (the Privacy Act); that has not been specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive Order or an Act of Congress
to be kept classified in the interest of national defense or foreign policy. See Glossary: Sensitive Information, Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech.,
https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/sensitive_information.
3 We thank Mark Krass for these insights.
4 Agencies covered by the Act include “any Executive department, military department, Government corporation, Government controlled corporation,
or other establishment in the executive branch of the [federal] Government (including the Executive Office of the President), or any independent regula-
tory agency. ” 5 U.S.C. § 552(f)(1).
5 U.S. General Accounting Office, Record Linkage and Privacy: Issues in Creating New Federal Research and Statistical Information 10 (2001).
6 Interview with Marc Groman, Former Senior Advisor for Privacy, White House Office of Management and Budget (Feb. 18, 2021); see also Bipartisan
Pol’y Ctr., Barriers to Using Government Data: Extended Analysis of the U.S. Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking’s Survey of Federal
Agencies and Offices 10 (2018).
7 See Joseph Near & David Darais, Differentially Private Synthetic Data, Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech. (May 3, 2021), https://www.nist.gov/blogs/cyber-
security-insights/differentially-private-synthetic-data; see also Steven M. Bellovin et al., Privacy and Synthetic Datasets, 22 Stan. L. Rev. 1 (2019).
8 E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347.
9 Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3501 (2012).
10 Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2017, Pub. L. No. 115-435, 132 Stat. 5529 (2019).
11 President’s Mgmt. Agenda, Federal Data Strategy 2020 Action Plan (2020).
12 Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a (2012).
13 There are many versions of the Fair Information Practice Principles, and the U.S. government has not institutionalized a specific version, though the
version used by the Department of Homeland Security is commonly referenced (available at: https://www.dhs.gov/publication/privacy-policy-guid-
ance-memorandum-2008-01-fair-information-practice-principles). The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development produced an influen-
tial version of them in 1980 (revised in 2013), which remains an authoritative source. OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows
of Personal Data, OECD (2013), https://www.oecd.org/digital/ieconomy/oecdguidelinesontheprotectionofprivacyandtransborderflowsofpersonaldata.
htm.
14 See David Freeman Engstrom, Daniel E. Ho, Catherine M. Sharkey & Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Government by Algorithm: Artificial Intelli-
gence in Federal Administrative Agencies (2020) (documenting present use of AI by government agencies).
15 5 U.S.C. § 552a (a)(5).
16 5 U.S.C. §§ 552a(a)(8)(A)(i)(I), (II).
17 The Privacy Act of 1974, Elec. Privacy Info. Ctr., https://epic.org/privacy/1974act/ (last visited Aug. 15, 2021).
18 See Fact Sheet: National Secure Data Service Act Advances Responsible Data Sharing in Government, Data Coalition (May 13, 2021), https://www.
datacoalition.org/fact-sheet-national-secure-data-service-act-advances-responsible-data-sharing-in-government/; U.S Gov’t Accountability Office,
Record Linkage and Privacy: Issues in Creating New Federal Research and Statistical Information (2001).

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
101
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
19 It is no small irony that private companies in the U.S. have fulfilled that mission today. In fact, the U.S. government now approaches private industry,
either through legal process or through procurement, when it requires data about individuals that the government itself does not collect. Senator Ron
Wyden has proposed legislation to prevent the government from making these purchases. Wyden, Paul and Bipartisan Members of Congress Introduce
The Fourth Amendment Is Not For Sale Act, Ron Wyden U.S. Senator for Or. (Apr. 21, 2021), https://www.wyden.senate.gov/news/press-releases/
wyden-paul-and-bipartisan-members-of-congress-introduce-the-fourth-amendment-is-not-for-sale-act-.
20 See, e.g., World Econ. Forum, The Next Generation of Data-Sharing in Financial Services (2019).
21 See, e.g., Stacie Dusetzina et al., Linking Data for Health Services Research: A Framework and Instructional Guide, Agency for Healthcare Research &
Quality (Sept. 1, 2014), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK253315/.
22 See, e.g., European Comm’n, A European Strategy for Data (2020) (arguing for cross-border data aggregation and linkage of both private and pub-
lic sector data); M Sanni Ali et al., Administrative Data Linkage in Brazil: Potentials for Health Technology Assessment, 10 Frontiers in Pharmacology 984
(2019); Data Linkage, Australian Inst. of Health & Welfare (Jan. 4, 2020), https://www.aihw.gov.au/our-services/data-linkage.
23 See, e.g., Elsa Augustine, Vikash Reddy & Jesse Rothstein, Linking Administrative Data: Strategies and Methods (2018) (describing tips for
conducting data linkages in California); see also U.S. Dep’t of Health & Human Services, Status of State Efforts to Integrate Health and Human
Services Systems and Data (2016).
24 Ben Moscovitch, How President Biden Can Improve Health Data Sharing For COVID-19 And Beyond, Health Affairs (Mar. 1, 2021), https://www.
healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20210223.611803/full/.
25 Home, Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Ctr., https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/.
26 The COVID Tracking Project, https://covidtracking.com/.
27 Fred Bazzoli, COVID-19 Emergency Shows Limitations of Nationwide Data Sharing Infrastructure, Healthcare IT News (June 2, 2020), https://www.
healthcareitnews.com/news/covid-19-emergency-shows-limitations-nationwide-data-sharing-infrastructure.
28 See, e.g., C. Jason Wang et al., Response to COVID-19 in Taiwan: Big Data Analytics, New Technology, and Proactive Testing, JAMA (Mar. 3, 2020), https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2762689/; Fang-Ming Chen et al., Big Data Integration and Analytics to Prevent a Potential Hospital Outbreak
of COVID-19 in Taiwan, 54 J. Microbiology, Immunology & Infection 129-30 (2020).
29 See, e.g., Q&A on the Pentagon’s “Total Information Awareness” Program, Am. C.L. Union, https://www.aclu.org/other/qa-pentagons-total-informa-
tion-awareness-program; The Five Problems with CAPPS II: Why the Airline Passenger Profiling Proposal Should Be Abandoned, Am. C.L. Union, https://
www.aclu.org/other/five-problems-capps-ii.
30 See, e.g., Barton Gellman, Dark Mirror: Edward Snowden and the American Surveillance State (2020); Edward Snowden, Permanent Record
(2019).
31 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
32 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(3).
33 The Privacy Act also contains specific carve-outs for disclosures to the Census Bureau and to the National Archives and Records Administration.
However, the carve-outs for these two agencies require that the disclosures be made for the purposes of a census survey and of recording historical
value, respectively. Because the NRC’s explicit purpose is to democratize AI innovation, it is unlikely that the NRC can take advantage of this existing
exception to dataset disclosures under the Privacy Act.
34 For example, the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s list of routine uses includes broad disclosure “[t]o an agency or organization for the
purpose of performing audit or oversight operations as authorized by law, but only such information as is necessary and relevant to such audit or over-
sight function. ” Privacy Act of 1974; Department of Homeland Security Federal Emergency Management Agency-008 Disaster Recovery Assistance Files
System of Records, 78 Fed. Reg. 25282 (May 30, 2013).
35 See, e.g., Britt v. Naval Investigative Service, 886 F.2d 544 (3d Cir. 1989).
36 The Privacy Act of 1974, supra note 17.
37 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(5).
38 5 U.S.C. §§ 552a(a)(8)(B)(i), (ii) (emphasis added).
39 44 U.S.C. § 3561(8), (12).
40 U.S. Dep’t of Health & Human Services, The State of Data Sharing at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 16 (2018).
41 44 U.S.C. § 3575(4).
42 See Engstrom, Ho, Sharkey & Cuéllar, supra note 14, at 16 (finding that the Bureau of Labor Statistics is one of the top ten agencies that use
artificial intelligence); Machine Learning, Census Bureau (Apr. 17, 2019), https://www.census.gov/topics/research/data-science/about-machine-learn-
ing.html (asserting that the Census Bureau “needs” machine learning capabilities); Bureau of Econ. Analysis, 2020 Strategic Action Plan 7 (2020)
(highlighting the importance of artificial intelligence and machine learning to BEA’s strategy).
43 Group level data analyses also have inherent privacy risks and harms. See, e.g., Linnet Taylor, Safety in Numbers? Group Privacy and Big Data Analyt-
ics in the Developing World, in Group Privacy: New Challenges of Data Technologies 13 (2017).
44 See 34 U.S.C. §§ 41303(c)(2), (3), (4).
45 Nat’l Acad. of Sci., Innovations in Federal Statistics 41 (2017).
46 See 13 U.S.C. § 6.
47 Nat’l Acad. of Sci., supra note 45, at 40.
48 According to the study, “an agency’s legal counsel may advise against sharing data as a precautionary measure rather than because of an explicit
prohibition. ” U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office, Sustained and Coordinated Efforts Could Facilitate Data Sharing While Protecting Privacy 1
(2013).
49 See Amy O’Hara & Carla Medalia, Data Sharing in the Federal Statistical System: Impediments and Possibilities, 675 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci.
138, 141 (2018).
50 Robert M. Groves & Adam Neufeld, Accelerating the Sharing of Data Across Sectors to Advance the Common Good 12 (2017).
51 Bipartisan Pol’y Ctr., supra note 6, at 18-20.
52 See O’Hara & Medalia, supra note 49, at 141.
53 Administrative Data Research UK, ADR UK, https://www.adruk.org.
54 About ADR UK, ADR UK, https://www.adruk.org/about-us/about-adr-uk/.
55 Id.
56 See World of Work, ADR UK, https://www.adruk.org/our-work/world-of-work/.

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
102
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
57 Funding Opportunities, ADR UK, https://www.adruk.org/news-publications/funding-opportunities/.
58 Id.
59 Id.
60 Funding Opportunity: A Unique Chance to Shape Data Science at the Heart of UK Government, ADR UK (Apr. 8, 2021), https://www.adruk.org/
news-publications/news-blogs/funding-opportunity-a-unique-chance-to-shape-data-science-at-the-heart-of-uk-government-384/.
61 Funding Opportunities, supra note 57.
62 Digital Economy Act 2017 (Gr. Br.).
63 ADR UK, Trust, Security and Public Interest: Striking the Balance 28 (2020).
64 Id.
65 Id.
66 How Do We Work with Researchers?, ADR UK, https://www.adruk.org/our-mission/working-with-researchers/.
67 Accessing Secure Research Data as an Accredited Researcher, Off. for Nat’l Stat., https://www.ons.gov.uk/aboutus/whatwedo/statistics/requesting-
statistics/approvedresearcherscheme.
68 See Nick Hart & Nancy Potok, Modernizing U.S. Data Infrastructure: Design Considerations for Implementing a National Secure Data Service
to Improve Statistics and Evidence Building 17, 21 (2020).
69 Id.
70 Id. at 15.
71 President’s Mgmt. Agenda, supra note 11, at 9.
72 Id. at 31.
73 See What is Open Data?, Open Data Handbook, https://opendatahandbook.org/guide/en/what-is-open-data/.
Chapter 6
1 See Keeping Secrets: Anonymous Data Isn’t Always Anonymous, Berkeley Sch. of Info. (Mar. 15, 2014), https://ischoolonline.berkeley.edu/blog/anony-
mous-data/; Arvind Narayanan & Vitaly Shmatikov, How to Break Anonymity of the Netflix Prize Dataset, Cornell U. (Nov. 22, 2007), https://arxiv.org/pdf/
cs/0610105.pdf.
2 Matt Fredrikson, Somesh Jha & Thomas Ristenpart, Model Inversion Attacks that Exploit Confidence Information and Basic Countermeasures, 22 Pro-
ceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Security, Audit & Control 1322 (2015); Nicholas Carlini et al., Extracting Training Data from Large
Language Models, Cornell U. (June 15, 2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.07805.pdf.
3 See, e.g., HIPAA Training, Certification, and Compliance, HIPAA Training, https://www.hipaatraining.com/; Research Data Management, UK Data Serv.,
https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/learning-hub/research-data-management/.
4 Ashwin Machanavajjhala et al., L-Diversity: Privacy Beyond K-Anonymity, 22 Int’l Conf. Data Eng’g 24 (2006).
5 Cynthia Dwork & Aaron Roth, The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy (2014).
6 See, e.g., Tara Bahrampour & Marissa J. Lang, New System to Protect Census Data May Compromise Accuracy, Some Experts Way, Wash.
Post (June 1, 2021), https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/social-issues/2020-census-differential-privacy-ipums/2021/06/01/6c-
94b46e-c30d-11eb-93f5-ee9558eecf4b_story.html; Kelly Percival, Court Rejects Alabama Challenge to Census Plans for Redistricting and Privacy,
Brennan Ctr. (June 30, 2021), https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/court-rejects-alabama-challenge-census-plans-redistrict-
ing-and-privacy.
7 See, e.g., Leonard E. Burman et al., Safely Expanding Research Access to Administrative Tax Data: Creating a Synthetic Public Use File and a
Validation Server (2018); see also The Synthetic Data Vault, https://sdv.dev.
8 Valerie Chen, Valerio Pastro & Mariana Raykova, Secure Computation for Machine Learning with SPDZ, Cornell U. (Jan. 2, 2019), https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1901.00329.pdf.
9 Louis J. M. Aslett et al., A Review of Homomorphic Encryption and Software Tools for Encrypted Statistical Machine Learning, Cornell U. (Aug. 26, 2015),
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1508.06574.pdf.
10 See Hongyan Chang & Reza Shokri, On the Privacy Risks of Algorithmic Fairness, Cornell U. (Apr. 7, 2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.03731.pdf.
11 Ruggles et al., Differential Privacy and Census Data: Implications for Social and Economic Research, 109 Am. Econ. Ass’n Papers & Proceedings 403,
406 (2019).
12 In Computer Science literature, such algorithmic settings are often referred to as hyperparameters. For instance, k is a hyperparameter for k-ano-
nymity. By setting k to different values (e.g., 5, 10, 100), practitioners can modulate the amount of anonymity afforded to records in the data. As we note
however, the choice of hyperparameters controls both the privacy effected on a dataset as well as the fidelity of that data.
13 See Differential Privacy for Census Data Explained, Nat’l Conf. of State Legislatures (July 1, 2021), https://www.ncsl.org/research/redistricting/dif-
ferential-privacy-for-census-data-explained.aspx; Hongyan Chang & Reza Shokri, On the Privacy Risks of Algorithmic Fairness, Cornell U. (Apr. 7, 2021),
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.03731.pdf. Some scholars even find that the incorporation of differential privacy into machine learning algorithms can have
disparate impact on underrepresented groups. See Eugene Bagdasaryan & Vitaly Shmatikov, Differential Privacy Has Disparate Impact on Model Accura-
cy, Cornell U. (Oct. 27, 2019), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.12101.pdf.
14 Steven Ruggles, Differential Privacy and Census Data: Implications for Social and Economic Research 17.
15 Id. at 18-19.
16 Nat’l Acad. of Sci., Innovations in Federal Statistics 86 (2017). The fragmented FSRDC review process is similar to the fragmented data access
regime we discussed in Chapter Three.
17 Special Sworn Researcher Program, Bureau of Econ. Analysis, https://www.bea.gov/research/special-sworn-researcher-program (last updated July
23, 2021).
18 13 U.S.C. § 9.
19 The institutional form of the NRC is discussed in depth in Chapter Four.
20 NORC Data Enclave, NORC, https://www.norc.org/PDFs/BD-Brochures/2016/Data%20Enclave%20One%20Sheet.pdf.
21 CMS Virtual Research Data Center (VRDC), Research Data Assistance Ctr., https://resdac.org/cms-virtual-research-data-center-vrdc.

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
103
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
22 Request for Information (RFI) Seeking Stakeholder Input on the Need for an NIH Administrative Data Enclave, Nat’l Inst. of Health (Mar. 1, 2019),
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-19-085.html.
23 See FASEB Response to NIH Request for Information (RFI): Seeking Stakeholder Input on the Need for an NIH Administrative Data Enclave, Fed’n of Am.
Societies for Experimental Biology (2019), https://www.faseb.org/Portals/2/PDFs/opa/2019/FASEB_Response_Data_Enclave_RFI_NOT-OD-19-085.
pdf; Am. Soc’y of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology (May 30, 2019), https://www.asbmb.org/getmedia/e3401ed5-3210-4ed2-a82a-7363cb86071d/
ASBMB-Response-to-NIH-RFI-NOT-09-19-085.pdf.
24 What We Do, Cal. Pol’y Lab, https://www.capolicylab.org/what-we-do/.
25 Id.
26 CPL Roadmap to Government Administrative Data in California, Cal. Pol’y Lab, https://www.capolicylab.org/data-resources/california-data-road-
map/.
27 Interview with Evan White, Executive Director, California Policy Lab (Apr. 29, 2021).
28 Id.
29 Id.; see, e.g., Policy Evaluation and Research Linkage Initiative (PERLI), Cal. Pol’y Lab, https://www.capolicylab.org/data-resources/perli/; University
of California Consumer Credit Panel, Cal. Pol’y Lab, https://www.capolicylab.org/data-resources/university-of-california-consumer-credit-panel/.
30 Interview with Evan White, supra note 27.
31 Id.
32 See, e.g., Life Course Dataset, Cal. Pol’y Lab, https://www.capolicylab.org/life-course-dataset/.
33 See CPL Roadmap to Government Administrative Data in California, supra note 26.
34 We note that it is possible that the organizational form could affect the authority of NRC staff to speak to the legality of data transfers.
Chapter 7
1 Christopher Whyte, Deepfake News: AI-Enabled Disinformation as a Multi-Level Public Policy Challenge, 5 J. Cyber Pol’y 199 (2020); Don Fallis, What Is
Disinformation?, 63 Libr. Trends 601 (2015).
2 Mary L. Gray & Siddharth Suri, Ghost Work: How to Stop Silicon Valley From Building a New Global Underclass (2019); Science Must Examine
the Future of Work, Nature (Oct. 19, 2017),
https://www.nature.com/articles/550301b.
3 David Danks & Alex John London, Algorithmic Bias in Autonomous Systems, 26 Int’l Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence 4691 (2017); Joy Buolam-
wini & Timnit Gebru, Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification, 81 Proceeding of Machine Learning Res.
1 (2018); Ben Hutchinson et al., Unintended Machine Learning Biases as Social Barriers for Persons with Disabilities, 125 ACM SIGACCESS Accessibility &
Computing 1 (2020).
4 Oscar H. Gandy Jr., The Panoptic Sort: A Political Economy of Personal Information (1993); Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality (2018);
Rashida Richardson, Racial Segregation and the Data-Driven Society: How Our Failure to Reckon with Root Causes Perpetuates Separate and Unequal
Realities, 36 Berkeley Tech. L. J. 101 (2021).
5 For approaches to improve machine learning practices, see Timnit Gebru et al., Datasheets for Datasets, Cornell U. (Mar. 19, 2020), https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1803.09010.pdf; Margaret Mitchell et al., Model Cards for Model Reporting, 2019 Proceedings ACM Conf. on Fairness, Accountability & Transpar-
ency 220 (2019); Kenneth Holstein et al., Improving Fairness in Machine Learning Systems: What do Industry Practitioners Need?, 2019 CHI Conf. on Hum.
Factors in Computing Sys. 1 (2019); Michael A Madaio et al., Co-Designing Checklists to Understand Organizational Challenges and Opportunities Around
Fairness in AI, 2020 CHI Conf. on Hum. Factors in Computing Sys. 318 (2019). The literature on AI’s societal impacts and fairness, accountability, and
transparency of AI is vast, but see Michael Kearns & Aaron Roth, The Ethical Algorithm: The Science of Socially Aware Algorithm Design (2019);
Eubanks, supra note 4; Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt & Arvind Narayanan, Fairness and Machine Learning (2019); Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math
Destruction (2016).
6 45 C.F.R §§ 46.101-124.
7 J. Britt Holbrook & Robert Frodeman, Peer Review and the Ex Ante Assessment of Societal Impacts, 20 Res. Evaluation 239 (2011).
8 Id.
9 Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) and Protection of Human Subjects in Clinical Trials, U.S. Food & Drug Admin., https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/cen-
ter-drug-evaluation-and-research-cder/institutional-review-boards-irbs-and-protection-human-subjects-clinical-trials (last updated Sept. 11, 2019).
10 There are crucial questions with regards to consent even with data considered “publicly” available. See generally Casey Fiesler & Nicholas Proferes,
“Participant” Perceptions of Twitter Research Ethics, 4 Social Media + Society 1 (2018); Sarah Gilbert, Jessica Vitak & Katie Shilton, Measuring Americans’
Comfort with Research Uses of Their Social Media Data, 7 Social Media + Society 1 (2021).
11 Sara R. Jordan, Future of Privacy Forum, Designing an Artificial Intelligence Research Review Committee (2019), https://fpf.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/10/DesigningAIResearchReviewCommittee.pdf.
12 Agatta Feretti et al., Ethics Review of Big Data Research: What Should Stay and What Should Be Reformed?, 22 BMC Medical Ethics 1, 6 (2021); Kathryn
M. Porter et al., The Emergence of Clinical Research Ethics Consultation: Insights from a National Collaborative, 2018 Am. J. Bioethics 39 (2018).
13 Feretti et al., supra note 12.
14 See, e.g., Mark Diaz et al., Addressing Age-Related Bias in Sentiment Analysis, 2018 Proceedings CHI Conf. on Hum. Factors in Computing Sys. 1
(2018); Buolamwini & Gebru, supra note 3.
15 See, e.g., Timnit Gebru et al., Datasheets for Datasets, Cornell U. (Mar. 19, 2020), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.09010.pdf; Margaret Mitchell et al., Model
Cards for Model Reporting, 2019 Proceedings ACM Conf. on Fairness, Accountability & Transparency 220 (2019); Emily M. Bender et al., On the Dan-
gers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?, 2021 Proceedings ACM Conf. on Fairness, Accountability & Transparency 610 (2021);
Christo Wilson et al., Building and Auditing Fair Algorithms: A Case Study in Candidate Screening, 2021 Proceedings ACM Conf. on Fairness, Account-
ability & Transparency 666 (2021); Pauline T . Kim, Auditing Algorithms for Discrimination, 166 U. Pa. L. Rev. Online 189 (2017).
16 Phase II: Proposal Review and Processing, Nat’l Sci. Found., https://www.nsf.gov/bfa/dias/policy/merit_review/phase2.jsp#select.
17 Harvey A. Averch, Criteria for Evaluating Research Projects and Portfolios, in Evaluating R&D Impacts: Methods and Practice 263 (1993).
18 Nat’l Security Comm’n on Artificial Intelligence, Final Report 141-54 (2021).
19 History and Mission, U.S. Privacy & Civil Liberties Oversight Bd., https://www.pclob.gov/About/HistoryMission.

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
104
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
20 AI in Counterterrorism Oversight Enhancement Act of 2021, H.R. 4469, 117th Cong. (2021).
21 In instances where a researcher is using data obtained from one of the agencies that falls under ORI’s oversight, it may make sense to have ORI adju-
dicate those cases directly. For more information about the ORI, see ORI, Office Of Research Integrity, https://ori.hhs.gov/.
22 Michael S. Bernstein et al., ESR: Ethics and Society Review of Artificial Intelligence Research, Cornell U. (July 9, 2021), https://arxiv.org/
pdf/2106.11521.pdf.
23 Nat’l Sci. Found., Broader Impacts, https://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/special/broaderimpacts/.
24 See, e.g., Notice of Special Interest: Administrative Supplement for Research and Capacity Building Efforts Related to Bioethical Issues, Nat’l Inst. of
Health (Nov. 17, 2020), https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-21-020.html; Notice of Special Interest: Administrative Supplement
for Research on Bioethical Issues, Nat’l Inst. of Health (Dec. 30, 2019), https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-20-038.html; see also
Courtenay R. Bruce et al., An Embedded Model for Ethics Consultation: Characteristics, Outcomes, and Challenges, 5 AJOB Empirical Bioethics 8 (2014);
Sharon Begley, In a Lab Pushing the Boundaries of Biology, an Embedded Ethicist Keeps Scientists in Check, Stat (Feb. 23, 2017), https://www.statnews.
com/2017/02/23/bioethics-harvard-george-church/. Private foundations also promote the use of embedded bioethicists. See, e.g., Making a Differ-
ence Request for Proposals – Fall 2021, The Greenwall Found. (2021), https://greenwall.org/making-a-difference-grants/request-for-proposals-MAD-
fall-2021.
Chapter 8
1 Paul Cichonski et al., Computer Security Incident Handling Guide (2012).
2 Putative attacks could include the deployment of ransomware, phishing schemes, gaining root access (the highest level of privilege available which
gives users access to all commands and files by default), exposure of secret credentials, data poisoning, data exfiltration, as well as other types of
unauthorized network intrusions.
3 Karen Hao, AI Consumes a Lot of Energy. Hackers Could Make it Consume More, MIT Tech. R. (May 6, 2021), https://www.technologyreview.
com/2021/05/06/1024654/ai-energy-hack-adversarial-attack/.
4 Catalin Cimpanu, Vast Majority of Cyber-Attacks on Cloud Servers Aim to Mine Cryptocurrency, ZDNet (Sept. 14, 2020), https://www.zdnet.com/article/
vast-majority-of-cyber-attacks-on-cloud-servers-aim-to-mine-cryptocurrency/.
5 We note that the NRC will likely need to comply with data specific security regulations as well. For instance, medical data security will need to comply
with HIPAA, and financial data will need to comply with The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
6 Ray Dunham, FISMA Compliance: Security Standards & Guidelines Overview, Linford & Co. (Nov. 29, 2017), https://linfordco.com/blog/fisma-compliance/.
7 Amy J. Frontz, Review of the Department of Health and Human Services Compliance with the Federal Information Security Modernization Act
of 2014 for Fiscal Year 2020 (2021).
8 U.S. Senate Comm. on Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs, Federal Cybersecurity: America’s Data at Risk 18 (2019).
9 Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) Background, Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech., https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/
fisma-background (last updated Aug. 4, 2021).
10 Dunham, supra note 6.
11 U.S. Senate Comm. on Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs, supra note 8, at 19.
12 Id. at 18.
13 Id. at 19.
14 Id. at 20.
15 Kevin Stine, et al., Guide for Mapping Types of Information and Information Systems to Security Categories (2008). Specifically, FISMA defines
compliance in terms of three levels: low impact, moderate impact, and high impact. Low impact indicates that the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or
availability of the system will have a limited adverse effect, while high impact indicates that such losses will have severe or catastrophic effects. See Sar-
ah Harvey, 3 FISMA Compliance Levels: Low, Moderate, High, KirkpatrickPrice (Apr. 24, 2020), https://kirkpatrickprice.com/blog/fisma-compliance-lev-
els-low-moderate-high/.
16 Nat’l Inst. Standards & Tech., Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations (2020).
17 Marianne Swanson et al., Guide for Developing Security Plans for Federal Information Systems (2006).
18 Michael McLaughlin, Reforming FedRAMP: A Guide to Improving the Federal Procurement and Risk Management of Cloud Services, Info. Tech. & Innova-
tion Found. (June 15, 2020), https://itif.org/publications/2020/06/15/reforming-fedramp-guide-improving-federal-procurement-and-risk-management.
19 Program Basics, FedRAMP, https://www.fedramp.gov/program-basics/; see also Steven VanRoekel, Security Authorization of Information Sys-
tems in Cloud Computing Environments (2011).
20 FISMA vs. FedRAMP and NIST : Making Sense of Government Compliance Standards, Foresite, https://foresite.com/fisma-vs-fedramp-and-nist-making-
sense-of-government-compliance-standards/. However, we note that FedRAMP approval is exempted for certain types of cloud models: (i) where the
cloud is private to the agency, (ii) where the cloud is physically located within a Federal facility, (iii) where the agency is not providing cloud services
from the cloud-based information system to any external entities. See VanRoekel, supra note 19.
21 FedRAMP , FedRAMP Security Assessment Framework 5 (2017).
22 Doina Chiacu, White House Warns Companies to Step Up Cybersecurity: ‘We Can’t Do it Alone’, Reuters (June 3, 2021), https://www.reuters.com/tech-
nology/white-house-warns-companies-step-up-cybersecurity-2021-06-03/; see also Significant Cyber Incidents, Ctr. Strategic & Int’l Studies, https://
www.csis.org/programs/strategic-technologies-program/significant-cyber-incidents (last visited Aug. 19, 2021).
23 U.S. Senate Comm. Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs, supra note 8, at 5.
24 Id. at 6.
25 Frontz, supra note 7.
26 Jonathan Reiber & Matt Glenn, The U.S. Government Needs to Overhaul Cybersecurity. Here’s How., Lawfare (Apr. 9, 2021), https://www.lawfareblog.
com/us-government-needs-overhaul-cybersecurity-heres-how.
27 Nat’l Security Agency, Embracing a Zero Trust Security Model (2021).
28 McLaughlin, supra note 18.
29 Id.
30 Id.

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
105
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
31 Exec. Order No. 14,028, 86 Fed. Reg. 26633 (May 17, 2021).
32 U.S. Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Moving the U.S. Government Towards Zero Trust Cybersecurity Principles (2021).
33 See, e.g., David Kushner, The Real Story of Stuxnet, IEEE Spectrum (Feb. 26, 2013), https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-real-story-of-stuxnet.
34 HTTP is the protocol at the highest level of abstraction targeting the application layer, and its secure variant HTTPS additionally encrypts the data
using an encryption protocol. Without encryption, HTTP is insecure and should not be used. The encryption protocol in original use was SSL but this
has since been deprecated in the realm of network security in favor of its newer version, TLS. Both SSL and TLS rely on public key certificates signed by
a trusted certificate authority. When these certificates have expired, the websites providing them can no longer necessarily be trusted. Although these
measures have their own limitations, not adopting them can only be less secure.
35 See, e.g., Azure Confidential Computing, Microsoft, https://azure.microsoft.com/en-ca/solutions/confidential-compute/; Nataraj Nagaratnam,
Confidential Computing, IBM (Oct. 16, 2020),
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/confidential-computing; Confidential Computing, Google Cloud, https://cloud.google.com/confidential-computing.
36 David Archer et al., From Keys to Databases—Real-World Applications of Secure Multi-Party Computation, 61 Computer J. 1749 (2018).
37 Amit Elazari Bar On, We Need Bug Bounties for Bad Algorithms, Motherboard (May 3, 2018) https://www.vice.com/en/article/8xkyj3/we-need-bug-
bounties-for-bad-algorithms.
Chapter 9
1 Importantly, this chapter discusses the extent to which researchers should be required to share their research outputs, not the extent to which re-
searchers should be required to share their private data. The latter was discussed in Chapter Three.
2 Dan Robitzski, AI Researchers Are Boycotting A New Journal Because It’s Not Open Access, Futurism (May 3, 2018), https://futurism.com/artificial-intel-
ligence-journal-boycot-open-access.
3 Mikio L. Braun & Cheng Soon Ong, Open Science in Machine Learning (2014).
4 Since researchers using the NRC are not “contractors” under FAR/DFARS, and since evidence is lacking on the value of Other Transactions to AI re-
searchers, we do not cover FAR/DFARS and Other Transactions in this section.
5 Under the Bayh-Dole Act, Aa “federal funding agreement” is defined as “any contract, grant, or cooperative agreement entered into between any
Federal agency, other than the Tennessee Valley Authority, and any contractor for the performance of experimental, developmental, or research work
funded in whole or in part by the Federal Government. ” 35 U.S.C. § 201.
6 35 U.S.C. § 202.
7 35 U.S.C. § 203.
8 See, e.g., Mark A. Lemley & Julie E. Cohen, Patent Scope and Innovation in the Software Industry, 89 Cal. L. Rev. 1 (2001); Mark A. Lemley, Software
Patents and the Return of Functional Claiming, 2013 Wis. L. Rev. 905 (2013).
9 Jeremy Gillula & Daniel Nazer, Stupid Patent of the Month: Will Patents Slow Artificial Intelligence?, Elec. Frontier Found. (Sept. 29, 2017), https://
www.eff.org/deeplinks/2017/09/stupid-patent-month-will-patents-slow-artificial-intelligence.
10 U.S. Patent & Trademark Off., Inventing AI: Tracing the Diffusion of Artificial Intelligence with Patents 2 (2020).
11 See, e.g., Mike James, Google Files AI Patents, I Programmer (July 8, 2015), https://www.i-programmer.info/news/105-artificial-intelli-
gence/8765-google-files-ai-patents.html. This is especially problematic because companies represent 26 out of the top 30 AI patent applicants world-
wide, while only four are universities or public research organizations. World Intell. Prop . Org., Artificial Intelligence 7 (2019).
12 Lisa Ouellette & Rebecca Weires, University Patenting: Is Private Law Serving Public Values?, 2019 Mich. St. L. Rev. 1329 (2019).
13 Id. at 1331; see also Arti Kaur Rai, Regulating Scientific Research: Intellectual Property Rights and the Norms of Science, 94 Nw. U. L. Rev. 77, 136 (1999).
14 See Brian J. Love, Do University Patents Pay Off? Evidence From a Survey of University Inventors in Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, 16 Yale
J. L & Tech. 285 (2014).
15 See id. at 286.
16 See, e.g., Tech Transfer FAQ, U. Mich., https://techtransfer.umich.edu/for-inventors/resources/inventor-faq/ (“We carefully review the commercial
potential for an invention before investing in the patent process. However, because the need for commencing a patent filing usually precedes finding a
licensee, we look for creative and cost-effective ways to seek early protections for as many promising inventions as possible”); What is Technology Trans-
fer, Princeton U., https://patents.princeton.edu/about-us/what-technology-transfer (“[T]echnologies and everyday products are possible because of
technology transfer . . . Because the discoveries emerging from university research tend to be early-stage, high-risk inventions, successful university
technology transfer transactions require a patent system that protects such innovations. ”).
17 The Uniform Guidance for intellectual property is laid out in 2 C.F.R. § 200.315.
18 Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards, Grants.gov, https://www.grants.gov/learn-grants/
grant-policies/omb-uniform-guidance-2014.html (last visited Aug. 27, 2021).
19 See Key Sections of the Uniform Guidance, AICPA.org, https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/governmentalauditquality/resources/singleaudit/uni-
formguidanceforfederalrewards/key-sections-uniform-guidance.html.
20 2 C.F.R. § 200.315. A “federal award” under the Uniform Guidance includes, among other things, “the federal financial assistance that a recipient
receives directly from a Federal awarding agency or indirectly from a pass-through entity;” or “the cost-reimbursement contract under the Federal
Acquisition Regulations;” or a “grant agreement, cooperative agreement, [or] other agreement [for federal financial assistance]. ” 2 C.F.R. § 200.1.
21 2 C.F.R. §§ 200.315(b), (c). These provisions specify that the government merely “reserves” its “right” to copyright and data rights over research
produced under the federal award.
22 U.S. Copyright Office, Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices 35 (2021, 3d ed.).
23 Wil Michiels, How Do You Protect Your Machine Learning Investment?, EETimes (Mar. 31, 2020), https://www.eetimes.com/how-do-you-protect-your-
machine-learning-investment-part-ii/.
24 See, e.g., Tabrez Y. Ebrahim, Data-Centric Technologies: Patent and Copyright Doctrinal Disruptions, 43 Nova L. Rev. 287, 304; Daryl Lim, AI & IP: Innova-
tion & Creativity in an Age of Accelerated Change, 52 Akron L. Rev. 813, 835 (2018)
25 2 C.F.R. § 200.315(b).
26 Id.

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
106
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
27 For a comprehensive report on how artificial intelligence is used in various government agencies, see David Freeman Engstrom, Daniel E. Ho, Cath-
erine M. Sharkey & Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Government by Algorithm: Artificial Intelligence in Federal Administrative Agencies (2020).
28 Jukebox, OpenAI (Apr. 30, 2020), https://openai.com/blog/jukebox/.
29 See, e.g., Shlomit Yanisky-Ravid, Generating Rembrandt: Artificial Intelligence, Copyright, and Accountability in the 3A Era--the Human-Like Authors
are Already Here--a New Model, 27 Mich. St. L. Rev. 659 (2017); Kalin Hristov, Artificial Intelligence and the Copyright Dilemma, 57 J. Franklin Pierce Ctr.
Intell. Prop . 431 (2017).
30 Kalin Hristov, Artificial Intelligence and the Copyright Survey, 16 J. Sci. Pol’y & Governance 1, 14-15 (2020).
31 Id. at 16.
32 See What is Transfer Learning?, TensorFlow (Mar. 31, 2020), https://www.tensorflow.org/js/tutorials/transfer/what_is_transfer_learning.
33 See, e.g., Yunhui Guo et al., SpotT une: Transfer Learning Through Adaptive Fine-T uning, Cornell U. (Nov. 2018), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1811.08737.pdf.
34 2 C.F.R. § 200.315(d).
35 See Zhiqiang Wan, Yazhou Zhang & Haibo He, Variational Autoencoder Based Synthetic Data Generation for Imbalanced Learning, IEEE (2017).
36 See Noseong Park, Mahmoud Mohammadi & Kshitij Gorde, Data Synthesis Based on Generative Adversarial Networks, 11 Proc. VLDB Endowment
1071 (2018).
37 See Ron Bakker, Impact of Artificial Intelligence on IP Policy 12.
38 See Marta Duque Lizarralde, A Guideline to Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Intellectual Property 4-7 (2020).
39 Steven M. Bellovin et al., Privacy and Synthetic Datasets, 22 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 1, 2-3 (2019); see also Fida K. Dankar & Mahmoud Ibrahim, Fake It Till
You Make It: Guidelines for Effective Synthetic Data Generation, 5 Applied Sci. 11 (2021); but see Theresa Stadler et al., Synthetic Data – Anonymisation
Groundhog Day, Cornell U. (July 8, 2021), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.07018.pdf.
40 See, e.g., Daniel S. Quintana, A Synthetic Dataset Primer for the Biobehavioural Sciences to Promote Reproducibility and Hypothesis Generation, 9 eLife
1 (2020).
41 Yuji Roh et al., A Survey on Data Collection for Machine Learning, Cornell U. (Aug. 12, 2019), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1811.03402.pdf.
42 See, e.g., Hang Qiu et al., Minimum Cost Active Labeling, Cornell U. (June 24, 2020), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.13999.pdf; Eric Horvitz, Machine
Learning, Reasoning, and Intelligence in Daily Life: Directions and Challenges, 18 Proceeding of the Conf. on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 3
(2007).
43 Cognilytics Research, Data Engineering, Preparation, and Labeling for AI 2019 3 (2019).
44 See Wil Michiels, How Do You Protect Your Machine Learning Investment?, EETimes (Mar. 26, 2020), https://www.eetimes.com/how-do-you-protect-
your-machine-learning-investment/. In fact, in the European Union, labeled datasets are awarded with database rights protections. Mauritz Kop,
Machine Learning & EU Data Sharing Practices, Stan.-Vienna Transatlantic Tech. L. F.(Mar. 24, 2020), https://ttlfnews.wordpress.com/2020/03/24/
machine-learning-eu-data-sharing-practices/.
45 See, e.g., Niklas Fiedler et al., ImageTagger: An Open Source Online Platform for Collaborative Image Labeling, 11374 Lecture Notes in Computer Sci.
162 (2019).
46 Id. at 162.
47 Researchers may, for instance, use NRC data and compute resources to implement active learning strategies, procedures to manually label a subset
of available data and infer the remaining labels automatically using a machine learning model. See, e.g., Oscar Reyes et al., Effective Active Learning
Strategy for Multi-Label Learning, 273 Neurocomputing 494 (2018). Similarly, researchers may augment existing public sector data with valuable labels.
48 See, e.g., Pedro Saleiro et al., Aequitas: A Bias and Fairness Audit Toolkit, Cornell U. (Apr. 29, 2019), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1811.05577.pdf; Florian
Tramèr et al., FairTest: Discovering Unwarranted Associations in Data-Driven Applications, Cornell U. (Aug. 16, 2019), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1510.02377.
pdf.
49 While we do not discuss the idiosyncratic modifications to the Uniform Guidance that vary from agency-to-agency, we encourage the task force to
assess these modifications if it decides to implement the NRC through a particular agency. If the NRC is administered through multiple agencies, the
complex amalgam of agency-specific IP rules may increase the friction in using the NRC if researchers must context-switch from one set of regulations
to the next depending on the funding agency.
50 2 C.F.R. § 2900.13. Previously, the Department of Labor explicitly required IP generated under a federal award to be licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution license, but this rule was changed in April 2021 to replace the proprietary term “Creative Commons Attribution license” with the
industry-recognized standard “open license. ” 86 Fed. Reg. 22107 (Apr. 27, 2021).
51 Dissemination and Sharing of Research Results - NSF Data Management Plan Requirements, Nat’l Sci. Found., https://www.nsf.gov/bfa/dias/policy/
dmp.jsp.
52 See, e.g., Aidan Courtney et al., Balancing Open Source Stem Cell Science with Commercialization, Nature Biotechnology (Feb. 7, 2011), https://
www.nature.com/articles/nbt.1773.
53 See Klint Finley, When Open Source Software Comes with a Few Catches, Wired (July 31, 2019), https://www.wired.com/story/when-open-source-soft-
ware-comes-with-catches/; Guide to Open Source Licenses, Synopsys (Oct. 7, 2016), https://www.synopsys.com/blogs/software-security/open-source-li-
censes/.
54 See Daniel A. Almeida et. al, Do Software Developers Understand Open Source Licenses?, 25 IEEE Int’l Conf. on Program Comprehension 1 (2017)
(finding that software developers “struggle[] when multiple [open-source] licenses [are] involved” and “lack the knowledge and understanding to tease
apart license interactions across multiple situations. ”).
55 See, e.g., Alexandra Theben et al., Challenges and Limits of an Open Source Approach to Artificial Intelligence 14 (2021); Stadler et al., supra
note 39; Milad Nasr et al., Comprehensive Privacy Analysis of Deep Learning: Passive and Active White-box Inference Attacks against Centralized and Feder-
ated Learning, Cornell U. (June 6, 2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00910.pdf.
56 Some universities have decided to eliminate classified research. See, e.g., At the Hands of Radicals, Stan. Mag. (Jan. 2009), https://stanfordmag.org/
contents/at-the-hands-of-the-radicals.
57 See Donald Kennedy, Science and Secrecy, 289 Sci. 724 (2000); Peter J. Westwick, Secret Science: A Classified Community in the National Laboratories,
38 Minerva 363 (2000).
58 See Braun & Ong, supra note 3; Sören Sonnenburg et al., The Need for Open Source Software in Machine Learning, 8 J. Machine Learning Res. 2443
(2007); see also Katie Malone & Richard Wolski, Doing Data Science on the Shoulders of Giants: The Value of Open Source Software for the Data Science
Community, HDSR (May 31, 2020), https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/xsrt4zs2/release/4.

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
107
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
59 See Laura A. Heymann, Overlapping Intellectual Property Doctrines: Election of Rights Versus Selection of Remedies, 17 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 239, 240
(2013); Oracle Am. Inc. v. Google Inc., 750 F.3d 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2014) (accepting that software is both patentable and copyrightable).
60 Robert E. Thomas, Debugging Software Patents: Increasing Innovation and Reducing Uncertainty in the Judicial Reform of Software Patent Law, 25
Santa Clara Computer & High Tech. L.J. 191, 222-23 (2008).
61 See, e.g., Joaquin Vanschorin et al., OpenML: Networked Science in Machine Learning, Cornell U. (Aug. 1, 2014), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1407.7722.pdf
(developing a collaboration platform through which scientists can automatically share, organize and discuss machine learning experiments, data, and
algorithms); see also Sarah O’Meara, AI Researchers in China Want to Keep the Global-Sharing Culture Alive, Nature (May 29, 2019), https://www.nature.
com/articles/d41586-019-01681-x; Shuai Zhao et al., Packaging and Sharing Machine Learning Models via the Acumos AI Open Platform, 17 ICMLA (2018).
62 Jeanne C. Fromer, Machines as the New Oompa-Loompas: Trade Secrecy, the Cloud, Machine Learning, and Automation, 94 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 706, 712
(2019); Jordan R. Raffe et al., The Rising Importance of Trade Secret Protection for AI- Related Intellectual Property 1, 5-6 (2020); Jessica
M. Meyers, Artificial Intelligence and Trade Secrets, Am. Bar Ass’n (Feb. 2019), https://www.americanbar.org/groups/intellectual_property_law/pub-
lications/landslide/2018-19/january-february/artificial-intelligence-trade-secrets-webinar/; AIPLA Comments Regarding “Request for Comments on
Intellectual Property Protection for Artificial Intelligence Innovation”, Am. Intell. Prop . L. Ass’n (Jan. 10, 2020), https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/AIPLA_RFC-84-FR-58141.pdf.
63 Clark D. Asay, Artificial Stupidity, 61 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1187, 1197, 1241-42 (2020).
64 See id.; Am. Intell. Prop . L. Ass’n, supra note 62, at 16.
65 See Asay, supra note 63, at 1242.
Appendix
1 Department of Energy Awards $425 Million for Next Generation Supercomputing Technologies, Energy.gov (Nov. 14, 2014), https://www.energy.gov/
articles/department-energy-awards-425-million-next-generation-supercomputing-technologies.
2 Amazon EC2 P3 Instances, Amazon, https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/p3/ (last visited Sept. 9, 2021).
3 CORAL Request for Proposal B604142, Lawrence Livermore Nat’l Laboratory (2014), https://web.archive.org/web/20140816181824/ https://asc.llnl.
gov/CORAL/. We note that we were not able to locate the final award documents, nor is Summit budgeted in sufficient detail to back out cost from the
DOE budget statements. Our cost estimates here, however, are comparable to publicly reported estimates for the total cost of the Summit system.
4 This is based on a $30M maximum in the DOE Office of Science contract for non-recurring engineering (NRE) costs for the systems at Argonne National
Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
5 This is based on the difference in the RFP terms between the inclusion of maintenance under the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory system
(with a maximum budget of $170M) and the exclusion of maintenance under the systems for the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the Argonne
National Laboratory (with a maximum budget for the build contract of $155M). This is likely an upper bound on maintenance, given that the difference
reflects the combination of NRE and 5-year maintenance.
6 See CORAL Price Schedule, Lawrence Livermore Nat’l Laboratory (2014), https://web.archive.org/web/20140816181824/ https://asc.llnl.gov/CORAL/
RFP_components/04_CORAL_Price_Schedule_ANL_ORNL_tabs.xlsx. We used 1.62% as the interest rate to calculate the cost over 60 months. It is the
5-year Treasury constant maturity rate on November 14, 2014, see Selected Interest Rates (Daily) – H.15, Fed. Res., https://www.federalreserve.gov/
releases/H15/default.htm, when DOE announced the award of the HPC system, see Department of Energy Awards $425 Million for Next Generation Super-
computing Technologies, supra 1.
7 For instance, this estimate is in line with the cost of $200M reported by the New York Times. Steve Lohr, Move Over, China: U.S. is Again Home to World’s
Speediest Supercomputer, N.Y. Times (June 8, 2018), https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/08/technology/supercomputer-china-us.html. Some reporting
conflates the procurement of multiple systems that occurred contemporaneously.
8 Research shows that for training compute-intensive deep learning models, such as ResNet-101, the GPU utilization is around 70%. Jingoo Han et
al., A Quantitative Study of Deep Learning Training on Heterogeneous Supercomputers, 2019 IEEE Conf. on Cluster Computing 1, 5 (2019). However,
ResNet-50 has a GPU utilization of approximately 40%, see id., and other accounts report that GPUs are utilized only 15-30% of the time, see, e.g., Lukas
Biewald, Monitor and Improve GPU Usage for Training Deep Learning Models, Towards Data Sci. (Mar. 27, 2019), https://towardsdatascience.com/mea-
suring-actual-gpu-usage-for-deep-learning-training-e2bf3654bcfd; Janet Morss, Giving Your Data Scientists a Boost with GPUaaS, CIO (June 2, 2020),
https://www.cio.com/article/3561090/giving-your-data-scientists-a-boost-with-gpuaas.html.
9 Compute Canada, Cloud Computing for Researchers 1 (2016), https://www.computecanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/CloudStrate-
gy2016-2019-forresearchersEXTERNAL-1.pdf.
10 Jennifer Shkabatur, The Global Commons of Data, 22 Stan. Tech. L.R. 407, 407-09 (2019).
11 Benjamin Sobel, Artificial Intelligence’s Fair Use Crisis, 41 Colum. J.L. & Arts 61 (2017).
12 Id.
13 See Protecting What We Love About the Internet: Our Efforts to Stop Online Piracy, Google Pub. Pol’y Blog (Nov. 7, 2019), https://www.blog.google/
outreach-initiatives/public-policy/protecting-what-we-love-about-internet-our-efforts-stop-online-piracy/.
14 See Jennifer M. Urban, Joe Karaganis & Brianna M. Schofield, Notice & Takedown in Everyday Practice 39 (2017) (illustrating the difficulty that
online service providers face in manually evaluating a large volume of data for potential infringement; for example, one online service provider ex-
plained that “out of fear of failing to remove infringing material, and motivated by the threat of statutory damages, its staff will take “six passes to try to
find the [identified content]. ”); see also Letter from Thom Tillis, Marsha Blackburn, Christopher A. Coons, Dianne Feinstein et. al, to Sundar Pichai, Chief
Executive Officer, Google Inc. (Sept. 3, 2019), https://www.ipwatchdog.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/9.3-Content-ID-Ltr.pdf (“We have heard from
copyright holders who have been denied access to Content ID tools, and as a result, are at a significant disadvantage to prevent repeated uploading of
content that they have previously identified as infringing. They are left with the choice of spending hours each week seeking out and sending notices
about the same copyrighted works, or allowing their intellectual property to be misappropriated. ”).
15 See Google, How Google Fights Piracy 6 (2016). To illustrate the costs of implementing Content ID on a large-scale platform, Google announced in
a report in 2016 that YouTube had invested more than $60 million in Content ID.
16 See Sobel, supra note 11, at 66-79.
17 See Authors Guild v. Google Inc., 804 F.3d 202 (2d Cir. 2015).
18 Id.

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
108
A Blueprint for the National Research Cloud
19 Id. at 216-17.
20 Matthew Stewart, The Most Important Court Decision For Data Science and Machine Learning, Towards Data Sci. (Oct. 31, 2019), https://towardsdata-
science.com/the-most-important-supreme-court-decision-for-data-science-and-machine-learning-44cfc1c1bcaf.
21 See, e.g., James Grimmelmann, Copyright for Literate Robots, 101 Iowa L. Rev. 657, 661; Sobel, supra note 11, at 51-57.
22 See Sobel, supra note 11, at 57.
23 See Anna I. Krylov et. al. What is the Price of Open Source Software? 6 J. Physical Chemistry Letters 2751, 2753 (2015) (explaining that budding
researchers considering commercialization may be particularly concerned about what licenses are available, since a “strictly open-source environment
may furthermore disincentivize young researchers to make new code available right away, lest their ability to publish papers be short-circuited by a
more senior researcher with an army of postdocs poised to take advantage of any new code. ”).
24 See, e.g., A Data Scientist’s Guide to Open-Source Licensing, Towards Data Sci. (Nov. 4, 2018), https://towardsdatascience.com/a-data-scientists-
guide-to-open-source-licensing-c70d5fe42079; Choose an Open-Source License, https://choosealicense.com.
25 Licensing a Repository, GitHub, https://docs.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/licensing-a-repository.
26 What is the Most Appropriate Licence for My Data?, FigShare, https://help.figshare.com/article/what-is-the-most-appropriate-licence-for-my-data.
27 See Developer Agreement, Twitter (Mar. 10, 2020), https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/agreement; Non-commercial Use of the Twitter
API, Twitter, https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/commercial-terms.
28 See Daniel A. Almeida et. al, Do Software Developers Understand Open Source Licenses?, 25 IEEE Int’l Conf. on Program Comprehension 1 (2017).
29 Id. at 9.
30 Alexandra Kohn & Jessica Lange, Confused About Copyright? Assessing Researchers’ Comprehension of Copyright Transfer Agreements, 6 J. Librarian-
ship & Scholarly Commc’n. 1, 9 (2018).
31 See Will Frass, Jo Cross & Victoria Gardner, Taylor & Francis Open Access Survey June 2014 15 (2014). Note that lack of IP literacy could act as
an additional deterrent to uploaders. The Taylor and Francis Open Access Survey of 2014 found that “63% of respondents indicated a lack of under-
standing of publisher policy as an important or very important factor in failing to deposit an article in an IR [Institutional Repository]. ” Id.
32 Dataverse Community Norms, Harv. Dataverse, https://dataverse.org/best-practices/dataverse-community-norms.
33 Copyright and License Policy, FigShare, https://help.figshare.com/article/copyright-and-license-policy.
34 Australian Data Research Commons, Research Data Rights Managing Guide 6 (2019).
35 See Harvard Dataverse General Terms of Use, Harv. Dataverse (2021), https://dataverse.org/best-practices/harvard-dataverse-general-terms-use.
36 Stan. U. Inst. of Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence Index Report 2021 125-34 (2021).
37 Thilo Hagendorff, The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines, 30 Minds & Machines 99 (2020).
38 Andrew D. Selbst, An Institutional View of Algorithmic Impact Assessments, 35 Harv. J.L. & Tech. 1, 66 (forthcoming 2021).
39 Brent Mittlestadt, Principles Alone Cannot Guarantee Ethical AI, 1 Nature Mach. Intelligence 501 (2019).
40 DOD Adopts Ethical Principles for Artificial Intelligence, U.S. Dep’t Defense (Feb. 24, 2020), https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/
Article/2091996/dod-adopts-ethical-principles-for-artificial-intelligence/.
41 President’s Mgmt. Agenda, Federal Data Strategy: Data Ethics Framework (2020).
42 Artificial Intelligence: An Accountability Framework for Federal Agencies and Other Entities, U.S. Gov’t Accountability Office (June 30, 2021), https://
www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-519sp.
43 Principles of Artificial Intelligence Ethics for the Intelligence Community, Office of the Director of Nat’l Intelligence, https://www.odni.gov/index.
php/features/2763-principles-of-artificial-intelligence-ethics-for-the-intelligence-community.
44 Key Considerations for Responsible Development and Fielding of Artificial Intelligence, Nat’l Security Comm’n Artificial Intelligence (2021), https://
www.nscai.gov/key-considerations/.
45 Recommended Practices, Nat’l Security Comm’n Artificial Intelligence, https://www.nscai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Key-Consider-
ations-Supporting-Visuals.pdf.
46 Defense Innovation Bd., AI Principles: Recommendations on the Ethical Use of Artificial Intelligence by the Department of Defense (2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
