
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
K E Y
TAKEAWAYS
 Few federal agencies
are using AI in ways
that rival the private
sector’s sophistication
and prowess, yet AI use
is widespread and poses
numerous governance
questions.
 AI tools used by the
federal government
need to reflect
transparency and
society’s longstanding
legal, political and ethical
foundations.
 At federal agencies,
many of the most
compelling AI tools were
created from within
by innovative, public-
spirited technologists –
not profit-driven private
contractors.
SEPTEMBER
2020
AI’s Promise and Peril
for the U.S. Government
David Freeman Engstrom, Daniel E. Ho,
Catherine M. Sharkey, and
Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar
While the use of artificial intelligence (AI) spans the breadth of the U.S. federal
government, government AI remains uneven at best, and problematic and
perhaps dangerous at worst. Our research team of lawyers and computer
scientists examined AI uses among federal administrative agencies – from facial
recognition to insider trading and health care fraud, for example. Our report,
commissioned by the Administrative Conference of the United States and
generously supported by Stanford Law School, NYU Law School, and Stanford’s
Institute for Human-Centered AI, is the most comprehensive study of the subject
ever conducted in the United States. The report's findings reveal deep concerns
about growing government use of these tools, and so we suggest how AI could
be unleashed to make the federal government work better, more fairly, and at
lower cost.
In March 2019, the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence funded
research exploring the topic of AI’s growing role in federal agencies. The project
culminated in the 122-page report , “Government by Algorithm: Artificial Intelligence
in Federal Administrative Agencies, ” which was commissioned by the Administrative
Conference of the United States, an agency that provides advice across federal agencies.
In the big picture, AI promises to transform how government agencies do their work by
reducing the cost of core governance functions, improving decision-making, and using the
power of big data for greater efficiency. Many benefits exist. In the enforcement context,
1

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Policy Brief: AI’s Promise and Peril
for the U.S. Government
the Securities and Exchange Commission can use AI to
“shrink the haystack” of potential violations of insider
trading, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services use AI to identify fraud, for example. AI tools can
help administrative judges spot error in draft decisions
adjudicating disability benefits and help examiners at
the Patent and Trademark Office process patent and
trademark applications more efficiently and accurately.
The Food and Drug Administration, the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, and Housing and Urban
Development currently task AI to engage the public, by
sifting through millions of citizen complaints. Others
have experimented with chatbots to field questions from
welfare beneficiaries, asylum seekers, and taxpayers.
While the benefits are real and tangible, key issues and
problems remain. Questions arise, for example, about
the proper design of algorithms and user interfaces,
the respective scope of human and machine decision-
making, the boundaries between public actions and
private contracting, the capacity to learn over time
using AI, and whether the use of AI is even permitted in
certain contexts.
Research
Outcomes
To more fully understand this dilemma, our research
team studied uses of AI at the top 142 federal agencies,
conducted in-depth case studies of adoption,
development, and deployment, and analyzed the results
from technical, legal, and policy angles.
Our five main findings include:
• The government’s AI toolkit is diverse and spans
the federal administrative state. This includes
conventional machine learning to more advanced “deep
learning” with natural language and image data. In fact,
nearly half of the federal agencies studied (45%) have
experimented with AI and related machine learning
tools. These activities reflect enforcing regulatory
mandates, adjudicating government benefits and
privileges, evaluating public health and safety, extracting
TOP TEN AGENCIES AND SUBAGENCIES BY
NUMBER OF USE CASES
Agency Name
Number
of use
cases
Office of Justice Programs 12
Securities and Exchange Commission 10
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
9
Food and Drug Administration 8
United States Geological Survey 8
United States Postal Service 8
Social Security Administration 7
United States Patent and
Trademark Office
6
Bureau of Labor Statistics 5
Customs and Border Protection 4
The above list excludes overarching department-level agencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
In-house expertise yields AI
tools that are better tailored to
complex governance tasks and
more likely to be implemented
in a lawful, policy-compliant,
and accountable fashion.
Policy Brief: AI’s Promise and Peril
for the U.S. Government
information from the government’s massive data
streams, and communicating with citizens.
• Despite the federal embrace of AI, the technological
sophistication lags in the public sector. Our computer
scientists found that AI used in federal agencies either
lacked detail and only 12% could be rated as high in
sophistication. This raises a red flag because federal
agencies will find it harder to realize gains in accuracy and
efficiency with less sophisticated tools. Without significant
public investment, the public-private technology gap
could widen.
• AI technical capacity must come from within
federal agencies. While many agencies rely on private
contractors to build out AI capacity, a majority of profiled
use cases (53%) are the product of in-house efforts
by agency technologists. This underscores the critical
importance of internal agency capacity building as AI
continues to proliferate. In-house expertise promotes
AI tools that are better tailored to complex governance
Number of use cases
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Policy area
Law
Enforcement
Health
Financial Regulation
AI USES BY POLICY AREA Each bar represents the count of the number of use cases by policy area.
Social Welfare
Commerce
Environment
Science and Energy
Other
Communications
Agriculture
Labor and Employment
Transportation
Housing
Education

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
AI USES BY DATA TYPENumber of use cases
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Data Type
‘Structured’ data includes numerical information
and other factored variables.
Structured
Text
Image
Audio
AI could raise fairness and
equity issues, while also fueling
social anxieties.
Policy Brief: AI’s Promise and Peril
for the U.S. Government
tasks and more likely to be designed and implemented in
lawful, policy-compliant, and accountable ways.
 • AI decision-making needs to take into account
America’s unique legal norms, reasoning, and
constraints. Government agencies have an obligation
to explain decisions, but such explanations become
increasingly difficult as algorithmic decision making
systems displace human judgment and its capacity
for nuance. If AI tools are to successfully proliferate
throughout federal agencies, they must be designed
to ensure accountability and fidelity to legal norms of
transparency, explanation, and non-discrimination.
This means creating AI that truly functions reasonably
within the complexities of human and institutional
environments.
• AI could raise fairness and equity issues, while also
fueling social anxieties. A concern is that the wealthy
and privileged will “game” the federal government’s AI
systems by maximizing their considerable resources
and know-how. An enforcement agency’s algorithmic
predictions could fall more heavily on smaller
businesses that, unlike larger firms, lack computer
scientists who can reverse-engineer the agency’s
model and keep out of its cross-hairs. If citizens come
to believe that federal AI systems are rigged, then
broad societal support for an effective and tech-savvy
government will evaporate quickly.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
Moving forward
on federal AI
As our report notes, the federal government’s use of AI
raises issues of accountability, technological quality, and
societal conflict. Delving deeper, questions arise:
For example, how much transparency is necessary to
judge an AI tool’s fidelity to the law, accountability, and
other societal norms and conventions?
Also, to what extent can existing legal oversight tools,
particularly administrative law, achieve meaningful
accountability, and to what extent will accountability
require newly minted interventions? And, how do we
weigh the merits of internally-built AI tools and growing
government’s own tech operations compared to using
private contractors with AI-based solutions at the ready?
This conversation on federal AI is extremely important
now. The White House recently announced plans
to chart a national artificial intelligence policy for
federal agencies – a welcome and long overdue step.
Meanwhile, both funding for AI research and updating
agency IT systems and guidance for agencies are in the
works, and would be excellent next steps in terms of
concrete support.
In closing, the federal government is at a crossroads
with AI. Managed well, federal AI use can make the U.S.
government more efficient, accurate, and fair. Managed
poorly, federal AI can exacerbate the public-private
technology gap, make agencies more vulnerable and less
transparent, and heighten concerns about government
arbitrariness and biases.
Much work remains to be done. Wherever the nation
lands on AI policy issues at the individual level, federal
AI use on a widespread basis is here to stay. The
question now is whether the government's unfolding
of AI throughout federal agencies will be managed well
or managed poorly. How we answer that question will
critically shape the future of governance.
The question now is whether
the government's unfolding
of AI throughout federal
agencies will be managed
well or managed poorly
Policy Brief: AI’s Promise and Peril
for the U.S. Government

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
David Freeman Engstrom,
Professor of Law and Associate Dean
for Strategic Initiatives, Stanford
University; Affiliated Faculty,
Stanford Institute Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence (HAI).
Daniel E. Ho,
William Benjamin Scott and Luna M.
Scott Professor of Law, Professor of
Political Science, and Senior Fellow at
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
Research, Stanford University; Associate
Director, Stanford Institute Human-
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HAI).
Catherine M. Sharkey,
Crystal Eastman Professor of Law, NYU
Mariano Florentino Cuéllar,
Justice on the Supreme Court
of California; Herman Phleger
Visiting Professor of Law, Stanford
University; Affiliated Faculty,
Stanford Institute Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence (HAI).
The original report, Government by Algorithm:
Artificial Intelligence in Federal Administrative
Agencies can be found here:
https://law.stanford.edu/ACUS-AI-Report
Stanford University’s Institute on Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence (HAI), applies rigorous analysis
and research to pressing policy questions on artificial
intelligence. A pillar of HAI is to inform policymakers,
industry leaders, and civil society by disseminating
scholarship to a wide audience. HAI is a nonpartisan
research institute, representing a range of voices.
The views expressed in this policy brief reflect the views
of the authors. For further information, please contact
HAI-Policy@stanford.edu.
Stanford HAI: Cordura Hall, 210 Panama Street, Stanford, CA 94305-1234
T 650.725.4537 F 650.123.4567 E HAI-Policy@stanford.edu hai.stanford.edu
