Title: Research culture: embedding inclusive excellence - workshop report

URL Source: http://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/publications/2018/research-culture-workshop-report.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 23 Nov 2023 14:54:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
Research culture

embedding inclusive

excellence

Insights on the future culture of research Cover image

Young’s Translator (2031) , by Stephen Bennett and Amy Starmar,

from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects. Research culture

Research culture encompasses the behaviours, values,

expectations, attitudes and norms of our research

communities. It influences researchers’ career paths

and determines the way that research is conducted

and communicated.

The UK has a long history of shaping global research

culture, from the times of the Enlightenment scientists,

the foundation of the Royal Society and the frameworks

of publishing and peer review, through to its recent

leadership in championing science as an open enterprise.

Building on this history and the strengths of research culture

today, the Society has started a programme of work to

explore how the UK can promote the cultural conditions that

will best enable excellent research and researchers here

and elsewhere to flourish in the future 1. The focus of this

programme is on the assessment of research and

researchers, researcher career development, and open

science. The work builds on the recommendations of a

project led by the Nuffield Council on Bioethics in which

the Society was a partner 2.

The UK’s research ecosystem is evolving in ways that

provide new opportunities and new challenges. These

include the creation of UK Research and Innovation, the

development of an Industrial Strategy and the UK’s

departure from the EU. In a world where the research

budgets of the US, China, Germany and many other

countries are greater than the UK’s, it is more important

than ever to understand how the UK’s research culture

can be developed and used to its strategic advantage,

to attract and retain talent and support continued

research excellence.

This document captures the insights and ideas generated

through twelve  Visions of 2035  workshops held across

the UK, together with insights from a range of other

conferences and discussion meetings held over the last

year 3. In total, over 1,000 individuals from government,

industry, academia and the professional research services

participated in what the Society hopes is just the beginning

of a sustained national conversation.

The 12 workshops explored and reimagined 4 existing

research funding and assessment systems. Five common

themes emerged:

• Recognition and Esteem

• Setting Culture

• A Culture of Mobility

• Open Science

• Fostering Scientific Leadership

Each thematic area was typically explored through

two lenses:

• ‘Top-down’ – the role that public policy, funding and

research assessment frameworks play in setting the

incentives that shape research culture;

• ‘Bottom-up’ – the potential for researchers to catalyse

behavioural and attitudinal change at the level of

research groups and institutions, and how this might

bubble up to form new social norms.

The ideas and opinions presented in this document range

from those expressed by single individuals to those that

were almost universally held and we have tried to

distinguish between these.

Participants made a number of assumptions about the future

of research culture. For example, most assumed that the

research community of 2035 would be much more diverse

than it is today, including individuals from a wide range of

backgrounds, perspectives and experiences. They expected

that boundaries between scientific disciplines would be more

permeable. The elements of culture discussed in this

document would help to achieve these conditions.

There was clear consensus amongst participants that a

change in today’s research culture is necessary to ensure

the conditions for excellence. Some aspects of the current

research ecosystem that are essential for sustainable

delivery of excellent research are undervalued. In setting

out the needs and aspirations of the research community,

this document begins to identify ways in which the Society

and others can further support excellence in the research

community. It highlights areas where action is needed and

invites discussion on the forms that action might take.

> 1. www.royalsociety.org/researchculture
> 2. http://nuffieldbioethics.org/project/research-culture
> 3. A range of futures techniques were used to develop conversations, including using artefacts from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> These are pictured throughout this document. More information on this can be found at www.royalsociety.org/changingexpectations
> 4. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/research-culture/changing-expectations/visions-of-2035/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 3

Recognition and esteem

A crucial strand to the discussions was to retain and

enhance an environment where the best science can be

pursued. Participants highlighted the importance of being

given the time and the space to do blue skies, risky

research as well as synthesis and replicability studies.

Central to this being achieved was the need for the value

of these activities to be more widely recognised.

Participants reported a perception that current measures

of recognition and esteem in the academic environment

were disproportionately based on quantitative metrics

such as grant income, citation counts and the impact factor

of the journals in which they published. There is

widespread recognition that these metrics do not

adequately capture research excellence, and many leading

organisations, including the Royal Society, have signed the

San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment

(DoRA) which sets out good practice in this area 5.

Narrow approaches to assessment based on publication

metrics risk promoting an environment in which systemic

pressures may incentivise individuals to compromise on the

rigour and integrity of their research. Senior staff

participants from a number of UK universities were clear that

individuals’ broader contributions to teaching, research and

other strategic endeavours do inform decisions on

promotion and advancement. Participants from the Early

Career Researcher (ECR) community typically had a different

perception of what is required of them: across the course of

the workshop ECR participants spoke of the pressure to

‘publish early and often’ in order to secure promotion. The

Royal Society has reinforced others’ calls for transparent

promotion and progression criteria for all research staff 6.

> Image
> Interdisciplinary Collaboration Wheel (2028) , by Neus Torres Tamarit
> and Reggy Liu, from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> 5. http://www.ascb.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/sfdora.pdf
> 6. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2017/consultation-response-second-research-excellence-framework-REF/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 4

Some participants’ beliefs that quantitative metrics of

research impact were the only measures of their potential

that mattered seemed to be influenced by their

understanding of the Research Excellence Framework

(REF). For example, the fact that the REF 2014 guidelines

explicitly excluded consideration of journal impact factors

did not appear to be well known. The engrained social

norms about REF and their divergence from the rules by

which the REF operates is discussed in the Nuffield

Council of Bioethics 2014 report  The Culture of Scientific

Research in the UK  7.

The Royal Society has called for an institutionally-focussed

REF, where a portfolio of outputs from the institution would

be submitted. This portfolio, along with examples of research

impact, would provide evidence of the quality of the research

environment created by the institution. The uncoupling of

publications from individuals might reduce pressure on

individuals to produce ‘REF-able’ outputs, benefitting

ambitious, longer-term and collaborative research. It would

also emphasise the productivity of the institution as a whole,

valuing the contributions of support staff and technical

specialists as well as Principal Investigators (PIs).

“Diversity is being crushed by narrower and

narrower criteria for assessing success.”

Dame Ottoline Leyser FRS.

Idea

A standardised short format academic CV: Most

funders require a short version of an applicant’s CV as

part of grant applications. Some participants agreed

that a sector-wide standardised short format CV that

emphasises wider contributions to the research system

could increase the value associated with these

activities, but would need to be carefully introduced so

as not to create additional burdens on researchers.

Some of the activities that could be considered for

inclusion in this are discussed in the European

Commission’s statement on  Evaluation of Research

Careers fully acknowledging Open Science Practices 9.

The use of DOIs 10  and the addition of a summary

sentence for publications could reduce the emphasis

on the journal in which a paper is published, and

refocus attention on its contribution to the field. This

short format CV could be incorporated into current

contribution record platforms such as ORCiD 11 .

Example

Parent, Carer, Scientist  8 is a collection of 150 personal

stories from scientists who are combining a career in

research with their roles as parents and carers, each in

their own way. Through this initiative the Royal Society

is making visible the diversity of individuals who

perform research, and their varied other commitments,

to establish new norms and shape a more inclusive

research culture.

> 7. http://nuffieldbioethics.org/wp-content/uploads/Nuffield_research_culture_full_report_web.pdf
> 8. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/diversity-in-science/parent-carer-scientist/
> 9. https://ec.europa.eu/research/openscience/pdf/os_rewards_wgreport.pdf (pp6 and 7)
> 10. A digital object identifier (DOI) is a unique alphanumeric string assigned by a registration agency (the International DOI Foundation) to identify content
> and provide a persistent link to its location on the Internet. The publisher assigns a DOI when an article is published and made available electronically.
> 11. https://orcid.org/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 5

Setting culture

Leaders of scientific institutions play a pivotal role in

shaping culture. Participants consistently spoke about

how leaders who invest time in developing a positive

research culture influence others to do the same. There

was an appetite for such a focus to be an explicit and

embedded part of the ‘day job’ for all researchers and

research leaders.

Consistent messaging is crucial to catalysing a cultural

shift. A number of participants suggested that individuals

in leadership roles could better use the full range of

communication channels open to them, from email

signatures to governance and corporate social

responsibility reports. Diversity of communication could

ensure consistent and wide-reaching messaging and

reinforce action to develop and embed positive values

and behaviours.

Senior leaders need to practice what they preach.

Participants gave a number of examples of research

leaders taking small but impactful steps to improve

wellbeing in the workplace. This included keeping regular

hours to re-set the belief that only academics working

long hours could be successful.

Research culture is also strongly affected by a changing

funding landscape. For example, there is a movement in

the UK towards fellowships and associated programme

grants and away from project grants. A few participants

felt the balance between these different types of funding

should be carefully monitored to ensure the most effective

promotion of excellent science.

“Cultures are not set by policy statements

or by distributing a leaflet, but through the

people with whom we meet in thousands

of seemingly insignificant interactions on

perfectly ordinary days. We should all ask

ourselves whether we display the

characteristics that we value and want to see

embedded within the cultures in which we

work. Some people are more visible than

others, but none of us are invisible and we all

have a part to play in developing an inclusive

and supportive research culture for all.”

Professor Tom Welton OBE.

> Image
> Memorial to Mars Mission, 2027 (2032) by Helen Cawley, Priya Odedra
> and Josh Bourke, from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 6

A culture of mobility

Mobility refers to the ability of individuals in the research

community to move between roles and careers and, in

some cases, to follow ‘braided career paths’ combining

academic and other work at the same time. Participants

saw mobility as including movement in and out of careers

in charitable organisations, the public sector and teaching,

as well as industry.

96% of science PhD graduates do not end up holding a

permanent academic research position 12 , and there was

much discussion about how best to continue to encourage

the brightest undergraduates to take on PhD studies while

also designing environments that enabled them to make

the best possible choices about their future careers during

their graduate training. Individuals must take responsibility

for their own careers and, to do this, they require the time

and resource to understand the full and diverse range of

career options open to them. This might be made available

through greater institutional commitment to supporting

non-academic careers or braided career paths inside and

outside of academic research.

Enabling mobility

A culture that supports mobility would be characterised by

opportunities for people to gain experience in different

disciplines and organisations. Longer term industry-

academic collaborations and external mentoring for

researchers and research staff were given by participants

as examples of what ‘excellent’ might look like. The value

of these experiences in supporting career development

as well as enabling research that crosses the boundaries

between disciplines and organisations was highlighted in

the British Academy’s report  Crossing Paths: Interdisciplinary

Institutions, Careers, Education and Applications 13 .

Supporting collaborations and interactions between

researchers in different sectors could also help bridge a

perceived cultural divide in terms of the timescales that

individuals and their organisations work to. Academia was

suggested as being ‘too fast’ for industry, with a focus only on

the next publication and the next grant. This was thought to

drive a culture of selfishness and short termism that would be

prohibitive to productive collaboration. By contrast, academia

was sometimes considered ‘too slow’ by government which

could not often wait the lifetime of an academic 2 – 5 year

grant for outcomes to address evidential needs.

> Image
> The New Career Map (2027) by Liv Bargman and Stephen Bennett,
> from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> 12. https://royalsociety.org/~/media/Royal_Society_Content/policy/publications/2010/4294970126.pdf
> 13. https://www.britac.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Crossing%20Paths%20-%20Full%20Report.pdf
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 7

Engineering mobility

Rotating individuals through different disciplines and

sectors as a core and embedded part of their research

activities might begin to bridge the cultural divide between

different research environments. GlaxoSmithKline hosting

researchers in its Open Lab, BP’s International Centre for

Advanced Materials (ICAM) collaboration and the

Heilbronn Institute, a collaboration between UK GCHQ

and the University of Bristol, are examples of this 14 .

A changing conversation

The ‘push’ to introduce structured mobility opportunities into

the research system needs to be met by demand ‘pull’ if

they are to deliver real and sustained change. There was a

perception that institutional conversations around careers in

research mitigated against generating this demand.

Participants reported their being perceived as ‘failing’

should they decide to pursue a career outside of academic

research. This was often reinforced by language around

other career options being framed in terms of ‘alternative’,

‘Plan b’ or ‘selling out’ in the context of moving to industry.

Changing the language used to discuss research careers

is a long standing issue, but it is important for both the

community and the individual. The personal crush

associated with moving away from academia was

rationalised by ‘scientist’ being a strong part of researchers’

identity. Changing career direction involved self-evaluation

and uncertainty that act as a barrier. It also personalised

failure and ‘unsuccessful’ research in a way that might

incentivise poor practice and compromise research integrity.

Workshop participants felt that normalising and valuing

participation in a greater range of activities throughout

research careers might help to dispel these attitudes.

Despite the sense that current incentives are not aligned

to support mobility, individuals do transition from academic

research to lead rewarding, productive and successful

careers in other sectors. The Royal Society’s  Changing

expectations 15  case studies showcase individuals who

have benefited from pursuing non-traditional or braided

careers. By focussing on diverse contributions, aligning

cultures across research environments and changing

attitudes towards “failure”, we might empower a cohort of

researchers to do the same. The Royal Society is working

to achieve this, and is ready to build on these efforts with

help from others invested in influencing research culture.

Example

The Royal Society supports the mobility of researchers

between academia and industry through its Industry

Fellowship Scheme. Since 1998, this scheme has helped

nearly 200 scientists and engineers working on

collaborative projects between a business and a

university. Recently, this has been expanded with an

award of further funding, offering more flexible

Fellowships and to launch a new Entrepreneur in

Residence programme. This will support senior industrial

scientists and entrepreneurs to work at a university to

impact research, teaching and commercialisation and help

grow a more entrepreneurial culture within academia.

Example

Where will your career take you? These 23 career case

studies are the first stage of the Royal Society’s

Changing expectations  project, and inspire researchers

to think differently about blinkered definitions of

success and to challenge ideas about what skills and

achievements should be valued.

“I think it’s a little odd that in academia

people talk about ‘academia’ and ‘industry’

as if they are the only two options out

there, and everything that isn’t academia

is industry.”

Dr Amber Griffiths, founding director at FoAM Kernow.

> 14. http://www.icam-online.org/about-us/the-icam-story/; http://www.openlabfoundation.org/about.html; https://heilbronn.ac.uk/about/
> 15. www.royalsociety.org/changingexpectations
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 8

Open Science

Open science encompasses research that is accessible

to all, as discussed in the Royal Society’s previous report

Science as an open enterprise 16 . This includes making

research papers available at zero cost to the reader.

Openness also requires ways of enabling the public and

other non-academic audiences such as decision-makers, to

understand and engage with research. This in turn requires

initiatives such as summaries tailored to the audience, and

public engagement programmes 17 . A global push to make

science more open is underway, driven both by demand for

publicly-funded research to be publicly available and by the

increasing ease with which individuals can share information

digitally. These ideas underpin the Responsible Research

and Innovation (RRI) framework approach 18 .

Research is also being carried out in new environments

and in new ways. This often does not align with traditional

publishing models. Some participants felt there was an

opportunity to reimagine the mechanisms for the

dissemination of research findings, to prioritise their

usefulness to the entire research community, to reduce

delays involved in journal publication and break the links

between publishing metrics and assessment. The Royal

Society is helping to drive change in open science by

publishing two fully open access journals, with strong data

sharing policies and the use of open peer review 19 .

> Image
> Science Funding Referendum, Public Ballot Voting Form (2025)
> by Tere Chad, from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> 16. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/science-public-enterprise/report/
> 17. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/documents/concordatonopenresearchdata-pdf/; http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/Publications/policy/perConcordat/;
> The Royal Society and Academy of Medical Sciences will publish a report on evidence synthesis for policy in 2018.
> 18. https://www.rri-tools.eu/about-rri
> 19. https://royalsociety.org/journals/; https://royalsociety.org/journals/ethics-policies/data-sharing-mining/;
> http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/open-peer-review
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 9

Research findings are disseminated in different ways by

different sectors and even disciplines. This means

knowledge stock becomes available at different rates, with

different time lags. In industry, there was a perception that

research findings were primarily communicated internally,

and that incentives to share them with the wider

community were limited because of concerns about IP and

commercial advantage. By contrast, whilst academic

papers are widely available, there was a perception that

they might sometimes be structured and presented with

professional advancement and personal progression in

mind. In discussions it was widely agreed that the primary

incentives for disseminating research findings should be

the benefit to the community as a whole, and the

advancement of the research enterprise.

Integrity and emergent funding

In the UK, the outputs of all publicly-funded research must be

made openly available. No such mandate exists for research

funded by other routes, including new and emerging models

such as the growing citizen science movement. Currently,

researchers perceive some disincentives to open science

given the time it takes to prepare and publish open data, and

the lack of clarity in terms of its status in grant applications.

Transparency, in terms of the research being done and the

discrete contributions supporting it, was believed to be the

best way to embed a culture of integrity in these new

approaches 20 . It might also guard against supporting

unnecessary duplication of research within the wider

research system. Transparency was one important aspect

outlined in the Royal Society’s research integrity statement,

which sets out the key principals and behaviours expected

in a culture of scientific integrity  21 .

Whilst existing governmental, industrial and major charity

funding streams will continue to dominate the funding

landscape, some participants raised the possibility that the

diverse set of emerging, small-scale funding models could

offer opportunities to open up the scientific endeavour in

ways not previously possible. The emergence of

crowdfunded research, with some platforms now having

engaged over one million users, was thought to be a way

to support research of immediate interest and usefulness

to a wide audience. This might connect new audiences to

the process of research, helping to convey the value of

research and innovation as a whole.

Crowdfunding was not widely thought to be suitable for

all kinds of research, for example speculative, ambitious

research, and therefore it could only make a partial

contribution to a balanced research portfolio. Participants

were also concerned that research rigour might be put

under pressure, given the need for accountability to many

individuals and the demand to demonstrate short term

progress. At the same time some participants suggested

that crowdfunding platforms could benefit the integrity of

such research, for example “crowd.science” 22  provides a

buffer layer between funders and researchers and makes

visible to users the research history of those involved.

Idea

Living publication: Many participants discussed ‘Living’

publications. These would be augmented and altered

in real time and were proposed as having many

benefits as a model of sharing findings. Moving

towards this model, increasing numbers of researchers

are using the preprints movement to share information.

Rapid dissemination of research findings, transparent,

continuing peer review, and greater visibility around

the correction of unintentional errors were all identified

as advantages. The increasing availability of data and

power of algorithms might in the future allow AI to

contribute to assessment of the rigour of the research

published in this way.

Idea

Integrity kitemarks: Several participants suggested

that for crowdfunded projects, the research idea

and proposed methodology should be subject to

expert peer review and approval conferring an

‘integrity kitemark’ before it received funding, as a

way of embedding good practice from the earliest

possible stages.

> 20. http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/policy-and-analysis/reports/Documents/2012/the-concordat-to-support-research-integrity.pdf
> 21. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2017/research-integrity-statement/
> 22. https://crowd.science/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 10

Research Workspaces

Research is an inherently creative endeavour. There are

excellent examples of how large and central facilities such

as DIAMOND, ISIS and CERN have supported staff to

undertake ground-breaking research, to benefit from

planned and serendipitous meetings with others from the

same and different disciplines, and to build on the findings

and approaches of current and future leaders in their fields.

Workspace design plays an important role in driving creativity

and innovation. The academic and industrial laboratories

where research has traditionally taken place will continue to

dominate, but the growth of interdisciplinarity and emergence

of new and highly-specialised skills and resources mean that

workspace design is evolving to support researchers to

perform all aspects of the work they undertake across an

increasingly diverse research community.

Participants felt in the future, demand for flexible access

to a variety of workspaces might best be served by a ‘hub

and spoke model’. Individuals primarily based in the

research facilities of a core institution or organisation (the

hub) would additionally access a network of specialised

workspaces (the spokes). These ‘spokes’ could be tailored

to specific activities ranging from public engagement to

cutting-edge specialised analyses. ‘Spokes’ might be

shared, in a similar way to existing regional or national

research facilities; affiliated, as with the Reach Out lab on

Imperial College London’s South Kensington campus; or

designed into the core institution, as with education

outreach spaces within the Crick Institute. Harnessing the

potential of these bespoke spaces would require them to

have a strong relationship to their various hubs, as well as

connections to the wider research system.

Dedicated workspaces for academic researchers to

interface with businesses and investors are increasingly

common. The growing appetite for entrepreneurship and

commercialisation has contributed to a 110% rise in the

number of UK incubators and accelerators since 2011 24 .

Imperial College London’s White City Incubator, which

provides support for early stage technology led start-ups,

and I-HUB, a shared workspace targeted at a later stage of

translation and innovation are examples. Merging research

with design and manufacture is taking place in dedicated

Hackspaces and in the maker community. This has been

enabled by easy access to equipment, new digital

technologies and in some cases, dedicated technician

support. Workshop participants wanted to leverage their

existing research to explore translation, reducing the

barriers to taking advantage of the benefits these

spaces offer.

Idea

The academic filter bubble: Recommender algorithms

sift vast numbers of papers to identify those that might

be most relevant to a researcher, for example, the

Mendeley ‘Suggest’ feature. It is possible that a facility

could emerge in the future that effectively synthesised

the key messages of many papers into a single

document 23 . This could flag papers and findings that

might otherwise be missed, but it should not be a

mechanism relied on by researchers as it risks

distorting how a field is depicted, and losing the

nuance of different and divergent arguments. A few

participants felt transparency around the application of

these methods to filtering research information would

be crucial to the integrity of the research system.

> 23. https://blog.mendeley.com/2015/11/03/new-research-features-on-mendeley-com/;
> https://buildingrecommenders.wordpress.com/2016/10/10/mendeley-suggest-architecture/
> 24. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/608409/business-incubators-accelerators-uk-report.pdf
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 11

Shared spaces

Many participants described how spaces for discussion

and social interaction could have a particularly positive

effect on creative, ambitious thinking during the early

stages of a project. The possibilities for conversations that

sparked collaborations or interdisciplinary work were cited

as benefits of communal areas. Through the frequent

conversations they enable, these spaces were also seen

as beneficial for propagating good practice.

Teaching, mentoring and collaborating require access to

meeting rooms and spaces. A number of participants

reported that more of such spaces were needed. Coffee

shops and other public spaces were being used for

student supervisions and classes. Participants identified

the TEF and corresponding emphasis on assessing the

quality and value of teaching as possible incentives for

the investment in new, dedicated teaching space.

Private workspace

Shared work spaces are necessary but not sufficient.

A number of activities were identified as requiring access

to quiet, personal space, such as management of data,

writing grant applications and drafting manuscripts. It was

suggested that an individual’s home might be one ‘spoke’

available to meet this demand. However, normalising

homeworking divided opinion. Some participants thought

more should be done to unlock the benefits of home

working for researchers, others saw it as a slippery slope

to extending working hours further, which might negatively

affect individuals’ wellbeing. The Society commissioned

work exploring the specific mental health needs of

researchers, to develop understanding of how they

might best be met 25 .

The need for flexibility underpinned all these discussions.

Access to workspaces that suit both research-focussed and

non-research-focussed activities, personality type and

personal circumstances was believed to support people to

produce excellent research. Within the new research spaces

becoming accessible, establishing a strong, consistent

culture of integrity through an emphasis on training and

learning was felt to be important – which might itself be

designed into the research environment through provision

of learning and development focussed workspace.

Idea

Library of things: An initiative suggested by one

participant to support decentralisation of research into

new environments, widening participation. Items from a

collection of equipment and apparatus can be loaned

to a local research workspace on writing a successful

proposal. Users also input into how the collection is

expanded, to tailor it to their needs. The set of suitable

equipment and the range of disciplines this model

would suit is limited.

“At the Institute of Making, we’ve seen

first-hand how the open and collaborative

nature of a makespace can dramatically

reduce the friction to knowledge exchange”

Liz Corbin, researcher

Example

The Royal Academy of Engineering, through its

Enterprise Hub which could itself be considered a

‘spoke’, supports entrepreneurial engineering at all

stages of a research career. Enterprise Fellowships

provide funding and support to outstanding

engineering entrepreneurs. As Hub Members, they

have access to the Taylor Centre, the Hub’s physical

space in London. They also receive continuing support

and mentoring from the Academy’s Fellowship, some of

the most successful technology entrepreneurs and

business leaders in the UK and beyond.

> 25. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/diversity-in-science/understanding-mental-health-in-the-research-environment/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 12

Fostering scientific leadership

Participants often distinguished between the role of

individuals as scientific leaders and as leading scientists.

Leading scientists were described in terms of individuals

pushing the boundaries of research in academia and

industry. As examples of the latter, IBM and Microsoft have

distinguished scientists whose deep technical expertise

drives cutting-edge research across the organisation and

beyond. There was general agreement that these

individuals had a responsibility to be ambassadors for the

research system they depend on, but ambivalence as to

whether they should play any corporate role within their

institution. Many participants suggested this model could

also apply to senior researchers in academia who do not

wish to become PIs. The possibility of a career of this type

in academia was considered to have some distinct

advantages as part of the wider mix.

By contrast, scientific leaders of research groups,

programmes and institutions were identified as having a

responsibility to advocate for the researchers of the future

and develop the talents and skills of their research teams.

Many participants reported an increasing expectation that

researchers be both excellent researchers and excellent

leaders, with the requirement to fulfil both these

functions simultaneously.

> Image
> The Noble Award for Team Science (2030) by Hazel Ching-Hsuan
> Chiang, from the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 13

The primary function of higher education and research

institutions will always be excellent teaching and research.

However, organisations are rightly embracing a broader

agenda that includes, for example, enterprise and outreach.

This means that scientific leadership often extends beyond

an institution’s borders. The Society has previously called

for institutions to have strategies that enable their staff to

connect and share their research with a variety of

audiences, including the public, schools, industry and

policymakers 26 . Workshop participants generally welcomed

this proposition, and believed these activities could benefit

both the research community and wider society. However,

there was a perception that these activities may not be

valued by their home institution or within the wider research

system. Participants felt that social incentives, from personal

thanks to departmental awards, would be one effective way

to influence behaviour.

Leaders who had successfully founded companies, advised

policymakers or undertaken public engagement projects

were perceived as being the most effective in empowering

others to do the same. In addition to leveraging professional

networks, they gave ECRs confidence that pursuing these

activities could have a positive impact on career progression,

irrespective of whether their future career lay inside or

outside of research. Participants suggested that a critical

mass of individuals involved in activities from policy advice to

public engagement and commercialisation was needed so as

to normalise these roles and, in turn, foster respect for them.

Future leaders

There will always be a need to support talented individuals

who pursue excellent research. Research institutions and

funders provide training to support the development of

core skills, for example, grant writing and review. This was

consistently welcomed as invaluable in supporting

career development.

Some ECR participants suggested that there was a need

to complement the range of training developed with the

independent scientist in mind, with training focused on

enabling effective collaborations. This reflected a rise in

‘team science’ and a keenness to participate in

international and interdisciplinary research programmes.

Many of these themes have been highlighted for specific

disciplines, for example in the Academy of Medical

Sciences report  Improving recognition of team science

contributions in biomedical research careers 27 .

In addition to conducting excellent research and showing

leadership in research, ECRs often lead small teams. Some

participants perceived that leadership and associated

management skills (such as financial management) were

not sufficiently valued in the academic environment. This is

an issue that the Society is starting to explore, and one

that is discussed in the RCUK’s  Statement of Expectations

for Research Fellowships and Future Research Leaders 28 .

ECRs require leadership skills in multiple aspects of their

role. Beyond their leadership in research, ECRs are often

expected to lead in roles such as teaching and outreach.

A wider and deeper approach to skills development would

further support them in these broader responsibilities as a

researcher, and in pursuing and progressing their careers

along diverse paths. This would connect up different

sectors and roles in the research system, and would help

to put the hierarchies of academic research and career

pathways in a wider context.

> 26. https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2017/consultation-response-second-research-excellence-framework-REF/
> 27. https://acmedsci.ac.uk/file-download/38721-56defebabba91.pdf
> 28. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/skills/fellowshipstatement-pdf/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 14

Incentivising change

Participants recognised the benefits of investing in the

talents of ECRs for career trajectories both inside and

outside of academia. But many also highlighted that the

complex and interdependent nature of the relationship

between the ECR and Principal Investigator (PI) means

that it can be difficult to dedicate time to professional

development. Support for postdocs may not have an

immediate pay-off for PIs, who often rely on short-term

grants and might only employ them for 12 months.

It was suggested that ‘soft’ regulation could signal the

importance of skill development and successfully shift

behaviour. For example, postdoc contracts at Imperial

College London include the right to 10 days training

and development per year. This was thought to have

empowered them to take up opportunities relevant to

long-term career development, and created a helpful

framing for conversations with their PIs. The introduction

of the Teaching Excellence and Student Outcomes

Framework (TEF) was cited as a signal about the

importance of a skill set, teaching, which had led to

institutions introducing formalised teacher education.

The introduction of compulsory three month professional

placements for BBSRC funded PhDs was also seen to be

a positive step 29 .

More generally, funders were identified as having an

important role changing the research landscape and in

incentivising uptake of activities beyond research. Ideas

included providing opportunities for ECRs to apply for a

grant extension (of weeks to several months) to participate

in policy or public engagement work.

Sustaining and supporting science

Professional research service roles are essential to the

whole research enterprise. They offer technical assistance

and expertise, provide support with the ‘business’ aspects

of conducting research, from finance to HR, and connect

researchers to investors, industry and the public. Many

participants felt that there were opportunities for better

communication between researchers and these staff.

Participants recognised the need for greater value to be

placed on professional roles, such as technology transfer,

enterprise or analysis, essential to support the delivery

of excellent research, its reach and impact.

With respect to technical staff, there is great diversity in

backgrounds and responsibilities, ranging from animal

research technicians to those with deep technical expertise

in one analytical technique. Participants discussed how the

boundary between what technical staff do and what

researchers do is often blurred, and suggested that shared

responsibilities should be more widely acknowledged.

The ambition of the Technician Commitment, launched at

the Higher Education Technicians Summit, is to ensure

better visibility and recognition of the roles and

contributions of technical staff 30 .

“It’s a prisoners dilemma – everyone could

benefit, but the short term disincentives

need to be bridged”

Dr Richard Massey, Royal Society URF

> 29. http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/skills/investing-doctoral-training/pips/
> 30. http://technicians.org.uk/techniciancommitment/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 15

Driving cultural change

This document contains new and consolidated thinking

from the breadth and depth of the research community.

The insights and aspirations collected here are a record of

some of the concerns that currently exist, the areas where

change is believed to be most urgently required, and

emerging ideas about how change can be driven.

The Society’s programme is building throughout the year

towards a conference in Autumn 2018, which will bring

together intertwined debates around research

assessment, career progression, researcher development,

research dissemination and research integrity. This

conference will showcase initiatives and work across the

research landscape to continue to create and improve the

cultural conditions and environments in which excellent

research and researchers can flourish.

Example

As part of a broader training package, the Royal

Society provides opportunities for its funded

researchers to gain policy skills and experience.

Through initiatives such as the Policy Associate

Scheme, which offers ECRs the opportunity to work in

government on public policy issues; the policy primer,

which equips ECRs with the basic knowledge and skills

to interact effectively with decision makers; and the

pairing scheme, which connects researchers to

individuals in government, the Society is supporting

individuals to move between these two worlds 31 .

Example

The Concordat to Support the Career Development of

Researchers sets out clear standards that research staff

can expect from the institution that employs them, as

well as their responsibilities as researchers 32 . It is

credited with having helped to develop the

infrastructure that exists to support researchers in the

UK higher education system. The Concordat is currently

being reviewed to ensure it fulfils its intended purpose

from 2018 onwards 33 .

> Image
> Lab Cab, Transporter Container (2026) by Julie Light,
> from the the Museum of Extraordinary Objects.
> 31. https://royalsociety.org/grants-schemes-awards/policy-secondment-programme/;
> https://royalsociety.org/grants-schemes-awards/science-policy-primer/; https://royalsociety.org/grants-schemes-awards/pairing-scheme/
> 32. https://www.vitae.ac.uk/policy/vitae-concordat-vitae-2011.pdf
> 33. http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/skills/frameworks/review-of-the-concordat-to-support-the-career-development-of-researchers/
> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 16

Changing expectations

Changing expectations is an ambitious programme of work that

aims to understand how best to steward research culture through

a shifting research landscape.

Through a national dialogue with the research community,

by drawing on the experiences of our past and present,

and exploring potential futures, Changing expectations

will investigate the evolving relationship between the

research community and the wider research system.

Research culture: embedding inclusive excellence

Across 20 events in 15 locations with over 1,000 people

and 2,000 hours of face-to-face conversations the Royal

Society has gathered together the ideas featured in this

booklet on what a future research culture could look like.

These ideas will be the platform upon which the Royal

Society builds, working towards a landmark conference

on research culture taking place in Autumn 2018.

To find out more about the programme, visit:

royalsociety.org/changingexpectations

or email:  researchculture@royalsociety.org

Share your ideas on the future of research culture:

SciCulture

> Research culture: Embedding inclusive excellence 17

The Royal Society is a self-governing Fellowship

of many of the world’s most distinguished scientists

drawn from all areas of science, engineering, and

medicine. The Society’s fundamental purpose, as it

has been since its foundation in 1660, is to recognise,

promote, and support excellence in science and to

encourage the development and use of science for

the benefit of humanity.

The Society’s strategic priorities emphasise its

commitment to the highest quality science, to

curiosity-driven research, and to the development

and use of science for the benefit of society.

These priorities are:

• Promoting excellence in science

• Supporting international collaboration

• Demonstrating the importance of science to everyone

For further information

The Royal Society

6 – 9 Carlton House Terrace

London SW1Y 5AG

T +44 20 7451 2500

W royalsociety.org
