NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING
 – i –

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING
INITIATIVE UPDATE:  PIONEERING
THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

A Report by the
FAST-TRACK ACTION COMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC COMPUTING
NETWORKING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT SUBCOMMITTEE
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY ENTERPRISE
of the
NATIONAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL

NOVEMBER 2019

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING
 – i –
About the National Science and Technology Council
The National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) is the principal means by which the Executive Branch
coordinates science and technology policy across the diverse entities that make up the Federal research and
development enterprise. A primary objective of the NSTC is to ensure that science and technology policy decisions
and programs ar e consistent with the President's stated goals. The NSTC prepares research and development
strategies that are coordinated across Federal agencies aimed at accomplishing multiple national goals. The work
of the NSTC is organized under committees that oversee subcommittees and working groups focused on different
aspects of science and technology. More information is available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/nstc.
About the Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) was established by the National Science and Technology
Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 to provide the President and others within the Executive Office of
the President with advice on the scientific, engineering, and technological aspects of the economy, national
security, homeland security, health, foreign relations, the environment, and the technological recovery and use
of resources, among oth er topics. OSTP leads interagency science and technology policy coordination efforts,
assists the Office of Management and Budget with an annual review and analysis of Federal research and
development in budgets, and serves as a source of scientific and technological analysis and judgment for the
President with respect to major policies, plans, and programs of the Federal Government. More information is
available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp.
About the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
Program
The Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) Program is the Nation’s primary
source of federally funded coordination of pioneering information technolog y (IT) research and development
(R&D) in computing, networking, and software. The multiagency NITRD Program, guided  by the NITRD
Subcommittee of the NSTC Committee on Science and Technology Enterprise, seeks to provide the R&D
foundations for en suring continued U.S. technological leadership and meeting the needs of the Nation for
advanced IT. The National Coordination Office (NCO) supports the NITRD Subcommittee and the Interagency
Working Groups (IWGs) that report to it. More information is available at https://www.nitrd.gov/about.
About the Fast Track Action Committee on Strategic Computing
The NITRD Subcommittee’s Fast -Track Action Committee (FTAC) on Strategic Computing was created to update
and disseminate the objectives and approaches necessary for sustaining and enhancing U.S. scientific ,
technological, and economic leadership in strategic computing research, development, and deployment.  More
information is available at https://www.nitrd.gov/news/Updating-US-Strategic-Computing-Objectives.aspx.
Acknowledgments
This document is the result of contributions from many Federal agency representatives, members of the FTAC on
Strategic Computing, the staff of the NITRD NCO , public responses to a  Request for Information on Update to
Strategic Computing Objectives , and observations from the Future Computing Community of Interest meeting
that took place August 5 -6, 2019. The FTAC on Strategic Computing gratefully acknowle dges all individuals who
contributed to the content of this National Strategic Computing Initiative Update.
Copyright Information
This document is a work of the U.S. Government and is in the public domain (see 17 U.S.C. §105). It may be freely
distributed, copied, and translated with acknowledgment to OSTP . Requests to use any images must be made to
OSTP. Digital versions of t his and other  NITRD documents are available at https://www.nitrd.gov/publications.
Published in the United States of America, 2019.

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING
 – ii –
NATIONAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Chair
Kelvin Droegemeier, Director, OSTP
Executive Director
Chloé Kontos, NSTC
COMMITTEE ON TOPIC
Co-Chairs
Jake Taylor, OSTP
Barry Schneider, NIST, Co-Chair
Bill Vanderlinde, DOE, Co-Chair
Manish Parashar, NSF, Co-Chair
Executive Secretary
Ji Lee, NITRD

Members
Erin Cheese, OMB
Stephen Dennis, DHS
Jeff Falgout, USGS
Susan Gregurick, NIH
Bill Harrod, ODNI
Thuc Hoang, DOE
Frank Indiviglio, NOAA
Tsengdar Lee, NASA
Richard Linderman, DOD
David Mountain, NSA
Andreas Olofsson, DARPA
Jesse Taylor, FBI

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING
 – iii –
Table of Contents

About the National Science and Technology Council ............................................................... i
Table of Contents .............................................................................................................. iii
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................... iv
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................... v
1. Enabling the Future of Computing .................................................................................... 1
Future Computing Hardware Considerations and Expectations .......................................................... 1
Software Considerations and Challenges .............................................................................................. 2
Recommendations .................................................................................................................................. 2
2. Providing a Strategic Foundation for Computing ............................................................... 3
Next-Generation Preparations: Infrastructure for Hardware and Software ......................................... 3
Data Considerations and Challenges ..................................................................................................... 4
Cybersecurity: Issues, Challenges, and Opportunities .......................................................................... 4
Cyberinfrastructure Services: Opportunities and Challenges ............................................................... 4
Workforce Considerations and Challenges ............................................................................................ 5
Recommendations .................................................................................................................................. 5
3. Ensuring Collaborative and Coordinated Approaches ......................................................... 6
Partnerships across Industry, Academia, and U.S. Federal Agencies ................................................... 6
Federal Coordination .............................................................................................................................. 7
Recommendations .................................................................................................................................. 7

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

 – iv –
Abbreviations

DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DOD Department of Defense
DOE Department of Energy
ED Department of Education
DHS Department of Homeland Security
FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation
FTAC Fast Track Action Committee on Strategic Computing
HEC high-end computing
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NIH National Institutes of Health
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
NITRD Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NSTC
Subcommittee and Program)
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NSA National Security Agency
NSF National Science Foundation
NSTC National Science and Technology Council
ODNI Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OSTP Office of Science and Technology Policy
R&D research and development
RFI Request for Information
USGS United States Geological Survey

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING
– v –
Executive Summary
The national computing landscape is undergoing rapid evolution along multiple dimensions due to the
introduction of new and potentially disruptive technologies a nd the demands of new classes of data -
intensive applications. Computer architectures and systems are more heterogeneous and complex, and
the challenges associated with the complexity and sustainability of software are significant. Application
developers are being called to meet  demands for improved usability and productivity. Therefore,  to
address this new environment , it is essential to update the 2016 U.S. Strategic Computing Plan 1 in a
holistic and synergistic fashion that involves government, academia, and industry. The Office of Science
and Technology Policy and the National Science and Technology Council Subcommittee on Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development created  a Fast Track Action Committee on
Strategic Computing in June 2019 to address this imperative.
The National Strategic Computing  Initiative Update builds on the 2016 Strategic Computing Plan to
enable focused and collaborative research, development, and deployment of  future computing
technologies to benefit the Nation . Realizing the successes of the National Strategic Computing
Initiative to date, this update examines steps beyond those already implemented for  realizing a
computing ecosystem that combines heterogeneous computing systems (from extreme-scale to edge-
centered systems and beyond) with the networking, hardware, software, data, and expertise required
to support national security and defense as well as U.S.  scientific, engineering,  and economic
leadership.
The refocused objectives identified are:
1. Pioneer new frontiers of digital and non- digital computation to address the scientific and
technological challenges and opportunities of the 21st century.
2. Develop, broaden, and advance the Nation’s computational infrastructure and ecosystem.
3. Forge and expand partnerships  for the f uture of computing to ensure American leadership in
science, technology, and innovation.
What follows include s key goals for a strategic approach to the future of computing, and a set of
recommendations to achieve those goals, which will expand our scientific knowledge, enable economic
growth, and improve our national security . These recommendations and goals were determined via
engagement with government, academia, and industry through various means, including a Request for
Information (RFI)2 and a Future Computing Community of Interest Meeting.3

1  https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/NSCI%20Strategic%20Plan_20160721.pdf.pdf
2  https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/06/18/2019-12866/request-for-information-on-update-to-
strategic-computing-objectives
3  https://www.nitrd.gov/nitrdgroups/index.php?title=FC-COI-2019

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 1 –

1. Enabling the Future of Computing
Objective: Pioneer new frontiers of digital and nondigital computation to address the scientific
and technological challenges and opportunities of the 21st century.
The computational landscape is rapidly  evolving as a consequence of the slowing progre ssion of
technology advances within Moore’s law, the end of Dennard scaling , and the unsustainable power
requirements of current technology systems.  Significant disruptions from emerging technologies and
paradigms can be found at all levels of the system, from hardware devices to system architectures and
software stacks. The growing complexity of algorithms and programming models ( designed to
overcome these disruptions and integrate them into existing applications to enhance performance )
exacerbates the c hallenge. At the same time, application workflows  are evolving with new
requirements that necessitate the integrat ion of  heterogeneous platforms, including those within a
given architecture as well as network-centric and edge computing.
As the Association for Computing Machinery A.M. Turing Award laureates John Hennessy
and David Patterson wrote, “The next decade will see a Cambrian explosion of novel
computer architectures, meaning exciting times for computer architects in academia
and industry.” 4
Although exciting, th ese technological advances have far-ranging consequences  that must be
considered when reexamining the U.S. Strategic Computing Plan.
Future Computing Hardware Considerations and Expectations
Recent cost  performance dynamics are resulting in l eading-edge computing hardware being
“commoditized” and ubiquitous, both in its access and use, across much of the science and engineering
enterprise. This democratization facilitates tackling  many scientifically challenging problems , for
example, through the emergence of cloud service providers . Future computing systems will be highly
multicore and heterogeneous within a single node or cabinet, and will increasingly involve explorations
into heterogeneous processors, heterogeneous memories and models, new interconnect technologies,
special-purpose and energy -efficient architectures, and a number of non -von Neumann computing
elements such as those based on neuromorphic and quantum technologies.
NVIDIA response to the RFI: “Looking forward, the practical realization of slowing
technology scaling will likely require a range of approaches including: (1) architectures
that incorporate increasingly specialized accelerator hardware; (2) packaging, signaling,
and interconnect technologies that enable greater scaling at both the “node” and
“system” level; (3) novel devices (e.g., carbon nanotube FETs) that can provide smaller
digital devices at lower power; and (4) novel computing technologies such as analog,
quantum, and neuromorphic that may require fundamental changes to algorithms.”

4  https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2019/2/234352-a-new-golden-age-for-computer-architecture/fulltext

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 2 –

Software Considerations and Challenges
Software supporting the future computing  ecosystem must balance the following: efficiency of
development, debugging, verification, and validation; usability, reproducibility, manageability,
extensibility, and sustainability; and performance and scalability. Software must be capable of
operation in multiple modes a nd high degrees of parallelism , with efficient management of memory
and input/output (I/O), while also supporting workflow composability and execution. Emerging future
computing technologies present new opportunities (e.g., real-time response, embedded processing of
data from sensors  or actuators, and steering of models and experiments ), but will also require new
algorithms, models of computation, data, programming environments, and software stacks. This
transformation will require considerable support and a radical rethinking of the software infrastructure
used in standard programming models . Software development, including migrating (often legacy)
applications to new systems, continues to be a  challenge and prevents  the community from taking
advantage of existing and emerging processing capabilities.  It is likely, due to the growing complexity
of applications and hardware environments,  that some future software development and testing will
lie well beyond human timescale development and thus be performed by software itself.
AMD response to the RFI: “It is possible to abstract and simplify much of the
complexity so that programmers can utilize simpler models of a system and increase
their productivity. Useful software abstractions improve developer productivity and
reduce execution risk by muting the cognitive noise produced by complexity.”
Recommendations
• To enable effective use of the Nation’s computing ecosystem from the edge to exascale and
beyond, the U.S. Government can:
ο Embrace a diversity of hardware and software  approaches for the future of computing and
leverage the innovation ecosystem to : stay at the forefront of computing,  increase focus on
usability and productivity, lower barriers to use for research and applications, and support
the integration of edge resources and data with traditional computing platforms , including
emerging data-driven applications;
ο Provide early access to novel hardware, software, and systems platforms that are needed to
identify and support promising research approaches and to reduce time to deployment;
ο Identify and prioritize the software research needed for the future of computing;
ο Encourage development, deployment, and sustainment  of software tools, frameworks, and
systems; and
ο Engage industry, academia,  and U.S. Government laboratories to coordinate  software
development and sustainability efforts via consortia and other forms of partnerships.
• To enable the development of end-to-end application workflows and integrated systems to tackle
pressing science, engineering, and national security challenges, the U.S. Government should:
ο Foster a fully engaged future computing community  by working with stakeholders from
across the Nation, poised to ensure that upcoming hardware and software developments are
leveraged in a timely manner to support applications;
ο Encourage novel solutions that leverage in -network and edge -processing capabilities to
process data close to the source as part of end-to-end application workflows;

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 3 –

ο Encourage multidisciplinary teams of  application specialists, end- users, developers, and
researchers to enable new, integrated solutions with appropriate security considerations, to
address pressing computational challenges and to widen the user base; and
ο Promote timely access for developers of technologies, architectures, and systems to carry out
the research needed to create the future computing software ecosystem. Developers should
also have a mechanism to provide early input into discussions about upcoming hardware
developments to ensure design decisions help users take advantage of new hard ware more
rapidly.
• To explore critical fundamental scientific and technical limits to computing in order to maximize
the benefits of novel computational hardware, software, architectures, and new computing
paradigms on applications, and to enable translation of this research to deployed technologies ,
the U.S. Government can:
ο Support continuous, long-term research and development ( R&D) in the basic science and
technology of computation to ensure American leadership in computing for the coming
decades;
ο Support the rapid translation to practice of basic R&D and technology to address scientific
challenges requiring the effective integration of advanced software and hardware; and
ο Support the integration and interoperability of application software via the development and
refinement of scientific gateways, portals , and associated workflow tools to enable  more
efficient approaches to solving challenging scientific and technical problems.
• Leverage the diversity of research opportunities and systems emerging from R&D on computation
to enable prosperity, ensure national security, and provide a stronger technological and scientific
foundation for the Nation.
2. Providing a Strategic Foundation for Computing
Objective: Develop, broaden, and advance the computational infrastructure and ecosystem.
The confluence of disruptive architectural and technological trends across the evolving future
computing landscape, and emerging trends in application workflows that increasingly integrate
simulation, traditional data analytics, and machine learning models, demand an agile, robust, secure,
useable, capable, and sustainable computational ecosystem. Such an ecosystem must integrate
emerging and future hardware platforms with the necessary software, data, and networking expertise.
Next-Generation Preparations: Infrastructure for Hardware and Software
The emerging highly multicore, heterogeneous, and energy-efficient architectures promise a revolution
in computing capabilities to solve challenging scientific and technological problems. It is also critical to
explore new software approaches that will enable us to effectively exploit this hardware to advance
science. Continuing this progress requires a sustained investment into the exploration of new materials,
devices, paradigms, technologies, and infrastructure in the form  of foundries, testbeds, experimental
systems prototypes, and the supply chain. Services required to support the use of these new computing
paradigms also require consideration.

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 4 –

Computing Community Consortium response to the RFI: “Computational
reproducibility is another area that deserves expanded efforts. Computational
reproducibility is a requirement for science to progress, and currently, we lack the
necessary tools and infrastructure to make computations reproducible.”
Data Considerations and Challenges
Data production from next-generation instrumentation as well as “long tail” data (smaller in size but
large in number and heterogeneity)  continues to increase exponentially, creating a demand for a
distributed but federated network of data preservation systems. Solutions to m any global challenges
require interdisciplinary data integration based on agreed-upon standard interfaces for data discovery,
access, compatibility, and reusability. International organizations are advancing these capabilities, and
U.S. and European polici es exist to make publicly funded research data openly available  for
technologies such as artificial intelligence and machine learning applications that need access to large
bodies of carefully curated, interoperable, and validated training data.
IBM response to the RFI: “Focus on development of capabilities that enable
important applications rather than on building even larger peak performance systems.”
Cybersecurity: Issues, Challenges, and Opportunities
Effective security ensures that computer systems are available for use, resources are not misused, data
are valid and trustworthy, and sensitive information  is protected. Key challenges in this area include :
the impact of cybersecurity on system performance, a diverse user base that often spans  multiple
networks and organizations, and the lack of clear security policies at the management level. However,
the opportunity to protect strategic data assets (e.g., intellectual property, economic competitiveness,
national security, and personal privacy) and ensure data integrity is critical for the adoption and success
of future computing.
Conversely, cybersecurity functions can be accelerated and improved using future computing
technologies. The volume, velocity, variety, and veracity of data within information pipelines combined
with the need to rapidly ingest, index, assess, and query that data demands future computing systems
that have real-time cybersecurity functionality. Opportunities exist for combining innovative analytics
and artificial intelligence  techniques to address problems such as network event detection, user
behavior analytics, and network mapping. Near -real-time approaches, enabled by advanced
computing capabilities and high-bandwidth, low-latency networks, allow defenders to understand and
minimize the threat of an ongoing security breach . Advanced computing  resources can be used to
model the cyber landscape and simulate attack events, allowing defenders to minimize attack vectors.
Cyberinfrastructure Services: Opportunities and Challenges
Cyberinfrastructure coordination services will be  integral to the future computing  ecosystem and
applications. Users depend on these services to ensure productivity, reduce time-to-solution, and:
• Discover, provision, and access available resources and services;

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 5 –

• Receive relevant and timely expert technical guidance and focused instruction in efficient and
effective use of available resources and services; and
• Engage in developmental efforts to ensure the effective use of the evolving computing landscape.
Equally important are services to ensure effective management, operation , and use of computing
resources, and integrating these services  into a coherent , coordinated national cyberinfrastructure
ecosystem. A modern computing ecosystem must securely increase user accessibility (including web-
based and mobile platforms); enable collaboration; simplify the use of high -end computing ( HEC) in
dynamic, system-of-systems scenarios; allow persistent access to relevant data ; and offer advanced,
high-performance service delivery mechanisms such as secure containers and virtual machines.  By
lowering the barriers to high-productivity computing, the ecosystem can deliver future computing
capabilities to a broader workforce, allowing workforce development  to focus on innova tion and
increasing diversity of thoughts.
Workforce Considerations and Challenges
Leveraging new computing capabilities and turning them into practical and usable forms for
applications is an important and challenging issue. It requires a skilled workforce, trained in the current
state-of-the-art, that is able to anticipate and exploit future technologies and solutions. This involves a
wide-range of training and skills, from  cable laying to power and heat management to research and
development to marketing and communication. Developing and sustaining a strong, diverse workforce
involves not only training within educational institutions or on the job, but refreshing skills throughout
a career as technologies, platform s, and applica tions evolve. Developing the necessary tools for
workforce training, re-skilling, productivity, and collaboration is equally important. Finally, establishing
synergies across government, academic, and industry stakeholders and developing creative incentives
and rewards mechanisms are essential to sustain this workforce.
Micron response to the RFI: “The number of application programmers has remained
relatively constant. This is a challenge. Promotion and funding for STEM- related
careers need to go into overdrive.”
Recommendations
• To provide a strong hardware and software foundation, U.S. Government should:
ο Ensure that investments in infrastructure such as foundries, testbeds, experimental systems,
and prototypes, as well as in relevant domains such as materials science, microwave
engineering, and supply chains, are made to enable the future of computation;
ο Support critical cyb erinfrastructure services including discovery, allocation, provisioning,
user support, and monitoring and management of the computational ecosystem;
ο Prioritize the development of a robust software ecosystem composed of shared, sustainable
software stacks, libraries, frameworks, and services that are essential for accelerating access
to and use of early-stage systems;
ο Support improved usability and productivity by lowering barriers to broaden HEC use and
application areas; and
ο Encourage stakeholders to develop common interfaces, align solutions, and establish shared
best practices and standards for the future of computing.

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 6 –

• To prioritize improved cybersecurity, the U.S. Government can:
ο Recognize and emphasize the importance of cybersecurity for the computing ecosystem and
of using advanced computing for enhancing and accelerating cybersecurity;
ο Encourage community members to work together to raise cybersecurity awareness, provide
tools to assess and evaluate cyber security, establish effective best practices, and develop
cybersecurity control baselines;
ο Develop near -real-time approaches ( enabled by HEC and high -bandwidth, lo w-latency
networks) to understand and minimize threats and to model and simulate the cyber
landscape; and
ο Prioritize achieving cybersecurity situational awareness to provide early identification of
security challenges, provide the technical foundation for a more resilient cyber defense for
computing, and bolster computing -enhanced cybersecurity to make systems significantly
more secure and easier to use.
• To support data usage and management for computing, the U.S. Government should:
ο Develop strategies for the management, access, and curation of data sets for research and
applications;
ο Support end-to-end data stewardship to increase the efficiency of scientific workflows and
ensure the dissemination of research results, including data;
ο Develop common inter faces, knowledge networks, tools, and services for data discovery,
access, transport, and processing, and timely or real-time data flows.
• To recognize that the entire strategic approach to the future of computing is dependent on a
capable and flexible work force, the U.S. Government should work both directly and with
stakeholders to:
ο Create a diverse work force necessary to achieve the  goals of the U.S. Strategic Computing
Plan and to support the broader U.S. innovation ecosystem at the leading edge of
computation.
3. Ensuring Collaborative and Coordinated Approaches
Objective: Forge and expand partnerships for the future of computing to ensure American
leadership in science, technology, and innovation.
Partnerships across Industry, Academia, and U.S. Federal Agencies
The computing ecosystem is extremely broad and diverse, and Federal agencies, academia, non-profit
organizations, and industry address and optimize different,  often complementary aspects of this
ecosystem that align with their individual missions and priorities. As a result, cross-sector partnerships
can lead to efficiencies and synergies that can significantly benefit all  stakeholders; such partnerships
should be encouraged  and actively facilitated . Long-term Federal agency engagement with industry
and academia is necessary to explore, develop, and produce technologies for mission-specific support;
these partnerships are also an important vehicle for recruitment and hiring. Finally, there exist several
unexplored opportunities for closer collaboration among Federal agencies to increase the productivity
and efficiency of the user base.

NATIONAL STRATEGIC COMPUTING INITIATIVE UPDATE: PIONEERING THE FUTURE OF COMPUTING

– 7 –

The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Joint University
Microelectronics Program (JUMP) is an example of a partnership between the nonprofit
Semiconductor Research Corporation and DARPA at a half-dozen university-based
research centers. Project 38, a vendor-agnostic collaboration between the Department
of Energy and the National Security Agency, is another example of Federal agencies
exploring new architectures based on a limited set of applications of interest.
Federal Coordination
Recognizing that the future of computing exists in a competitive global landscape, coordination of R&D
in the future of computing should ensure resources are available and efficiently used for both individual
agency efforts and to enable cross -agency opportunities and collaborations. At the same time,
coordination activities should provide an appropriate venue for unclassified and classified discussions
of b oth R&D and strategic considerations for the Nation’s approach to the future of computing.
Adopting a tiered structure that leverages existing working groups and expertise at NITRD and other
interagency bodies—along with appropriate decision makers in a new NSTC subcommittee that focuses
on the strategic implications of computing—can provide the necessary multifaceted coordination.
Recommendations
• To encourage partnerships and sustained engagement, the U.S. government should:
ο Foster Federal agency, academic, and industry collaborations that are both deep and broad
to leverage investments, realize synergies, and enable next - and next -next-generation
technology. Engagements with like-minded international partners should be included where
appropriate;
ο Provide multiyear mechanisms to explore, develop, and potentially deploy new technologies;
and
ο Encourage private sector research, development, and coordination, and work to integrate
new approaches and technologies generated through such activities into agency efforts.
• To ensure effective coordination, the U.S. Government should:
ο Implement an interagency governance structure focused on major future computing
initiatives across agencies, including:
 An Executive Council comprising senior management of the member agencies.
Consistent with individual agency missions, the Council can identify priorities and
support future computing objectives;
 A new NSTC subcommittee to ensure cross -agency coordination that includes defining
strategic implications for the future of computing at the classified level, in alignment
with the NSTC ’s NITRD Subcommittee and other subcommittees as appropriate, to
support the Council by producing a yearly report on progress toward s objectives and
performing other duties as assigned by the Council; and
 Existing and ad hoc working groups or other entities as (identified by the subcommittee)
to be housed within NITRD and other NSTC bodies and reporting up to the cognizant
bodies, as needed, to support the subcommittee’s efforts.
ο Track global efforts in future computing.
ο Align U.S. future computing initiatives with other major national initiatives.
