RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING
RESOURCES FOR FEDERALLY FUNDED
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

A Report by  the
SELECT COMMITTEE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

of the
NATIONAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL

NOVEMBER  17, 2020

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The United States Government [ will] sustain
and enhance the scientific, technological, and
economic leadership position of the United
States in AI R&D and deployment through a
coordinated Federal Government strategy ...
[that includes] better enabling the use of
cloud computing resources for federally
funded AI R&D.

—President Donald J. Trump, February 11, 2019

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
i
Mr. President:
In your February 11, 2019, Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence,
you directed the Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence (AI) to prepare recommendations on better
enabling the use of cloud computing resources for federally funded AI research and development (R&D).
The attached report is a product of interagency collaboration, led by th e National Science and
Technology Council’s Select Committee on AI and  Subcommittee on Machine Learning and AI, that
highlights key recommendations.
AI is a key driver in the economic growth and security of our Nation, as well as improved quality of life.
Sustained investments in AI  R&D are of paramount importance for  continued t echnological
breakthroughs that will maintain our national leadership in AI. Cloud platforms provide robust, agile,
reliable, and scalable computing capabilities that  can help accelerate advances in AI.  Additionally,
increased access to powerful cloud computing resources can broaden the ability of AI researchers  to
participate in the R&D needed for cutting-edge technological advances.
While it is becoming well recognized that cloud computing can advance AI R&D, several technical and
administrative challenges are currently limiting cloud adoption.  For example, m echanisms for
providing access to cloud computing are varied, and there is a need to understand best practices.
Inconsistencies in the methods for accessing and using different cloud systems can create inefficiencies
in the research process. Limited access to education and training opportunities that can inform
researchers how best to leverage cloud computing for AI R&D is slowing adoption. These and other
challenges to the effective use of cloud computing present unnecessary barriers to AI innovation.
In this report, the Select Committee has identified four key recommendations for how  the Federal
Government can better enable the use of cloud computing resources for federally funded AI R&D:
(1) launch and support pilot projects to identify and explore the advantages and challenges associated
with the use of commercial clouds in conductin g federally funded AI research; (2) improve education
and training opportunities to help researchers better leverage clo ud resources for AI R&D ; (3) catalog
best practices in identity management and single-sign-on strategies to enable more effective use of the
variety of commercial cloud resources  for AI R&D; and ( 4) establish and publish best practices for the
seamless use  of different cloud platforms for AI R&D.  Each rec ommendation, if adopted, should
accelerate the use of cloud resources for AI R&D.
By investing in AI R&D and democratizing access to powerful computational resources, including cloud
computing, the United States will expand the ability of academia, industry, and government to explore
innovative ideas for advancing AI. In turn, these advancements will lead to transformative technologies
that improve lives, grow innovati ve industries, empower workers, and increase our national security.
This report is another step in the overall strategy to position the United States as the world leader in
artificial intelligence.
Sincerely,
Mi
chael Kratsios
Chief Technology Officer of the United States

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
ii
National Science & Technology Council
Chair
Kelvin Droegemeier, Director, Office of Science
and Technology Policy
Staff
Tracie Lattimore , Executive Director, Office of
Science and Technology Policy
Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence
Co-Chairs
Michael Kratsios, Chief Technology Officer
of the United States
Sethuraman Panchanathan, Director, N ational
Science Foundation
Victoria Coleman, Director, Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency
Subcommittee on Machine Learning & Artificial Intelligence
Co-Chairs
Lynne Parker, Deputy Chief Technology Officer
of the United States
Stephen Binkley, Principal Deputy Director,
Office of Science, Department of Energy
Erwin Gianchandani, Deputy Assistant Director,
Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, National Science Foundation
Charles Romine, Director, Information
Technology Laboratory, National Institute of
Standards and Technology
Executive Secretary
Faisal D’Souza, Technical Coordinator, National Coordination Office for Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development program
Subcommittee on Networking & Information Technology Research & Development
Co-Chairs
Margaret Martonosi, Assistant Director,
Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, National Science Foundat ion
Kamie Roberts, Director, National Coordination
Office for Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development
program
Executive Secretary
Nekeia Butler, National Coordination Office for Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development program
Writing Team
Gil Alterovitz, Department of Veterans Affairs
Rupak Biswas, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Patricia Flatley Brennan, National Institutes of
Health
Erwin Gianchandani, National Science
Foundation
Lynne Parker, Office of Science and Technology
Policy
Venkatachalam Ramaswamy, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Dominic Sale, General Services Administration
Eddie Tejeda, General Services Administration

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
1
Introduction
Access to advanced computational and data resources has powered many of the recent advances in AI,
particularly in the area of machine learning.  For federally funded researchers, these resources may be
allocated and provisioned from agency high performance computing (HPC) resources, e.g., Department
of Energy (DOE) systems such as Summit and Sierra located at DOE laboratories, and systems funded
by the National  Science Foundation (NSF) such as Stampede2 and Frontera located on university
campuses. Increasingly, commercial cloud providers may be able to provide scalable and efficient
computational and data resources for AI researchers, including federally funded researchers. A 2018
report on the workshop Enabling Computer and Information Science and Engineering Research and
Education in the Cloud, funded by NSF, noted:
Cloud platforms provide on-demand, elastic, and self-serve access to resources at scale and are
thus capable of supporting large -scale and/or big data computing. They provide access to
contemporary hardware and advanced software stacks, with users “riding the technology
curve” as new technologies are made available in the cloud. The on -demand nature of access
to resources can provide a “fast path” to computing—acquiring cloud resources is much faster
than buying, installing, and operating on-premise, localized hardware [e.g., on many university
campuses]. Cloud platforms can also support important ne w modalities of data, such as
streaming data and real -time analytics on such data. … [R] esearchers and educators can
leverage modern cloud platforms to accelerate and improve their research and teaching,
instead of building and deploying dedicated local infrastructure.
1
Numerous other workshops and Federal advisory committees have noted similar advantages of cloud
use for research computing, 2,3,4 including for AI R&D.  This report responds to the February 11, 2019,
Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence 5 and provides
recommendations on better enabling the use of cloud computing resources  for federally funded AI
R&D.6 Below is a summary of the recommendations of the NSTC Selec t Committee on AI, followed by
additional details about each recommendation.

1 J. Rexford, M. Balazinska, D. Culler, and J. Wing. 2018. Enabling Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Research and Education in the Cloud. Technical Report. Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.
https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3233928
2 J. Bottum, D. Atkins, A. Blatecky, R. McMullen, T. Tannenbaum, J. Cheetham, J. Wilgenbusch, K. Bhatia, E. Deumens,
B. von Oehsen, G. Fox, M. Ziolkowski, A. Bedrossian, and D. Fay. 2017. The Future of Cloud for Academic Research
Computing. Technical Report of the 2016 National Science Foundation-funded workshop “Cloud Forward.”
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317835476_The_Future_of_Cloud_for_Academic_Research_Computing
3 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2016. Future Directions for NSF Advanced Computing
Infrastructure to Support U.S. Science and Engineering in 2017-2020. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/21886
4 National Institutes of Health. 2018. “NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science.” https://datascience.nih.gov/nih-
strategic-plan-data-science
5 The White House. 2019. Executive Order 13859 on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-maintaining-american-leadership-artificial-
intelligence/
6 The focus here is specifically on the use of commercial cloud computing services for AI R&D. The development
of agency-hosted cloud services for R&D and other services is being considered elsewhere, notably at
https://cloud.cio.gov/strategy/
.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
2
Summary of Recommendations
Recommendation 1: Coordinated by the NSTC Select Committee on AI and its operational arm, the
NSTC Subcommittee on MLAI , Federal agencies that  support AI R&D should launch and support
pilot projects to identify and explore the advantages and challenges associated with the use of
commercial clouds in conducting federally funded AI research, and document and broadly share
the results and associated best practices that emerge from those experiences. Several agencies
and department s—including the Department of Defense (DOD) Joint Artificial Intelligence Center
(JAIC);7 Department of Transportation (DOT);8 National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA);9
National Institutes of Health (NIH) ;10,11 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) ;12
National Science Foundation ;13 and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 14—have launched such
activities. Other agencies should be encouraged to consider pilots that identify  and explore the
advantages and challenges associated with the use of commercial clouds in conducting f ederally
funded AI research. From the date of the signing of the AI Executive Order, the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee
should report a nnually to the Select Committee on AI regarding progress and lessons learned from
these pilots.
Recommendation 2: Within 90 days of publishing this report, the NTSC MLAI Subcommittee should
establish a task force to outline an approach to educating and equipping those engaged in AI R&D
with the skills needed to use cloud -based platforms and technologies to help realiz e their full
benefits for advancing AI frontiers. The task force should publish a report on its findings within
180 days.  The task force should:  (1) collect information about the minimum skill requirements for
conducting cloud-based work; (2) propose new mechanisms of training and skill development, new
instructional materials , and/or an inventory of links to existing ones; and ( 3) encourage pilot ing
approaches for equipping and credentialing.
Recommendation 3: Within 90 days of publishing this report, the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee should
establish a task force to examine best practices in identity management and single- sign-on
strategies within government and across the research community to identify near- and long-term
approaches that will enable more effective use of the variety of commercial cloud resources, with
a focus on accelerating AI R&D activities.  Implementation of the best practices and strategies

7 Department of Defense. Joint Artificial Intelligence Center. https://dodcio.defense.gov/About-DoD-
CIO/Organization/JAIC/
8 Department of Transportation. Secure Data Commons. https://its.dot.gov/data/secure/
9 National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 2019. “Global Hydrology Resource Center Distributed Active
Archive Center (GHRC DAAC) Moves to the Earthdata Cloud.” https://earthdata.nasa.gov/learn/articles/tools-
and-technology-articles/ghrc-moves-to-the-earthdata-cloud
10 National Institutes of Health. Science and Technology Research Infrastructure for Discovery, Experimentation,
and Sustainability (STRIDES) Initiative. https://datascience.nih.gov/strides
11 National Institutes of Health. Artificial Intelligence for Biomedical Excellence (AIBLE). Last updated May 2020.
https://dpcpsi.nih.gov/sites/default/files/CoC_May_2020_1.05PM_Concept_Clearance_AIBLE_Brennan_508.pdf
12 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Big Data Program.
https://www.noaa.gov/organization/information-technology/big-data-program
13 National Science Foundation Program Solicitation. 2018. Enabling Access to Cloud Computing Resources for
CISE Research and Education (Cloud Access). https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2019/nsf19510/nsf19510.htm
14 Department of Veterans Affairs. n.d. “The National VA Data Commons Pilot: Principles and Early Results.”
https://www.research.va.gov/data/the_national_va_data_commons_pilot.pdf

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
3
should be coordinated through the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee, with the results shared broadly. This
task force should consider the extent to which existing activities provide guidance appropriate to AI R&D.
Recommendation 4: Within 90 days of publishing this report, the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee should
establish a task force  to establish and publish best practices that  use open approaches  and
promote model/code reuse/interoperability among commercial cloud provider platforms so that
AI software can work seam lessly across different platforms without the need for per -cloud
customization, again with a focus on accelerating AI R&D activities.  Implementation of the best
practices should be coordinated through the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee , with the results shared
broadly. This task force should consider the extent to which existing activities can be leveraged for AI R&D.
Recommendation Details
Recommendation 1: Coordinated by the NSTC Select Committee on AI and its operational arm, the
NSTC MLAI Subcommittee, Federal agencies that support AI R&D should launch and support pilot
projects to identify and explore the advantages and challenges associated with the use of
commercial clouds in conducting federally funded AI research, and document and broadly share
the results and associated best practices that emerge from those experiences.
Several Federal agencies have launched pilot projects to identify and explore the advantages and
challenges associated with the use of commercial clouds in conducting f ederally funded AI research.
Some of these are highlighted below. The efforts are complementary and have differing aims and goals
in supporting the research computing and data needs of each agency’s target community(ies). Thus, a
broad range of experience s and insights will be drawn from these pilots . (See earlier footnotes for
additional resources.)
• DOD JAIC’s Joint Common Foundation (JCF) is being built in the cloud so that machine learning
(ML) and AI development can be integrated with cloud security practices, to include infrastructure-
as-code and DevSecOps.15 The JCF will leverage cloud computing capabilities for data storage and
accelerated ML/AI development. In particular, t he JCF will integrate cloud platform -as-a-service
offerings for data science and ML to enable developers to begin developing on day one. Leveraging
the cloud will allow DoD to store, view, and easily share DoD source code and data that can be
reused and/or repurposed securely to accelerate ML/AI development at scale.
• DOT’s Secure Data Commons uses commercial cloud services to provide a secure, collaborative
environment for analysis of transportation research data.  DOT will be documenting the lessons
learned along the way  and building the entire platform “in the open” (e.g., sharing source code
and cloud architectures). DOT is already ingesting and analyzing “AI-relevant” data.
• NASA has several projects focusing on utilizing commercial cloud resources for storing large
data sets such as Earth-observing satellite data for easy and on-demand access by interested
third parties. NASA also recently launched a pilot project to study the use of commercial cloud
resources for AI R&D by the agency’s staff and their collaborators. The focus is to understand the
extent and viability of the services supported by such entities and to develop a platform for
seamless access to a combination of on -premises resources and those provided by multiple
commercial cloud providers.

15 DevSecOps manage Development (programmers, developers, security, application owners and analysts, and
project managers); IT Operations (administration of system, network, and database, and data center and
storage); and Information Security as tightly integrated processes.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
4
• NIH, through  the activity Science and Technology Research Infrastructure for Discovery,
Experimentation, and Sustainability (STRIDES) and the Artificial Intelligence for Biomedical
Excellence (AIBLE) initiatives, is addressing the challenges associated with data storage an d
accessibility by establishing partnerships with commercial cloud service providers and harnessing
the power of the commercial cloud in support of biomedical research.  STRIDES and AIBLE are
providing mechanisms for NIH biomedical researchers to access the  most advanced data sets to
accelerate machine learning and AI and associated research outcomes. A central tenet is that data
made available through these partnerships will incorporate standards endorsed by the biomedical
research community to make data discoverable, accessible, and useable, and  consistent with
all applicable laws, regulations, and policies governing data use, disclosure, and sharing.
• The NOAA Big Data Program  (BDP) improves the accessibility of NOAA's publicly available data
by partnering with commercial cloud service providers to leverage the marketplace value inherent
in NOAA’s data. The BDP enables public use of NOAA data by lowering technical obstacles such as
availability of data, network bandwidth, storage, and access  tools, thus facilitating new ways for
NOAA data to be understood and used by all. These partnerships allow NOAA to explore the use of
cloud technologies for modeling, detection, classification, an d data quality control , thereby
enabling AI and advanced analytics. The BDP seeks to curb increasing costs and risks associated
with Federal data access services while securely and rapidly scaling to meet the emerging data
access needs and requirements of users. By leveraging these public-private partnerships with the
cloud computing and information services industries (that will themselves monetize value-added
services built on those open Federal data), NOAA ensures that the value in its data is more widely
realized, and this ultimately enables new jobs and economic growth in the information services
industries. The NOAA BDP is currently in its operational phase, and the agency has signed contracts
with multiple commercial cloud computing service providers. These contracts have solidified the
partnerships between NOAA and these cloud service providers, and they show a commitment to
advancing NOAA’s data footprint in the cloud and providing increased access to NOAA data.
• NSF’s Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) has funded
an entity that can serve as a principal interface between the CISE research and education
community and public cloud computing providers.  This entity has multiple responsibilities,
including: (1) establishing partnerships with the various public cloud computing providers;
(2) assisting NSF in allocating cloud computing resources to qualifying CISE -funded projects;
(3) managing cloud computing accounts and resources allocated to individual CI SE projects;
(4) providing user training and other support to CISE researchers and educators using cloud
computing in their work; and ( 5) providing strategic technical guidance for CISE researchers and
educators interested in using public cloud computing platforms.  NSF is undertaking this activity
in order to better support the growing use of cloud computing resources by the NSF/CISE research
and education community, including AI researchers and educators. Given the initial success of this
activity, NSF is beginning to leverage the entity to expand access to cloud resources to programs
beyond CISE. As this pilot approach (and the others noted as part of this recommendation) scales,
it serves to inform policymakers on the feasibility of a potential future “National Research Cloud”
to enable AI research and education.
16
• The VA Data Commons  pilot has three goals:  (1) establish a regulatory framework to securely
transfer, store, and use VA data within a VA Data Commons; (2) capture the technical requirements

16 J. Etchemendy and F. Li. 2020. “National Research Cloud: Ensuring the Continuation of American Innovation.”
https://hai.stanford.edu/blog/national-research-cloud-ensuring-continuation-american-innovation

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
5
and software applications needed to conduct common research functions using VA data within a
VA Data Commons; and (3) obtain an estimate of the anticipated costs needed to maintain an on-
premises and cloud -based platform for a VA Data Com mons capable of scaling to support
thousands of approved research studies. A number of the considerations and lessons learned from
this pilot are expected to be applicable to commercial cloud services as well.
Starting with the pilots as an evidence base, t he NSTC MLAI S ubcommittee should develop a plan for
evaluating the impact of Federal investment in commercial cloud computing resources on advancing
AI R&D  and for identifying lessons learned and inform ing the viability of a potential future National
Research Cloud. This plan should address resource availability and integrity, use, and impact, including
enumeration of resources, key descriptors (e.g., the agency supporting the resource, capacity, cost
structure, access pathway, data quality, and model composition), and performance measures such as
system availability. Security considerations should also be addressed to provide appropriate access
and levels of protection depending on who is accessing the data (e.g., government, university-affiliated
research centers, federally funded research and development centers, universities, or contractors); the
type of data (e.g., controlled unclassified information, controlled technical information , personally
identifiable information , or proprietary information); the government’s right to the data (e.g.,
unlimited, government-purpose, or restricted); and the data classification. Use should account for both
human-initiated use and machine access, addressing system-level encounters; enumeration of services
used (e.g., the data extract, search, or algorithm implementation); and characteristics of the session
(e.g., the length of time or number of services per session). Impact should incorporate documentation
of the purpose , consequences of use including results of AI methods applied , costs offset from on -
premises approaches, and new results that it enabled.  Ultimately, the plan should allow for a better
understanding of demand and research workloads to enable strategic pricing models for providers and
researchers alike. To support the implementation of this plan, the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee should
track how agencies’ uses of cloud computing to advance AI R&D are evolving.
An important cost attribute associated with extramurally  funded cloud computing resources is the
corresponding indirect cost. While existing statute
17 precludes some agencies from revising indirect
cost rates associated with cloud computing resources, should additional flexibilities be afforded, this
topic warrants further discussion to level the playing field when considering overall costs of local on -
premises computing versus commercial cloud services and aligning overall costs with incentives.
Recommendation 2: Within 90 days of publishing this report, the NTSC MLAI Subcommittee should
establish a task force to outline an approach to educating and equipping those engaged in AI R&D
with the skills needed to use cloud -based platforms and technologies to help realize the ir full
benefits for advancing AI frontiers . The task force should  publish a report on its findings within
180 days.
Although many researchers, ranging from students to faculty and  others, may leverage limited cloud
computing in various capacities, there are few materials geared for educating researchers in use of
the cloud in their R&D activities. There are limited processes for formalizing the knowledge that such
users have acq uired or for allowing them to share publicly the new skills that they have acquired.
The task force of the NSTC MLAI subcommittee should:  (1) collect information about the minimum
skill requirements for conducting cloud -based work; (2) propose new mechanisms of training and skill

17 Public Law 115-245. 2018. An Act: Making consolidated appropriations for the Departments of Defense, Labor,
Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2019,
and for other purposes. https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/6157/text?overview=closed

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
6
development, new instructional materials, and/or an inventory of links to existing ones ; and
(3) encourage piloting approaches for equipping and  credentialing.  Such efforts may include
expanding or formalizing existing prog rams that develop such materials, like the VA Big Data -
Scientist Training Enhancement Program 18 that provides  Government with increased access to
academic expertise by linking researchers with postdoctoral fellows in training.
Recommendation 3: Within 90 days of publishing this report, the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee should
establish a task force to examine best practices in identity management and single- sign-on
strategies within Government and across the research community to identify near- and long-term
approaches that will enable more effective use of the variety of commercial cloud resources, with
a focus on accelerating AI R&D activities . Implementation of the best practices and strategies
should be coordinated through the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee, with the results shared broadly.
Different research areas  have different resource-access constraints and approaches. For example,
investigators who deal with research data from a variety of sources (e.g., clinical records, institutional
capture during the research process, and instrument data capture) inherit different controls and
restrictions over that data.
Accelerating AI R&D benefits from researchers’ access to data sets in a way that simultaneously respects
the data contributors’ rights while facilitating discovery and availability of relevant data sets. It is time
to move beyond role-based access to data to new strategies that promote investigator access to data
in a manner that provides fine-grained access control. A promising technology in this area is the use of
token-based access management control, in which an individual who has authenticated to a valid
resource can subsequently negotiate access to a variety of research resource data sources:  once the
combination of person, data permission, and data access instructions is met, the individual gains
access to the various desired data resources. The task force should consider the extent to which existing
activities, e.g., login.gov and IDmanagement.gov, provide guidance appropriate to AI R&D.  The task
force should also consider approaches for operational delivery and ongoing management of controlled
access protocols that support research objectives, security of data sets, visibility to the roles of the
personnel accessing the data, and appropriate use of Federal data.
Recommendation 4: Within 90 days of publishing this report, the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee should
establish a task force  to identify and publish best practices that use open approaches and
promote model/code reuse/interoperability among commercial cloud provider platforms so that
AI software can work seaml essly across different platforms without the need for per -cloud
customization, again with a focus on accelerating AI R&D activities.  Implementation of the best
practices should be coordinated through the NSTC MLAI Subcommittee , with the results shared
broadly.
The task force will collect information from agency representatives on promoting model and code reuse
across cloud environments.  This may include work being developed in side and outside the Federal
Government. Areas for further elucidation include:  (1) data and model sheets to capture meta
information for making portability across cloud providers easier; ( 2) community-based practices and
associated platforms (e.g., open-source Kubernetes automation processes) that enable sharing models
and data across cloud providers; ( 3) approaches for easily porting models and associated data across
different cloud platform instances (e.g., Docker) ; and  (4) definition of requirements for data
management (cleansing, anonymization, taxonomy, tagging, lifecycle management, etc .) and data

18 https://www.va.gov/oaa/specialfellows/programs/sf_bdstep.asp

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
7
movement that impact the agency sourcing and maintaining the data.  The task force should consider
the extent to which existing activities, e.g., code.gov, can be leveraged for AI R&D.
It is recognized that there are varying needs for different AI R&D activities.  Some may achieve optimal
performance by customizing for a single specialized cloud environment, while others may benefit from
integrating data in real time across platforms in a manner where heterogeneous cloud interoperability
is paramount, and still others may simply benefit from facilitating deployments in different
environments.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
8
Abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
AIBLE  Artificial Intelligence for Biomedical
Excellence (NIH)
BDP  Big Data Program (NOAA)
CISE Computer & Information Science &
Engineering Directorate of NSF
DARPA Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency
DoD Department of Defense
DOE Department of Energy
DOT Department of Transportation
GSA General Services Administration
HPC high performance computing
IT information technology
JAIC Joint Artificial Intelligence Center
(DOD)
JCF  Joint Common Foundation (DOD
JAIC)
ML machine learning
MLAI  Machine Learning and Artificial
Intelligence (Subcommittee of
the NSTC)
NASA National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
NCO National Coordination Office for
NITRD
NIH National Institutes of Health
NIST National Institute of Standards and
Technology
NITRD Networking and Information
Technology Research and
Development program
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
NSF National Science Foundation
NSTC National Science and Technology
Council
OSTP Office of Science and Technology
Policy
R&D research and development
STRIDES
  Science and Technology Research
Infrastructure for Discovery,
Experimentation, and Sustainability
(NIH)
VA Department of Veterans Affairs

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEVERAGING CLOUD COMPUTING RESOURCES FOR
FEDERALLY FUNDED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

About the National Science and Technology Council
The National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) is the principal means by which the Executive Branch coordinates
science and technology policy across the diverse entities that make up the Federal research and development
enterprise. A primary objective of the NSTC is to ensure that science and technology policy decisions and programs are
consistent with the President’s stated goals. The NSTC prepares research and development strategies that are
coordinated across Federal agencies aimed at accomplishing m ultiple national goals. The work of the NSTC is
organized under committees that oversee subcommittees and working groups focused on different aspects of
science and technology. More information is available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/nstc.
About the Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) was established by the National Scie nce and Technology Policy,
Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 to provide the President and others within the Executive Office of the President
with advice on the scientific, engineering, and technological aspects of the economy, national security, homeland
security, health, foreign relations, the environment, and the technological recovery and use of resources, among other
topics. OSTP leads interagency science and technology policy coordination efforts, assists the Office of Management
and Budget with an annual review and analysis of Federal research and development in budgets, and serves as a source
of scientific and technological analysis and judgment for the President with respect to major policies, plans, and
programs of the Federal Government. More information is available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp
.
About the Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence
The Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence advises and assists the NSTC to improve the overall effectiveness and
productivity of Federal R&D efforts related to AI to ensure continued U.S. leadership in this field. It addresses national
and international policy matters that cut a cross agency boundaries, and provides formal mechanisms for interagency
policy coordination and development for Federal AI R&D activities. It also advises the Executive Office of the President on
interagency AI R&D priorities; works to create balanced and comprehensive AI R&D programs an d partnerships;
leverages Federal data and computational resources across department and agency missions; and supports a technical,
national AI workforce.
About the Subcommittee on Machine Learning & Artificial Intelligence
The Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence (MLAI) Subcommittee monitors the state of the art in machine learning
and artificial intelligence within the Federal Government, in the private sector, and internationally to watch for the
arrival of important technology milestones in the  development of AI, to coordinate the use of and foster the sharing of
knowledge and best practices about ML and AI by the Federal Government, and to consult in the development of Federal
MLAI R&D priorities. The MLAI Subcommittee reports to the Committee on Technology and the Select Committee on AI.
The MLAI Subcommittee also coordinates AI taskings with the Artificial Intelligence R&D Interagency Working Group of
the NSTC Subcommittee on Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD).
About the Subcommittee on Networking & Information Technology Research & Development
The NITRD Program is the Nation’s primary source of federally funded work on pioneering information technologies (IT)
in computing, networking, and software. The NITRD Subcommittee of the NSTC Committee on Science and Technology
Enterprise guides the multiagency NITRD Program in its work to provide the research and development (R&D)
foundations for assuring continued U.S. technological leadership and meeting the needs of the Nation for advanced IT.
The National Coordination Office (NCO) supports the NITRD Subcommittee and the Interagency Working Groups (IWGs)
that report to it. More information is available at https://www.nitrd.gov/about/
.
About this Document
This report provides recommendations for leveraging cloud computing resources for f ederally funded artificial
intelligence research and development.  Cloud platforms provide  robust, agile, reliable, and scalable computing
capabilities, which can help accelerate advances in AI  R&D. Cloud computing can also democratize access to the
powerful computing capabilities needed for many types of AI R&D . This report is another step in the overall strategy to
position the United States as the world leader in artificial intelligence.
Copyright Information
This document is a work of the United States Government and is in the public domain (see 17 U.S.C. §105). Subject to the
stipulations below, it may be distributed and copied with acknowledgment to OSTP. Requests to use any images must be
made to OSTP. Published in the United States of America, 2020.
