National Science and Technology Council
Committee on Technology
Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science,
Engineering, and Technology
October 2016
NATIONAL NANOTECHNOLOGY
INITIATIVE
STRATEGIC PLAN

About the National Science and Technology Council
The National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) is the principal means by which the Executive Branch
coordinates science and technology policy across the diverse entities that make up the Federal research and
development enterprise. A primary objective of the NSTC is establishing clear national goals for Federal
science and technology investments. The NSTC prepares research and development strategies that are
coordinated across Federal agencies to form investment packages aimed at accomplishing multiple national
goals. The work of the NSTC is organized under committees that oversee subcommittees and working
groups focused on different aspects of science and technology. More information is available at

www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ostp/nstc.
About the Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) was established by the National Science and Technology
Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976. OSTP’s responsibilities include advising the President in policy
formulation and budget development on questions in which science and technology are important elements;
articulating the President’s science and technology policy and program s; and fostering strong partnerships
among Federal, state, and local governments, and the scientific communities in industry and academia. The
Director of OSTP also serves as Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and manages the NSTC.
More information is available at www.ostp.gov
.
About the Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology Subcommittee
The Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology (NSET) Subcommittee is the interagency body
responsible for coordinating, planning, implementing, and reviewing the National Nanotechnology Initiative
(NNI). It is a subcommittee of the Committee on Technology of the National Science and Technology Council.
The National Nanotechnology Coordination Office (NNCO) provides technical and administrative support to
the NSET Subcommittee and its working groups in the preparation of multiagency planning, budget, an d
assessment documents related to the NNI, including this strategy document. More information is available at
www.nano.gov
.
About this Document
This document is the strategic plan for the NNI. It describes the NNI vision and goals and the strategies by
which these goals are to be achieved. The plan  includes a description of the NNI investment strategy and the
program component areas called for by the 21st Century Research and Development Act of 2003, and it also
identifies specific objectives toward collectively achieving the NNI vision. This plan updates and replaces  the
NNI Strategic Plan of February 2014.
Copyright Information
This document is a work of the United States Government and is in the public domain (see 17 U .S.C. §105).
Subject to the stipulations below, it may be distributed and copied with acknowledgement to NNCO.
Copyrights to graphics included in this document are reserved by the original copyright holders or their
assignees and are used here under the Go vernment’s license and by permission. Requests to use any images
must be made to the provider identified in the image credits or to NNCO if no provider is identified.
Printed in the United States of America, 2016.

NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
COMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY (CoT)
SUBCOMMITTEE ON NANOSCALE SCIENCE, ENGINEERING, AND TECHNOLOGY (NSET)
 CoT Chair: Thomas Kalil, Office of Science and Technology Policy
 CoT Executive Secretary:  Afua Bruce, Office of Science and Technology Policy

NSET Subcommittee Chairs:
Lloyd J. Whitman, OSTP
Lori A. Henderson, NIH
National Nanotechnology Coordination
Office (NNCO):
Michael A. Meador, Director
Lisa E. Friedersdorf, Deputy Director
NSET Subcommittee Executive Secretary:
Stacey Standridge, NNCO
Nanotechnology Environmental and Health
Implications (NEHI) Working Group
Chairs:
Treye A. Thomas, CPSC
John Howard, NIOSH
Nanotechnology Innovation and
Commercialization Ecosystem (NICE)
Working Group Chairs:
Azlin M. Biaggi-Labiosa, NASA
Lynnette D. Madsen, NSF
Coordinator for Global Issues:
Christopher M. Cannizzaro, DOS
Coordinator for Standards Development:
Ajit Jillavenkatesa, NIST
Coordinator for Environmental, Health, and
Safety Research:
Treye A. Thomas, CPSC
Coordinator for Education, Engagement,
and Societal Dimensions:
John F. Bobalek, DOTreas

NSET Subcommittee Participants

Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP)
Lloyd J. Whitman*
Altaf H. Carim
Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Danielle Jones*
James Kim*
Celinda Marsh*
Consumer Product Safety Commission
(CPSC)†
Treye A. Thomas*
Department of Commerce (DOC)
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS)
Kelly Gardner*
Economic Development Administration
(EDA)
Thomas Guevara
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST)
Heather Evans*
Ajit Jillavenkatesa*
Debra L. Kaiser
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO)
Gladys Corcoran*
Jesus Hernandez*
Jerry Lorengo*
Peter Mehravari*
Department of Defense (DOD)
Jeffrey DePriest*
Eric W. Forsythe*
Mark H. Griep
Akbar Khan*
Antti J. Makinen*
Heather Meeks
Brian D. Pate
Gernot S. Pomrenke*
Lewis E. Sloter*
David M. Stepp*
Department of Education (DOEd)
Russell D. Shilling*
Department of Energy (DOE)
Harriet Kung*
George Maracas*
Andrew R. Schwartz*
David Forrest*
Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS)
Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry (ATSDR)
Deborah Burgin
Candis M. Hunter
Custodio V. Muianga
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Anil Patri*
National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH)
Charles L. Geraci*
Vladimir V. Murashov*
N
ational Institutes of Health (NIH)
Piotr Grodzinski*
Lori A. Henderson*
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Kumar Babu*
Department of the Interior (DOI)
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
Patricia Bright
Michael Focazio
Jeffery Steevens
Department of Justice (DOJ)
National Institute of Justice (NIJ)
Joseph Heaps*
Department of Labor (DOL)
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA)
Janet Carter*
Department of State (DOS)
Christopher M. Cannizzaro*
Ken Hodgkins*
Department of Transportation (DOT)
Peter Chipman*
Jonathan R. Porter*
Department of the Treasury (DOTreas)
John F. Bobalek*
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Tina Bahadori*
Jeff Morris*
Intelligence Community (IC)
National Reconnaissance Office (NRO)
Matthew Cobert*
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA)
Azlin M. Biaggi-Labiosa*
Lanetra C. Tate
National Science Foundation (NSF)
Khershed Cooper*
Fred Kronz
Lynnette Madsen*
Mihail C. Roco*
Nora Savage
Grace J. Wang*
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)†
Brian Thomas*
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Agriculture Research Service (ARS)
James Lindsay*
Forest Service (FS)
World L.-S. Nieh*
National Institute of Food and
Agriculture (NIFA)
Hongda Chen*
U.S. International Trade Commission
(USITC)†
E
lizabeth R. Nesbitt*
* Official NSET Representative
† An independent commission that is represented on NSET but is non-voting
All affiliations listed above are as of October 2016.

Acknowledgments
This s trategic plan was developed with broad input from the U.S.  nanotechnology community. The
efforts of the many people who contributed to this update of the NNI Strategic Pl an are gratefully
acknowledged. In particular, the individuals listed below provided valuable input and dedicated
considerable time and expertise to the development of the 2016 NNI Strategic Plan.
Strategic Planning Project Manager: Stacey Standridge (NNCO, contractor)
Strategic Planning Team: Heather Evans (DOC/NIST), Lisa Friedersdorf (NNCO), Lori Henderson
(DHHS/NIH), Debra L. Kaiser (DOC/NIST), Igor Linkov (DOD), Michael A. Meador (NNCO), Mihail C. Roco
(NSF), Andrew R. Schwartz (DOE), Lewis E. Sloter (DOD), David M. Stepp (DOD), Treye A. Thomas (CPSC),
Lloyd J. Whitman (OSTP), and Nikolai Zhitenev (DOC/NIST)
Stakeholder Workshop Speakers: Marcie Black (Advanced Silicon Group), Michelle Bradbury
(Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center), Oliver Brand (Georgia Institute of Technology), Greg Lowry
(Carnegie Mellon University), and Paul Weiss (University of California, Los Angeles)
Stakeholder Workshop Panelists: Deji Akinwande (University of Texas at Austin), Sharon Glotzer
(University of Michigan), Zhen Gu (North Carolina State University and University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill), Richard Hennig (University of Florida), Matthew Hull (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University), Debra L. Kaiser  (DOC/NIST), Katia Karalis (Emulate, Inc.) , Saniya LeBlanc (The George
Washington University), Frank Malinoski (Nanomedicines Alliance and Liquidia Technologies), Timothy
Malloy (University of California, Los Angeles), World Nieh (USDA/FS), Joseph Sprengard, Jr. (General
Nano), Brian Thrall (Pacific Northwest National Laboratory), Elissa Williams (Scientific & Biomedical
Microsystems), and Xiaoyu (Rayne) Zheng (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University)

EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20502

October 31, 2016

Dear Members of Congress:

 Under the auspices of the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI), progress in understanding
and harnessing the novel phenomena that occur at the nanoscale—about 100,000 times smaller than the
width of a human hair—is leading to revolutionary new materials, devices, and structures that are
improving human health, creating jobs, and strengthening our national defense. Since its launch in 2001,
the NNI has enabled ground-breaking discoveries that have revolutionized science; established world-
class capabilities for the characterization of nanoscale materials and their fabrication into nanoscale
devices; and educated tens of thousands of scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs.

 Nanotechnology is steadily moving from the laboratory to the marketplace and is now enabling or
enhancing products in a variety of sectors, including clothing, electronics, clean energy technologies, and
automobiles. With the continuation of an integrated Federal initiative, nanotechnology is poised to
significantly improve how we diagnose and treat disease, enable comfortable garments that protect our
troops from biological and chemical threats, and provide the high-strength, light-weight components
needed for the long journey to Mars.

 During this administration, nanotechnology research and development has evolved from a focus
on foundational discoveries aimed at understanding and exploiting nanoscale phenomena, to an enabling
technology. Revenue from the sale of nanotechnology-enabled products in the United States has grown
more than six-fold from 2009 through 2016 and is projected to exceed $500 billion in 2016.

Although a great deal of progress has been made in expanding our fundamental understanding of
nanoscale materials and devices, there are still challenges associated with designing and fabricating
integrated nanosystems. This update of the NNI Strategic Plan identifies high-impact research
investments that can address these challenges. Progress in the design and fabrication of integrated
nanosystems will help the United States realize the potential of the nanotechnology frontier.

Sincerely,

John P. Holdren
Assistant to the President for Science and Technology
Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy

 i 
Table of Contents

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................ iii
The NNI ..................................................................................................................................... 1
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................... 1
Overview of the NNI .......................................................................................................................................... 3
The NNI Strategic Plan ................................................................................................ ...................................... 4
Goals and Objectives............................................................................................................... 6
Goal 1: Advance a world-c lass nanotechnology research and development program. ............................... 6
Goal 2: Foster the transfer of new technologies into products for commercial and public benefit........... 10
Goal 3: Develop and sustain educational resources, a skilled workforce, and a dynamic
infrastructure and toolset to advance nanotechnology. ................................................................ 16
Goal 4: Support responsible development of nanotechnology. .................................................................. 22
The NNI Collaboration Ecosystem ........................................................................................ 28
Concluding Remarks ............................................................................................................. 32
Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI ............................................................................ 33
Appendix B. Stakeholder Workshop Summary ................................................................... 49
Appendix C. Abbreviations and Acronyms ......................................................................... 54

 iii 
Executive Summary
The National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI), established in 2001, is now a collaboration of twenty
Federal agencies and C abinet-level departments with shared interests in nanotechnology research,
development, and commercialization. These agencies recognize that the ability to understand and
harness the novel phenomena that occur at the nanoscale is already leading to revolutionary new
materials, devices, and structures. These advances promise to improve human health and quality of life,
enhance the U.S. economy, boost job creation, and strengthen our national defense. Since the inception
of the NNI, these agencies have invested more than $ 23 billion in support of cutting- edge research;
world-class user facilities for characterization, modeling, and fabrication; and the responsible transfer of
nanotechnology-based products from lab to market. As a result of these investments, nanotechnology
has become ubiquitous in our dail y lives and can be found in a wide variety of commercial products
including healthcare products, cosmetics, consumer electronics, apparel, and automobiles.
Nanotechnology is poised to revolutionize the way we diagnose and treat diseases such as cancer, help
us improve our fitness, and reduce our energy consumption.
Under the 21
st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act of 2003, NNI agencies are
required to develop an updated NNI Strategic Plan every three years. This document represents a
consensus among NNI agencies on the high- level goals and priorities of the Initiative and on specific
objectives to be pursued over at least the next three years. The plan provides the framework under
which individual agencies conduct their own mission- specific nanotechnology programs, coordinate
these activities with those of other NNI agencies, and collaborate.
Over the life of the NNI, nanotechnology has evolved from an area of fundamental research focused on
understanding and exploiting the phenomena that oc cur at the nanoscale to what is now a broadly
enabling technology. Recognizing this evolution, the focus of the NNI has broadened from investments
in foundational (fundamental) research in nanomaterials and nanotechnology -enabled devices to
include activit ies directed at how these novel materials and devices can be incorporated into
nanotechnology-enabled systems. This update of the NNI Strategic Plan reflects that evolution and
addresses how the NNI agencies will collaborate with each other and the broader  nanotechnology
community to expand the ecosystem that supports fundamental discovery , fosters innovation, and
promotes the transfer of nanotechnology discoveries from lab to market.
Goal 1: Advance a world-class nanotechnology research and development program.
Nanotechnology is inherently multidisciplinary, and NNI agencies have supported research at the
frontiers and intersections of scientific disciplines such as biology, chemistry, materials science, and
physics to enable new discoveries. Agencies will build on that legacy to foster research that exploits
the convergence of nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, and cognitive science
to lead to the next scientific breakthroughs and address key societal challenges. NNI agencies will
also promote the integration of modeling and simulation together with data analytics across the
research and development spectrum to accelerate nanotechnology discovery.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  iv 
NNI agencies will continue to support a diverse and robust portfolio of Nanotechnology Signature
Initiatives (NSIs) to provide additional focus and collaboration to accelerate technology
development in areas of strategic national interest. In 2015, the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy ( OSTP) announced the first Nanotechnol ogy-Inspired Grand Challenge,
challenging the community to create a new type of computer that can proactively interpret and learn
from data, solve unfamiliar problems using what it has learned, and operate with the energy efficiency
of the human brain. Grand challenges such as this have ambitious but achievable goals that harness
science, technology, and innovation to solve important national or global problems and have the
potential to capture the public’s imagination . NNI agencies will continue to expl ore grand
challenges and other mechanisms to promote public –private collaborations that accelerate
nanotechnology discovery, development, and deployment.
Goal 2: Foster the transfer of new technologies into products for commercial and public benefit.
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR ) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) funding
has been instrumental in the transfer of nanotechnology products from lab to market. Building on
this success,  NNI agencies will explore additional mechanisms to f oster commercialization,
innovation, and entrepreneurship. Programs such as the NSF  Innovation Corps (I -Corps), the NIH
Translation of Nanotechnology in Cancer Consortium, and the Air Force Research Laboratory -
supported Nano -Bio Manufacturing Consortium  (NBMC) are excellent models for supporting
innovation and commercialization. NNI agencies will continue to support activities such as these
and to identify best practices that can  be incorporated into new approaches to maximize the
commercial benefit of NNI investments.
While sparking innovation and stimulating entrepreneurship  is critical, sustaining success is also
vital. NNI agencies together with the National Nanotechnology Coordination Office  (NNCO)
augment outreach to industry, technical societies, and trade organizations with more focused
measures to identify and help address challenges faced by businesses working to  commercialize
nanotechnology. Among these challenges is the development of scalable, robust , and repeatable
methods for the manufacture of nanomaterials and nanotechnology-enabled products (NEPs). NNI
agencies will strengthen  intersections with the Manufacturing Innovation Institutes to identify
opportunities to address these and other nanotechnology-related manufacturing challenges.
Commercialization of U.S.-developed nanotechnology products requires active engagement with
the international community in areas such as intellectual property, standards development, and the
potential environmental, health, and safety (EHS) implications of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs)
and NEPs. NNI agencies are active in and, in many cases , lead international collaborations in these
and other areas . The agencies  will continue these interactions and forge new partn erships to
advance nanotechnology commercialization and other NNI goals.
Goal 3: Develop and sustain educational resources, a skilled workforce, and a dynamic infrastructure and
toolset to advance nanotechnology.
Success in nanotechnology research, devel opment, and commercialization requires a skilled
workforce—from the shop floor to the laboratory —and world-class physical and computational
tools. NNI agencies will continue to promote the development of new experimental and

Executive Summary
  v 
computational tools to support advances in nanotechnology. A key accomplishment of the NNI has
been the development of unique, high-value nanofabrication and characterization facilities that are
open for use by researchers from industry, academia, and government. NNI agencies will pursue an
“evergreen” approach to physical infrastructure that continually supports  workhorse tools in
addition to providing support for the development of new tools and techniques and for workforce
training to maintain these facilities. This physical infrastructure must be complemented by a robust
cyber infrastructure, including modeling and simulation tools, databases , and advanced data
analytics. This cyber toolbox has been and will be increasingly critical to the understanding and
development of nanotechnology.
The NNI also has a rich legacy in education and outreach through programs such as the NSF -
sponsored Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network (NISE Net), a network of museums and
other institutions that had more than 30 million people participating  in its programs, events, and
exhibitions from 2008 to 2015. Recently NNI agencies, in collaboration with NNCO, have significantly
expanded outreach and student engagement in nanotechnology -related topics through activities
such as contests and challenges and through the development of networks to encourage students
and provide support for educators. NNI agencies will build on these mechanisms and explore other
approaches to education and engagement that will inform students and the public about
nanotechnology and will also inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers , including
those from underrepresented groups.
Goal 4: Support responsible development of nanotechnology.
Responsible and sustainable  development is critical throughout the entire nanotechnology
enterprise to protect human health and the environment while realizing the societal and economic
benefits of this broadly enabling technology. NNI agencies will continue to support collaborative
fundamental research to refine our  understanding of the EHS implications of ENMs and NEPs, as
discussed in the 2011 NNI Environmental, Health, and Safety Research Strategy. NNI agencies have
worked with industry to provide information and assistance to ensure safe handling of
nanomaterials and the pro duction of NEPs that are safe for consumers. The ethical, legal, and
societal implications of nanotechnology continue to be important issues for the Initiative.
In 2016, the NNI initiated a series of webinars focused on promoting best safety practices in
nanotechnology research, product manufacturing, and product disposal and recycling. NNI
agencies will continue these activities and pursue other opportunities to collaborate with the
nanotechnology community to share information and best practices. NNI agencies and NNCO also
have been active in international c ollaborations, such as the U.S. –EU Communities of Research
(CORs), to share information and coordinate activities; they will continue these efforts and look for
new ways to promote global collaboration on the responsible development of nanotechnology.

 1 
The NNI
Introduction
Since 2001, Federal agencies and C abinet-level departments have invested more than $23 billion in
nanotechnology research, development, and commercialization. These investments, made under the
auspices of the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI), have enabled groundbreaking discoveries that
have revolutionized science; established world -class facilities for the characterization of nanoscale
materials and their fabrication into nanoscale devices; educated  tens of thousands of individuals from
undergraduate students to postdoc toral researchers; and fostered the responsible incorporation of
nanotechnology into commercial products. As a result, nanotechnology is becoming ubiquitous in our
daily lives and has found its way into many commercial products, including cosmetics, apparel,
consumer electronics, and automobiles. Nanotechnology -based diagnostics and therapeutics are
poised to drastically improve  the way we diagnose and treat disease s, such as cancer, and
nanotechnology can help us improve our fitness and reduce energy consumption. Looking toward the
future, nanotechnology is moving from a fundamental research area to an enabling technology that can
lead to new materials, devices, and systems that will profoundly impact quality of life, the Nation’s
economy, and national security. The strong collaborations built under the NNI will be critical in
sustaining an ecosystem that invests in the next breakthroughs in nanoscale materials and devices but
also promotes the effective and responsible transition of nanotechnology discoveries from lab to
market. This strategic plan builds upon the collaborations and prior accomplishments of the NNI to
develop and nurture that ecosystem and to move the NNI into its next phase.
What is nanotechnology?
Nanotechnology encompasses science,
engineering, and technology at the
nanoscale, which is about 1 to 100
nanometers. Just how small is that? A
nanometer is one-billionth of a meter.
For reference, a sheet of paper is about
100,000 nanometers thick. Nanoscale
matter can behave differently than the
same bulk material. For example, a
material’s melting point, color,
strength, chemical reactivity, and more may change at the nanoscale. Nanotechnology is affecting all
aspects of life through innovations that enable, for example, strong, lightweight materials for better fuel
economy; targeted drug delivery for safer and more effective cancer treatments; clean , accessible
drinking water around the world; superfast computers with vast amounts of storage; self -cleaning
surfaces; wearable health monitors; more efficient solar panels; safer food through packaging and
monitoring; regrowth of skin, bone, and nerve cells for better medical outcomes; smart windows that
lighten or darken to conserve energy; and nanotechnology -enabled concrete that dries more quickly
and has sensors to detect stress or corrosion in roads, bridges, and buildings.
If a buckminsterfullerene molecule (60 carbon atoms arranged in a
sphere, with a diameter of 1.1 nanometers) were as big as a softball, a
softball would be as big as the Earth.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  2 

Table 1: Federal Departments and Agencies Participating in the NNI.

The NNI
  3 
Overview of the NNI
The National Nanotechnology Initiative, established in 2001, has grown to be a collaboration of twenty
Federal departments and independent agencies with interests in nanotechnology research,
development, and commercialization  (see Table 1) .1 These agencies recognize that the ability t o
understand and harness the novel phenomena that occur at the nanoscale can lead to revolutionary
new materials, devices, and structures. Furthermore, advances in nanotechnology can improve human
health and quality of life, enhance the U.S. economy, boost job creation, and strengthen the national
defense. Collectively the NNI agencies have a broad range of roles and responsibilities, from conducting
and supporting fundamental and mission -focused research to developing and implementing
regulations that provide for the safe and environmentally responsible development of nanotechnology
and its incorporation into commercial products.
Funding support for the NNI comes directly from eleven of the participating agencies, rather than from
a centralized NNI budget. The nanotechnology budgets of these agencies are reported in the annual
NNI Supplement to the President’s Budget, which also serves as the annual report for the NNI,
summarizing investments by each agency and highlighting accomplishments and future plans. As an
interagency research and development (R&D) effort, the NNI informs and influences Federal budget and
planning processes through its individual participating agencies and through the National Science and
Technology Council (NSTC).
The activities of  the NNI are coordinated under the Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology
(NSET) Subcommittee of the NSTC’s Committee on Technology. NSET members work together to
develop a comprehensive nanotechnology R&D program by establishing shared goals, priorities, and
strategies that complement agency -specific missions and activities and provide opportunities for
collaboration and leveraging of participating agencies’ resources and investments. In addition, the NNI
provides a central interface for stakeholders and interested members of the general public, including
those from academia, industry, and regional/state organizations, as well as international counterparts.
To these ends, the National Nanotechnology Coordination Office (NNCO) provides technical and
administrative support to the NSET Subcommittee, serves as a central point of contact for Federal
nanotechnology R&D activities, and performs public outreach on behalf of the NNI. Working groups
established by the NSET Subcommittee serve to strengthen interagency coordination and collaboration
in critical areas such as commercialization and the environmental, health, and safety aspects of
nanotechnology (nanoEHS). In addition, coordinators are named for specific cross-cutting areas to serve
as primary points of contact for these topics.
The vision of the NNI is a future in which the ability to understand and control matter at the nanoscale leads
to a revolution in technology and industry that benefits society . The NNI expedites the dis covery,
development, and deployment of nanoscale science, engineering, and technology to serve the public
good through a program of coordinated research and development aligned with the missions of the
participating agencies. In order to realize the NNI vision, the NNI agencies work collectively toward the
following four goals:
Goal 1: Advance a world-class nanotechnology research and development program.

1 See Appendix A for a description of each agency’s interest in the NNI.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  4 
Goal 2: Foster the transfer of new technologies into products for commercial and public benefit.
Goal 3: Develop and sustain educational resources, a skilled workforce, and a dynamic infrastructure and
toolset to advance nanotechnology.
Goal 4: Support responsible development of nanotechnology.
As the NNI agencies work toward realizing the NNI vision, success will not be defined as a static endpoint.
Rather, success will be measured by continual and substantive progress toward these four goals.
The NNI Strategic Plan
The National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan provides the framework that underpins the
nanotechnology-related activities of the NNI agencies. Its aim is to ensure that advancements in
nanotechnology and its application s continue in this vital R&D enterprise, while potential concerns
about current and future applications are also addressed. The purpose of the strategic plan is to catalyze
achievement in support of the goals and vision of the NNI, as outlined above, by providing guidance for
agency leaders, program managers, and the research community regarding the planning and
implementation of Federal nanotechnology R&D investments and activities.
The 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act of 2003 calls for the triennial update
of the NNI Strategic Plan.2 This strategic plan represents a consensus among NNI agencies on the high-
l
evel goals and priorities of the Initiative and on specific objectives to be pursued over at least the next
three years. It serves as an integrated, interagency strategy that informs the strategic plans of individual
agencies (e.g., EPA’s Nanomaterial Research Strategy,
3 FDA’s Nanotechnology Regulatory Science
Research Plan, 4 NASA’s 2015 Nanotechnology Roadmap, 5 and the Strategic Plan for NIOSH
Nanotechnology Research and Guidance 6). Accordi ngly, this strategic plan provides the framework
under which individual agencies can conduct their own mission- specific nanotechnology programs ,
and it promotes interagency collaboration and coordination.
This update of the NNI S trategic Plan is focused on creating an ecosystem that supports all aspects o f
the nanotechnology enterprise from fundamental discovery to commercial products. This plan
emphasizes the use of various mechanisms for collaboration across the broader nanotechnology
community to advance the goals of the NNI. These mechanisms include well-established structures such
as the NNI Nanotechnology Signature Initiatives  (NSIs), as well as newer  approaches such as

2 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act (15 U .S.C. §7501(c)(4), P .L. 108 -153;
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-108publ153/html/PLAW-108publ153.htm).
3 United States Environmental Protection Agency Office of Research and Development, Nanomaterial Research
Strategy (EPA 620/K-09/011, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, District of Columbia, 2009).
4 United States Food and Drug Administration, 2013 Nanotechnology Regulatory Science Research Plan (U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, Washington, District of Columbia, 2013; www.fda.gov/ScienceResearch/SpecialTopics/
Nanotechnology/ucm273325.htm).
5 National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA Technology Roadmaps, Technology Area 10:
Nanotechnology (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, District of Columbia, 2015;
www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/2015_nasa_technology_roadmaps_ta_10_nanotechnology_final.pdf).
6 Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, Protecting the Nanotechnology Workforce: NIOSH Nanotechnology Research and
Guidance Strategic Plan (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Washington, District of Columbia,
2014; www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2014-106/).

The NNI
  5 
Nanotechnology-Inspired Grand Challenges. This plan also relies upon opportunities to leverage
complementary activities in existing Federal initiatives in healthcare, 7 information technology, 8 and
advanced materials and manufacturing 9 to extend the reach and broaden the impact of the NNI. This
update of the NNI S trategic Plan promotes new approaches to engag ing the general public and
inspiring the next generation of scientists and engineers , including those from underrepresented
groups, through the use of contests and other challenges. This plan also seeks to build upon the highly
regarded NNI collaborations on understanding the potential environmental, health, and safety  (EHS)
implications of nanotechnology and to use that understanding in developing science-based regulatory
policies.

7 For example, the Precision Medicine Initiative (www.whitehouse.gov/precision -medicine) and the Brain
Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative (www.braininitiative.nih.gov/).
8 For example, the National Strategic Computing Initiative ( www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/
ostp/nsci_fact_sheet.pdf ) and the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program
(www.nitrd.gov/).
9 For example, the Materials Genome Initiative (www.mgi.gov/ ), Manufacturing USA ( formerly the National
Network for Manufacturing Innovation , www.manufacturing.gov/nnmi/), and the NSTC Committee on
Technology’s Subcommittee on Advanced Manufacturing.

 6 
Goals and Objectives
The participating agencies pursue the NNI vision through four interdependent goals. These goals have
remained consistent since they were first introduced in the 2004 NNI Strategic Plan and are all equally
critical to the NNI’s success. Based on extensive input from internal and external stakeholders, the NNI
agencies have specified objectives in support of each goal as detailed below. Although not all member
agencies are responsible for fulfilling all objectives, each objective is advanced by at least two agencies.
The NNI agencies independently and collaboratively contribute to all four goals, and these activities are
reported on an annual basis in the NNI Supplement to the President’s Budget.
Goal 1: Advance a world -class nanotechnology research and development
program.
NNI agencies expand the limits of fundamental understanding of the phenom ena that occur at the
nanoscale and exploit those phenomena to develop new materials and devices whose performance
exceeds that of conventional technologies. The overarching focus of Goal 1 is to advance nanoscience
and nanoengineering through the implementation of the objectives described below. Progress in R&D
will require the availability of a skilled workforce, infrastructure, and tools (Goal 3) and will produce the
discoveries that will enable the responsible incorporation of nanotechnology into commercial products
(Goals 2 and 4).
Goal 1 Objectives
1.1. Support R&D that extends the frontiers of nanotechnology and strengthens the intersections
of scientific disciplines.
1.1.1. Extend the frontiers of nanotechnology with a diverse R& D portfolio that includes basic
scientific research, foundational research, use -inspired research, applications research, and
technology development.
1.1.2. Strengthen the intersections of scienti fic disciplines by supporting interdisciplinary research
to facilitate convergence of knowledge, tools, and domains of nanotechnology with other areas in
science and technology.
1.1.3. Sustain a strategic and complementary research portfolio incorporating intramural and
extramural programs consisting of single -investigator efforts, multi- investigator and
multidisciplinary research teams, and centers and networks for focused research.
1.1.4. Foster the development of comprehensive approaches to nanotechnology R&D that integrate
simulation, modeling, and data analyti cs throughout all aspects of materials and device
development, evaluation, and testing.
1.2. Identify and support nanoscale science and technology research enabled by breakthroughs
in science, driven by national priorities, and informed by active engagement with stakeholders.
1.2.1. Engage with academia, industry, government, and the public to gather input and feedback on
federally supported research.

Goals and Objectives
  7 
1.2.2. Foster stakeholder collaborations with NNI agencies via means such as matching funds,
challenge prizes, partnerships, and consortia.
1.2.3. Identify and facilitate opportunities for international collaboration.
1.3. Assess the performance of the U.S. nanotechnology R&D program.
1.3.1. Identify the common attributes of successful research programs and ge neral best practices
within the NNI agencies and within other domestic and international nanotechnology R&D
programs.
1.3.2. Develop quantitative measures of performance in coordination with existing efforts to
establish metrics for innovation.
1.3.3. Tailor, enhance, or augment traditional assessment strategies and employ them to assess the
impact of NNI activities.
1.4. Advance a dynamic portfolio of Nanotechnology Signature Initiatives (NSIs) that are each
supported by multiple NNI agencies and address significant national priorities.
1.4.1. Identify potential new NSIs with input from stakeholders.
1.4.2. Conduct and disseminate the outcomes of biennial assessments of each NSI to review
progress, ensure relevance and need to continue, and identify future strategic areas of focus.
1.5. Utilize Nanotechnology -Inspired Grand Challenges to engage the broader community to
solve problems of national and global importance.
1.5.1. Identify topics for potential g rand challenges by engaging the broader community through
mechanisms such as workshops, Requests for Information (RFIs), and webinars.
1.5.2. Develop approaches, including public–private partnerships and consortia, to plan and resolve
grand challenges.
1.5.3. Conduct biennial assessments of the progress and impact of each grand challenge and report
the results.
A unique, established  strength of the nanotechnology enterprise lies in its interdisciplinary nature. A
broad nanotechnology R&D portfolio invests at the frontiers and intersections of many fields including
biology, chemistry, computer science, ecology, engineering, geology, materials science, medicine,
physics, and the social sciences. Recently, NNI agencies have been exploring efforts focused on research
at the convergence of nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, and cognitive sciences
that leverage knowledge and approaches in each of these areas to solve problems of national and
societal importance. As part of this broad nanotechnology R&D portfolio, NNI agencies will continue to
explore convergence as  a way of enhancing the impact that nanotechnology can have on scientific
discovery and solving critical problems.
Activities targeted toward this goal span a broad continuum, from support for basic and fundamental
research, to use -inspired and applications -focused research, to technology development. Research
efforts of NNI agencies are a mixture of extramural research and research conducted in Government
labs, each of which plays a unique and vital role in the discovery and innovati on process. These efforts

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  8 
Near Zero Friction from Nanoscale Lubricants
Researchers at Argonne National Laboratory’s Center for
Nanoscale Materials, one of five DOE Nanoscale Science
Research Centers (NSRCs) , have attained
superlubricity—the near absence  of friction —using
nanodiamonds wrapped in graphene flakes at the
interface of diamond -like carbon and graphene on a
silica substrate.10 Friction hampers the movement of all
mechanical parts in  engines, motors, etc. , in
transportation, oil refineries, power plants, and other
facilities, and it accounts for most of the energy lost in
moving parts. This wear accelerates mechanical failures,
ultimately causing machines to both break down sooner
and cost more to run.
The Argonne research demonstrates that friction can be
reduced and  superlubricity can be achieved at the
macroscale in a dry operating environment by the
addition of nanodiamonds and graphene flakes
between two surfaces, one made of grap hene-coated
silica and one made of diamond -like carbon. In this
system, the coefficient of friction is just 0.004 (10–20
times lower than Teflon), and contact areas are reduced
by more than 65%. Analysis of the wear debris revealed
that the graphene flakes  form nanoscroll-like features that wrap around the nanodiamonds. Computer
simulations show that more and more graphene flakes scroll with time, gradually reducing the contact
area between the nanoscrolls and the diamond- like carbon surface, which allows s uperlubricity to be
attained. This discovery could enable significant cost savings by increasing machine life and reducing the
amount of energy needed to run mechanical systems. In 2016 DOE awarded Argonne a Technology
Commercialization Fund Award to develop the technology with the John Crane company.
11
a
re executed through a balanced combination of grants to single investigators, collaborative research
teams, and networks; research centers; and user facilities.
Modeling and simulation tools as well as data analytics and related software can support and enhance
all aspects of nanotechnology research, development, and commercialization. Computational
modeling and simulation tools are becoming increasingly more efficient and accurate in predicting the
behavior and performance of nanoscale materials and nanotechnology -enabled devices. These tools
can reduce the time, effort, and cost required to develop robust synthesis and processing approaches
to produce nanomaterials and nanomaterial -based products, impro ve nanomanufacturing methods,
and focus testing and evaluation efforts on those tests that are the best representation of performance.

10 D. Berman, S.A. Deshmukh, S.K.R.S. Sankaranarayanan, A. Erdemir, A.V. Sumant, Macroscale superlubricity
enabled by graphene nanoscroll formation. Science 348, 1118–1122 (2015).
11 energy.gov/technologytransitions/articles/doe-announces-16-million-54-projects-help-commercialize-
promising
Visualized model of a superlubricity (low-friction)
system (gold = nanodiamond particle ;
red = graphene nanoscroll; green = underlying
graphene on blue silica; black /gray = diamond -
like carbon surface). Image courtesy of the Center
for Nanoscale Materials; image credit: J. Ingsley,
Argonne National Laboratory.

Goals and Objectives
  9 
Data analytics tools can help process the large amounts of data generated from the testing and
evaluation of nanoscale ma terials and nanotechnology -enabled devices and can identify trends that
can be exploited to optimize the properties and performance of these materials and devices. NNI
agencies will not only continue to support the development of improved simulation, model ing, data
analytics, and related software tools in support of nanotechnology research and development but will
also encourage the development of integrated approaches that incorporate their use in all aspects of
nanoscale material and device development, testing, and evaluation.
As the NNI moves toward its third decade , there is  a greater emphasis not only on supporting
fundamental research that will lead to the next discoveries in nanoscale materials and devices but also
on developing  nanotechnology-enabled systems. The NSIs provide one potential mechanism to
facilitate this transition. In 2015, the five existing NSIs were reviewed to assess the progress that has
been made against their research goals and objectives, to update these goals and objectives to ensure
continued relevance, and to determine if there is still a  need for the focus that NSIs provide in a given
topical area. During that review process it was determined that a robust research ecosystem has been
established to suppo rt nanotechnology-based solar energy R&D such that the focus of an NSI in this
area was no longer required. Accordingly, the Nanotechnology for Solar Energy Collection and Conversion
NSI was retired. In 2016, a new NSI, Water Sustainability through Nanotechnology: Nanoscale Solutions for
a Global-Scale Challenge,
12 was launched to address the pressing technical challenges of ensuring water
quality and supply, including increasing water availability, improving the efficiency of water delivery
and use, and enabling the next generation of water monitoring systems. NNI agencies will continue to
develop, implement, and routinely review a robust portfolio of NSIs to address national priorities.
Collaborations and partnerships are a key aspect of the NNI and of the U.S. innovation ecosystem. These
interactions include academic, industrial, and international collaborations in areas of mutual interest
and benefit, where partnering will accelerate and/or improve research outcomes . Public –private
partnerships and other novel approaches to managing and implementing research should be pursued
that engage the broader community in advancing the knowledge base and in developing solutions to
pressing national and global problems . Along these lines, the NNI has turned to the use of
Nanotechnology-Inspired Grand Challenges, ambitious but achievable goals that harness nanoscience,
nanotechnology, and innovation to solve important national or global problems and have the potential
to capture the public’s imagination. Based upon input from NNI agencies and the public, the first  such
grand challenge was announced in 2015, calling on the scientific community to work together to create
a computer that can proactively interpret and learn from data, solve unfamiliar problems using what it has
learned, and process information with the efficiency of the human brain.
13 NNI agencies, industry,
universities, and private foundations have expressed an interest in addressing this challenge and are
working to produce transformational computing capabilities that will be essential for turning the rising
tide of data into useful information when and where it is needed. NNI agencies will work closely with
the scientific community to identify topics for additional g rand challenges and to develop plans to
address them.

12 www.nano.gov/NSIWater
13 www.nano.gov/FutureComputing

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  10 
Nanotechnology is an enabling element of  many other national initiatives beyond the NNI, including
the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)14 Initiative and National
Microbiome Initiative.15 NNI agen cies will continue to support these and other important national
initiatives and will explore ways to contribute to the development of new initiatives.
Goal 2: Foster the transfer of new technologies into products for commercial
and public benefit.
Nanotechnology is rapidly becoming ubiquitous in a variety of products that improve our daily lives—
from cosmetics and sunscreens, to healthcare, to consumer electronics , and to automobile tires and
components. However, more work is needed to fully realize the benefits that nanotechnology can have
for our national security, economic well-being, creation of jobs, and quality of life. The focus of this goal
is to establish and e xpand the ecosystem and the resources to foster nanotechnology innovation and
the responsible transfer of nanotechnology-enabled products (NEPs) from lab to market.
Successful commercialization of any new technology depends upon a number of factors. Robust, cost-
effective manufacturing methods are needed to reliably make products that take full advantage of the
novel properties of their nanoscale constituents. Investment strategies are needed to reduce risk and
shepherd the most promising technologies from lab to market. Maximizing the benefits of NEPs to the
U.S. economy requires efforts to remove barriers to global commercialization, as well as understanding
the potential markets for those products.
The NNI fosters technology transfer by facilitating interactions with key industry sectors and providing
access to resources available at NNI agencies, e.g., results of funded nanotechnology R&D, access to user
facilities and government collaborators, and aiding in the establishment of a business environment
conducive to the responsible development of NEPs. Partners in this endeavor include international,
regional, state, and local organizations that promote nanotechnology development and commercialization
as well as professional societies, trade associations, and other nongovernmental organizations.
Goal 2 Objectives
2.1. Assist the nanotechnology -based business community in understanding the Federal
Government’ s R&D funding and regulatory environment.
2.1.1. Disseminate information on where the Federal Government can directly assist in the transfer
and commercialization of nanotechnology-enabled products.
2.1.2. Disseminate information about resources available to support commercialization of
nanotechnology-based products.
2.2. Increase focus on nanotechnology-based commercialization and related support for public–
private partnerships.
2.2.1. Sustain successful initiatives and expand the number of public–private partnerships.
2.2.2. Collect and disseminate information on best practices to advance commercialization of U.S.-
derived nanotechnologies.

14 P . S. Weiss, President Obama announces the BRAIN Initiative. ACS Nano 7(4), 2873–2874 (2013).
15 P . S. Weiss, Launching the Microbiome Initiative. ACS Nano 10(6), 5589–5590 (2016).

Goals and Objectives
  11 
2.2.3. Foster development of robust, scalable nanomanufacturing methods with sufficient precision
to facilitate commercialization.
2.3. Promote broader accessibility and utilization of user facilities, cooperative research centers,
and regional initiatives to accelerate the transfer of nanoscale science from lab to market.
2.3.1. Provide flexible and timely access to tools and processes, expertise, and training critical to the
transition from discovery to prototype development.
2.3.2. Build broader awareness of resources available at federally funded user facilities to support
the transfer of nanoscale science from lab to market.
2.4. Engage in international activities integral to the developme nt and responsible
commercialization of nanotechnology-enabled products and processes.
2.4.1. Participate and, where appropriate, lead in the development of international standards for
nanotechnology.
2.4.2. Establish, sustain, or join  international collaborations and cooperative activities to further
nanotechnology-related commercialization, innovation, and trade.
2.4.3. Support forums in which U.S. and international stakeholders can exchange technical
information and discuss issues relevant to enabling commercialization.
Transitioning NEPs from lab to market continues to be a priority for the NNI. NNI agencies utilize
traditional mechanisms to support technology transfer such as the Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) programs.
16 In addition, NNI agencies
promote technology transfer and entrepreneurship through activities such as the NSF Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) program,17 the NIH Translation of Nanotechnology in Cancer consortium 18, and the Nano-Bio
Manufacturing Consortium (NBMC) supported by the Air Force Research Laboratory.19 Identifying best
practices from each of these programs that lead to successful commercialization and employing them
in other programs will maximize the benefits of NNI investments in commercialization. NNI agencies will
continue to collaborate and share information and to work with industry and academia to foster
innovation and commercialization.
NNI agencies recognize the important role of collaboration between the Federal Government,
academia, and industry in facilitating the commercialization of federally funded nanotechnology
discoveries. Over the life of the Initiative , NNI agencies have interacted with key industry sectors to
better understand their technology needs and to address these needs through public –private
partnerships and other collaboration mechanisms. The NNI will continue these interactions through
focused workshops, town hall meetings, webinars, and collaborations with professional societies and
trade groups.

16 www.sbir.gov/
17 www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/i-corps/index.jsp
18 nano.cancer.gov/collaborate/collaborating/nanotechnology.asp
19 www.nbmc.org/

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  12 
NNI agencies are also pursuing ways to leverage activities and resources in other Federal initiatives and
programs to accelerate the commercialization of NEPs. The National Network for Manufacturing Innovation
(NNMI),20 initiated in 2012 and recently renamed Manufacturing USA, is a partnership between government,

industry, and academia to collaborate and co-invest to nurture manufacturing innovation and accelerate
commercialization. The nine institutes established to date are excellent resources to support
commercialization of NEPs because most of the institutes have capabilities and expertise in
nanomanufacturing. NNI agencies are currently engaged with each of these institutes and will explore ways
to collaborate with them to accelerate commercialization and to foster innovations in nanomanufacturing.
Na
no technology  Startup Challenge in  Cancer  (NSC2)
In October 2015, the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) partnered with the Center for Advancing
Innovation
21 (CAI) in collaboration with
Medimmune to launch the Nanotechnology
Startup Challenge in Cancer 22 (NSC2).
NSC2 is accelerating commercialization of
nanotechnology inventions intended for cancer
applications by recruiting young entrepreneurs
and students to launch startup companies
based on these inventions. Staff from NIH and
CAI identified eight promising nanotechnology
inventions from scientists in participating NIH
institutes—NCI, the National Institute of
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI).
These inventions formed the core of NSC
2 technologies, but teams were also invited to bring in external
technologies to compete.
Teams entered the challenge by submitting information on their chosen invention, as well as the expertise
and background of team members. In April 2016, 28 teams comprised of 274 scientists, entrepreneurs, and
legal and business experts were accepted into the challenge, including four teams with “third -party”
inventions originating outside NIH. As part of CAI’s required accelerator training, competing teams received
coaching in business development from CAI and education from outside experts from the biotechnology
industry, venture capital community, foundations, and government in crucial areas including research and
development planning, regulatory strategy, intellectual property, and financial modeling.
On July 26, 2016, CAI announced the ten winners and finalists of the NSC
2. The winning teams were
chosen by expert judges based on their business plans, financial models, and live pitches. These teams
each advanced to the final stage of the challenge. The teams are now launching their companies, with
mentoring on business management, staffing, technology licensing , and raising seed money from
investors. The challenge has provided a new path to commercializing cancer nanotechnology and
provides a model for engaging industry in effective technology transfer.

20 www.manufacturing.gov/nnmi/
21 www.thecenterforadvancinginnovation.org/
22 www.nscsquared.org/
The team behind AuTACA, a startup from Wake Forest
School of Medicine  and NSC2 Winner of the Innovation
Excellence Award for NIH Invention #5.

Goals and Objectives
  13 
Public –Private Partnerships: Nano -Bio Manufacturing Consortium  (NBMC)
T
he Nano-Bio Manufacturing Consortium (NBMC) is a public–private partnership between the Air Force
Research Laboratory, industry, and academia with the objective of creating an industrial ecosystem of
suppliers, integrators, and end -users to develop a common platform utilizing nanomaterials, bio -
macromolecules, and flexible hybrid electronics to enable human performance monito ring for both
defense and commercial products, as well as other nano-bio-enabled technologies.
The immediate goal is to create an industrial commons that cooperatively develops pervasive
technology by jointly addressing critical path challenges surroundi ng material supply, qualification,
processing, integration, and requirements that are responsive to end-use scenarios. The introduction of
open architecture concepts focuses the commons on accelerating the risk reduction of key
component technology,
interoperability of design
tools, consideration of
manufacturability early in
R&D, and development of
robust supply chain
relationships.
Established in 2013 through
a cooperative agreement
with FlexTech Alliance, the
NBMC is executing more
than $ 10 million in R&D
over three years through 11
collaborative projects,  fully
cost-shared (at least 50%)
with industrial and
academic partners.
Demonstrations to date include development of subsystems and integration into conformal “skin-
like” devices that attach to the body to selectively detect biometric information and biomarkers that
correlate with stress, fatigue, and cognitive ability.
NNI agencies are also exploring ways that the Federal Government can help shepherd promising
technologies to commercialization. One way is by supporting and growing a market for mission-critical
technologies until the commercial market reaches a sustainable level. Investments by DOD under the
Defense Production Act Title 3 Program
23 have enabled, for example, the development of a production-
scale capability to manufacture carbon nanotube sheets and yarns. These materials have been utilized
to replace the metallic conductors in data cables to produce cables that are 30 –70% lighter than
conventional cables and significantly more durable. These ultralightweight data cables are finding both
military and commercial applications in satellites and aircraft. NASA has built upon this capability and is
working with industry to improve the mechanical properties of these yarns, utilize them as

23 www.dpatitle3.com/dpa_db/
Wireless biomarker microfluidic sensor patch for measurement of electrolytes in
sweat and evaluation of hydration status using ion -specific nanomaterials
deposited on highly sensitive interdigitated electrodes (NBMC -funded project
led by GE and including UES, Inc. , A ir Force Research Laboratory , American
Semiconductor, University of Massachusetts Amherst, University of Connecticut,
University of Arizona, and Dublin City University). Image credit: GE.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  14 
reinforcements in ultralightweight composites, and demonstrate their suitability for future NASA
missions. NNI agencies will continue to explore mechanisms such as these to collaborate with industry
and facilitate commercialization.
A key component of fostering the successful transfer of NEPs from lab to market is  creating awareness
of and access to  regulatory information and  Federal resources that support commercialization,
including funding opportunities (e.g., SBIR and STTR programs), user facilities, and nanoEHS research.
Identifying these resources and how to access them can be a challenge for  any business, but it is
particularly true for small- and medium-sized businesses that may not have the personnel and resources
necessary to gather this information and make the right contacts. NNCO and the NSET Subcommitt ee
have addressed this need through outreach and active engagement with industry, including one -on-
one interactions, nano.gov
, webinars, workshops, and other events that provide for communication and
collaboration, and t hrough outreach activities under the Nanotechnology Innovation and
Commercialization Ecosystem (NICE) Working Group. 24 In 2015, NNCO established a webinar series
focused on highlighting the successes and challenges of nanotechnology -based businesses. 25 The
webinars are intended to identify best practices that could be adopted by other businesses and
problems that the Federal Government could help address. NNI agencies and NNCO will continue these
activities and will look for new opportunities to share information.
Since the EHS  aspects of engineered nanomaterials  (ENMs) are an essential factor in the
commercialization of NEPs, NNI agencies have worked with industry to provide advice and guidance on
ENMs in all phases of a product’s life cycle. For example, NIOSH has worked extensively with industry on
the safe handling of ENMs  in the workplace by providing on -site safety assessments (including
monitoring) and support, and in the publication of Intelligence Bulletins.
26 These and other nanoEHS
collaborations are discussed further in the section on Goal 4.
Significant public and private investments in nanotechnology R&D worldwide have led to the
commercialization of an ever -expanding array of NEPs across a variety of industry sectors. At t he
international level, vibrant and dynamic exchange of information on topics such as  market needs,
intellectual property rights, and regulation  is accompanying the rapid pace of global innovation in
nanotechnology and the associated knowledge gains. With supply chains distributed across multiple
countries, NNI agencies will continue to engage early and often in international forums that support
responsible commercialization and best practices. These forums include organizations that develop
international standards, government -to-government collaborations, and other activities that bring
together stakeholders from the United States and around the world.
Many NNI agencies are already active  in and lead important international activities. Agencies will
maintain and strengthen this strategic engagement while balancing budget constraints and mission
objectives. NNI agencies will also explore means for leveraging public–private partnerships to maximize
the impact of their participation and strengthen ties with the  U.S. private sector. NNI agencies’
engagements span a wide range of issues, including the development of consensus standards,

24 See www.nano.gov/NICE. This working group was previously the Nanomanufacturing, Industry Liaison, and
Innovation (NILI) Working Group. The name was changed when the working group was rechartered in May 2015.
25 www.nano.gov/SMEwebinars2016
26 www.cdc.gov/niosh/pubs/cib_date_desc_nopubnumbers.html

Goals and Objectives
  15 
specifications, protocols, exchange of scientific and technical information, and identification of market
trends. By participating in a variety of forums and partnerships, NNI agencies will proactively address
nanotechnology-related intellectual property rights as well as  potential nanoEHS, consumer, and
societal issues—all of which enable innovation, commercialization, trade, a nd U .S. leadership in
strategic and transformative technologies.

Advancing the Commercialization of Cellulosic Nanomaterials Applications
Cellulosic nanomaterials derived from trees
are abundant, renewable, and sustainable,
and have exceptional properties. Cellulosic
nanocrystals, for example, cou ple high
strength with light weight and also
exhibit useful electrical and optical
properties. USDA Forest Service is advancing
the responsible commercialization of
cellulosic nanomaterials in multiple end-use
applications by employing a strategy that is
focused on filling knowledge gaps,
overcoming technical barriers, and working
through government -university-industry
partnerships. Because there are hundreds of potential proprietary applications for cellulosic
nanomaterials, the Forest Service has entered into both informal and formal (e.g., t he Public –Private
Partnership for Nanotechnology, P
3Nano) partnerships to pool resources, provide early adopters and end-
use researchers with access to kilogram to ton quantities of three basic types of cellulosic nanomaterials,
and concentrate USDA int ramural R&D and technology transfer efforts on overcoming technical and
economic hurdles that benefit multiple end-use applications. These efforts include:
• Developing the science and technology to disperse cellulosic nanomaterials into matrices of other
materials.
• Forming stress-free films and coatings.
• Applying surface modifications.
• Characterizing/measuring the physical properties of cellulosic nanomaterials.
• Drying, dewatering, and dispersing cellulosic nanomaterials.
• Forming high-strength aerogels.
• Developing compatibilizers for cellulosic nanomaterial-reinforced polymer composites.
• Partnering with external experts to ensure occupational and product safety of cellulosic
nanomaterial-containing products.
Example applications being developed through partnerships include use of cellulosic nanomaterials  in
barrier coatings  for fruit,  concrete and precast concrete , aerogel foams for insulation and sound
deadening, and reinforced paper products.
Photos of pears that are uncoated vs. pears coated with
nanocellulose-based barrier coating at ambient condition
(20±2°C and 30±2% relative humidity) for three weeks. Photo
courtesy of Oregon State University.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  16 
Goal 3: Develop and sustain educational resources, a skilled workforce, and
a dynamic infrastructure and toolset to advance nanotechnology.
The successful development of nanotechnology , from basic research through commercialization,
requires a strong foundation and continu ous improvements in  the human, physical, and cyber
infrastructure. Substantial investments, strengthened by interagency cooperation and collaboration
through the NNI, are needed to develop the talent and facilities necessary to achieve the other NNI goals
of advancing a world -class R&D program (Goal 1), fostering the transfer of new technologies into
products for commercial and public benefit (Goal 2), and supporting responsible development of
nanotechnology (Goal 4).
Goal 3 Objectives
3.1. Expand outreach and informal education programs in order to inform the public about the
opportunities and impacts of nanotechnology.
3.1.1. Develop and publish materials appropriate for informing the public at large and educational
materials for students at all levels.
3.1.2 Utilize social media, contests, and other novel approaches to inform and inspire the public, in
particular students, about nanotechnology.
3.2. Establish and sustain programs that assist in devel oping and maintaining a skilled
nanotechnology workforce.
3.2.1. Develop, publish, and disseminate materials for educating and training the workforce, at all
levels, from vocational to professional.
3.2.2. Continue to provide opportunities for practical t raining experience for students in federally
supported nanotechnology facilities.
3.2.3. Encourage education about the areas of convergence between nanotechnology and other
related scientific disciplines, such as biotechnology, information technology, and cognitive science.
3.3. Provide, facilitate the sharing of, and sustain the physical and cyber R&D infrastructure,
notably user facilities and cooperative research centers.
3.3.1. Establish regular mechanisms to determine the current and future infrastruct ure needs of
users and stakeholders of these facilities and centers.
3.3.2. Develop, operate, and sustain state-of-the-art tools, infr astructure, and user facilities,
including ongoing investment, staffing, and upgrades.
3.4. Promote the storage and sharing of data and the development and use of informatics tools
for nanotechnology R&D.
3.4.1. Encourage informatics literacy in the nanotechnology workforce.
3.4.2. Support the development of integrated, accessible modeling and informatics tools  in all
aspects of nanotechnology research, development, and commercialization.
3.4.3. Support the developm ent of databases, as well as machine -readable formats and data
standards to enable greater interoperability.

Goals and Objectives
  17 
Over the first fifteen years of the NNI, considerable progress has been made with respect to the
infrastructure that supports nanotechnology research and development. This infrastructure includes
educational resources and workforce programs, national networks of user facilities, and a cyber
infrastructure with databases, models, and simulations. But infrastructure needs, of course, are a moving
target, and it is important to leverage and build upon the existing resources as the requirements of the
nanotechnology community evolve and expand.
While nanotechnology is rapidly finding its way into a wide variety of consumer products, much of the
public remains unaware of this emerging technology. The NSF -supported Nanoscale Informal Science
Education Network (NISE Net) made significant strides in public outreach  and established a strong
community of interest. The resources developed by NISE Net and other efforts have been made readily
accessible in a searchable database.
27 In addition to the resources developed by agency grantees, NNCO
and the NNI agencies have collaborated
with public and private entities to develop
educational videos, animations, and
contests.
28 Efforts like these need to
continue, and other means, such as
increased use of social media, should be
explored to engage a broader public
audience in a two -way dialogue. The NNI
agencies and NNCO will continue to look for
opportunities to reach students and the
general public where they get information
(such as television, virtual communities, etc.)
and to collaborate with appropriate
organizations to inform and inspire the
public about nanotechnology.
The novel properties of nanoscale materials
can excite students to learn more about
nanotechnology and about science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields more broadly. Furthermore,
the inherent ly interdisciplinary nature  of
nanotechnology helps prepare students to
meet future workforce needs. Beyond the
informal education and outreach
activities discussed above, nanotechnology
resources and programs have been
developed for all stages of education. Some
states, such as Virginia, have even

27 nanohub.org/publications/118
28 www.nano.gov/multimedia-and-contests
Nanoscale Informal Science Education
Network (NISE Net )
Reaching more than 30
million people from 2008
through 2015, the NSF-funded
Nanoscale Informal Science
Education Network (NISE Net)
introduced nanotechnology
and how it will impact our
society to people all across
the country. As a national
community of researchers
and informal science educators
dedicated to fostering public awareness,
engagement, and understanding of nanoscale
science, engineering, and technology, NISE Net has
created activities, programs, and exhibits for public
audiences that have been implemented in more than
500 institutions, including science museums, schools,
science festivals, and more . Resources developed
under this activity continue to be available and used
broadly. As the program period came to a close in
2015, the community has transitioned to the National
Informal STEM Education Network. NISE Net is
building o n the strong community and knowledge
foundation established under the initial program and
expanding into new topic areas, including synthetic
biology and other emerging technologies.
Photo credit:  Gary
Hodges, Sciencenter.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  18 
Generation Nano: Small Science, Superheroes Contest
NSF and NNI collaborated in 2015 to
launch the first “Generation Nano: Small
Science, Superheroes” contest. This
competition is designed to excite
students who m ay not already be
engaged with science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) topics to
learn more about nanotechnology.
Generation Nano inspires students to
imagine how nanotechnology can save
the day and asks students to design
nanotechnology-enabled gear for an
original superhero. Students submit a
brief technical write -up explaining the
technology behind their gear and either a short comic or video featuring  their hero es using their
nanotechnology-enabled gear. For the first year, submissions came from 116 students representing 14
different states. NSF brought the three finalists to the 2016 USA Science and Engineering Festival to
present their comics and the  science behind them to visitors. During the three -day festival, #GenNano
had a potential social media reach of nearly 16 million followers. The legendary comic book creator Stan
Lee helped to promote
the contest through his
social media ch annels,
including a Vine video
that has been played
more than  30,000
times. Based on the
success of the first year,
NSF has decided to
repeat the competition
with a second launch
scheduled for fall 2016.
incorporated nanotechnology concepts into their K–12 education standards. Resources, from lesson plans
to text books and complete courses, have been developed. A searchable database has been established
to promote easy access to these resources, particularly for teachers,
29 and a network is beginning to
coalesce. Through the use of webinars and discussion threads, teachers in the network are able to share
best practices for incorporating nanoscale topics in K –12 classrooms. NNCO and the NNI agencies will
continue to support teachers through Research Experience for Teachers (RET) programs, 30 workshops,
engagement at science teacher conferences, and promotion of resources for teaching nanotechnology.

29 nanohub.org/publications/118
30 www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=505170
Image Credit: Amina Khan, NSF.
Panel from the winning comic by Eric Liu, Thomas Jefferson High School for Science
and Technology.

Goals and Objectives
  19 
With the assistance of NNI agency-supported centers and programs, colleges and universities are now offering
undergraduate minors and majors, technician training, and postgraduate programs in nanoscale science and
engineering. A strong network of degree programs and certificate-based technician training programs—such
as those provided by the Nanotechnology Applications and Career Knowledge (NACK) Network and the Nano-
Link Center for Nanotechnology Education31—have been established through NSF’s National Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) program. The success of these programs depends on strong collaboration
between educators and industry to ensure the incorporation of the specific skills required for local workforces.
NNI agencies will continue to support efforts to develop the nanotechnology technician workforce, including
interactions with national laboratories and NNI-funded user facilities.
University educational programs in nanotechnology are administered within traditional departments
or through newly formed centers, departments, schools, or colleges. Nanoscience and nanotechnology
principles impact all science, technology, and engineering disciplines and are embedded throughout
traditional programs, even where nanotechnology- specific degrees or programs don’t exist. NNI
agencies and NNCO will continue to support efforts to develop and share best practices and resources
for faculty interested in incorporating nanotechnology concepts in their courses. NNI agencies will also
continue to provide and promote opportunities for students to engage in research and other practical
training experiences at universities and national laboratories through programs such as Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
32 and Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF). 33 In
2016, college students across the country established a network aimed at raising awareness of cutting-
edge research, 34 including the convergence of nanotechnology with biotechnology, information
technology, and cognitive science. NNCO will facilitate the expansion of this student -led network and
to promote opportunities for student research and internships.
The nanotechnology enterprise requires support for a widely accessible state -of-the-art physical
infrastructure. As nanotechnology rapidly advances, shared -use facilities must maintain existing tools
and continuously refresh their equipment to meet the evolving needs of users from industry, academia,
and government  for synthesis, processing, fabrication, characterization, modeling, and analysis of
nanomaterials and nanosystems. In many cases, single researchers or institution s find it diffic ult to
justify funding the acquisition of and support for all necessary tools. Therefore, user facilities critically
enable research and development  and accelerate commercialization by co -locating a broad suite of
nanotechnology tools, maintaining and replacing these tools to keep them at the leading edge, and
providing expert staff to ensure the most productive use of the tools. The facilities also support the
development of advanced  nanoscale fabrication methods and measurement tools . Finally, shared
facilities are a vital resource for training nanotechnology researchers and for creating a community of
shared ideas by mixing researchers from different disciplines and sectors. NNI user facilities include the
NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastru cture (NNCI), DOE Nanoscale Science Research
Centers (NSRCs), NIST Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology (CNST), and National Cancer Institute
(NCI) Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory (NCL). An emphasis on the physical infrastructure to
support nanotechnology research and development will continue to be a key priority for the NNI.

31 See www.nano4me.org/ and www.nano-link.org/.
32 www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=5517&from=fund
33 www.nist.gov/surf/
34 www.nano.gov/node/1506

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  20 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) Open Campus Initiative
The U.S. Army Research Laboratory
(ARL) Open Campus initiative directly
impacts advancement in nanoscience
and technology by building a
framework to accelerate discovery,
innovation, and transition. Started in
2014, Open Campus  is a new business
model to pursue leading -edge basic
and applied research in a truly
collaborative fashion by enabling the
continuous flow of people and ideas
between government, academia, and
the private sector. The model
accelerates progress toward NNI goals
by increasing public –private
partnerships, growing Army education
and outreach programs, leveraging
Army resources (e.g., equipment,
facilities, and subject ma tter experts),
and facilitating seamless involvement of
all partners. Recently, Open Campus
expanded ARL's physical presence in the national and International community by exploiting a model of
regional research and development hubs. These collaborative in novation hubs bring new resources to
solving Army problems and provide access to large pools of experts. As an extension of Open Campus,
ARL opened a remote collaboration site in southern California in 2016—ARL West—with additional sites
in the Southwest and Central United States set to open in late 2016 or early 2017. ARL West taps into the
fast-growing technology expertise and capabilities in the Los Angeles area and is focused on research
into how humans generate and interact with data to make decisions more effectively and efficiently. ARL
West also allows access to regional excellence in nanotechnology. ARL South will focus its hub on
materials and manufacturing including electronic devices and structural components. Regional
strengths include exploiting nanostructured materials as feedstocks for additive manufacturing. ARL
Central will focus on filling technology gaps and addressing protection goals in high- strain-rate
environments. Success in creating materials for the high- strain-rate environment is r eliant on
understanding and exploiting the nanoscale.
The Army's Strategic Material Research Open Campus initiative strive s to enable efficient and focused
collaboration opportunities, including in nanoscience, technology, and commercialization, through
regional and national initiatives. Additional collaborative efforts directly impacting NNI goals are new
centers. Established and near-term planned centers are: Center for Research in Extreme Batteries—kicked
off in 2015; Additive Manufacturing Science Cent er—kicked off in 2015; Semiconductor Research
Nanofab Center —in progress; and Center for Semiconductor Materials and Device Modeling —in
progress. In the aggregate, the Open Campus initiative will be an accelerator of the NNI vision.
The Rodman Materials Research Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving
Ground, Maryland. The Rodman Building is home to the U.S. Army
Research Laboratory’s structural materials research, and has
extensive materials characterization and synthesis facilities for
metals, ceramics, polymers, glasses, and composites. By utilizing the
Open Campus framework, visiting scientists can work side -by-side
with ARL  scientists and engineers in ARL facilities such as the
Rodman Laboratory. Find out more about Open Campus and other
ARL facilities across the nation at www.arl.army.mil/opencampus/.

Goals and Objectives
  21 
National User Facility Network
Under the NNI, several participating agencies have built or supported
the development of user facilities to create an extensive and
unparalleled resource for outside users. These user facilities are
geographically diverse an d provide state -of-the-art tools —both
physical and computational—to create, characterize, and understand
nanomaterials and nanotechnology -
enabled components and devices. The
technical staff at these centers are
available to consult with users on topics
ranging from experimental design and
troubleshooting to tool selection and
training.
The physical user facilities described
below collectively serve more than
11,000 researchers a year, and
nanoHUB.org hosts more than 345,000
users a year. These resources provide
the infrastructure and expertise to fuel
a vibrant nanotechnol ogy research
ecosystem.
• National Nanotechnology
Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI):
NSF launched the NNCI in 2015,
providing a total of $81 million over five years to support 16 sites and a coordinating office. The NNCI is the
successor to the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, which ran from 2004 to 2014.
• Nanoscale Science Research Centers (NSRCs): The NSRC Program operates a system of five coordinated centers
strategically located at DOE national laboratories across the United States. Each scientifically distinct center contains
laboratories for synthesis, nanofabrication, characterization, one -of-a-kind signature instruments, and
theory/modeling/simulation expertise. NSRCs are co-located with major x-ray, neutron, and high-performance
computing facilities to enable users to conduct comprehensive high-impact nanoscience research.
• NIST Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology (CNST): Within DOC, the NIST CNST provides rapid access
to the tools needed to make and measure nanostructures. These tools are provided to anyone who needs them,
both inside and outside NIST, with a particular emphasis on helping industry.
• Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory (NCL): Working in concert with NIST and FDA, the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) established the NCL to perform preclinical efficacy and toxicity testing of nanoparticles.
The NCL serves as a national resource and knowledge base for all cancer researchers to facilitate the regulatory
review of nanotechnologies intended for cancer therapies and diagnostics.
• Network for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN): The NSF-funded NCN provides simulation services and
educational material through nanoHUB.org, which hosts a rapidly growing collection of simulation programs for
nanoscale phenomena that run in the cloud and are accessed through a web browser.
For more information on the NNI user facility network, see www.nano.gov/userfacilities
.
Photos from severa l NNCI sites. Clockwise from top right: A researcher
prepares to enter the Cornell NanoScale Science and Technology Facility
(Photo Credit: Cornell University Marketing ); a researcher examines a
photomask at the Chapel Hill Analytical and Nanofabrication L aboratory
(Photo Credit: Dan Sears, the University  of North Carolina at Chapel Hill );
and Professor David Dickensheets, left, and student Erwin Dunbar work
with silicon wafers at Montana State University in Bozeman (Photo Credit:
Montana State University).

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  22 
In addition to the human and physical infrastructure, the NNI agencies have established foundational
cyberinfrastructure for nanotechnology research and development. For example, the NSF -funded
Network for Computational Nanotechnology  (NCN)35 has developed models and simulation tools to
predict behavior at the device, circuit, and system level for nanoelectronics, nanoelectromechanics, and
nanobiological systems, and serves as a virtual laboratory for the nanotechnology community with
online simulation and education. This cyber infrastructure is critical for the storage and sharing of data
and the development and use of informatics tools. The emphasis on sharing data, models, and
simulations will accelerate research breakthroughs and the development of nanotechnology, but open
sharing of research outputs is a cultura l transition for many scientists and engineers. For this reason,
many of the NNI efforts in this area have been embedded in the broader nanotechnology community
and will expand in the coming years. Examples of community -focused informatics efforts include the
U.S.–EU Communities of Research  (CORs)
36 and the Nanotechnology Knowledge Infrastructure (NKI)
Signature Initiative. 37 The NNI agencies will continue to support the cyber infrastructure required to
advance nanotechnology and to collaborate with academia, industry, journals, and nongovernmental
organizations as appropriate.
Goal 4: Support responsible development of nanotechnology.
Responsible development of nanotechnology  is required throughout the entire enterprise to protect
the environment and human health while realizing the societal and economic benefits of
nanotechnology. Responsible development underpins all of the other goals,  including fundamental
research (Goal 1); evaluation and handling of nanomaterials throughout the product life cycle, from
research and development through commercialization to end-of-life considerations (Goal 2); and the
safety infrastructure from laboratory safety protocols to student training and worker safety (Goal 3).
Efforts to ensure responsible development of nanotechnology are inherently multidisciplinary and
require coordination among multistakeholder national and international teams.
Goal 4 Objectives
4.1. Support the creation of a comprehensive knowledge base for evaluation of the potential risks
and benefits of nanotechnology to the environment and to human health and safety.
4.1.1. Identify and update relevant knowledge gaps and prioritize needs through active stakeholder
engagement, including with industry, government, and nongovernmental organizations.
4.1.2. Adopt or develop and validate measurement tools and decision-making models to enable
hazard and exposure quantification for human and environ mental risk assessment and
management.
4.1.3. Engage in international efforts, including  those aimed at generating best practices and
consensus standards.

35 nanoHUB.org
36 us-eu.org/communities-of-research/
37 www.nano.gov/NSINKI

Goals and Objectives
  23 
4.2. Create and employ means for timely dissemination, evaluation, and incorporation of relevant
environmental, health, and safety (EHS) knowledge and best practices.
4.2.1. Explore new avenues to engage with a broad group of stakeholders, to communicate EHS
research progress, and to share technical information.
4.2.2 Pursue mechanisms to disseminate information about the state of understanding with respect
to EHS aspects of nanotechnology.
4.2.3. Participate in coordinated international efforts focused on sharing data, guidance, and best
practices for environmental and human risk assessment and management.
4.3. Develop the national capacity to identify, define, and responsibly address concepts and
challenges specific to the ethical, legal, and societal implications (ELSI) of nanotechnology.
4.3.1. Promote awarenes s of and education about ELSI among relevant stakeholders , including
manufacturers, regulators, nongovernmental organizations, workers, and the public.
4.3.2. Foster deliberative interactions, such as public forums, among relevant stakeholders
concerning national and global ELSI.
4.4. Incorporate sustainability in the responsible development of nanotechnology.
4.4.1. Encourage the development of engineered nanomaterials that are safer and more sustainable
alternatives to materials—nanoscale and otherwise—that are now in use.
4.4.2. Promote the design and development of safe and environmentally benign manufacturing and
end-of-life processes for engineered nanomaterials and nanotechnology-enabled products.
In support of Goal 4, the NNI published, with input from stakeholders, a nanoEHS research strategy  in
2011.38 This document was developed  with a broad, multi -agency perspective . It  details specific
research needs in six interrelated and synergistic nanoEHS core research areas: (1) a nanomaterial
measurement infrastructure that provides accurate and reproducible data coupled with (2)  predictive
modeling and informatics to quantitatively assess (3) human exposure, (4) human health, and (5)  the
environment essential for science-based (6) risk assessment and risk management of ENMs and NEPs.
The NNI agencies, individually and collaboratively, support efforts that address the needs identified in
the nanoEHS research strategy . In 2014, the NNI released a progress review 39 to provide examples of
ongoing, completed, and anticipated nanoEHS research and to illustrate the breadth of activities in all
six core research areas. As detailed in the progress review, extensive collaboration and coordination
among the NNI agencies has led to the creation of a wealth of knowledge that supports the evaluation
of potential risks of nanotechnology. For example, comprehensive measurement techniques and
modeling tools have been developed that consider the full life cycles of ENMs in various media,
exposure assessment data have be en collected, and resources have been developed to inform

38 Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology Subcommittee of the Committee on Technology, National
Nanotechnology Initiative 2011 Environmental, Health, and Safety Research Strategy  (National Science and
Technology Council, Washington, District of Columbia, 2011; www.nano.gov/2011EHSStrategy).
39 Nan oscale Science, Engineering, and Technology Subcommittee of the Committee on Technology, Progress
Review on the Coordinated Implementation of the National Nanotechnology Initiative 2011 Environmental, Health, and
Safety Research Strategy (National Science and Technology Council, Washington, District of Columbia, 2014;
www.nano.gov/2014EHSProgressReview).

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  24 
workplace exposure control strategies for key classes of ENMs. Modes of interaction between ENMs and
physiological and environmental systems ha ve contributed to improved assessment of transport and
transformations of ENMs in various environmental media and biological systems. A life cycle perspective
on nanomaterial risk assessment and management has been widely adopted.
The NNI agencies will continue to work together and with domestic and international collaborators to
leverage investments, identify gaps, prioritize needs, develop analytical risk assessment and
management tools, and support the expansion of knowledge in nanoEHS. Collaborations such as these
enable the nanotechnology community to advance sustainable development and respond to
regulatory requirements such as those under the recently amended Toxic Substances Control Act
(TSCA).
40 Identification of gaps and prioritization of needs for nanoEHS knowled ge should be
accomplished through an analysis of the state of the science and active stakeholder engagement. There is
a clear need to develop broadly available and validated data and applicable measurement tools, including
International Collaboration to Understand Behavior of Nanomaterials in the
Environment
As engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) are
incorporated into a growing number of
products, it is important to understand if and
how they may be released a cross the product
life cycle, and to understand how the released
form interacts with ecosystems and organisms.

The Center for the Environmental Implications of
NanoTechnology (CEINT), headquartered at
Duke University  and funded by NSF and EP A ,
investigates the p otential risks associated with
ENMs, while nurturing fundamental discovery of
nanoparticle interactions in nature , which may
be the basis for future advances in agriculture,
nanomedicine, environmental protection, and
materials science. CEINT research examine s the
release of new nanomaterials from consumer products over time, as well as the impact of emerging
nanomaterials made from multiple nanoscale elements and structures.
Enabled by increased capability for data sharing and evaluation, CEINT is t he central hub of an
international effort examining nanotechnology implications for living systems and the environment. The
Center’s vision is that this international effort will become a template for future efforts to evaluate the
potential environmental risks of emerging technologies in general. CEINT is integrating the collective findings
from these efforts to build predictive models for ENM behavior and risk forecasting. To that end, CEINT is
leading an effort that engages partners in the European Nano Safety Cluster, the Nanomaterial Registry,
and nanoHUB to create the NanoInformatics Knowledge Commons, a first-generation data repository of
nanoparticle properties, effects, and protocols and associated analytical tools.

40 Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act (15 U.S.C. §2601, P .L. 114-182; www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
pkg/PLAW-114publ182/html/PLAW-114publ182.htm).
The CEINT Mesocosm Facility is home to 30 complex
simulated wetland ecosystems, enabling a wide array of
uniquely realistic investigations into the mechanisms that
govern nanomaterial transport, t ransformation,
ecological interactions, bio -uptake, and biological
interactions. Photo courtesy of CEINT.

Goals and Objectives
  25 
Guidance for Responsible Development of Nanotechnology
T
o derive true benefit from nanotechnology, it must be developed and deployed in a way that protects
the health and well-being of workers. The first challenge that must be met is that of protecting the health
and well-being of workers who are manufacturing and applying new engineered nanomaterials for the
creation of new and improved products and applications that will benefit society. NIOSH , as an active
participant in the NNI, has realized great success in developing partnerships with the private sector to
develop and disseminate good risk management guidance based on direct interaction with companies
that manufacture, formulate, or use nan omaterials. NIOSH has already conducted more than 100 site
visits and works with nanomanufacturing facilities to evaluate potential worker hazards and develop
strategies to mitigate risk.
A key output of NIOSH research is the formulation of guidance for the safe handling and processing of
nanomaterials. Much of the knowledge gained and used by NIOSH is a result of direct interaction with private
sector partners. NIOSH has developed guidance materials that include recommended exposure limits, risk
assessments, exposure measurement strategies and techniques, process emission controls focused on
eliminating worker exposures, and recommendations for personal protective equipment.
models and standards, that enable quantification of hazard and exposure, characterization of risks, and
selection of risk management strategies. The NNI will continue to work to ensure that the nanoEHS knowledge
base encompasses the full life cycle of ENMs and NEPs—ENM production, NEP manufacture and consumer use,
and ENM and NEP end-of-life (disposal or recycling)—through the use of formal methods and tools.
As knowledge is created to support the responsible development of nanotechnology, the NNI agencies
are employing a variety of means to disseminate and incorporate this information into practice. These
efforts include webinars, guidance documents, progress reviews, and fact sheets. The NNI agencies will
continue to actively share nanoEHS findings and to promote the development and dissemination of
information on the state of the science in these areas.
One of the strengths of the NNI is the strong communication and collaboration among agencies with
vastly different roles and missions. This collaboration,  enabled by the NSET Nanotechnology
Environmental and Health Implications (NEHI) Working Group, ensures that nanoEHS research activities
are informed by the collective needs of the NNI agencies. The knowledge gained using measurement
tools—protocols, stand ards, instruments, methods, models, and validated data —supports science -
based risk assessment and management. NNI agency efforts will continue to promote the development
and validation of measurement tools and decision- making models, including emerging met hods and
Partnerships with the private sector are a key to NIOSH success. Photos courtesy of NIOSH.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  26 
High -Throughput Screening and Predictive Toxicological Modeling
The University of California Center for Environmental
Implications of Nanotechnology (UC CEIN), fu nded
by NSF and EPA, has been preparing the nanoEHS
community for the utility of high -throughput
screening methods and predictive toxicology for
evaluating engineered nanomaterials. By assembling
nanomaterial libraries that represent a wide range of
nanomaterial categories, UC CEIN has established a
reference grid for more than 300 nanomaterials that
can be hierarchically ranked through the use of
mechanism-based adverse outcome pathways in
cells, bacteria, and various environmental life forms.
The testing also reflects the link between material
physicochemical properties and triggering of
molecular injury that, in whole -animal testing,
reflects the possibility of adverse health outcomes.
This platform now allows tiered risk assessment of
industrial nanomaterials by in vitro testing (tier 1) and
sparing animal testing with shorter- (tier 2) or longer-
term (tier 3) protocols for assisting regulatory decision making based on exposure potential. The aim of
tiered testing is to progressively shift to tier 1 assessment as more confidence is gained with the system,
including limiting the volume of testing by grouping and read -across. The screening also provides
structure–activity analysis that can be used for safer design of nanomaterials.
This platform has enabled  UC CEIN to develop predictive toxicological profiling and a comprehensive
database of industrially important materials (e.g., silver, copper, silica, transition metal oxides, rare earth
oxides, catalyst nanomaterials, III-V semiconductors, single and multiwall carbon nanotubes, graphene,
composite materials, powders, and nanotherapeutics) as a resource to profile and rank new materials,
which could also be used for categorization and read-across. The UC CEIN approach, data repository, and
computational tools are available to assist nanomaterial or new chemical characterization and data
collection for premanufacturing notices to EPA, predictive toxicological modeling to limit the use of more
expensive animal tests, regulatory decision analysis, and safer design based on quantitative structure –
activity relationships. The tiered approach can also be used as a screening tool during the R&D design
stage. The Center’s comprehensive infrastructure has been used to launch multistakeholder discussions
between academia, industry, and regulatory partners. Outputs include the development of joint white
papers describing the utility of high- throughput screening for nanotechnology,
41 including use for
material categorization and a tiered decision analysis approach that can replace expensive animal testing,
such as 90-day inhalation studies.
42

41 A. E. Nel, et al.,  A multi-stakeholder perspective on the use of alternative test strategies for nanomaterial safety
assessment. ACS Nano. 7, 6422–6433 (2013).
42 H. Godwin, et al. , N anomaterial categorization for assessing risk potential to facilitate regulatory decision -
making. ACS Nano. 9, 3409–3417 (2015).
Cellular high-throughout screening platform  in the
UC CEIN Laboratory at UCLA.

Goals and Objectives
  27 
tools that support decision analysis where data are incomplete. The NNI agencies will continue to play
a strong participatory and, where appropriate, leading role in international activities to develop
consensus standards and in other international activities. The NNI agencies and NEHI will also
communicate and share relevant information with state and local governments.
The NSF -funded Centers for Nanotechnology in Society 43 have developed considerable capacity to
address the ethical, legal, and societal implications of nanotechnology and raised national awareness of
these issues. With this strong foundation, ELSI considerations are now embedded throughout NNI
activities including, for example, focused efforts within the National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure.
44 The NNI agencies and NNCO will continue to foster interactions and dis cussions in
national and global forums.
Responsible development of nanotechnology includes incorporating principles of sustainability.
Sustainability applies to the evaluation of existing nanomaterials across their life cycle, the integration
of sustainability concepts into the design of new materials, and sustainable development in general.
NNI activities will continue to promote integration of sustainability in the design, development, and
manufacture of ENMs and NEPs.
Additionally, the potential for nano technology to improve societal, economic, and environmental
sustainability needs to be addressed for improvement of societal well -being. Some of the beneficial
applications that nanotechnology could provide in support of societal sustainability are ENMs for more
efficient generation and use of energy, water purification, production of food and bio -based industrial
and commercial products, and remediation of environmental contaminants. Recognizing the particular
promise of nanotechnology to address the technical challenges related to water quality and quantity,
the NNI launched the Water Nanotechnology Signature Initiative in 2016.
45

43 www.cns.ucsb.edu/ and cns.asu.edu/
44 www.nnci.net/
45 www.nano.gov/NSIWater

 28 
The NNI Collaboration Ecosystem
One of the significant strengths of the NNI is the collaborative ecosystem that has been established and
that continues to evolve with the needs of the community and as nanoscale science and engineering
matures. The NNI agencies have adopted a number of mechanisms to not only share information but
also to ensure that resources are leveraged to the greatest extent possible to more quickly advance the
four goals of the NNI . The interagency planning and coordination of the NNI takes place through the
White House National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) Committee on Technology’s Nanoscale
Science, Engineering, and Technology (NSET) Subcommittee and its working groups and coordinators.
In order to accelerate nanotechnology development in topical areas of na tional importance, the
Nanotechnology Signature Initiatives (NSIs) were formed to enhance coordination and collaboration
among the participating agencies and to engage with the public. Grand challenges were adopted in
2016 as a mechanism to bring together the NNI collaboration ecosystem, including  the Federal
Government, industry, and academia, to pursue ambitious but achievable goals that address problems
confronting the Nation . The nanotechnology knowledge developed under the NNI has broad
application to many other Federal initiatives. Strong collaborations have been developed with these
initiatives, and NNI agencies will pursue additional partnerships with these and future efforts. Much of
the research and development activity of the NNI is performed outs ide of the Federal agencies in the
form of grants and contracts to universities and industry. To better connect these efforts, several
community-building and engagement activities are being employed, ranging from webinars and
workshops to contests and the development of networks. These activities are briefly described below;
further details about the NSET Subcommittee, its working groups and coordinators, NSIs,
Nanotechnology-Inspired Grand Challenges, the U.S.- EU Communities of Research (CORs), and the
functions of the National Nanotechnology Coordination Office (NNCO) can be found on the NNI website,
www.nano.gov, and in the annual NNI Supplement to the President’s Budget.
46
Nanotechnology Research and Development Community
The NNI community extends beyond the Federal Government and includes the grantees, students,
companies, technical and professional societies, foundations, and others engaged in nanotechnology
research and development. This vibrant community exists as a result of the efforts of the NNI agencies
over the past sixteen years. With the expansion of scientific knowledge in nanotechnology, formal and
informal collaborations have developed among researchers across a diverse range of fields and
countries. These interactions and collaborations have been and continue to be facilitated by agency
activities including public–private partnerships, research centers, and networks. In addition to providing
fabrication, characterization, and testing capabilities, the physi cal infrastructure also provides a place
for researchers, industry, and ideas to mix, further expanding the community. This community has
broken down the traditional disciplinary boundaries and laid the foundation for interdisciplinary
discovery, which is increasingly vital to research as fields converge.

46 The NNI Supplement to the President’s 2017 Budget is available at www.nano.gov/2017BudgetSupplement.

The NNI Collaboration Ecosystem
  29 
The  Launch  of  a New  Nanotechnology  Signature  Initiative  (NSI) : Water
Sustainability  through  Nanotechnology
The NNI’s portfolio of Nanotechnology Signature
Initiatives (NSIs) is intended to be dynamic and is
designed to change  as technical and societal
priorities evolve. As such, the Water Sustainability
through Nanotechnology: Nanoscale Solutions for a
Global-Scale Challenge NSI was launched in March
2016 to take advantage of the unique properties
of engineered nanomaterials that may generate
significant breakthroughs in addressing our
Nation’s water challenges. The water NSI  is
designed to aid in the development of
technological solutions that can alleviate current
stresses on the water supply and provide methods
to sustainably utilize water resources in the future.
The three specific thrusts of the water NSI are to:
1. Increase water availability using
nanotechnology.
2. Improve the efficiency of water delivery and use with nanotechnology.
3. Enable next-generation water monitoring systems with nanotechnology.
This activity will leverage existing and emerging efforts of six Federal a gencies—DOC/NIST, DOE, EP A,
NASA, NSF, USDA/NIFA—to create the necessary technical breakthroughs. These efforts include DOE’s
Water-Energy Tech Team; the Innovations at the Food- Energy-Water Nexus activity at NSF and
USDA/NIFA; and EPA’s 2014 Water Technology Innovation Blueprint, Promoting Technology Innovation
for Clean and Safe Water. Where appropriate, the w ater NSI will also interface with other interagency
Federal activities such as the NNI’s Sensors NSI and the Open Water Data Initiative to build and  share
cross-community expertise and to collaboratively address key challenges that span multiple groups.
Nanotechnology Signature Initiatives
Recognizing the need to accelerate nanotechnology development in key areas of national importance,
the NNI agencies and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) developed NSIs
as a mechanism for enhanced interagency coordination and focused investment. The NSIs provide a
spotlight on these critical areas and define the shared vision of the participating agencies.  Inherently
interdisciplinary, these R&D efforts benefit greatly from coordinated planning and collaboration. By
leveraging the expertise, capabilities, and resources of appropriate Federal agencies, the NSIs accelerate
research and development and overcome challenges specific to their respective technology areas. The
agency participants in the signature initiatives actively collaborate to plan and conduct activities to
advance the goals of the NSIs. Depending on the needs of the NSI, these activities may include release
of Requests for Information (RFIs), workshops and webinars, symposia and town hall meetings
embedded in the technical programing of conferences, and the development of resource portals on the
The NSF -funded Nanosystems Engineering Research
Center on Nanotechnology Enabled Water Treat ment
(NEWT) will help provide clean water in a reliable and
affordable fashion. NEWT is developing highly compact,
mobile, and modular water treatment systems that will
be easy to deploy, capable of tapping unconventional
water sources, and will enable access to clean water and
wastewater reuse almost anywhere in the world. Image
credit: NEWT/Rice University.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  30 
NNI website nano.gov. In some cases, development of public –private partnerships may also be an
appropriate mechanism to advance the areas spotlighted by NSIs.
Nanotechnology-Inspired Grand Challenges
A Nanotechnology-Inspired Grand Challenge is defined as an ambitious but achievable goal that
harnesses nanoscience, nanotechnology, and innovation to solve important national or global
problems and  that has the potential to capture the public’s imagination. The first Nanotechnology-
Inspired Grand Challenge, announced in October 2015, challenged the community to create a new type
of computer that can proactively interpret and learn from data, solve unfamiliar problems using what it has
learned, and operate with the energy efficiency of the human brain. This Grand Challenge for Future
A Nanotechnology -I nspired  Grand  Challenge  for  Future  Computing
In October 2014, the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology (PCAST) recommended that the NNI engage with the
public to identify and select grand challenges in order to focus and
amplify the impact of Federal nanotechnology activities. Working
with the NNI agencies, the White House O ffice of S cience and
Technology Policy (OST P) then issued a  Request f or Information
(RFI) on June 15, 2015, seeking suggestions from the public for
Nanotechnology-Inspired G rand C hallenges. After considering
more than 100 responses from R&D experts and industrial
stakeholders, OSTP announced the first grand challenge on
October 20, 2015:
Create a new type of computer that can proactively interpret and learn from data, solve unfamiliar
problems using what it has learned, and operate with the energy efficiency of the human brain.
This Nanotechnology-Inspired G rand C hallenge is relevant to two other U.S. initiatives: the National
Strategic Computing Initiative and the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies
(BRAIN) Initiative. Five NNI agencies—DOD, DOE, IC, DOC/NIST, and NSF—have programs that support
research in pursuit of this challenge, and support for this effort outside the Government is also strong. A
wide range of private sector and non-Federal groups have released statements in support of this grand
challenge. The NNI agencies listed above released a white paper on July 29, 2016, that presents a
collective vision of the emerging and innovative solutions needed to realize the challenge goals. By
coordinating and collaborating across multiple levels of government, industry, academia, and nonprofit
organizations, the nanotechnology and computer science communities can look beyond the decades-
old approach to computing based on the von Neumann architecture and chart a new path that will
continue the rapid pace of innovation beyond the next decade.
A h
uman  can do tasks in ways that a conventional computer cannot, with a fault-tolerant,
adaptive brain that uses less energy than it takes to power an incandescent light bulb. By
combining innovations in nanotechnology, computer science, and neuroscience, radically new
approaches to creating both hardware and software can be developed, enabling computers
capable of efficiently interpreting images and speech, proactively spotting patterns and
anomalies in data, learning from data as it is received, and solving unfamiliar problems using
what has been learned.
This challenge will look beyond
conventional computing based on the
Von Neumann architecture.

The NNI Collaboration Ecosystem
  31 
Computing is a rallying cry not only to the NNI and the broader nanotechnology community, but also
to those involved in two other national initiatives: the National Strategic Computing Initiative and the
Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative. More information
about this grand challenge, including statements of support from a wide variety of organizations and a
Federal white paper describing the interagency vision for the emerging and innovative solutions
needed to realize the challenge goals, can be found at www.nano.gov/grandchallenges
. This 2016 NNI
Strategic Plan introduces Objective 1.5 for the NNI agencies to explore this and other complex technical
topics that may be advanced by the grand challenge mechanism.
Contests and Community Networks
The NNI extends beyond the twenty Federal agencies and departments involved in the Initiative  and
includes the thousands of university professors, students, and industrial scientists and engineers who
benefit from numerous grants and contracts by NNI agencies to academia and industry. These
researchers, however, often do not feel connected to or engaged with the NNI, and opportunities to
share knowledge or leverage resources may not be fully realized. Despite the fact that nanotechnology
is becoming ubiquitous in everyday consumer products, the public remains largely un aware of
nanotechnology—what it is and its benefits and risks. To address these issues, the NNI agencies have
launched a number of efforts to engage the public and build the broader NNI community. With support
from NNCO, these agencies will continue effort s such as image and video contests for students that
highlight student research and help build broader awareness of the NNI activities. Another mechanism
to support public awareness and education is the development of nanotechnology-focused community
networks for students and teachers. NNCO will continue to facilitate these networks to enable the
sharing of resources and best practices through activities such as regular teleconferences, webinars, and
the establishment of web-based resource portals. NNCO and the NNI agencies will also work together
and with others to develop content, such as brochures, videos, and animations, and to look for venues
where nanotechnology content can be included to engage and educate the broader public.
Communities of Research
Communities of interest can be powerful mechanisms to build and sustain relationships among people
with common or synergistic research goals. The NNI is collaborating with the European Union  (EU) to
facilitate the U.S.–EU CORs,
47 which serve as a platform for American and European researchers to share
information and collaborate, primarily on nanoEHS issues. Established in 2012, these CORs have
collaborated on activities such as joint papers, 48 webinars, and workshops, as well a s an interactive
“nanoEHS scrimmage” to spark collaborations and new ideas.49 The U.S.–EU CORs enable the leveraging
of knowledge across national boundaries and provide the mechanism for enhanced communication to
help the research community address issues such as the current state of knowledge in important areas.
The NNI will look for opportunities to employ this mechanism in other collaborative areas (geographical
and/or topical), as appropriate.

47 us-eu.org
48 For example, Selck, H.,  et al. , Nanomaterials in the aquatic environment: A European Union –United States
perspective on the status of ecotoxicity testing, research priorities, and challenges ahead. Environ. Toxicol. Chem.,
35, 1055–1067 (2016).
49 nanoehs.enanomapper.net/

 32 
Concluding Remarks
The National Nanotechnology Initiative has been highly successful in its efforts to advance
nanotechnology research, development, and the responsible transfer of nanotechnology -based
products from the lab to market. Investments by NNI agencies, collec tively more than $23 billion over
the life of the NNI, have supported groundbreaking multidisciplinary research that has expanded the
boundaries of scientific understanding of phenomena that occur at the nanoscale and how these
phenomena can be exploited to produce new materials and devices with properties and performance
exceeding those of conventional systems. In addition, NNI investments have created a network of state-
of-the-art user facilities for characterization, modeling, and fabrication that suppor t a broad range of
activities from fundamental research to the development of commercial products. NNI agencies have
also supported fundamental research to understand the potential risks of ENMs and NEPs and have used
this understanding to develop science-based regulations to protect human health and the environment
and to ensure the full benefits of nanotechnology to society. Funding from NNI agencies has helped
inform the public and stakeholders about nanotechnology and its benefits and risks, develop a h ighly
skilled workforce supporting nanotechnology research and commercialization, and educate and inspire
the next generation of scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs.
The NNI is at a crossroads. Nanotechnology has evolved from an area of fundamental research to an
enabling technology. Recognizing this evolution, the NNI has expanded its focus from support for
fundamental research on nanomaterials and devices to include new efforts focused on utilizing these
materials and devices to develop nanotechnolog y-enabled systems. The next phase of the NNI will
require a robust ecosystem that supports fundamental discovery, fosters innovation, and promotes the
transfer of nanotechnology discoveries from lab to market, along with continued efforts to ensure the
safety of NEPs across their entire life cycle. This strategic plan reflects the collective vision of NNI
agencies on how they will collaborate with each other and the broader nanotechnology community to
expand this ecosystem.

 33 
Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
The NSET Subcommittee was established in July 2000 as part of the NSTC Committee on Technology to
facilitate interagency collaboration on nanoscale R&D and to provide a framework for setting Federal
R&D budget priorities related to nanotechnology. Moreover, the NSET Subcommittee provides a
platform for communication, collabora tion, and coordination that promotes the engagement of all
participating agencies, including those with an interest but no targeted funding in nanotechnology. In
the following sections, the agencies describe their individual interests in nanotechnology R&D and the
NNI, as they collectively contribute to the welfare of the Nation and to their respective agency missions
and responsibilities.
50
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
CPSC, in cooperation with Federal partners, analyzes the use and safety of nanotechnology in consumer
products. In order to meet identified data needs, the CPSC staff has met with and collaborates with staff
at a number of Federal agencies in areas of mutual interest where collaboration would be beneficial and
support the respe ctive missions of each agency. More consumer products are using compounds or
materials that have been produced using nanotechnologies that directly manipulate matter at the
atomic level and produce materials that could not have been produced in the past.
Nanomaterials with the same chemical composition as larger-scale materials may demonstrate different
physical and chemical properties and may behave differently in the environment and the human body.
CPSC has developed an internal nanotechnology team composed of various technical experts (e.g.,
engineers, toxicologists, and economists) to advise the Commission on the safe use of nanotechnology
in consumer products. As part of the NNI, the CPSC nanotechnology team participates in the
interagency collection a nd analysis of data and in the development of reports that focus on the
potential EHS issues associated with the use of nanotechnology.
Department of Commerce (DOC)
DOC participates in the NNI to promote job creation, economic growth, sustainable development, and
improved standards of living for all Americans by working in partnership with businesses, universities,
communities, and our Nation’s workers. The Department touches the daily lives of the American people
in many ways, with a wide range of responsibilities where nanotechnology is important, including trade,
economic development, technology,  innovation, entrepreneurship and business development,
environmental stewardship, and statistical research and analysis. The Bureau of Industry and Security
(BIS), Economic Development Administration (EDA), National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), and U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) are active participants in the NSET Subcommittee.
Their engagement informs the D epartment- and Federal Governm ent-wide coordination of
nanotechnology-related trade and economic polic ies, R&D, standards activities, and protection of
intellectual property.

50 The latest information on the nanotechnology activities of NNI agencies is available at www.nano.gov.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  34 
Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS)
The interagency coordination provided by the NNI enables BIS to stay apprised of new nanotechnology
advancements that may present national security challenges and that may provide opportunities for
companies in the national defense industrial base. Further, the NNI creates mechanisms (e.g., through
regular meetings of the NSET Subcommittee) for BIS to share information about national security needs
and challenges with other Federal agencies. BIS may also exercise its statutory data collection authority,
as needed, in support of the NNI vision. Together, these exchanges support the BIS mission to advance
U.S. national security, foreign policy, and economic objectives by ensuring an effective export control
and treaty compliance system and promoting continued U.S. strategic technology leadership.
Economic Development Administration (EDA)
The mission of EDA is to lead the Federal economic development agenda by promoting innovation and
competitiveness, preparing American regions for growth and success in the worldwide economy.
Economic development results in a sustained increase i n prosperity and quality of life through
innovation, lowered transaction costs, and the utilization of capabilities toward the responsible
production and diffusion of goods and services. The vision and four goals of the NNI Strategic Plan align
strongly with EDA’s mission and leading-edge economic development policy. The NSET Subcommittee
provides a venue for EDA to understand the current state of nanotechnology development and to
collaborate across the Federal Government to increase the rate and efficiency  of nanotechnology
commercialization efforts that originate in and near our Nation’s research laboratories. EDA's support for
commercialization includes funding for innovation centers, coordination with universities and Federal
labs, collaborative funding opportunities with other Federal agencies, and technical assistance and
capacity building for regional innovation ecosystems that support entrepreneurs. Further, EDA funding
priorities include support for innovation in nanotechnology -relevant sectors such as advanced and
additive manufacturing, energy, green growth, and others.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Advancing nanoscale measurement science, standards, and technology is an important component of
NIST’s mission to promote U.S. innovation and industrial competitiveness. From leading cutting -edge
research, to providing world -class user facilities, to coordinating the development of standards that
promote trade, NIST’s nanotechnology program directly impacts priorities important to the Nation’s
economy and well-being. The NNI-related research conducted in NIST’s laboratories and user facilities
develops measurements, standards, and data crucial to a wide range of industries and Federal agencies,
from the development of new measurement and fabrication methods necessary for advanced
manufacturing to the development of the reference materials and data necessary to accurately measure
key nanomaterial properties needed for the responsible development and use of nanotechnology. NIST
further supports the U.S. nanotechnology enterprise through its two user facilities, the NIST Center for
Neutron Research (NCNR) and the Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology (CNST). The NCNR
provides access to a broad range of world-class neutron scattering tools for characterizing the atomic-
and nanometer- scale structure and dynamics of materials. As the Department of Commerce’s
nanotechnology user facility, the CNST enables innovation by providing rapid access to the tools
needed to make and measure nanostructures, with a particular emphasis on helping industry.

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  35 
The NNI has enabled NIST to prioritize and coordinate nanotechnology research in numerous areas,
most notably in nanoelectronics, nanomanufacturing, and energy, as well as nanoEHS. NIST is working
closely with other NNI agencies in planning and implementing the NSIs. Through activities of the NSET
Subcommittee’s Nanotechnology Environmental and Health Implications (NEHI) Working Group, NIST
receives input from a broad range of stakeholders on the c ritical measurement science and
measurement tools —protocols, standards, instruments,  methods, models, and validated data—
required for risk assessment and management of ENMs and NEPs. This input is essential to the
development and implementation of NIST’s programmatic efforts.
NIST staff members participate widely and lead in nanotechnology-related standards development and
international cooperation activities. NIST staff expertise helps ensure the technical quality and efficacy
of the resulting internationa l standards and enables rapid technology  transfer from NIST to the
stakeholder community. NIST experts participate and provide leadership in multilateral activities such
as the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD) Working Party on
Manufactured Nanomaterials,  the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Technical
Committee 229, the International Electrotechnical Commission Technical Committee 113, and ASTM
International Committee E56. Interagency coordination and informat ion sharing related to these
activities is facilitated through the NSET Subcommittee and the NNI’s coordinators for Global Issues and
for Standards Development.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO)
The strength and vitality of the U.S. economy depends  directly on effective mechanisms that protect
new ideas and investments in innovation and creativity. USPTO is at the cutting edge of the Nation’s
technological progress and achievement as the Federal agency responsible for granting patents,
registering trademarks, and providing intellectual property policy advice and guidance to the Executive
Branch. Through its participation in the NNI and work with other agencies in the NSET Subcommittee,
USPTO has made several improvements to its processes to keep pace  with the rapid advances being
made in this area. Notably, USPTO adopted the NNI definition of nanotechnology in its development of
the first detailed, patent -related nanotechnology classification hierarchy of any major intellectual
property office in the world. USPTO also has used the networking and information- sharing
opportunities presented by participation in the NNI to establish nanotechnology -related training
opportunities for patent examiners. USPTO has significantly contributed to the NNI by providing advice
on patent and other intellectual -property-related matters as well as contributing a variety of
nanotechnology-related patent data, which have been used as benchmarks to analyze nanotechnology
development and to perform trend analysis of nanotechnology patenting activity in the United States
and globally.
Department of Defense (DOD)
DOD leadership considers nanotechnology to have high and growing potential to contribute to the
warfighting capabilities of the Nation. Because of the broad and interdi sciplinary nature of
nanotechnology, DOD leadership views it as an enabling technology area that should receive the
highest level of Department attention and coordination. The vision of the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Research and Engineering includ es nanoscale science and engineering as one of six high- interest
basic science areas, along with synthetic biology, quantum information science, cognitive neuroscience,

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  36 
human behavior modeling, and novel engineered materials. The definition, potential, and challenges of
nanotechnology are described by DOD in the following terms: The science of materials on the atomic
scale makes possible new classes of electronics and sensors, chemical catalysts, high-strength materials,
and energetic materials. Challenges include developing new ENMs, functionalizing them when
necessary, developing scalable processes for manufacturing, and incorporating them into devices. DOD
also invests in nanotechnology for advanced energetic materials, photocatalytic coatings, active
microelectronic devices, structural fibers, strength- and toughness -enhancing additives, advanced
processing, and a wide array of other promising applications. The DOD nanotechnology efforts are
based on coordinated planning and federated execution among the military departments and agencies
(e.g., the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency [ DARPA] and the Defense Threat Reduction
Agency [DTRA]). Although DOD does not establish funding targets for nanotechnology specifically, its
support for nanotechnology -related R&D has remained robust through the competitive success of
nanotechnology-related efforts in core research planning, technology development solicitations, and
other programs such as Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR), the Multidisciplinary U niversity
Research Initiative (MURI), and the Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship Program.
51
D
OD was among the initial participating agencies in the NNI and the NSET Subcommittee and considers
the Initiative and its formal coordination forums to have been valuable as a means to facilitate
technology planning, coordination, and communication among the Federal agencies. The meetings and
workshops hosted or facilitated by the NSET Subcommittee and NNI participants help to identify and
define options and opport unities that materially contribute to DOD planning activities and program
formulation. The transparency that is enabled by the NNI is viewed as symmetrically beneficial to DOD,
the other agencies, and the many private -sector stakeholders in the broad arena  of nanoscience,
nanotechnology, and nanotechnology-enabled applications.
Department of Education (DOEd)
DOEd is committed to supporting and improving science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education for students from preschool to graduate school. DOEd also seeks to improve access to
quality STEM education for all students, particularly students from groups that have historically been
underserved in the STEM fields, including students in low -income communities, students of color,
females, students with special educational needs, and students living in rural communities. In addition,
DOEd supports STEM educators through a variety of programs and initiatives.  DOEd’s STEM Office can
be supportive of interagency working groups by participating in regular s ubcommittee meetings. The
NNI provides a conduit to help D OEd staff members appreciate the specific STEM requirements for
proficiency in nanotechnology by connecting them with experts at NSF , DOL, an d other Federal
agencies. In return, DOEd can provide valuable information to the NNI agencies on nanotechnology-
relevant student requirements and teacher training.
Department of Energy (DOE)
DOE views nanoscience and nanotechnology as having a vitally important role to play in solving the
energy and climate-change challenges faced by the Nation. This broad and diverse field of R&D will likely

51 Formerly the National Security Science and Engineering Faculty Fellowship Prog ram, www.acq.osd.mil/rd/
basic_research/program_info/vbff.html

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  37 
have a dramatic impact on future technologies for solar energy collection and conversion, energy
storage, alternative fuels, and energy efficiency, to name just a few. DOE has participated in the NNI
since its inception and maintains a strong commitment to the Initiative, which has served as an effective
and valuable way of spotlighting needs and targeting resources in  this critical area of science and
technology. The NNI continues to provide a focus for overall investment in physical sciences, a crucial
locus for interagency communication and collaboration, and an impetus for coordinated planning. The
research and infrastructure successes spurred by the NNI have made the United States a world leader in
this area, with significant national benefit.
The majority of DOE NNI investments are made by the Office of Science (SC), with an emphasis on
fundamental phenomena and p rocesses. Examples of such research supported include the following:
nanostructured materials for electron and ion transport in next -generation batteries and fuel cells;
nanoscale quantum materials for future energy technologies; fundamental understanding of nanoscale
defects that will enable predictive design of materials with superior mechanical properties and radiation
resistance; elucidation of the elementary steps of light absorption, charge separation, and charge
transport in nanostructured materials and chemical systems for improved solar energy conversion;
atomically precise materials for molecular electrocatalysts that efficiently convert electrical energy into
chemical bonds in fuels; and enhanced computational capabilities for the simulation of chemical and
geochemical processes at the molecular and nanoscales. Additional NNI investments come from the
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) and from the Advanced Research Project
Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) in areas such as ENMs  and nanot echnology-enabled devices. These funds
support nanotechnology R&D at universities, national laboratories, nonprofit research institutes, and
companies of all sizes.
In addition, DOE supports major research facilities, a category in which the DOE investmen t is
significantly larger than that of other agencies, due primarily to the operation of five Nanoscale Science
Research Centers (NSRCs) located at DOE laboratories. The NSRCs operate as user facilities, with access
based on submission of proposals that ar e reviewed by independent evaluation boards and provided
at no cost for nonproprietary work. The NSRCs support synthesis, processing, fabrication, and analysis
at the nanoscale and are designed to be state -of-the-art user centers for interdisciplinary nano scale
research, serving as an integral part of DOE’s comprehensive nanoscience program that encompasses
new science, new tools, and new computing capabilities.
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)
DHHS participates in the  NNI as part of its missi on to protect the health of all Americans and provide
essential human services. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH), and National Institutes of Health (NIH) contribute to the NSET Subcommittee
to address a range of priorities relevant to the NNI. DHHS also contributes to NNI EHS efforts that support
and promote  responsible development of nanotechnology through a variety of mechanisms, most
notably the NEHI Working Group of the NSET Subcommittee.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
The use of nanotechnology can lead to novel therapies, early detection of disease,  and better health
outcomes for patients, but can also alter the safety, effectiveness, performance, and/or quality of FDA-

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  38 
regulated products. For this reason, FDA is interested in additional scientific information and tools to
help better detect and predict potential effects of such changes on both human and animal health.
FDA investments help address questions related to the safety, effectiveness, quality, and/or regulatory
status of products that contain ENMs or otherwise involve the use of nanotechnology; develop models
for safety and efficacy assessment; and study the behavior of nanomaterials in biological systems and
their effects on both human and nonhuman animal health. These investments support FDA’s mission to
protect and promote public health and help support the responsible development of nanotechnology.
FDA has developed a regulatory science program in nanotechno logy to foster the responsible
development of FDA-regulated products that may contain ENMs or otherwise involve the application
of nanotechnology. The FDA program establishes tools, standardized methods, and data to assist in
regulatory decision-making while providing in-house scientific expertise and capacity that is responsive
to nanotechnology-related FDA-regulated products.
The Office of the Commissioner, in partnership with the FDA Nanotechnology Task Force (NTF),
facilitates communication and coopera tion across the agency on nanotechnology regulatory science
research, both within FDA and with national and international stakeholders. The NTF provides the
overall coordination of FDA’s nanotechnology regulatory science research efforts in the following
programmatic investment areas: (1) scientific staff development and professional training; (2) laboratory
infrastructure and product-testing capacity; (3)  collaborative and interdisciplinary regulatory science
research on characterization, detection, identification, quantitation of nanomaterial structure–activity
relationships that influence the safety and efficacy of nanomaterials in FDA-regulated products; and (4)
consensus standards development.
As needed and appropriate, FDA continues to foster and develop collaborative relationships with other
Federal agencies through participation in the NNI , through  the NSET Subcommittee  and the NEHI
Working Group , as well as with regulatory agencies, healthcare professionals, industry,  academics,
consumers, and other stakeholders. Most recently, NTF has increased its i nternational enga gement
through:
• Participation in the U.S.–EU Communities of Research (CORs).
• Participation in the International Pharmaceutical Regulators Forum Nanomedicines Working Group.
• Organization o f the “Global Summit on Regulatory Science: Nanotechnology Standards and
Applications” that took place in September 2016,
• Continued participation in ISO and ASTM International activities in standards development, along
with other stakeholders.
The goal of these activities  is to strengthen global regulatory research collaboration and coordination
to advance  nanotechnology for the benefit of human and animal health and to  develop novel
characterization/measurement tools, reference materials, and c onsensus standards to aid
commercialization and responsible development of FDA -regulated products. These collaborations
allow information to be exchanged efficiently and serve to identify research needs related to the use of
ENMs.

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  39 
Although FDA activities are relevant to all four NNI goals, FDA efforts are primarily focused on Goal s 3
and 4, to develop a skilled workforce, infrastructure,  and toolset and to support responsible
development of nanotechnology.
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
NIOSH is responsible for conducting research and providing guidance to protect the health and safety
of people at work. Workers are generally the first people in society to be exposed to the hazards of an
emerging technology, and nanotechnology is no exception. The workplaces where ENMs and NEPs are
developed, investigated, manufactured, used, and disposed of are quite varied and span all economic
sectors. NIOSH conducts focused research on hazard identification, exposure assessment, risk
characterization, and risk management to protect the health and safety of workers . The results of this
research allow NIOSH to develop effective recommendations and to promote responsible development
of the technology. In addition to investigating the potential implications of nanotechnology, NIOSH is
also evaluating how nanotechnology can be applied to address occupational safety and health issues.
In order to meet the need for a unified approach to this complex research challenge, the NIOSH
Nanotechnology Resea rch Center (NTRC) was chartered  to manage NIOSH’s investment in
nanotechnology and to coordinate a multidisciplinary research program across the Institute. In addition
to providing internal coordination of the NIOSH research program, the NTRC serves as an interface point
for NNI participating agencies , for private sector organizations manufacturing or formulating
nanomaterials, and for other agencies and research institutes nationally and internationally.
NIOSH toxicology studies continue to provide better understanding of the ways in which some types of
ENMs may enter the body and interact with the body’s organ systems. The scope of these research
efforts has expanded beyond the few nanoparticle types evaluated at the start of the NIOSH
nanotechnology research program. A key component of this effort is to understand the characteristics,
properties, and material modes of action  relevant for predicting potential health risks. The toxicology
studies have served as a starting point to identify the priority materials for further risk assessment,
exposure evaluations, and development of risk management practices.
NIOSH field investigators continue to work with a growing number of private sector companies to assess
potential occupational exposure to ENMs, including a focused effort on carbon nanotubes. However,
more data are needed on the full extent and magnitude of workers’ exposures to broad categories of
ENMs in workplaces that manufacture or use ENMs, nanostructures, and nanodevices. NIOSH field
investigators continue to expand the scope of assessment and the number and type of facilities that
can be assessed.
Controlling worker exposure to ENMs is one of the first steps in a risk -based approach to responsible
development of nanotechnology. NIOSH will increase its effort with private sector partners to evaluate
the extent of adherence to  risk management guidance, with an initial focus on evaluating the
effectiveness of engineering control measures. Additional field research is needed to address questions
raised about possible human health risks in exposed nanotechnology workers and to develop guidance
for medical screening and prospective epidemiologic studies.  Starting in late 2016, NIOSH will work
collaboratively with private - and public -sector partners to evalu ate the effectiveness of risk
management practices developed for nanomaterials that are now appropriate when those materials are

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  40 
used in advanced manufacturing processes. Risk management practices applied to advanced/additive
manufacturing processes using nanoscale metal materials will be evaluated.
NIOSH will continue to work with NNI agencies and a broad range of national and international private
and public partners to develop research- based information and guidance to protect workers involved
with ENMs. The results being produced by NIOSH will continue to serve as the foundation for meeting
the critical NNI research needs related to human hazard and exposure assessment, exposure mitigation,
risk assessment techniques, risk management practices, and human medical surveillance and
epidemiology. NIOSH has developed formal collaborations with the National Toxicology Program
(National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIEHS), CPSC, DOD, and OSHA . It has also
developed productive informal interactions  with other agencies, including EPA, NIST, DOE, and FDA.
NIOSH will continue to develop partnerships in the public–private arena, such as its collaboration with
the State University of New York (SUNY ) Polytechnic Institute’s Colleges of Nanoscale Science a nd
Engineering to launch the Nano Health and Safety Consortium.
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
NIH is the primary Federal agency for conducting and supporting biomedical and behavioral  research.
The NIH mission is to seek fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and
the application of that knowledge to enhance health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and disability. NIH
recognizes that advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology have the potential to make valuable
contributions to biology, medicine, and related disciplines, which in turn could contribute to a new era
in healthcare. The Federal agencies’ R&D investments, for example, have resulted in advanced materials,
tools, and nanotechnology -enabled instrumentation that can be used to study and understand
biological processes in health and disease. NIH-supported R&D efforts, in particular, are bringing about
new paradigms in the detection, diagnosis, and tr eatment of common and rare diseases, resulting in
new classes of nanotherapeutics and diagnostic biomarkers, tests, and devices.
NIH has participated in the NNI since 2001. The NNI serves as a framework within which NIH can work
collaboratively with other  agencies to address some of the most perplexing challenges in the
development and application of nanotechnologies for biomedical applications. Through the
interagency planning, coordination, and communication  efforts, scientists are addressing key
challenges by:
• Understanding the manner in which nanoscale building blocks and processes integrate and
assemble into larger systems and how these processes can be precisely controlled to achieve
predictable outcomes.
• Learning how to design ENMs that can seamlessl y and functionally integrate with tissues of the
body to perform biological functions.
• Developing “top-down” and “bottom-up” engineering approaches to control properties that allow
the identification, characterization, and quantification of biological mole cules, chemicals, and
structures involved in early-stage changes or progression in a disease state.
• Engineering complex, theranostic -based nanoparticles and nanodevices to target therapies and
diagnose the progress of treatments.
• Adopting new materials, na notechnology-enabled tools, and analytical instruments from diverse
fields to support medical research.

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  41 
NIH continues to support the NNI by stimulating R&D in nanoscience and nanotechnology through both
intramural and extramural funding activities in all five Program Component Areas, with major financial
investments in foundational research (PCA 2) and nanotechnology- enabled applications, devices, and
systems (PCA 3). For more information on specific topics funded by NIH, please visit the NIH Research
Portfolio Online Reporting Tool at www.report.nih.gov
. NIH plays a substantive role in developing
scientific understanding of how to design ENMs for safe use in manufacturing and for use in medical
treatments. The Nationa l Cancer Institute (NCI), for example, established the Nanotechnology
Characterization Laboratory (NCL), which has developed a comprehensive assay portfolio for the
assessment of the safety of nanoparticles in in vivo applications, and NIEHS and the National Toxicology
Program have focused on assessing properties relevant to the chronic exposure of workers to ENMs. NIH
also supports large center grants, program grants, and small businesses whose technologies or products
are licensed or currently undergoing Phase I–III clinical trials.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
DHS interests in nanoscience are primarily focused on the application of nanoscale materials and
devices that provide enhancements in component technology performance for homeland security
applications. The applications for the efforts described below are in threat detection for enhanced
security for aviation, mass transit, and first responders:
• Materials toolbox: These efforts are focused on the development of materials systems that allow
systematic control of chemical and structural features from molecular scales (functional groups)
through nano - and microscales. The ability to precisely tune material properties is critical for
successful development of improved active sensor surfaces and analyte collection substrates as well
as for development of novel sensing structures and arrays.
• Advanced preconcentrators: The DHS Science and Technology Directorate is interested in the
development of high- performance nano scale preconcentrators for use in next -generation
detection systems.
• Advanced sensing platforms: Work on the development of nanoscale sensing platforms continues
with industry partners. The emphasis of these efforts is on development of manufacturing
techniques for low-cost sensor platforms and wearable sensing technologies.
Department of the Interior (DOI) / U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
USGS, serving as the primary science organization within DOI, has seven mi ssion areas, including
environmental health. The science supporting the environmental health mission area focuses on the
environment–health interface. Research characterizes processes that affect interactions among the
physical environment, the living environment, and people, as well as the factors that affect ecological
and human exposure to disease agents and the resulting toxicological or infectious disease s. The
mission of USGS in environmental health science is to contribute scientific information to
environmental, natural resource, agricultural, and public health managers, who use that information to
support sound decision making. The five main goals are:
• Identify, prioritize, and detect contaminants and pathogens of emerging concern.
• Reduce the impact of contaminants on the environment, fish and wildlife, and people.

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  42 
• Reduce the impact of pathogens on the environment, fish and wildlife, domesticated animals, and
people.
• Discover the complex interactions between, and combined effects of, exposure to cont aminants
and pathogens.
• Prepare for and respond to environmental impacts and related health threats of natural and
anthropogenic disasters.
The intended outcome of this science is prevention and reduction of adverse impacts to the quality of
the environment, the health of our living resources, and human health. Communicating  with, and
receiving input from, partners and stakeholders regarding their science needs is essential. USGS
engages all stakeholders to ensure that its efforts are focused on the highest  priority environmental
health issues, and that products are provided in the most timely and usable form to all those who can
use them. USGS must reach out to the scientific community, internally and externally, to ensure that
efforts are integrated with and take full advantage of the activities of others.
Department of Justice (DOJ) / National Institute of Justice (NIJ)
The NIJ investment in nanotechnology furthers DOJ’s mission through the sponsorship of research that
provides objective, independent, evidence-based knowledge and tools to meet the challenges of crime
and justice, particularly at the s tate and local levels. New projects are awarded on a competitive basis;
therefore, total investment may change each fiscal year. However, NIJ continues to view
nanotechnology as an integral component of its R&D portfolio as applicable to criminal justice needs.
Department of Labor (DOL) / Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
OSHA plays an integral role in nanotechnology by protecting the Nation’s  workforce. OSHA
accomplishes its mission by collaborating and sharing information with other Federal agencies through
NNI activities and NSET Subcommittee meetings. As part of this effort, OSHA’s goal is to educate
employers on their responsibility to pro tect workers and to educate workers on safe practices in
handling ENMs. OSHA is developing guidance and educational materials promoting worker safety and
health that will be shared with the public directly and through the NNI.
Department of State (DOS)
DOS participates in the NNI to identify and promote multilateral and bilateral scientific activities that
support U.S. foreign policy objectives, protect national security interests, advance economic interests,
and foster environmental protection. DOS assists NNI agencies in establishing partnerships with
counterpart institutions abroad by holding regular joint committee meetings with representatives from
more than fifty countries. These meetings are governed by binding science and technology agreements
that facilitate exchange of scientific results, provide for protection and allocation of intellectual property
rights and benefit sharing, facilitate access for researchers, address taxation issues, and respond to the
complex set of issues associated with economic development, domestic security, and regional stability.
DOS engages in multilateral international organizations that support the responsible development of
nanotechnology, including the OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy and its
subsidiary Working Party on Biotechnology, Nanotechnology, and Converging Technologies; the
Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management; and ISO.

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  43 
Department of Transportation (DOT) / Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)
FHWA sees great promise in the application of nanotechnology to help solve long-term transportation
research needs in support of DOT’s strategic goals: Safety, State of Good Repair, Economic
Competitiveness, Quality of Life in Communities, and Environmental Sustainability. By strat egically
investing in focused research areas and leveraging investments in nanoscale technology by other NNI
partners and Federal agencies, industry, and academia, FHWA aims to accelerate the capability to
provide safer, more efficient, longer- lasting highway transportation systems. FHWA’s Exploratory
Advanced Research Program is investing in nanoscale research to address key highway research issues
in infrastructure, safety, operations, and the environment. Nanotechnology promises breakthroughs in
multiple areas, offering a potential for synergy and benefits across many traditional highway research
focus areas.
The development of innovative materials and coatings can deliver significant improvements in durability,
performance, and resiliency of highway and transportation infrastructure components. Nanoscale
engineering of traditional transportation infrastructure materials (e.g., steel, concrete, asphalt, and other
cementitious materials, as well as recycled forms of these materials) offers great promise.
In the near- to mid-term, FHWA sees promise in new methods for nanoscale characterization of complex
heterogeneous materials that can support multiscale modeling and increased understanding of
material interactions throughout the life cycle of pavements and materials, resulting in the broad impact
of a decrease in the use of increasingly scarce virgin materials and the energy required to construct and
maintain the highway system.
In the longer term, nanoscale science may allow for pavements and structures with embedded sensors
and active controls that provide for multiple functions and increased resilience, such as pavements that
change texture or increase porosity when wet, pavements with dynamic lane markings meeting the
needs of traffic conditions, or materials that change tension in response to wind or water forces or traffic
loading.
FHWA’s long-term strategy is to continue targeted investment in select areas while building an
appreciation for highway research needs with NNI agencies and the broader nanoscale research
community in order to augment long -standing partnerships and make significant progress toward
improving the Nation’s highway and transportation systems.
Department of the Treasury (DOTreas)
DOTreas works through the NSET Subcommittee to help the NNI achieve its vision congruent with that
of DOTreas: to serve the American people and strengthen national security by managing the Federal
Government’s finances effectively; to promote economic growth and stability; and to ensure the safety,
soundness, and security of U.S. and international financial systems. DOTreas monitors those aspects of
developing nanotechnology that could most effectively assist the execution of its role as the steward of
the U.S. economic and financial systems and as an influential participant in the global economy. DOTreas
seeks to assess and utilize nanotechnology in the discharge of its responsibilities, including advising the
President on economic and financial issues, encouraging sustainable economic growth, and fosteri ng
improved governance in financial institutions. It seeks to harness those aspects of nanotechnology R&D
that will allow it to better operate and maintain systems that are critical to the Nation’s financial

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  44 
infrastructure, such as the production of coin a nd currency. Interactions with the NSET Subcommittee
help DOTreas as it endeavors to capture developments in nanoscale science and engineering that are
changing the parameters of its domestic and international operations, particularly those impacting its
critical national security-related activities in implementing economic sanctions against foreign threats
to the United States, identifying and targeting the financial support networks of national security
threats, improving the safeguards of U.S. financial systems, and creating new economic and job
opportunities to promote economic growth and stability at home and abroad.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
EPA’s interest in the NNI is to collaborate to better understand the implications and emerging
applications of ENMs to help protect human health and the environment. Innovations in chemical and
material design are rapidly changing the landscape of industrial and consumer products as novel
materials such as ENMs are incorporated to enhance product perform ance. Scientifically supported
approaches are required to efficiently screen for and ev aluate potential impacts of ENMs  to human
health and the environment. EPA conducts applied research to develop, collate, mine, and apply
information on ENMs to support risk-based decisions on sustainable manufacture and use.
In this research, a life cycle perspective is applied and available information synthesized to consider
potential for impacts associated with manufacture, use, and disposal of products containing ENM s.
Results of this research will provide the methods and tools to enable EPA to efficiently evaluate emission,
transformation, potential exposure, and impacts of ENMs across the material/product life cycle. The
long-term impact will be to accelerate the pace at which the safety of existing nanomaterials is assessed
and to inform the sustainable design and development of emerging materials and products.
To help nanotechnology create maximum societal benefits and to minimize its potential environmental
impacts, EPA collaborates with Federal partners within the NSET Subcommittee, and with international
organizations such as OECD, to bridge research gaps, address critical issues such as regulatory needs
and test guidelines, and communicate information about nan otechnology to all interested
stakeholders.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
The three prime drivers for NASA’s aerospace R&D activities are to (1) reduce vehicle weight; (2) enhance
performance; and (3) improve safety, durability, and reliability. Nanotechnology is a tool to address each
of these drivers. Nanotechnology research at NASA is focused in four areas: engineered materials and
structures; energy generation, storage, and distribution; electronics, sensors, and devices; and
propulsion. This research is conducted through a combination of in- house activities at NASA research
and flight centers, competitively funded research with universities and industry, and collaborations with
other agencies, universities, and industry. Through the University Research Centers Program, NASA has
also funded nanotechnology research at minority -serving institutions, including the Center for
Advanced Nanoscale Materials at the University of Puerto Rico and the High Performance Polymers and
Composites Center at Clark Atlanta University. A major emphasis of NASA's nanotechnology R&D is on
transitioning nanotechnology discoveries into mission applications.
NASA has participated in the NNI since its inception and is committed to partnering with other
participating agencies to identify key technical challenges in nanotechnology R&D, focus resources to

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  45 
address these challenges, and accelerate the development of nanotechnology breakthroughs and their
translation into commercial products.
National Science Foundation (NSF)
NSF supports fundamental nanoscale science and engineering in and across all disciplines. It supports
formal and informal nanotechnology education and physical research infrastructure in academic
institutions. It also advances nanotechnology innovation through a variety of translational research
programs and by partnering with industry, states, and other agencies.
The NSF nanotechnology investment in 2016 supported more than 5,000 active projects, more than 30
research centers, and several infrastructure networks for device development, computation, and
education. It impacted more than 10,000 students and teachers. Approximately 150 small businesses
have been funded to perform research and product development in nanotechnology through the SBIR
and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. NSF’s nanotechnology research is supported
primarily through grants to individuals, teams, and centers at U.S. academic institutions. The efforts in
team and center projects have been particularly fruitful because nanoscale research and education are
inherently interdisciplinary pursuits, often combining elements of materials science, engineering,
chemistry, computer science, physics, and biology.
Fundamental changes envisioned through nanotechnology require a long -term R&D vision. NSF
sponsored the first initiative dedicated to nanoparticles in 1991 and the 1997 –1999 Partnership in
Nanotechnology program, and it produced the 1999 interagency report , Nanotechnology Research
Directions: Vision for Nanotechnology in the Next Decade ,
52 which was adopted as an official N ational
Science and Technology Council (NSTC) document in 2000. NSF push es the frontiers of science and
technology innovations through continual interaction with the nanotechnology community, new
programs, and ongoing evaluation of current investments. The NSF-led study, Nanotechnology Research
Directions for Societal Needs in 2 020, was released in 2010.
53 With input from academic, industry, and
government experts from more than 35 countries, the report addresses the progress and impact of
nanotechnology since 2000 as well as the vision and research directions for nanotechnology in the next
ten years. Further, convergence of nanotechnology with other technologies and areas of application
have been analyzed in the NSF -led 2013 report developed in collaboration with NIH, EPA, DOD, NASA,
and USDA, Convergence of Knowledge, Technology, and Society.
54
N
SF supports the NSIs through core programs and new solicitations. NSF has a dedicate d program for
nanomanufacturing and has program solicitations each year to support new concepts for high- rate
synthesis and processing of nanostructur es, nanobiotechnology methods, and methods to fabricate
devices, assemble them into systems, and then further assemble them into larger- scale structures of
relevance to industry. EHS implications of nanotechnology, including development of predictive toxicity
of nanomaterials and rigorous experiments to develop models for nanomaterial exposures in the
environment, will be investigated in three dedicated multidisciplinary centers and in more than 60 other
smaller groups.

52 www.nano.gov/node/948
53 www.wtec.org/nano2
54 www.wtec.org/NBIC2

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  46 
NSF also has a focus on addressing e ducation and societal dimensions of nanotechnology. Education-
related activities include development of materials for schools, curricula for nanoscience and engineering,
new teaching tools, undergraduate programs, technical training, and public outreach programs.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)
The mission of NRC is to license and regulate the Nation’s civilian use of byproduct, source, and special
nuclear materials in order to protect public health and safety, promote the common defense and
security, and protect the environment. NRC’s scope of responsibility includes regulation of commercial
nuclear power plants; research, test, and training reactors; nuclear fuel cycle facilities; medical,
academic, and industrial uses of radioactive materials; and tr ansport, storage, and disposal of
radioactive materials and waste. In addition, NRC licenses the import and export of radioactive materials
and works to enhance nuclear safety and security throughout the world.
As a regulatory agency, NRC does not typically sponsor fundamental research or product development.
Rather, NRC is focused in part on confirmatory research to verify the safe application of new
technologies in the civilian nuclear industry. Currently the agency’s focus with respect to
nanotechnology is to monitor developments that might be applied within the nuclear industry to help
NRC carry out its oversight role.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Nanotechnology has the potential to impact all areas that USDA provides leadership on: food ,
agriculture, natural resources, rural development, nutrition, the environment, and related issues. The
Agricultural Research Service (ARS), Forest Service (FS), and National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(NIFA) participate in the NSET Subcommittee to  promote coordinated research, development,
commercialization, education, and outreach on nanoscale science, engineering, and technology in
support of a variety of applications, including cellulosic and other nano - and biomaterials, agricultural
production, and human nutrition, as well as food safety and food quality. USDA also contributes to NNI
EHS efforts toward responsible development and deployment of nanotechnology.
Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
ARS is USDA’s chief in-house scientific research agency. ARS research leverages science and technology,
including ENMs and NEPs, to enable substantial improvements in long-term agricultural production, in
food safety and quality, and in human nutrition. Examples of this research include the development of
nanorod-based biosensors to rapidly, accurately, and selectively identify Salmonella; the incorporation
of nanoemulsions, nanoparticles, and microfibrils into edible films to develop food products with
improved barrier and mechanical properties, greater nutritional value, and improved taste; and the use
of nano-cantilevers to detect toxin molecules with high sensitivity.
Forest Service (FS)
Nanotechnology has enormous promise to bring about fundamental changes in and significant benefit
from our Nation’s use of renewable resources. For example, cellulose nanomaterials derived from trees:
(1) are renewable and sustainable; (2) are produced in trees via photosynthesis from solar energy,
atmospheric carbon dioxide, and water; (3) store carbon; and (4) the material itself is carbon neutral.
Cellulosic nanocrystals, for example, are predicted to have strength properties comparable to Kevlar,

Appendix A. Agency Interests in the NNI
  47 
have piezoelectric properties comparable to quartz, and can be manipulated to produce photonic
structures. The USDA FS, in collaboration with a public–private partnership named P3Nano (the Public–
Private Partnership for Nanotechnology), has been partnering with industry and academic institutions
to conduct research in industry -driven topics. Current global research directions in cellulose
nanomaterials indicate that this material could be used for a variety of new and improved product
applications, including lighter and stronger paper and paperboard products, stronger cement materials,
barrier coatings , body armor , lightweight automobile and airplane composite panels , electronics,
biomedical applications , rheology modifiers , and replacement of petrochemicals in plastics and
composites. Several commercial products containing cellulose nanomaterials are already on the market.
Examples include rheology modifiers in gel ink for ballpoint pens, deodorants in adult diapers, additives
in personal care products, and growth media for biomedical research. The U.S. forest products industry,
the major player in cellulose nanomaterials, has actively engaged with NNI agencies and programs via
its industry technology alliance—Agenda 2020—and by co-organizing workshops.
Through participation in the NNI and representation on the NSET Subcommittee, FS is partnering with
other Federal entities (e.g., NIST, DOE, DOD, NIOSH), industry, and academia to develop the precompetitive
science and technology critical to the economic and sustainable production and use of new high-value,
nanotechnology-enabled forest-based products. Participation in the NNI and the NSET Subcommittee has
helped create a favorable environment for increased FS investment in nanotechnology R&D. FS
nanotechnology research has contributed broadly to the NNI Program Component Areas with primary
emphasis on PCA 1 (Nanotechnology Signature Initiatives/Sustainable Nanomanufacturing), PCA 3
(Nanotechnology-Enabled Applications, Devices, and Systems), and PCA 4 (Research Infrastructure and
Instrumentation), with possible future investments in PCA 5 (Environment, Health, and Safety).
National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA)
Established by the 2008 Farm Bill, NIFA is USDA’s primary extramural research, education, and extension
agency. NIFA’s mission is to invest in and advance agricultural research, education, and extension to
solve societal challenges. NIFA’s current priority areas are: (1) global food security ; (2) climate change;
(3) sustainable bioeconomy; (4) childhood obesity ; (5) food safety ; and (6) water. Nanoscale science,
engineering, and technology have demonstrated their relevance and great potential to enable
revolutionary improvements in agriculture and food systems, including plant production and products;
animal health, production, and products; food safety and quality; nutrition, health, and wellness;
renewable bioenergy and bio -based products; natural resources and the environment; agriculture
systems and technology; and agricultural economics and rural communities.
NIFA’s predecessor agency (Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service, or CSREES)
was among the early participating agencies in the NSET Subcommittee, joining in 2002, and that agency
(later, NIFA) has actively participated in and contributed to NNI activities ever since. The NNI provides a
solid platform on which NIFA can effectively explore broad opportunities in nanoscience and
nanotechnology to address critical societal challenges fa cing agriculture and food systems through
coordination, collaboration, and leveraging resources with other Federal agencies. Scientific discoveries
and technological breakthroughs inspire agricultural and food scientists to seek novel solutions. The
extensive infrastructure networks developed by the NNI agencies enhance the productivity and expand
the capability of agricultural and food science R&D in academia and industry. NIFA actively contributes

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  48 
to and benefits significantly from its participation in th e NNI activities to identify research gaps and
opportunities through workshops and discussions, to support public engagement and communication,
to facilitate public–private partnerships in close collaboration with industry, and to participate in and
promote international information exchanges and cooperation. NIFA also supports multiagency joint
research efforts of common interest and importance as appropriate to its mission, goals, and objectives.
The agency’s nanotechnology programs have broadly contribut ed to the NNI, with primary emphasis
on Nanotechnology Signature Initiatives  (PCA 1); Foundational Research (PCA 2); Nanotechnology -
Enabled Applications, Devices, and Systems (PCA 3); and Environment, Health, and Safety (PCA 5). NIFA’s
SBIR program also supports innovative nanotechnology R&D throughout its broad topic areas.
U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC)
The USITC representative attends NSET Subcommittee and working group meetings to keep the
Commission abreast of current trends and issues related to nanotechnology that may have the potential
to impact international trade. Upon request, the USITC representative may provide technical support to
the NSET Subcommittee.

 49 
Appendix B. Stakeholder Workshop Summary
The 2016 NNI Strategic Planning Stakeholder Workshop was held on May 19–20, 2016, in Washington, DC.
The goal of this workshop was to obtain input from stakeholders regarding the vision for the next phase
of the National Nanotechnolog y Initiative. Topics covered included  future technical directions,
implementation mechanisms, education and outreach activities, and approaches for promoting
commercialization. The conversations during the workshop directly informed the development of this
document, and the NNI strategic planning team devoted several meetings to discussing the themes
that emerged during the workshop . For example, inspired by workshop discussions on topics such as
data analytics and modeling, the strategic planning team added several nanoinformatics -relevant
objectives and sub-objectives to the plan.
The workshop was attended by approximately 80 participants from a variety of backgrounds, including
government, academia, industry, and nongovernmental organizations. In addition, the live webcast was
accessed 286 times during the event. The workshop was two full days, with a half day devoted to each
of the four NNI g oals. The discussions for each goal spanned introductory plenary sessions with
presentations and discussion panels, a s well as breakout sessions in which the groups addressed
questions provided by the workshop organizers. More information about the workshop, including links
to the agenda, presentation slides, and videos of the plenary presentations, is available at
www.nano.gov/2016StakeholderWorkshop.
The following sections reflect a summary of workshop discussions and individual participant comments and
do not necessarily represent the Federal Government’s perspective.
Cross-Cutting Themes
Several themes were repeatedly emphasized  by individual participants  throughout the workshop,
highlighting the importance of these topics across the four NNI goals. The recurrent themes fell into two
broad categories: (1) topics that reflect the maturation and evolution of nanotechnology R&D ; and (2)
structural observations and recommendations.
The Maturation and Evolution of Nanotechnology R&D
Sixteen years after the advent of the NNI, basic research is building on the foundation of knowledge that
has been developed to date and is becoming more complex, as evidenced by the emergence of research
in areas such as precision medicine and precision materials . Further, nanotechnology is increasingly
moving from the lab to the market. This transition was reflected in the workshop conversations, which
heavily focused on nanotechnology -enabled systems, as well as the translation of research into
applications. One  of the domina nt themes at the workshop was nanomanufacturing . Several
participants argued that greater focus on manufacturing science is needed to take full advantage of
nanotechnology discoveries. On the fundamental research side, there is a need to develop scalable,
robust, and repeatable processes that retain the material’s initial properties. On the applied side, key
challenges are yield, throughput, and cost. One approach to addressing these nanomanufacturing
issues would be to strengthen links between the NNI and Manufacturing USA (formerly  the National
Network for Manufacturing Innovation) . With respect to infrastructure, awareness of

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  50 
nanomanufacturing facilities is surprisingly low, and there is a need to concisely capture and share
information on m anufacturing opportunities and resources, as well as shared physical and virtual
infrastructure.
Data and informatics are also topics that have grown in visibility and relevance in recent years .
Computing speeds have increased orders of magnitude since the inception of the NNI, and many
research problems are now data- limited, where they previously were computing -limited. As such,
theory is beginning to drive more experiments. Future increases in  computing speeds will present
tremendous opportunities for predictive, precision materials development across all scales and will
fundamentally change the way that science and product development are carried out. The experiment,
theory, and simulation loop can be strengthened to support this change, and new computational tools
and data management strategies  are needed. As plenary speaker Paul Weiss put it, scientists and
engineers should “think smart data instead of big data. ” On the topic of modeling and simulation,
workshop participants argued that the field is currently too fractured and that model validation and
standards are still needed. Many questions related to data storage, sharing, dissemination, and use are
not unique to nanotechnology, while other issues, such as ontology development, are nanotechnology-
specific. There is a need for comprehensive, publicly available data resources, and these resources could
be developed based on existing resources in other scientific and technological domains. Sharing and
analyzing data is essential, and the attendees suggested that the Federal Government can support this
trend by enforcing data security and sharing requirements. The biggest challenges  with data sharing
are cultural reluctance to share coupled with the existence of few incentives to share. As journals begin
to require data submission with published papers, there will be a very large amount of nanomaterial
data collected, which could be in diverse formats and that will need to be curated by a trusted curator.
The issue of format diversity needs to be addressed as soon as possible because postmortem or legacy
data is almost impossible to curate. Finally, data reproducibility is still a significant challenge.
Collaborating for Success
Nanotechnology has been a fundamentally important and key enabling technology for many other
Federal initiatives, and is closely related to several other initiatives. Intersections between the NNI and
the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), the Brain Resear ch through Advanci ng Innovative
Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative , the Precision Medicine Initiative, the National Strategic
Computing Initiative, and the National Microbiome Initiative were all mentioned during the workshop.
For example, many of the NNI’s nanoinformatics interests are related to MGI activities. Throughout the
workshop, attendees repeatedly emphasized that it will continue to be important for the NNI to
interface with these other initiatives.
On a similar note, the need for scientists, engineers, and technology developers to collaborate broadly
across institutions, disciplines, sectors, and countries was also a frequent topic. These collaborations can
be encouraged by building stronger relationships among disparate communities. For example, there is
a natural connection among the scientists who generate nanoEHS knowledge under Goal 4 and the
businesses and workers who produce NEPs under Goal 2; nanoEHS knowledge can be integrated in the
product design so that new products are safe.  It wou ld be particularly beneficial to strengthen the
connections between the nanoEHS community and small businesses. There is also an opportunity for
the nanoEHS community to cross -pollinate with the biomedical community and to share information

Appendix B. Stakeholder Workshop Summary
  51 
related to the safety of nanoparticle systems. In support of technology development, the need to foster
and reinforce connections among academia, national labs, industry, and manufacturers was mentioned
in multiple sessions. These relationships could be supported  through mechanisms such as
precompetitive consortia. International collaborations are also an essential component of the
nanotechnology ecosystem, particularly  in the nanoEHS arena. Finally, research on transdisciplinary
topics and converging technologies will be increasingly important.
Many participants offered comments on possible metrics and indicators to assess the impact of the NNI.
Keeping in mind that the technology development timeline is generally  on the scale of multiple
decades, nanotechnology is still  in an early phase of development. Nevertheless, a big challenge is
identifying which materials, processes, and products contain nanotechnology or are nanotechnology -
enabled. One suggestion was to work with trade associations or to undertake social media analysis to
gather more information on this question. Further complicating the development of metrics is the fact
that it is also difficult to identify exactly how much the nanotechnology-enabled component or process
contributes to a product’s overall value. Multiple participants in several breakout sessions advocated for
measuring success broadly, noting that there are multiple ways to gauge impact. For example, beyond
publication numbers, research productivity could be measured by Digital Object Identifiers ( DOIs),
patents, products made, tools developed, lives saved, etc. There are many new and nontraditional
metrics that were not around five years ago.
Goal-Specific Themes
In addition to the topics that cut across multiple goals, important goal -specific themes also emerged
during the workshop discussions. For example, during a discussion of biomedical sciences under Goal 1,
plenary speaker Michelle Bradbury argued that it is  beneficial to spend time carefully developing the
drug or assay before testing it in biological systems; yet, it is difficult to publish this early development
work. A paradigm shift is needed because strong early development work is essential for success ful
translation. It is also key to validate in humans phenomena and trends that are seen in animals. There is
a notable knowledge gap between preclinical studies and validation work in clinical trials. For both the
physical and biomedical sciences, attendees emphasized the importance of international collaborations
to leverage compl ementary expertise and synergistic funding. Finally , many participants were
enthusiastic about the Nanotechnology -Inspired Grand Challenge mechanism in general, and the
future computing topic for the first grand challenge in particular.
For Goal 2, plenary speaker Marcie Black  suggested that the Federal Government can encourage
nanotechnology startups with accessible and cost- effective physical facilities, favorable domestic and
international intellectual property policies, and grants. Several participants noted that the technical staff
at small companies can spend a significant portion of their time working on paperwork for grants and
that the Federal Government works on a differ ent timescale than small companies ; it was suggested
that the process for awarding and managing grants to small companies could be streamlined. Similarly,
a big challenge for biomedical companies is funding advanced development, particularly when the
company is starting to think about the path to FDA approval and licensing at the same time. Funding
mechanisms are needed that don’t dampen the process. Multiple w orkshop attendees noted that
companies may face nanotechnology-specific challenges on their way to commercialization, including

National Nanotechnology Initiative Strategic Plan
  52 
insurance and standards. Again, nanomanufacturing was a major topic of conversation at the workshop,
and in response to this emphasis, it has been incorporated throughout the 2016 Strategic Plan.
Conversations in multiple sessions touched on issues of workforce development and education, which
fall under Goal 3 . Participants argued that the scientific workforce should be creative, analytical, and
entrepreneurial, and be able to communicate clearly and work across disciplines. The NNI has been a
catalyst for and sustainer of interdisciplinary research, and some workshop attendees noted that the
NNI has been “the ultimate melting pot” for science and engineering, equipping students with essential
collaboration and communication skills. Ph.D.-level students are being well trained, but plenary speaker
Oliver Brand contended that better continuing education and community college training is needed.
Similarly, attendees in the workforce and training breakout session suggested that training programs
need to be more targeted to industry’s workforce needs. On the topic of education, multiple participants
in several workshop sessions discussed the need to collect and disseminate best practices and resources
for teachers. One participant noted that a teacher-friendly nanotechnology education resource portal
was added to nanoHUB.org in early 2016 to address this need.
55 Attendees in several breakout sessions
suggested that user facilities could engage teac hers and students through internships, lab tours, and
virtual experiments. Some participants also advocated for novel K–12 education methods such as game-
based learning and social media.
Individual s peakers and attendees repeatedly highlighted the need fo r an “evergreen” physical
infrastructure that includes developing new tools, maintaining older workhorse tools, and enabling a
workforce to manage the tools. Several participants in multiple breakout sessions felt that the United
States lags in tool development, despite previously being a leader, and attendees advocated for more
support for tool development. Specific needs include multimodal tools, device fabrication (rather than
component fabrication ) capabilities, and field -deployable instruments for nanoEHS studies. As
nanotechnology continues to mature and to move into the marketplace, participants argued that user
facilities can do more to support translation, scale -up, and manufacturing . For example, there is an
opportunity to strengthen ties to Manufacturing USA, facilitate rapid prototyping, and support
manufacturing (e.g., roll -to-roll). User facilities also provide a natural venue for community -forming
activities across disciplines and sectors. Finally, many potential users may not be aware of what facilities
and resources are available; m echanisms to increase awareness and guide users to the available
resources would be beneficial.
Similar to the discussions around fundamental research, the workshop conversations related to Goal 4
reflected a community that is building on the nanoEHS knowledge developed over the 16 years of the
NNI to conduct more complex and realistic studies. Plenary speaker Gregory Lowry noted that the acute
effects of ENMs  are well studied and relatively limited, but that chroni c and accumulated effects may
need more attention. As such, the entire field is moving more toward “realism” in research studies by
looking at, for example, relevant exposure scenarios and chronic exposures, but new tools are needed
to support this transition. Several participants suggested that standardized methods are needed across
toxicity and exposure studies and to characterize EN Ms. These standardized methods are particularly
important for studies in complex matrices such as soils, tissues, and complex aerosol mixtures.

55 nanohub.org/publications/118

Appendix B. Stakeholder Workshop Summary
  53 
There is a growing belief that exposure and hazard are inseparable. The exposure route influences the
nanomaterial’s potential hazard, and in some cases, the hazard can influence the exposure. Thus, system
properties and processes cannot be ignored. However, more information is needed about what happens
to ENMs during consumer use. On the environmental side, scientists understand enough about the
processes and materials to model their behavior, but the models still need to be validated. The
community-renewed focus on exposure science and calls for state -of-the science reports further
underscore the maturation of nanotechnology since the inception of the NNI.
With respect to trends over the next five to ten years, multiple participants at several breakout sessions
mentioned that categorization  of nanomaterials in risk groups will be increasingly important. The
conversation around ris k assessment will also continue to grow more sophisticated. Instead of
evaluating whether an ENM is “safe, ” scientists and policymakers are beginning to evaluate whether a
particular material is safer than its alternatives. Scientists are also starting to look at ways to optimize
the benefit-to-risk ratio by maintaining material functionality and minimizing adverse impacts. Finally,
the workshop conversation moved beyond simply developing and collecting nanoEHS knowledge
toward the use of this knowledge to produce safe r and more sustainable nanomaterials and
technologies. Individual p articipants throughout the workshop emphasized the importance of
communicating and disseminating what is already known, particularly to state and local governments,
product manufacturers, and consumers.

 54 
Appendix C. Abbreviations and Acronyms
ARL Army Research Laboratory (DOD)
ARPA-E Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (DOE)
ARS Agricultural Research Service (USDA)
ATE Advanced Technological Education (NSF)
BIS Bureau of Industry and Security (DOC)
BRAIN Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies
CAI Center for Advancing Innovation
CEINT Center for the Environmental Implications of NanoTechnology
CNST Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology (DOC/NIST)
COR Community of Research
CPSC  Consumer Product Safety Commission
DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DOD)
DHHS  Department of Health and Human Services
DHS  Department of Homeland Security
DOC  Department of Commerce
DOD Department of Defense
DOE  Department of Energy
DOEd  Department of Education
DOI  Department of the Interior
DOIs Digital Object Identifiers
DOJ  Department of Justice
DOL Department of Labor
DOS  Department of State
DOT  Department of Transportation
DOTreas  Department of the Treasury
DTRA Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DOD)
EDA Economic Development Administration (DOC)
EERE Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy (DOE)
EHS environment(al), health, and safety
ELSI ethical, legal, and societal implications
ENM engineered nanomaterial
EPA  Environmental Protection Agency
EU European Union
FDA Food and Drug Administration (DHHS)
FHWA Federal Highway Administration (DOT)
FS Forest Service (USDA)
I-Corps Innovation Corps (NSF)
IC  Intelligence Community
ISO International Organization for Standardization
MGI Materials Genome Initiative
MURI Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative
NACK Network Nanotechnology Applications and Career Knowledge Network
nanoEHS nanotechnology-related environment(al), health, and safety
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NBMC Nano-Bio Manufacturing Consortium
NCI National Cancer Institute
NCL Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory

Appendix C. Abbreviations and Acronyms
  55 
NCN Network for Computational Nanotechnology
NCNR NIST Center for Neutron Research (DOC/NIST)
NEHI Nanotechnology Environmental and Health Implications Working Group (NSET)
NEP nanotechnology-enabled product
NEWT Nanosystems Engineering Research Center on Nanotechnology Enabled Water Treatment
NHLBI National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (DHHS/NIH)
NIBIB National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (DHHS/NIH)
NICE Nanotechnology Innovation and Commercialization Ecosystem Working Group (NSET)
NIEHS National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (DHHS/NIH)
NIFA  National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA)
NIH National Institutes of Health (DHHS)
NIJ National Institute of Justice (DOJ)
NIOSH National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (DHHS)
NISE Network Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network, 2008 to 2015;
National Informal STEM Education Network, 2016 ff.
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology (DOC)
NKI Nanotechnology Knowledge Infrastructure (NSI)
NNCI National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure
NNCO National Nanotechnology Coordination Office
NNI National Nanotechnology Initiative
NNMI National Network for Manufacturing Innovation, renamed Manufacturing USA in October 2016
NRC  Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NSC2 Nanotechnology Startup Challenge in Cancer
NSET Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology Subcommittee (NSTC Committee on Technology)
NSF National Science Foundation
NSI Nanotechnology Signature Initiative
NSRC Nanoscale Science Research Centers (DOE)
NSTC National Science and Technology Council
NTF Nanotechnology Task Force (FDA)
NTRC Nanotechnology Research Center (NIOSH)
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration (DOL)
OSTP Office of Science and Technology Policy (Executive Office of the President)
PCA Program Component Area
PCAST President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
RFI Request for Information
R&D research and development
RET Research Experiences for Teachers
REU Research Experiences for Undergraduates
SBIR Small Business Innovation Research
SC Office of Science (DOE)
STEM science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
STTR Small Business Technology Transfer Research
SUNY State University of New York
SURF Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship
TSCA Toxic Substances Control Act
UC CEIN University of California Center for Environmental Implications of Nanotechnology
USDA  U.S. Department of Agriculture
USGS U.S. Geological Survey (DOI)
USITC  U.S. International Trade Commission
USPTO  U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (DOC)

National Science and Technology Council
Committee on Technology
Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology
http://www.nano.gov
