
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
ADVANCING QUANTUM INFORMATION SCIENCE:
NATIONAL CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A JOINT REPORT OF THE
Committee on Science and
Committee on Homeland and National Security
OF THE NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL

Produced by the
Interagency Working Group on Quantum Information Science
of the Subcommittee on Physical Sciences

July 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

ii
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20502

July 22, 2016

Dear Colleagues:
I am pleased to provide to you this report on Advancing Quantum Information Science: National
Challenges and Opportunities . Recent advances in quantum information science (QIS) have
increased interest and motivated new activity both domestically and internationally, making this
report particularly timely. The document has been produced by an Interagency Working Group
(IWG) on Quantum Information Science under the Subcommittee on Physical Sciences (PSSC) of
the National Science and Technology Council. The report represents a coordinated effort across
the numerous agencies and Executive Office of the President components participating in the IWG
on QIS, and was informed by interactions with industry, academia, and other stakeholders. It is
presented as a joint report of the PSSC’s parent group, the Committee on Science, and of the
parallel Committee on Homeland and National Security.
Quantum information science offers tremendous promise for both qualitative and quantitative
leaps forward in information acquisition, processing, and transmission by exploiting quantum -
mechanical phenomena. The field has seen rapid progress and growi ng attention in recent years,
with ramifications across a broad range of fundamental sciences and for both near-term and long-
term applications. Industry and international commitments signal the early stages of QIS -enabled
devices and capabilities entering the marketplace, and are suggestive of much larger impacts to
come.
Federal agencies in the United States have supported research and development in QIS consistent
with agency missions for many years, and additional activities are planned or have recently been
initiated. This report outlines a cohesive Federal approach going forward with an emphasis on
broad and stable core programs, strategic and opportunistic targeted investments, and close
monitoring and evaluation of Federal activity and of the field a s a whole. Cooperation across
government, academia, and the private sector will be of great value in enhancing the effectiveness
of these efforts. The report highlights the identification of QIS as a priority for Federal coordination
and investment as an i mportant component of U.S. scientific leadership, national security, and
economic competitiveness.

Sincerely,

John P. Holdren
Assistant to the President for Science and Technology
Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

iii
About the National Science and Technology Council
The National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) is the principal means by which the Executive Branch
coordinates science and technology policy across the diverse entities that make up the Federal research
and development (R&D) enterprise. One of the NST C’s primary objectives is establishing clear national
goals for Federal science and technology investments. The NSTC prepares R&D packages aimed at
accomplishing multiple national goals. The NSTC’s work is organized under five committees: Environment,
Natural Resources, and Sustainability; Homeland and National Security; Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) Education; Science; and Technology. Each of these committees oversees
subcommittees and working groups that are focused on different aspects of science and technology. More
information is available at www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/nstc.
About the Committees of the NSTC
The purpose of the Committees is to advise and assist the NSTC, under Executive Order 12881, to increase
strategic impact, overall effectiveness, and productivity of Federal science and technology (S&T) activities.
The Committee on Science (CoS) focuses on Federally supported efforts that develop new knowledge in
the scienc es, mathematics, and engineering (not including those areas primarily related to the
environment and natural resources) , and the Committee on Homeland and N ational Security (CHNS)
covers Federal research and development efforts in areas of S&T related to h omeland and national
security. Both Committees address significant national and international policy, program, and budget
matters that cut across agency boundaries and provide a formal mechanism to promote interagency S&T
policy development, coordination, collaboration, and information exchange.
About the Interagency Working Group on Quantum Information Science
The Interagency Working Group on Quantum Information Science (QIS) was created under the
Subcommittee on Physical Sciences of the NSTC Committee on Science in order to assess Federal
programs in QIS, monitor the state of the field, provide a forum for interagency coordination and
collaboration, and engage in strategic planning of Federal QIS activities and investments.
About the Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) was established by the National Science and
Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976. OSTP’s responsibilities include advising the
President in policy formulation and b udget development on questions in which science and technology
are important elements; articulating the President’s science and technology policy and programs; and
fostering strong partnerships among Federal, state, and local governments, and the scientifi c
communities in industry and academia. The Director of OSTP also serves as Assistant to the President for
Science and Technology and manages the NSTC. More information is available at
www.whitehouse.gov/ostp.
Copyright Information
This document is a work of the United States Government and is in the public domain (see 17 U.S.C. §105).
Subject to the stipulations below, it may be distributed and copied with acknowledgement to OSTP.
Copyrights to graphics inc luded in this document are reserved by the original copyright holders or their
assignees and are used here under the government’s license and by permission. Requests to use any
images must be made to the provider identified in the image credits or to OSTP if no provider is identified.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

iv
Report prepared by
NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
COMMITTEES ON SCIENCE (CoS) AND HOMELAND AND NATIONAL SECURITY (CHNS)
SUBCOMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES (OF CoS)
INTERAGENCY WORKING GROUP ON QUANTUM INFORMATION SCIENCE
National Science and Technology Council
Chair
John P. Holdren
Assistant to the President for Science
and Technology and Director,
Office of Science and Technology Policy
Staff
Afua Bruce
Executive Director
Committee on Science
Chairs
Francis Collins
Director
National Institutes of Health
France Cordova
Director
National Science Foundation

Jo Handelsman
Associate Director for Science
Office of Science and Technology Policy
Staff
Sarah Mazur
Executive Secretary
Environmental Protection Agency
Committee on Homeland and National Security
Chairs
Reginald Brothers
Under Secretary for Science and Technology
Department of Homeland Security
Steve Fetter
Principal Assistant Director for National Security
& International Affairs
Office of Science and Technology Policy
Steve Welby
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research &
Engineering
Department of Defense

Staff
Tod Companion
Executive Secretary
Department of Homeland Security

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

v
Subcommittee on Physical Sciences (of CoS)
Chairs
Altaf H. Carim
Assistant Director for Research Infrastructure
Office of Science and Technology Policy
F. Fleming Crim
Assistant Director for Mathematics
and Physical Sciences
National Science Foundation
Patricia Dehmer
Deputy Director for Science Programs
Office of Science
Department of Energy

Ellen Stofan
Chief Scientist
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Staff
Sara Dwyer
Executive Secretary
National Science Foundation
Interagency Working Group on Quantum Information Science
Chairs
J. Steve Binkley
Associate Director, Advanced Scientific
Computing Research
Office of Science
Department of Energy
C. Denise Caldwell
Director, Physics Division
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate
National Science Foundation
Carl Williams
Deputy Director, Physical Measurement
Laboratory
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Department of Commerce
Staff
Claire Cramer
Executive Secretary
Office of Science
Department of Energy
Members
Avital Bar Shalom Office of Management and Budget
Altaf Carim Office of Science and Technology Policy
Lali Chatterjee Department of Energy – Office of Science, High Energy Physics
Tatjana Curcic Department of Defense – Air Force Office of Scientific Research
Dominique Dagenais National Science Foundation – Division of Electrical, Communications &
Cyber Systems
Mahmoud Fallahi National Science Foundation – Division of Electrical, Communications &
Cyber Systems
TR Govindan Department of Defense – Army Research Office
Mark Heiligman Office of the Director of National Intelligence – Intelligence Advanced
Research Projects Activity
Stephen Jordan Department of Commerce – National Institute of Standards and
Technology
Marvin Kruger Department of Defense
Joydip Kundu Office of Management and Budget
Dimitri Kusnezov Department of Energy – National Nuclear Security Administration

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

vi
Dmitry Maslov National Science Foundation – Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations
David Moehring Office of the Director of National Intelligence – Intelligence Advanced
Research Projects Activity
William T. Polk Office of Science and Technology Policy
Robin Staffin Department of Defense – Office of the Secretary of Defense
Richard T. Willis Department of Defense – Office of Naval Research

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

vii
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 1
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 2
QIS and Technology ...................................................................................................................................... 4
Sensing and Metrology ............................................................................................................................. 4
Communication ......................................................................................................................................... 4
Simulation ................................................................................................................................................. 5
Computing ................................................................................................................................................. 6
QIS and Fundamental Science....................................................................................................................... 7
Addressing Impediments to Progress ........................................................................................................... 8
Institutional Boundaries ............................................................................................................................ 8
Education and Workforce Training ........................................................................................................... 8
Technology and Knowledge Transfer ........................................................................................................ 8
Materials and Fabrication ......................................................................................................................... 9
Level and Stability of Funding ................................................................................................................... 9
Government Investment in QIS .................................................................................................................. 10
DOD ......................................................................................................................................................... 10
DOE ......................................................................................................................................................... 11
IARPA ....................................................................................................................................................... 11
NIST ......................................................................................................................................................... 11
NSF .......................................................................................................................................................... 12
The Broader Context ................................................................................................................................... 13
The Path Forward ........................................................................................................................................ 13
References .................................................................................................................................................. 15

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Advancing Quantum Information Science: National Challenges and Opportunities

1
Executive Summary
Quantum information science (QIS) builds on uniquely quantum phenomena such as superposition,
entanglement, and squeezing to obtain and process information in ways that cannot be achieved based
on classical behavior. It is thus a foundational science. Its currently envisioned applications include sensing
and metrology, communications, simulation, and high-performance computing, and it has the potential
to enable significant scientific advances in physics, chemistry, biology, and materials science, among other
domains. This report provides a brief description of the field, summarizes developments and potential
impacts in various fields of technology and realms of basic research, identifies impediments to progress
and potential approaches to addressing them, surveys Federal investments, and discusses the Federal
path forward in the context of international and private-sector activity.
While recent progress in QIS has been substantial, a number of challenges remain. These include stability
and continuity of funding, institutional and disciplinary boundaries, education and workforce training
needs, knowledge transfer and interfaces with industry, and materials and fabrication. Federal activity
includes long-standing and continuing programs at some agencies as well as newer efforts that are in the
process of being implemented or are proposed. Federal efforts will provide new capabilities and will
complement the activity and attention in academia and the private sector to begin address ing the
identified impediments to progress.
Rapid technical advances and growing international interest and investments in quantum-enabled science
and technology have marked the past few years. The interdisciplinary nature of the field, the reliance on
complex, sophisti cated, and precise physical arrangements in order to observe and utilize quantum
behavior, and the potential for substantial economic consequences merit special attention. A coherent,
all-of-government approach will facilitate advancement of QI S. This approach includes stable and
sustained core programs, focused strategic investments in targets of opportunity , and continued close
monitoring and evaluation of the field and of Federal and non -Federal activity. This report recommends
that quantum information science be considered a priority for Federal coordination and investment, with
particular attention to find ing and implementing mechanisms to address identified impediments to the
field.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
2
Introduction
In 1994, Peter Shor, a computer scientist at AT&T Labs, made a landmark discovery that transformed the
nascent field of Quantum Information Science (QIS). Shor’s breakthrough (Shor 1994) was an efficient
algorithm for factoring large numbers using a quantum computer —a computer that exploits quantum
mechanical phenomena to perform calculations that can greatly exceed the capabilities of conventional
digital electronics. The first logic operations performed on qubits—the quantum analog to the digital bits
used to store information in today’s computers—were demonstrated in the laboratory shortly thereafter
(Monroe 1995). Subsequent developments in a
variety of scientific and technolo gical fields have
similarly opened up new vistas in sensing,
metrology, communication, and simulation.
At the time of Shor’s discovery, scientists had long
been aware that quantum mechanics describes
nature in a manner that transcends conventional
logic and runs counter to intuition, but the
technological possibilities were not easy to
foresee. While it might not have been surprising
that “classical” digital logic has limitations, it did
come as a surpri se that rewriting the rules of
digital logic to include inherently quantum
mechanical phenomena would allow
computations far beyond those previously
imagined. It is now understood t hat these
counterintuitive quantum phenomena can be
harnessed to build more powerful computers,
manufacture more accurate sensors and
detectors, make laboratory measurements with
greater precision , and realize practical
technologies relevant to both commerce and
defense. QIS is far more than a new approach to
computing or a collection of technological
applications: it is a scientific paradigm in its own right.
QIS arises from the synthesis of two of the most powerful intellectual constructs of the 20 th century:
quantum theory and information theory. Quantum theory is a probabilistic description of energy and
matter that accurately accounts for physical phenomena that are not well -explained by purely
deterministic descriptions. Such quantum phenomena include the photoelectric effect, for which Einstein
won the Nobel Prize in 1921, and the selective absorption of light by atoms that forms the basis for today’s
atomic clocks. Information theory characterizes information in terms of entropy, which forms the basis of
modern digital communication through substantially more efficient encoding, error correction, and use
of transmission capacity than prior techniques. Individually, these theories profoundly transformed
civilization by enabling the development of technologies such as lasers and microelectronics that
permeate modern life and by fundamentally changing the way modern society thinks about physics and
information. Their synthesis in QIS has similar potential to produce revolutionary new technologies and
further transform understanding of the world.

Why is QIS Different?
Current and future QIS applications differ from earlier
applications of quantum mechanics such as the
laser by exploiting the quantum properties of
superposition, entanglement, and squeezing to
acquire, process, and transmit information in ways
that greatly exceed existing capabilities. Quantum
systems, including single particles, are described by
a set of variables that can take on a prescribed
range of values. Until the value of each variable is
measured, the system is in a superposition state that
includes all possible measurement outcomes with
some probability. An entangled state is a
superposition of the states of multiple particles in
which the properties of each particle are correlated
with the properties of the other particles, even if the
particles are separated by a large distance.
Squeezing is a method of manipulating noise in
quantum systems that obey the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. The uncertainty principle
places a lower limit on the combined uncertainty in
two related variables, but does not specify how the
uncertainty is distributed between them. A squeezed
state has the minimum allowed total uncertainty, but
allows much more precise determination of one
variable relative to the other.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
3
QIS is currently at an inflection point, creating opportunities and challenges for the Nation. One measure,
simplistic but telling , is the steady —and steep —increase in publications related to quantum
communication, computing, and information; a plot of these publications over the past 15 years is shown
in Figure 1. The pace of basic and applied research as well as development and demonstration is increasing
and is likely to continue to accelerate in the near -term future. At the same time, advancing the field still
requires deep scientific expertise and technical specialization that are not easily transferred to the U.S.
high-tech economy. The QIS research comm unity, dominated by academics and a handful of research
groups in government and industry, will be hard pressed to meet these demands. Furthermore, a global
race is developing. National governments and private companies are stepping up their investments in
recognition of the potential implications of a QIS -based technological revolution. Numerous workshops
over more than a decade, sponsored by Federal agencies or organizations supported by Federal agencies,
have drawn increasing attention to the value and i mportance of QIS. A continued robust research and
development ecosystem for QIS in the United States is necessary so that the U.S. research community,
industry, and government agencies are engaged and poised to take advantage of technological
breakthroughs when they occur. Strengthening this ecosystem will enhance U.S. national security, bolster
U.S. economic competitiveness, and extend U.S. leadership in scientific discovery.
Fifteen Years of Growth in QIS

Figure 1. A Google Scholar search for publications (excluding patents and citations) containing the terms
“quantum information,” ”quantum computing,” and “quantum communication” illustrates how the field has
grown in recent years.
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000Number of Papers per Year
QIS-related publications, 2000-2015
information
computing
communication

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
4
QIS and Technology
QIS is expected to open entirely new vistas of technological development. The greatest impacts are likely
to be felt first in sensing and metrology, next in communication and simulation, and finally in computing.
Sensing and Metrology
QIS is already pushing the boundaries of sensing and metrology. The atom interferometers that are useful
for inertial navigation, described in the accompanying box, can also be adapted for use as gravimeters,
with applications ranging from Earth system monitoring to pinpointing the location of subterranean
mineral deposits. Magnetometers based on point defects in diamond can operate in close proximity to
the human body and also in extreme environments relevant to military and industrial applications. QIS -
based timekeeping devices such as the quant um logic clock (Chou 2010) at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) are among the most precise in the world. Photon sources and single
photon detection techniques being developed for longer -term applications such as quantum
communication will, in the near term, improve the calibration of light -sensitive detectors (Levine 2015)
and enable detection of trace elements in low-absorption and quantity-limited samples. With continued
investment and effective coordination between the research co mmunity and industry, a broad range of
QIS-enhanced sensors could be available in the U.S. marketplace within 5 years, with still more under
development.
Communication
Quantum communication, the ability to transmit information encoded in quantum states of light or
matter, is a challenging technical problem because the information stored in quantum states is irrevocably
altered when the quantum system is disturbed. This has the advantage that eavesdroppers are easily
detected, leading to quantum -secure methods of communication, and the disadvantage that signa ls
cannot be replicated or amplified. Quantum -secure communication is currently an active area of
development. Quantum key distribution, a secure method for generating an encryption key between
distributed partners which may have useful applications in net works, has received recent industry
attention in both the United States and abroad . Other applications that may see near -term
QIS for Navigation
The GPS networks that many ships and
aircraft depend on for precise
navigation can be jammed or
physically attacked. In the absence of
GPS, these vessels rely on inertial
navigation systems that measure
acceleration and rotation. Cold atoms
traveling in opposite directions around
a loop form wavelike interference
patterns that are exqui sitely sensitive
to rotation. By replacing the less -
accurate gyroscopes currently used
to measure rotation with QIS -based
atomic sensors (e.g., Durfee 2006) , it
will be possible to navigate accurately
without GPS for at least 100 times
longer.

Figure 2. In the above schematic of an atomic rotation sensor, lasers
are used to place atoms in a superposition state and send them in
opposite directions around a loop. If the sensor is rotating about an
axis perpendicular to the loop, the atoms on each path will interfere
with one another when the cloud recombines. (Credit: Willis/ONR)

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
5
implementation, including unforgeable virtual money and quantum fingerprinting techniques to
determine whether two remote pieces of data (such as financial records) are identical, demonstrate the
potential for quantum communication to affect commerce. In the longer term, quantum networks will
connect distributed quantum sensors, for example for global seismic monitoring, and allow qu antum
information to flow coherently between the internal components of the quantum simulators and
computational devices discussed below. Solutions that build on current experimental work to develop
reliable photon sources and technology to allow long -distance transmission of quantum information as
well as ongoing theoretical work on protocols for sharing data, for example between quantum processors,
could, with consistent attention and support, appear within 5 to 10 years.
Simulation
Quantum simulators use readily-manipulated quantum systems to investigate the properties of other
quantum systems that are difficult to study directly, such as complex materials. Materials calculations are
the second -largest use of the Department of Energy’s ( DOE’s) National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center (NERSC), one of the primary supercomputing facilities available to the U.S. research
community. Quantum simulators have the potential to produce efficient solutions to these problems and
others in computational science that are limited by the inherent capabilities of traditional high
performance computers. Prototype quantum simulators based on several different technologies have
already been demonstrated in the laboratory: m agnetic materials have been simulated u sing arrays of
trapped ions (Monroe 2015) and the dynamics of simple chemical reactions have been simulated using
both cold atoms (Torrontegui 2012) and quantum dots (Smirnov 2007). In the long term, quantum
simulation may allow us to understand the proper ties of extraordinary materials such as high -
temperature superconductors, predict interactions of complex molecules, and allow models of nuclear
and particle physics to be explored in previously inaccessible regimes . Quantum simulation has not yet
tackled problems that are intractable with conventional computers; however, there appears to be an
opportunity to implement selected applications that would otherwise not be achievable in areas such as
chemistry, materials science, and physics within a decade.
QIS for Magnetometry

The ability to measure small magnetic fields with
high spatial resolution has wide -ranging
applications in biology and medicine. Diamond
crystals doped with nitrogen (NV diamond) have
point defects (nitrogen-vacancy, or NV, centers)
that are sensitive to magnetic fields and confined
to a space approximately the size of a single
atom within the diamond crystal structure.
Microscopic NV diamond crystals can be
brought extremely close to biological samples
without causing damag e. Using QIS techniques
to extract information from the NV centers, it is
possible at room temperature to map the
position of magnetic molecules in living cells
(LeSage 2013) and detect tumor cells in blood
(Glenn 2015). It may even one day be possible
to detect the action of individual neurons
(Childress 2014, Hall 2012).

Figure 3. Quantum defects in diamond provide a non-invasive,
high-resolution image (right) of the magnetic field produced by
a single tumor cell immersed in a sample of human blood.
Conventional optical imaging (left) cannot detect the tumor
cell because the blood s catters and absorbs light. Magnetic
fields pass unaffected through the blood, allowing the
magnetically sensitive quantum defects to detect the tumor
cell. (Image credit: Walsworth Group/Harvard)
100 µm
+5 (µT)
−5
0
optical image
 NV diamond
image

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
6
Computing
Quantum computers process information stored in qubits, which are each individually in superposition
states and are entangled with one another. The unique quantum properties of the qubits allow a quantum
computer to perform certain computations much faster, in some cases exponentially faster, than is
possible using conventional computers. The most striking example is Shor’s algorithm for integer
factorization, discussed above, which demonstrates the power of quantum computers to solve problems
of practical significance. Exponential quantum speedups have been discovered for problems in chemistry
and materials science (Brown 2010 , Hastings 2015 ), and particle physics (Jordan 2012) ; quantum
computation may eventually revolutionize these and other scientific fields. Quantum algorithms offering
more modest spe edups have been discovered for searching and related tasks (Grover 1996, Reichart
2012), whose applications are ubiquitous. More speculative research has raised the possibility of quantum
speedups for a wide variety of problems related to optimization and scientific computing, such as machine
learning, software verification and validation, and radar scattering calculations (Aaronson 2015, Clader
2013, Pudenz 2012). Quantum computing hardware is currently at the laboratory prototype stage and is
progressing steadily; one commercial entity has made a 5-qubit processor available to the research
community over the internet. While further substantial scale-up will be needed to test algorithms such as
Shor’s, systems with tens of entangled qubits that may be of interest for early-stage research in quantum
computer science will likely be available within 5 years. Developing a universal quantum computer is a
long-term challenge that will build on technology developed for quantum simulation and communication.
Deriving the full benefit from quantum computers will also require continued work on algorithms,
programming languages, and compilers. The ultimate capabilities and limitations of quantum computers
are not fully understood, and remain an active area of research.
Ion Traps as Tools for QIS

Figure 4. Trapped ions are one of several promising technologies for QIS applications. The chip shown on the left,
manufactured by Sandia National Laboratories, can trap a string of ions just above the chip’s surface. Quantum
information can be stored and processed by manipulating the ions with lasers and microwave radiation. Similar chips
could one day form the backbone of a quantum computer. The NIST Quantum Logic Clock, shown on the right, is a
laboratory-scale experiment that uses an entangled helper ion to increase the accuracy and stability of an atomic
clock based on a trapped aluminum ion. Superconducting circuits, quantum defects in materials, quantum dots, and
topological materials also hold promise for QIS applications. (Photo credit: JQI, Burrus/NIST)

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
7
QIS and Fundamental Science
Even as technical applications are developed and commercialized, QIS remains a rich area of scientific
inquiry, simultaneously providing greater insight into the natural world and the nature of information
itself. In recent years, quantum information science has seen increasingly widespread use in other areas
of science, both experimental and theoretical. High-precision measurements enabled by control of
quantum systems such as individual atoms, molecules, and NV centers have been used in biology to
probe the interiors of cells (Kucsko 2013) and in physics to test fundamental symmetries (ACME 2014)
and search for dark matter (van Bibber 2013). The tensor networks developed to compactly express
quantum states by exploiting their entanglement structure have yielded powerful new computational
methods for simulating materials (Sachdev 2009) and have led to progress on longstanding problems in
theoretical condensed matter physics such as the classification of phases of matter. Quantum
information concepts such as entanglement, error correction, and circuit complexity have been applied
to central problems of quantum gravity such as understanding the emergence of spacetime (Pastawski
2015) and the interiors of black holes (Harlow 2013). Mathematical techniques from quantum
information have also increasingly been used to solve problems in many areas of classical computer
science, including algorithms, cryptography, and the design of error-correcting codes (Drucker 2011).
There are also hints that QIS concepts may be relevant to seemingly more distant physical systems such
as photosynthesis, phonon-mediated receptors in the nose and brain, and the navigation systems of
migratory birds (Lambert 2012).

Bell Tests: From Philosophy to Quality Assurance
Entanglement was at the heart of a
philosophical conundrum as quantum
theory was initially developed: how can it
be true that the properties of two
entangled particles are correlated if the
particles’ properties are indeterminate
and can only be specified as probabilities
until a measurement is made on one or
both of them? In 1935, Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen postulated that it could be
possible to describe the properties of
entangled particles with “hidden
variables” that would only be accessible
to an observer by making a measurement
(Einstein 1935). In 1964, John Bell showed
that it is possible to determine
experimentally whether hidden variables
exist or whether the properties of
entangled particles are truly
undetermined until a measurement is
performed (Bell 1964). Within the last year,
three loophole-free “Bell test” experiments have definitively ruled out hidden variables (Giustina 2015,
Hensen 2015, Shalm 2015). Bell tests have implications for QIS applications well beyond philosophy. For
example, Bell tests form the basis for device-independent secure cryptographic protocols such as the
production and distribution of cryptographic keys (Pironio 2010). And, because Bell tests directly measure
entanglement, they serve as a verification tool for laboratory hardware and engineered devices.
Figure 5. Physicist Krister Shalm with the photon source used in
NIST’s 2015 Bell test that strongly supports the existence of
quantum entanglement. (Photo Credit: Burrus/NIST)

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
8
Addressing Impediments to Progress
As the Interagency Working Group surveyed the state of the field, it became apparent that despite the
considerable advances in recent years, there is great potential for enhancing the rate of progress in QIS
by addressing the issues described b elow. Federal agencies are already working to address these
impediments, and plan to implement solutions as their QIS programs evolve and grow. A cooperat ive
effort between government, academia, and the private sector to find and implement solutions will be
even more effective than Federal efforts alone in overcoming impediments and reaping the benefits QIS
has to offer.
Institutional Boundaries
Much of the research in QIS has been conduc ted within existing institutional boundaries. For example,
individual Divisions of the National Science Foundation ( NSF) have funded QIS -related research in
individual university departments. The next critical steps in QI S R&D will require increased collaboration
across these boundaries. Teams with a diverse range of skills will be needed in order to, for example,
translate a proof-of-principle source of entangled photons on an optical table in a physics laboratory to a
robust, scalable platform that can be incorporated into a real -life quantum network. Federal programs
that fund diverse teams , such as those described in the following section of this report, have already
proven to be effective in accelerating the pace of QIS research. Similarly, university -based centers and
institutes that facilitate faculty collaboration across departmental boundaries have been remarkably
productive. Several universities that can be considered leaders in QIS have taken the initiative to f orm
their own centers and institutes. Others have partnered with private foundations or the government.
Continued efforts to surmount barriers within institutions and encourage research collaborations that
bring together diverse skills and expertise are likely to translate directly into accelerated progress in QIS.
Education and Workforce Training
Both academic scientists and industry representatives identify discipline-specific education as insufficient
for continued progress in QIS. At this stage in the f ield’s evolution, a deep understanding of quantum
mechanics is required to move forward with both basic research and technical applications. Quantum
mechanics is rarely taught in depth outside of physics departments, which could explain why the physics
community has embraced QIS to a greater degree than, for example, computer scientists or applied
mathematicians. However, QIS is not purely physics. C omputer science a nd applied mathematics are
essential to many of the areas outlined above. Electrical enginee ring and s ystems engineering are also
critical, and process engineering will become more important as QIS technology is deployed on a larger
scale. In general, QIS R&D requires and will continue to require a diverse range of skills and expertise that
varies from one application to another. Some universities, led by the efforts of forward -thinking
researchers, are already designing undergraduate and introductory graduate level courses for students in
engineering and other disciplines outside of physics that incorporate QIS topics. The university-based QIS
centers mentioned above also provide students with the opportunity to develop a skill set suited to QIS
R&D. As QIS progresses and grows, lessons learned from these early efforts to support QIS education and
workforce training can be applied to meet future needs.
Technology and Knowledge Transfer
As QIS applications mature from laboratory prototypes into potentially marketable technology,
knowledge must be transferred from universities and national labor atories to an appropriately skilled
private-sector workforce. Industry representatives have identified existing Federal programs such as the
Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) grants and NSF’s

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
9
Grants Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program as valuable, but these programs
do not address many of the challenges industry faces in bringing QIS applications to market. One of the
key challenges is the lack of a consistent framework to support R&D that develops a laboratory prototype
into a final marketable product. Another challenge involves licensing of intellectual property (IP) from
universities; much of this IP is pre -competitive because QIS is not yet a mature field, but is being valued
similarly to developed, more marketable technologies. A third is connecting capable and qualified
graduates with companies in need of their specialized skills. Small companies, in particular, often lack the
resources to recruit widely or support interns. These challenges are common to many areas of research
and development, but are particularly acute in emerging and rapidly -developing fields such as QIS. The
Federal government has been actively focused on improving technology transfer1 and strengthening the
STEM workforce.2 At the same time, universities can take the initiative to prepare students for the full
range of possible career options and facilitate translating the world-class research performed on campus
into high-impact technology that will benefit society.
Materials and Fabrication
Much of the effort to develop practical QIS applications depends on the availability of materials with the
appropriate quantum properties and the ability to package hardware that may currently fill several large
laboratory tables into a functionally equivalent form that can be manufactured and built into usable
devices. Progress in certain areas of QIS is already limited by the availability of fabrication capabilities for
quantum materials, including the NV diamond crysta ls mentioned above. Design, integration, and fabri-
cation of new devices for QIS applications are engineering challenges that will require capabilities beyond
those readily available. Providing the research community with greater access to Federal facilities that
allow exploration of new materials and device concepts will enhance progress in basic and applied QIS
research. Development and deployment of QIS applications will be contingent on reliable production of
novel quantum materials. Fundamental improvements in fabrication tools and techniques will be required
to produce these new materials and the QIS devices that incorporate them at scale. The manufacturing
and systems-level engineering challenges associated with quantum device produ ction are not yet fully
understood but will become increasingl y important as the field develops and demand for such devices
increases.
Level and Stability of Funding
QIS has historically suffered from an overall instability of U.S. research funding that has negatively
impacted both the pace of technical progress and development of a QIS workforce in the United States.
Much of the instability can be traced to insufficient coordination among Federal agencies: as individual
agency programs either grew or terminated, the overall level of Federal QIS research funding fluctuated
greatly. Fluctuations in Federal and other U.S. funding led to discontinuities in university-based research
programs and contributed to promising young as well as senior researchers choosing to pursue alternate
careers or look for opportunities outside the United States. Coordinating Federal QIS programs to
maintain a smooth funding profile with an overall level sufficient to support progress will enhance the
value of these Federal investments and attract talent to the field. Coordination is one of the objectives of
the current Interagency Working Group in QIS.

1 https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/10/28/presidential-memorandum-accelerating-technology-transfer-and-
commerciali
2 https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/stem_stratplan_2013.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
10
Government Investment in QIS
Federal agencies have supported research in QIS and related areas since the field emerged over 20 years
ago. This support has played a significant part in enabling U.S. scientists to establish their present leading
roles in the field. Federally-funded basic and applied research in QIS is currently on the order of $ 200
million a year. The Department of Defense (DOD) services and Office of the Secretary of Defense, NIST,
and NSF have provided basic research support for QIS, while the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) and the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) have funded a series of
targeted, limited-term programs. In FY 2017, DOE plans to initiate activity and support new programs in
QIS research relevant to the DOE mission. Agency programs are structured to take advantage of scientific
and technical opportunities as well as to begin to address the impediments listed above.
DOD
DOD’s basic research agencies in the
individual services —the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (AFOSR), the Army
Research Office (ARO), and the Office of Naval
Research (ONR)—as well as the Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD) actively support
basic and applied research in QIS and related
technology with a focus on national security
applications such as precision navigation,
precision timing, and secure quantum
networks. OSD has made 12 Multidisciplinary
University Research Initiative (MURI) awards
for QIS-related topics from FY 2011 through FY
2015. These awards provide a higher level o f
support for a longer period of time than many
other government-funded programs, and
have been lauded by the research community
as a support mechanism that is well-suited to
complex, team-based QIS projects. Starting in
FY 2016, OSD is supporting a Tri -Service
Quantum Science and Engineering Program
(QSEP) that will exploit expertise at the Joint
Service laboratories to prototype a scalable
quantum network, develop and entangle practical quantum memories, and demonstrate a high-sensitivity
sensor application across the network. The Army, Air Force, and Naval Research Laboratories also support
their own programs related to QIS. Notably, the Army Research Laboratory (ARL) began in FY 2015 a five-
year collaborative basic research effort connecting ARL, academi c, industrial, and other government
researchers to develop a multi-site, multi-node, modular quantum network with the long-term objective
of identifying and providing beyond-classical capabilities for DOD mission needs. The service agencies also
support other efforts such as those of the Laboratory for Physical Sciences (LPS), which collaborates with
ARO in the sponsorship and administration of numerous academic quantum computing research projects
around the world. LPS is a unique facility at the University of Maryland where university and Federal
government personnel collaborate on research in advanced communication and computer technologies,
including quantum computing.
QIS and the NSCI
In addition to having strong connections to other
related science and technology initiatives, including
the National Nanotechnology Initiative and the
Materials Genome Initiative, QIS will play a key role in
the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI).
Established by Executive Order 13702 in 2015, the NSCI
aims to sustain U.S. leadership in high performance
computing (HPC). A key NSCI strategic objective is to
establish, over the next 15 years, a viable path forward
for future HPC systems. The NSCI pursues this objective
through two concurrent paths: technologies that
accelerate traditional digital computing after the limits
of current semiconductor techn ologies are reached;
and new computing paradigms to address problems
beyond the scope of traditional high performance
computing. Promising options on both paths depend
heavily on QIS. Understanding and controlling
quantum effects will be critical to furthe r miniatur -
ization of charge-based complementary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) devices , and to refining
alternatives for digital computing such as spin -based
CMOS or superconducting computing. Basic and
applied QIS R&D is also needed to clarify the range of
computational problems a potential quantum
computer could address, and to resolve the many
challenges to fielding a practical quantum computer.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
11
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA) has funded and continues to fun d programs
that target different areas in QIS. The Quantum Assisted Sensing and Readout (QuASAR) program seeks
to develop sensors that operate near and bel ow the standard quantum limit; the Quiness program is
exploring a variety of approaches to im proving quantum communications; the Optical Lattice Emulator
(OLE) program aimed to simulate the properties of quant um materials in atomic systems; and the
Quantum Entanglement Science and Technology (QuEST) program sought innovative approaches to
overcome outstanding challenges in QIS. The recently launched Fundamental Limits of Photon Detection
(Detect) program aims to develop innovative approaches enabling revolutionary advances in the modeling
and fabrication of photon detectors which could have applications across the QIS field.
DOE
Over the past decade, individual DOE laboratories funded by the Office of Science and the National
Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) have taken the initiative to develop expertise in specific areas of
QIS, recognizing the increasing relevance of the field to their work to support DOE’s mission. Starting i n
FY 2017, DOE will support a core program of research to explore the applicability of quantum simulation
and computing to scientific questions of interest to DOE. Initially, these efforts will focus on implementing
testbeds for use by the research community to explore quantum computations, research in underpinning
applied mathematics and computer science , and algorithm development for applications in Office of
Science program ar eas, including Basic Energy Sciences and High Energy Physics . In addition, DOE is
working with the scientific community to explore QIS -based approaches to improve quantum materials
and structure synthesis, fabrication, characterization, and theory for tech nologies in physical science
experiments conducted in DOE facilities. A workshop on Basic Research Needs in Quantum Materials for
Energy Relevant Technology was conducted in February 2016; the report of this workshop is expected to
be released in the summer of 2016.
IARPA
IARPA has recently funded and plans to continue funding programs that target specific advances in
quantum computing over the next several years. The Logical Qubits Program 3 seeks to overcome the
limitations of current multi-qubit systems by building a logical qubit from a number of imperfect physical
qubits and the Quantum Enhanced Optimization Program4 seeks to harness quantum effects required to
enhance quantum annealing solutions to hard combinatorial optimization problems. IARPA has continued
interest in funding research on new computational methods, including algorithms, based on quantum
systems whose attributes are matched to an efficient or secure solution of intelligence problems.
NIST
NIST’s work in QIS, which began over 20 years ago, grew to its present level through a series of initiatives
extending back to 2005. NIST was the first to demonstrate a two-qubit gate (Monroe 1995), has developed
some of the world’s most sensitive single photon detectors ( Marsili 2013 ), and has exploited
entanglement to make a quantum logic clock (Chou 2010). The current NIST program focuses on
metrology in support of quantum communications, quantum computation, and quantum -based
measurements. In FY 2016, NIST is supplementing existing resources with new funds to support a thrust
in Quantum Based Sensors and Measurements that directly supports Federal efforts in QIS. In FY 2017,

3 http://www.iarpa.gov/index.php/research-programs/logiq
4 http://www.iarpa.gov/index.php/research-programs/qeo

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
12
NIST plans to increase support for research in quantum computing as part of a larger effort to fulfill NIST’s
role in the National Strategic Computing Initiative. NIST also supports two joint centers in QIS research at
the University of Maryland (UMD). The Joint Quantum Institute5 (JQI) was established in 2006 through a
cooperative effort of NIST, UMD, and the Laboratory for Physical Sciences 6 to serve as a world -class
research institute through the interchange of ideas among atomic physics, condensed matter, and
quantum informatio n scientists. In 2014, the Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer
Science7 (QuICS) was established by NIST and UMD as a complement to JQI, with a focus on how quantum
systems can be used to store, transmit, and process information and including strong participation from
computer scientists . Qu ICS and JQI are colocated and interact strongly to train scientists for future
industrial and academic opportunities in QIS in addition to performing cutting-edge research.
NSF
The NSF has funded decades of basic research in the physical sciences, mathematics, computer science,
and engineering that supports the foundations of QIS. In addition, NSF’s Physics Division has for over a
decade had a program in “Quantum Information Science and Revolutionary Computin g”8 specifically
dedicated to QIS. NSF also funds two QIS-related Physics Frontier Centers . The Institute for Quantum
Information and Matter at Caltech 9 has been focused on quantum information, quantum matter,
quantum optics, and quantum mechanical systems since 2011, and the Physics Frontier Center at the JQI10
has been exploring various means of controlling and processing quantum coherence and entanglement
since 2008. The productivity11 of both these centers and the JQI itself demonstrates how progress can be
enhanced by bringing together diverse teams and allowing students and early -career researchers to
pursue a path defined by research questions rather than institutional boundaries. In recent years, NSF has
seen an increasing number of high -quality QIS pr oposals submitted across the Foundation. NSF has
responded by creating new programs and adapting existing programs to better meet the needs of the QIS
research community. In FY 2016, NSF’s Engineering Directorate selected “Advancing Communication
Quantum Information Research in Engineering”12 as a new topic for its Emerging Frontiers in Research
and Innovation program, which funds multidisciplinary teams at a higher level than a standard award to
pursue paradigm-shifting research. QIS has been added to the l ist of suggested topical areas 13 for NSF’s
SBIR/STTR program, and NSF’s Physics Division selected QIS as one of two topics for a special FY 2016
program to promote a collaborative approach and provide workforce training at the postdoctoral level
through Focused Research Hubs in Theoretical Physics.14 To further address the challenges associated with
funding research that spans boundaries across Divisions and Directorates, NSF has just announced a new
metaprogram to begin in FY 2017, "Connections in Quantum In formation Science".15 The metaprogram
will be organized by NSF’s Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS), Engineering (ENG),

5 http://jqi.umd.edu/
6 http://www.lps.umd.edu/
7 http://quics.umd.edu/
8 http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=505207
9 http://iqim.caltech.edu/
10 http://jqi.umd.edu/pfc
11 http://iqim.caltech.edu/research/publications/, http://jqi.umd.edu/research/publications
12 http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=13708
13 http://www.nsf.gov/eng/iip/sbir/topics/IT.jsp
14 http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2016/nsf16501/nsf16501.htm
15 http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=505283&org=DMR&from_org=NSF

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
13
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) to foster QIS research at the intersection
of these three disciplines.
The Broader Context
QIS is an increasingly international field. In just the last two years, several nations have announced new
programs with significant QIS components that will supplement existing R&D investments. For example,
the United Kingdom committed16 in 2014 to a five-year quantum technologies program that includes four
new hubs in speci fic technological areas and announced 17 in 2016 a related effort to train a skilled
quantum technology workforce. In 2015, the Netherlands embarked upon a ten-year effort to accelerate
the development of quantum computing at the Delft University of Technology’s quantum technology
institute. In addition, the European Commission has announced plans to launch a new ten-year flagship
project in quantum technologies, beginning in 2018.18 With the increase in activity abroad, international
collaboration is becoming more common and researchers are crossing borders to pursue the most exciting
scientific questions.
The level of private sector investment in QIS is also increasing. Several large U.S. companies, as well as a
number of startups, have new investments in QIS projects that include the development of quantum
computers and the software required to use them. Some of these companies are providing support to
academic research groups both in the United States and abroad. At the same time, a growing number of
small companies are focused on bringing specific quantum devices, such as the navigation sensors
described above, to market. Building and strengthening connections be tween the QIS research
community and U.S. industry will be increasingly important as QIS applications mature and competition
ramps up in the worldwide marketplace.
The Path Forward
The significant advances in QIS over the past 5 years are a direct result of the long history of Federal
investment in this area . Recognizing the strategic importance of emerging QIS applications and the rich
ground for scientific inquiry, Federal agencies are placing a higher priority on QIS than in the past, adapting
existing programs to address identified impediments to progress and developing new programs to build
upon and complement existing ones. Agencies are also exploring possibilities for bringing government,
academia, and industry together to enhance knowledge transfer and establish a skilled future workforce
in QIS. The c urrent slate of agency activities form s a foundation for a coherent, all -of-government
approach to QIS that includes:
 Stable and sustained core programs that can be enhanced as new opportunities appear and
restructured as impediments evolve;
 Strategic investment in targeted, time -limited programs to achieve concrete, measureable
objectives;
 Continued close monitoring of the field to evaluate the outcome of Federal QIS investments and
quickly adapt programs to take advantage of technical breakthroughs as they are made.

16 http://uknqt.epsrc.ac.uk
17 https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/newsevents/news/ministerdtpqt/
18 http://www.nature.com/news/europe-plans-giant-billion-euro-quantum-technologies-project-1.19796;
http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/04/europe-bet-1-billion-quantum-technology

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
14
These three principles offer a good approach to continued U.S. leadership in QIS , but in order to be
effective they must be rigorously implemented and even expanded in order to maximize impact .
Sustained c ore programs will allow established researchers to continue their work , give students
confidence that QIS is a field with a future, and provide a solid base for trans lating laboratory
demonstrations into marketable technology. Targeted, time-limited programs are an effective mechanism
for achieving well-defined techn ical advances and allow quick adaptation to a changing technological
landscape. Continued monitoring is required to ensure that the Federal strategy for QIS investment
remains effective into the future and to avoid technological surprise . Carefully controlled growth of
funding and programs , coupled with close monitoring of progress and readiness to apply greater focus
and resources as events warrant, should allow the United States to address the impediments to progress
and remain at the forefront of this rapidly advancing, strategically important field. QIS should be
considered a pr iority for Federal coordination and investment, with particular attention to finding and
implementing mechanisms to address the identified impediments to progress and a commitment to keep
the United States at the leading edge of scientific and technological developments.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
15
References
Aaronson, S. “Read the fine print.” Nature Physics 11 (2015) pp. 291-293
The ACME Collaboration, “Order of Magnitude Smaller Limit on the Electric Dipole Moment of the
Electron.” Science 343 (2014) pp. 269-272
J. Bell. “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox.” Physics 1 (1964) pp. 195-200
Brown, K. Munro, W., and V. Kendon. “Using quantum computers for quantum simulation.” Entropy 12
(2010), pp. 2268-2307
Childress, L., Walsworth, R., and M. Lukin. “Atom-like crystal defects: From quantum computers to
biological sensors.” Physics Today 67 (2014) pp. 38-43
Chou, C.W., et al. “Frequency Comparison of Two High-Accuracy Al+ Optical Clocks.” Physical Review
Letters 104 (2010): 070802
Clader, B.D., Jacobs, B.C., and C.R. Sprouse. “Preconditioned quantum linear systems algorithm.”
Physical Review Letters 110 (2013) 250504
Drucker, A. and R. de Wolf. Theory of Computing Library Graduate Surveys 2 (2011) p. 1
Durfee, D.S., Shaham, Y.K., and M.A. Kasevich. “Long-Term Stability of an Area-Reversible Atom-
Interferometer Sagnac Gyroscope.” Physical Review Letters 97 (2006) 240801
Einstein, E., Podolsky, B., and N. Rosen. “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be
Considered Complete?” Physical Review 47 (1935) pp. 777-780
Giustina, M., et al. “Significant Loophole-Free Test of Bell’s Theorem with Entangled Photons.” Physical
Review Letters 115 (2015) 250401
Glenn, D.R., et al. “Single-cell magnetic imaging using a quantum diamond microscope.” Nature Methods
12 (2015), pp. 736-738
Grover, L. “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for evaluating formulas.” Proceedings of STOC (1996)
pp. 212-219
Hall, L.T., et al., “High spatial and temporal resolution wide-field imaging of neuron activity using
quantum NV-diamond.” Scientific Reports 2 (2012) DOI: 10.1038
Harlow, D. and P. Hayden. “Quantum computation vs. firewalls” Journal of High Energy Physics 6 (2013)
pp. 85-151
Hastings, M., et al. “Improving algorithms for quantum chemistry.” Quantum Information and
Computation 15 (2015), pp. 1-21
Hensen, B., et al. “Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3
kilometres.” Nature 526 (2015) pp. 682-686
Jordan, S., Lee, K., and J. Preskill. “Quantum algorithms for quantum field theories.” Science 335 (2012)
pp. 1130-1133
Kucsko, G., et al. “Nanometre-scale thermometry in a living cell.” Nature 500 (2013) pp.54-58
Lambert, N. et al. “Quantum biology.” Nature Physics 9 (2013) pp. 10-18
LeSage, D., et al. “Optical magnetic imaging of living cells.” Nature 496 (2013) pp. 486-489

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
16
Levine, Z. et al. “Absolute calibration of a variable attenuator using few-photon pulses.” Optics Express
23 (2015) pp. 16372-16382
Marsili, F., et al. “Detecting single infrared photons with 93% system efficiency.” Nature Photonics 7
(2013) pp. 210-214
Monroe, C., et al. “Demonstration of a Fundamental Quantum Logic Gate.” Physical Review Letters 75
(1995) pp. 4714-4717
Monroe, C., et al. “Quantum Simulation of Spin Models with Trapped Ions.” Proceedings of the
International School of Physics ‘Enrico Fermi’ Course 189 (2015) pp. 169-187
Pastawski, F., et al. “Holographic quantum error-correcting codes: toy models for the bulk/boundary
correspondence.” Journal of High Energy Physics 6 (2015) pp. 149-194
Pironio, S., et al. “Random numbers certified by Bell’s theorem.” Nature 464 (2010) pp. 1021-1024
Pudenz, K. and D. Lidar. “Quantum adiabatic machine learning.” Quantum Information Processing 12
(2012) pp. 2027-2070
Sachdev, S. “Tensor networks: a new tool for old problems” Physics 2 (2009) p. 90
Shalm, L. K., et al.”Strong Loophole-Free test of Local Realism.” Physical Review Letters 115 (2015)
250402
Shor, P. “Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum
computer.” Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Santa
Fe, NM, Nov. 20-22, 1994, pp. 124-134. (Revised and expanded versions of this paper subsequently
appeared on the arXiv preprint server and in SIAM Journal of Computing 26 (1997) pp. 1484-1509)
Smirnov, A.Y., et al. “Modelling chemical reactions using semiconductor quantum dots.” Europhysics
Letters 80 (2007) 67008
Torrontegui, E. et al. “Simulation of quantum collinear chemical reactions with ultracold atoms.” Journal
of Physics B 44 (2011) 195302
Van Bibber, K. and G. Carosi. “Status of the ADMX and ADMX-HF experiments.” Proceedings of the 8th
Patras Workshop on Axions, WIMPs, and WISPs. (2012) ISBN 978-3-935702-69-0
