
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Supply chains and the
global data collection
ecosystem
Policy Brief
Report No. 45/2021
Dr Samantha Hoffman and Dr Nathan Attrill
TW
ENTY YEARS OF ASPI STRATEGY
2001 - 2021

Mapping China’s Technology Giants

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the authors
Dr Samantha Hoffman is a senior analyst with ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre.
Dr Nathan Attrill is an analyst with ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre.
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Danielle Cave and Cheryl Yu for all of their work on this project. We would like to also thank our external peer reviewers
Lindsay Gorman, Kara Frederick and Chris Crowley. We’re also grateful for the valuable comments and assistance provided by Peter Mattis,
Tom Uren, Michael Shoebridge and Fergus Hanson.
This research report forms part of Mapping China’s Technology Giants , which is a multi-year project mapping and analysing the overseas
expansion of key Chinese technology companies. The project seeks to:
• analyse the global expansion of a key sample of China’s tech giants by mapping their major points of overseas presence
• provide the public with analysis of the governance structures and party-state politics in which these companies have emerged, and
are deeply entwined.
The Mapping China’s Technology Giants project is produced by researchers at ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre. The relaunch of
this project, and associated research, was funded with a US$270,000 grant from the US State Department
What is ASPI?
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute was formed in 2001 as an independent, non -partisan think tank. Its core aim is to provide the
Australian Government with fresh ideas on Australia’s defence, security and strategic policy choices. ASPI is responsible for informing the
public on a range of strategic issues, generating new thinking for government and harnessing strategic thinking internationally. ASPI’s
sources of funding are identified in our annual report, online at www.aspi.org.au and in the acknowledgements section of individual
publications. ASPI remains independent in the content of the research and in all editorial judgements.
ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre (ICPC) is a leading voice in global debates on cyber, emerging and critical technologies, issues
related to information and foreign interference and focuses on the impact these issues have on broader strategic policy. The centre has a
growing mixture of expertise and skills with teams of researchers who concentrate on policy, technical analysis, information operations
and disinformation, critical and emerging technologies, cyber capacity building, satellite analysis, surveillance and China-related issues.
The ICPC informs public debate in the Indo-Pacific region and supports public policy development by producing original, empirical,
data-driven research. The ICPC enriches regional debates by collaborating with research institutes from around the world and by
bringing leading global experts to Australia, including through fellowships. To develop capability in Australia and across the Indo-Pacific
region, the ICPC has a capacity building team that conducts workshops, training programs and large-scale exercises for the public and
private sectors.
We would like to thank all of those who support and contribute to the ICPC with their time, intellect and passion for the topics we work on.
If you would like to support the work of the centre please contact: icpc@aspi.org.au
Important disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in relation to the subject matter covered. It is provided with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering any form of professional or other advice or services. No person should
rely on the contents of this publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional.
ASPI
Tel +61 2 6270 5100
Email enquiries@aspi.org.au
www.aspi.org.au
www.aspistrategist.org.au
 facebook.com/ASPI.org
 @ASPI_ICPC
© The Australian Strategic Policy Institute Limited 2021
This publication is subject to copyright. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 , no part of it may in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, microcopying, photocopying, recording or otherwise) be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
without prior written permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the publishers. Notwithstanding the above, educational institutions
(including schools, independent colleges, universities and TAFEs) are granted permission to make copies of copyrighted works strictly for
educational purposes without explicit permission from ASPI and free of charge.
First published June 2021.
ISSN 2209-9689 (online),
ISSN 2209-9670 (print).
Cover image: ASPI ICPC, Nathan Attrill
Funding for this report
was provided by the
US State Department.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Policy Brief
Report No. 45/2021
Supply chains and the
global data collection
ecosystem
Dr Samantha Hoffman and Dr Nathan Attrill
Mapping China’s Technology Giants

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
What’s the problem? 03
What’s the solution? 03
1. The PRC’s data ecosystem 05
1.1 Who sets the standards matters 07
1.2 Harnessing the strategic value of data 08
1.3 A global outlook 09
2. The PRC’s developing data security framework 11
2.1 Data regulations: limiting individuals and organisations while empowering the state 13
2.2 Data regulations: setting the standards 16
3. Rethinking digital supply-chain vulnerability 18
3.1 Downstream data access: the GTCOM case study 19
3.2 Processing power 21
4. Recommendations 23
Appendix: The draft Data Security Law and draft Personal Information Protection Law 24
Notes 26
Acronyms and abbreviations 30
02 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
What’s the problem?
Most of the 27 companies tracked by our Mapping China’s Technology Giants project are heavily
involved in the collection and processing of vast quantities of personal and organisational data—
everything from personal social media accounts, to smart cities data, to biomedical data.1 Their
business operations—and associated international collaborations—depend on the flow of vast
amounts of data, often governed by the data privacy laws of multiple jurisdictions. Currently, however,
existing global policy debates and subsequent policy responses concerning security in the digital
supply chain miss the bigger picture because they typically prioritise the potential for disruption or
malicious alterations of the supply chain. Yet, as we have defined it in this report, digital supply-chain
risk starts at the design level (Figure 1).
For the People’s Republic of China (PRC), the designer is the Chinese party-state, through expectations
and agenda-setting in laws and policy documents and actions such as the mobilisation of state
resources to achieve objectives such as the setting of technology standards. It’s through those
standards, policies and laws that the party-state is refining its capacity to exert control over
companies’ activities to ensure that it can derive strategic value and benefit from the companies’
global operations. That includes leveraging data collection taking place through those companies’
everyday global business activities, which ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre (ICPC) described
in the Engineering global consent report.2 Technology isn’t agnostic—who sets the standards and
therefore the direction of the technology matters just as much as who manufactures the product.
This will have major implications for the effectiveness of data protection laws and notions of digital
supply-chain security.
What’s the solution?
This report recommends that governments, businesses and other organisations take a more
multidisciplinary approach to due diligence. That approach needs to take into account the core
strategic thinking that underlies the ways the Chinese party-state uses technology. It must also take
into account the breadth of what’s considered to be ‘state security’ in China and the ramifications of
the PRC’s cyber- and data-focused laws and regulations.
All governments should improve their regulatory frameworks for data security and privacy protection.
Doing so will put them in better ethical and legal positions to take meaningful long-term policy actions
on a whole suite of issues. However, those efforts in isolation won’t solve all of the unique challenges
posed by the Chinese party-state or other geopolitical challenges described in this report.
A more holistic approach, which would help to ensure that data is better protected, also requires
a better definition of digital supply-chain risk and a reframing of global policy debates on these
issues. There needs to be a greater understanding of how supply-chain risks manifest, including the
intentional introduction of access and more subtle monitoring and information collection by malicious
actors. Specific actions for managing potential data insecurity and privacy breaches in supply chains
should include improving risk-based approaches to the regulation of data transfers.
03

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Figure 1: Compromise of the digital supply chain without a malicious intrusion or alteration
Source: ASPI authors’ illustration.
04 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
1. The PRC’s data ecosystem
The PRC’s global data collection ecosystem was outlined in the ASPI ICPC policy report Engineering
global consent: the Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion.3 In that report, we
described ways the Chinese party-state directly and indirectly leveraged PRC-headquartered
commercial enterprises to access troves of data that those enterprises’ products help generate.
That report was based on how the Chinese party-state articulated its objectives on data use and
state security and a case study of the propaganda department–linked company Global Tone
Communication Technology Co. Ltd (which we expand on in the ‘Downstream data access’ section
of this report).
As part of the Mapping China’s Technology Giants project, we have identified the need to further
define the PRC’s ‘global data ecosystem’ concept. In this section, we focus on the nature of interactions
between political agenda-setting, active shaping of international technical standards, technical
capabilities, and data as a strategic resource. This directly affects companies’ business activities,
both domestic and global (Figure 2).
Figure 2: The PRC’s data ecosystem
Source: ASPI authors’ illustration.
The PRC’s data ecosystem begins with technical capability. That includes China’s advanced cyber
offensive skills, but also extends to its companies’ normal business operations anywhere in the world
providing access, collection, data processing or any combination of the three to the party-state.
The party-state’s ability to obtain large amounts of personal information and intellectual property
through its state-sponsored cyber operations has been widely reported in detail, including in
indictments by the US Department of Justice.4 However, the PRC’s policies and legislation—
purposefully shaped by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)—mean that the party-state’s ability
to access data is extended even further than the normal operations of PRC-based companies with
a global presence. It’s also consequential that those globally influential PRC-based technology
companies occupy every layer of the ‘technology stack’.
05

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
In Table 1, we illustrate the ‘technology stack’ by using the ISO standard Open Systems
Interconnection model as a reference (because it’s used for networking and data exchange but can
also be illustrative of the technology industry ecosystem).5 We then charted it against the relevant
companies in the Mapping China’s Technology Giants project and their US counterparts, which for
several decades have had a dominant presence in every layer.
Table 1: Technology business ecosystem, referencing a simplified Open Systems Interconnection model
 Software/hardware
groupings
General examples US-based companies PRC-based companies
Application
layer
Software applications Internet platforms
(e.g. social media,
websites, mobile apps),
machine-learning engines
(from cloud providers),
content handlers
Facebook, Google,
Amazon, Apple, Microsoft,
PayPal, Zoom, Salesforce,
Adobe
Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent,
JD.com, ByteDance, Ant
Group, Megvii, iFlytek,
CloudWalk, SenseTime,
YITU, Ping An Tech, Inspur,
Huawei, CETC
Storage and software
infrastructure
Content delivery networks,
cloud storage and
infrastructure
Cloudflare, Akamai,
Google, Microsoft, Amazon,
IBM, Oracle, Apple
Alibaba, Tencent,
ByteDance, Ping An Tech,
Inspur, Huawei, CETCNetwork
layer
Hardware Satellite navigation,
networking hardware,
sensor hardware,
semiconductors, mobile
wireless networking
equipment
Cisco, Juniper, Global
Positioning System
(GPS), Google, Amazon,
Apple, Nvidia, AMD, Texas
Instruments, Qualcomm,
Broadcom, Intel, Microsoft,
IBM
Huawei, ZTE, BeiDou,
Nuctech, Meiya Pico,
Hikvision, Uniview, Dahua,
Megvii, iFlytek, SenseTime,
DJI, Huawei’s Hisilicon,
SMIC, CETC
Physical
layer
Carrier infrastructure Submarine cables,
fibre-optic networks,
mobile wireless network
carrier equipment (5G
base stations)
AT&T, Sprint, Verizon,
Cogent, Comcast,
Facebook, Google,
Amazon, Microsoft,
T-Mobile US
Hengtong, China Mobile,
China Telecom, China
Unicom, PEACE cable Ltd,
Huawei, CETC
Source: ASPI authors’ illustration.
Technology companies everywhere are primarily driven by commercial interests. The difference
between the US and China is that in China the way the state conceives of the usefulness of data goes
beyond traditional intelligence collection. For the Chinese party-state, data and the information
derived from it contribute to everything. Domestically, that ranges from solving policy problems to
information control and state coercion. Globally, it ranges from expanding the PRC’s role in the global
economy to understanding how to shape and control its global operating environment. In the next
two sections, we elaborate on how the Chinese party-state’s laws, policies and actions, which apply to
PRC-based technology companies, create an ecosystem that provides it with access to the data that
those companies can obtain.
06 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
1.1 Who sets the standards matters
Technology isn’t values-agnostic. It takes on the values of its creator. Therefore, who sets the
standards, and consequently the direction of the technology, matters. We know, for instance, that
artificial intelligence has a history of racial and socio-economic bias built in from the design stage,
reflective of the inherent biases of the designers and the choice of data used to train the algorithms.6
Technologies must be designed to be ‘values-neutral’7 to avoid those problems, but that aspiration
might not ever be realistic.8
Liberal democracies don’t agree on what ‘values’ mean in this context. The European Union,
for example, is increasingly prioritising indigenous technology development not just because of
strategic competitors such as the PRC but also because of the US. That requires navigating often
complex relationships with US-based technology giants such as Google, Apple and Facebook.9
Part of protecting values in any liberal democracy is about preventing the creep of illiberalism
from sources both domestic and foreign. It’s also about introducing regulations and standards
that protect the norms and freedoms underpinning democratic values. When it comes to Europe
and the digital economy, much of that effort is currently targeted towards holding US technology
companies accountable.10
The Chinese party-state is creating mechanisms and power structures through which it can ensure its
ultimate and maximum access to datasets both domestically and globally. This is apparent through its
agenda-setting (articulated in party and policy documents), its expectation-setting (signalled through
new laws) and communications from the CCP (such as speeches and state media reporting).
Part of the CCP’s effort takes place through the PRC’s attempts to set standards that guide the design
of technologies. For example, PRC facial recognition systems are required to be designed to recognise
‘Uyghur faces’.11 Another example is big data platforms and systems designed to categorise individuals
based on a politicised version of whom the CCP deems suspicious or potentially threatening (such as
petitioners, Tibetans, Uyghurs or Falun Gong practitioners).12 Within the PRC, technologies are already
being researched and developed to meet the needs of the party-state (see section ‘Data regulations:
setting the standards’). When those technologies are exported, such design features can’t be erased by
the technology’s end-user, whether it’s a global company or a foreign government.
07

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
1.2 Harnessing the strategic value of data
The Chinese party-state has deliberately formulated a strategy to harness the strategic value of data
and the power of information to grow the power of the CCP over society. In 2013, Xi Jinping was quoted
as saying, ‘big data is the “free” resource of the industrial society. Whoever has a hold of the data has
the initiative.’13
In 2016, China’s 13th Five-Year Plan pushed for the creation of a ‘big data security management system’
alongside efforts to improve cyberspace governance by building an international consensus around
the PRC’s ideas on cyberspace security.14 The 14th Five-Year Plan, unveiled in 2021, continues the
party-state’s multifaceted priorities for the development and use of big data for economic and social
governance and calls for building new data infrastructure and improving the rules governing data
collection, storage and use.15
In addition to economic development, the party-state often describes big data technologies as
contributing to ‘social management’ (also called ‘social governance’).16 Social management covers
a broad and overlapping list of agenda items, from creating capabilities to improve public service
administration to strengthening ‘public security’. Ultimately, social management refers to the
party-state’s management of itself as well as of society. This process relies on shaping, managing and
controlling its operating environment through capabilities that enhance service provision and the
capacity for risk management.17
New and emerging digital technologies are valued because they’re viewed as a resource that can
improve everyday governance capacity and facilitate problem-solving. In simplifying government
service provision, the implementation of those technologies can in future facilitate communication
across the PRC’s sprawling government apparatus.18 Digital and data-driven technologies obviously
have multiple uses. For example, they can help streamline urban and social welfare services. In other
respects, those same services can feed into the party-state’s totalitarian model of governance and the
way it identifies and responds to what it believes are emerging threats.
This use of data occurs in ways that provide both convenience and control. Routine services are
intertwined with surveillance and coercive tools in ways that are often not legally possible in liberal
democratic societies—or, when they do occur, can be genuinely challenged by the public, media and
civil society. That distinction doesn’t simply apply to the ways different PRC Government departments
use similar technologies (such as ways the public security bureaus use technologies versus the ways
industrial work safety offices use them).
One example is Human Rights Watch’s findings on Xinjiang’s Integrated Joint Operations Platform,
which is used to centrally collect data on individual behaviours and flag ‘those deemed potentially
threatening’. One metric used to identify threats is energy usage from smart electricity meters:
abnormally high energy use could indicate ‘illegal’ activity, but such meters in their normal use would
also improve the accuracy of meter readings.19 Another example is building datasets for use in the
PRC’s ‘national defence mobilisation system’ (a crisis response platform) using data sourced from a
variety of government cloud networks, from smart cities to tourism-related cloud networks (Figure 3).20
08 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Figure 3: The concept of defence mobilisation and smart cities data integration and processing
Source: ASPI authors’ illustration.
Despite the benefits it can derive, the CCP also sees sources of harm emerging from technology and
its use, and it realises that technology isn’t an all-encompassing solution to its problems. Xi Jinping
has described science and technology as a double-edged sword: ‘On one hand, it can benefit society
and the people. On the other hand, it can also be used by some people to damage the public interest
and the interests of the people.’21 Such risks could include companies or officials having the ability to
exercise too much power with the aid of technology.22 They could also include the use of technology
by the CCP’s political opponents to organise against the party-state, from either inside or outside
the PRC.23
1.3 A global outlook
The PRC’s plans to harness the strategic value of data and the power of information to grow state
power are also globally oriented. The party-state sees its reliance on technologies originating in the
West (especially the US) as a threat to state security, for fear of how foreign powers might exploit
that reliance, especially in a crisis.24 That fear helps drive the development of the PRC’s indigenous
technology capabilities.25 Its capability effort includes planning on big data development to build an
‘industry ecosystem’ with ‘globally oriented key enterprises and innovative small- and medium-sized
enterprises with distinctive features’.26 It also includes a plan to export PRC-originated technology
standards, envisioned through the China Standards 2035 project.27 Economic benefits and objectives
are included in each plan, but through them the CCP also sets specific political ambitions.
As part of its global vision (see Figure 4), the Chinese party-state ensures that it’s a part of the
market-driven expansion and success of its global technology giants. Under Xi Jinping, the
government has increasingly demonstrated the extraterritoriality inherent in PRC state security
concepts and law. Moreover, the fact that companies have the right to do business in China at the
party-state’s discretion has become abundantly clear. The ability to harness the benefits of data
would help to achieve the CCP’s global vision because, through the processing and application of that
data, the party can improve the sophistication of its efforts to shape, manage and control its global
operating environment.
09

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Figure 4: Explainer: The Chinese party-state’s vision for the PRC in the world
Since its founding, the Chinese party -state has pursued the modernisation of the PRC with the goal of
becoming both wealthy and powerful, and returning to what the party views as China’s rightful place in the
world [1].
The party -state’s ambitions can be described as having three lines of effort:
1 The comprehensive modernisation of the PRC under the party -state’s rule.
2 The unification and economic, social, and cultural assimilation of areas claimed by the party -state
as ‘China’.
3 Becoming a global power that shapes the international order and the ways in which nation-states
interact.
Beijing’s much-touted ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ (一带一路) is just one part of a larger vision for a ‘new type
of international relations (新型国际关系) and a ‘community of common destiny for mankind’ (人类命运共
同体). In those concepts, the party -state has outlined a vision of international relations that more closely
resembles the way the party -state exercises influence over the PRC and Chinese society [2]. In fact, there’s
also an international version of the social management concept that’s been used to refer to a so -called
‘deficit in social governance’ due to the ineffectiveness of international institutions and the rules -based
international order [3]. The party-state sees that a ‘deficit’ in international social management has not
stopped ‘the West’ from having a strong discourse power [4]; therefore, the PRC needs to develop its own
‘discourse power’—a concept that analyst Nadège Rolland has described as ‘the ability to exert influence
over the formulations and ideas that underpin the international order’ [5].
Progress along each of these lines of effort may be uneven; however, these ambitious objectives can’t be
dismissed just because they appear unreachable or because the results appear fragmented today.
Sources: ASPI authors’ illustration. See endnote for detailed citations. 28
10 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
2. The PRC’s developing data security
framework
PRC legislation related to state security29 provides reasons for foreign governments to be concerned
about the exposure of any PRC-based commercial enterprise to the political demands of the
party-state. 30 Recent state security laws, such as the 2017 Intelligence Law, haven’t changed the
longstanding de facto practice of state power in the PRC, but have further codified expectations in
China that every citizen is responsible for state security.31 Assessments of those risks have helped
address what should be the obvious political and legal risks of doing business with PRC-based
technology companies.
Some analysts have attempted to downplay the significance of such laws by claiming that the law is
never black and white in the PRC and by describing compliance with PRC law as ‘a negotiation’.32 The
latitude of officials to enforce the law and corporations’ efforts to maintain their freedom of action
leave open grey areas, but that claim, in the context in which it’s being made, is false. Law may be a
negotiation in the PRC, as it is elsewhere, but the party-state decides whether there’s a negotiation at
all, and where that negotiation ends.
Critically, the party-state itself isn’t bound by the law when it’s challenged or when its interests are
threatened. A recent illustration of this is Alibaba and its founder, Jack Ma, who briefly ‘disappeared’ at
the end of 2020 following his public criticism of PRC regulators’ attitude towards big business, accusing
them of having a ‘pawnshop’ mentality that stifled innovation.33 In April 2021, it was announced that
Alibaba would be fined US$2.8 billion after a probe determined that it had abused its market position
for years.34 Nobody in the PRC is too big or too powerful to be subject to the party-state’s demands.35
PRC-based technology companies themselves have acknowledged their exposure to legal risks
emanating from the PRC. It’s standard practice for global companies to acknowledge in their privacy
policies that user data may be transferred and governed by laws outside of their own jurisdiction.
According to most privacy policies for websites and products of the 27 companies in our Mapping
China’s Technology Giants project, users who live outside the PRC may have their data transferred
to and processed and stored in a country that isn’t where they reside or have ordered services from,
including the PRC, where all of the companies have business. When the data is transferred it will
be governed by the law in that country’s jurisdiction, not only the law in the place where the data
originated (Figure 5).36
11

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Figure 5: New Mapping China’s Technology Giants product—‘Thematic snapshots’
Source: Mapping China’s Technology Giants project website, online .
Most of the 27 companies state that they’re committed to protecting personal information, but
acknowledge that they may be required to disclose personal data to meet law enforcement or state
security requirements. The definition of what meets the threshold of being a national security or
criminal case can be highly politicised in the PRC, and the process of definition isn’t similar to those
that occur in a liberal democracy.
The political system of the PRC creates this risk. Law in the PRC is first and foremost political and a
governing tool that enforces political power. It’s meant to be wielded by the party-state and to uphold
and expand the power of the state. Its implementation is reliant on the CCP’s leadership and is used
to strengthen the party’s governing capacity, but the law isn’t above the party-state even if it’s used
to manage its members.37 Nonetheless, the law is more than a blunt weapon of state power. It’s
important to think through the implications of the fact that the law also functions as a tool to set and
communicate the state’s expectations of its apparatuses, its entities and individuals.
New developments related to data collection, storage and transfer make these issues more apparent.
The Chinese party-state is currently deliberating on a draft Data Security Law (DSL) and draft Personal
Information Protection Law (PIPL).38 In April 2021, second draft versions were issued publicly (see
the appendix to this report for translations of the articles of the draft laws that we focus on in this
12 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
section). Both are expected to become law in 2021. The third and probably final version of the draft
DSL is expected to be deliberated at a National People’s Congress Standing Committee meeting on
7–10 June 2021.39
These laws don’t exist in a vacuum. They should be read along with a suite of other relevant state
security legislation, including, for example, the State Security Law (2015) and the Cybersecurity
Law (2016).
2.1 Data regulations: limiting individuals and organisations while empowering
the state
The draft DSL and draft PIPL should be read together. The main distinction is that the draft DSL lays out
the responsibilities of the state in creating a data security system and in guaranteeing data security,
whereas the draft PIPL defines the boundaries and personal information protection requirements for
individuals and entities.40
What makes the framework unique, compared to any other country’s laws regulating data security,
is that data security is unambiguously part of the party-state’s security strategy and is first about
protecting the CCP’s monopoly hold on power (Figure 6). The draft DSL says that the effort to
guarantee data security must adhere to the party-state’s ‘comprehensive state security outlook’.41
The draft establishes the state as the leader of the data security system, stating that the ‘central state
security leading mechanism’ is ‘responsible for decision making and overall coordination on data
security work, and researching, drafting and guiding the implementation of national data security
strategies and relevant major guidelines and policies.’42
13

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Figure 6: Explainer: The PRC’s state security concept
14 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Figure 6 (continued): Explainer: The PRC’s state security concept
Sources: ASPI authors’ Illustration. See endnote for detailed citations. 43
The law says not only that a party entity is in charge, but also that any significant policies will originate
there. The term ‘central state security leading mechanism’ in legal documents is synonymous with the
Central State Security Commission, which is a CCP body led by Xi Jinping.44 Therefore, the activity of
other state regulatory departments and public and state security organs responsible for implementing
data security efforts would flow from the decision-making and strategy that the Central State Security
Commission is tasked with overseeing and implementing.45
The draft DSL also applies to data-handling activities taking place ‘outside the territory of the PRC’,
if those activities are seen to ‘harm the state security, the public interest, or the lawful rights and
interests of citizens’ and organisations of the PRC, they are to be pursued for legal responsibility
‘in accordance with law.’ Existing law and practice illustrate the global application of such concepts.
15

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Hong Kong’s new National Security Law, passed in 2020, criminalises ‘separatism’, ‘subversion’,
‘terrorism’ and ‘collusion’ in addition to support for any of those activities by anyone, no matter where
in the world they’re located.46
The draft PIPL, meanwhile, is intended to regulate the power of individuals and entities who handle
the personal data of PRC citizens both inside and outside the country. It establishes a more robust
system for protecting individuals’ data privacy from individuals and companies.47 It applies to activities
outside the PRC involving the handling of personal information of natural persons within the territory
of the PRC when those outside actors are providing products or services to persons within the PRC,
analysing and assessing the conduct of natural persons within PRC or ‘other situations provided for by
law or administrative regulations’. Just like the draft DSL, it leaves open the potential that the law can
be used as intended: to protect the CCP’s power wherever necessary. Laws such as the Intelligence
Law illustrate specific cases in which other legislation might be used to justify this reach, and a law
such as the Hong Kong National Security Law illustrates the fact that political opponents of the
party-state might also be targeted in vague ‘other situations’.48
The draft PIPL also superficially applies to the state. For example, it says that any retrieval of personal
information requires following ‘legally prescribed duties’ and must be done ‘in accordance with the
authority and procedures provided by laws’.49 Yet, Article 19 establishes that:
[W]hen personal information handlers handle personal information, where there are circumstances
that laws and administrative regulations provide shall be kept confidential or need not be
announced, it is acceptable not to notify the individual.
On the basis of that logic, any case in which the 2017 Intelligence Law applies could be excluded from
the PIPL ’s protections. Article 7 of the Intelligence Law says that:
[A]ny organisation and citizen shall in accordance with the law, support, provide assistance, and
cooperate in national intelligence work, and guard the secrecy of any intelligence work they are
aware of.50
The important takeaway is that digital technology can be applied in ways that expand the
aforementioned capabilities of the party-state, but governance of its use can be managed in ways
that restrict officials’ discretion in applying it. This doesn’t mean, however, that these regulations limit
the party-state’s influence. In reality, the regulations enhance their ultimate influence over digital
technologies and the flow of data.
16 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
2.2 Data regulations: setting the standards
Both draft laws contain directives on how the party-state expects data security and data privacy
regimes to develop. They establish that, in the PRC, data shall be collected, stored and processed in a
manner that’s consistent with the party-state’s paramount security concepts and objectives. Especially
given the party-state security concept guiding data security, it’s notable that Xi Jinping has called for
strengthening ‘the Party’s leadership over standardisation work’ and has described standardisation as
the ‘commanding heights’ of international economic and technological competition.51
Beyond establishing which institutions are in charge and who is responsible for data security, the draft
DSL also establishes expectations about how the PRC’s standardisation system is to function that are
specific to data security. The draft DSL says that State Council administrative departments and other
relevant State Council departments are responsible for organising ‘the formulation and appropriate
revision of standards related to technology and products for the development and use of data and to
data security.’52 The most relevant body under the State Council is the Standardisation Administration
of China (SAC), which is an agency under the State Administration for Market Regulation. According
to the revised 2017 Standardisation Law,53 the SAC is required to oversee standards initiation and
implementation. At the practical level, technical committees develop standards, which are then
accredited by the SAC.54
The technical committees working on the standards consist of stakeholders that are mostly
government entities, government-linked research institutes and commercial enterprises. Many
standards they develop are mandatory requirements, which companies must also meet to
successfully bid for a project domestically. A March 2021 report by IPVM pointed to documents such
as ‘GA/T1400.3—2017’ on ‘public security video image information application systems’ developed
by the Science and Technology Information Technology Bureau of the Ministry of Public Security
in coordination with several companies included in the Mapping China’s Technology Giants project,
including Uniview, Hikvision and Dahua.55
As the standards develop domestically, they’ll also be projected globally, not just through market
activity but also as the PRC seeks to participate and shape international technology standards. The
SAC is also responsible for representing the PRC at international standards-setting bodies.56 Both the
draft PIPL and the draft DSL have provisions stating that the state is required to participate in setting
international rules and technology standards for data security and personal information protection.57
The expansiveness of that expectation-setting creates normalised pathways for the PRC to exploit
data-sharing downstream in ways that can undermine the security of other countries, as we describe
in the next section.
17

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
3. Rethinking digital supply-chain vulnerability
Not all methods used to acquire data need to be intrusive, subversive, covert or even illegal—they
can be part of normal business data exchanges. Figure 1 (on page 3) illustrates how a digital supply
chain can be compromised without a malicious intrusion or alteration. The data-sharing relationships
that bring commercial advantages are also the same ones that could compromise an organisation.
Thinking about risk solely in terms of potential disruption ignores the ways in which supply-chain risk
can emerge from normal processes, in which no disruption is required.
The vulnerability of supply chains was made apparent by the Covid-19 pandemic, which made
supply-chain resilience even more important. As we become more digitally interconnected, the
breadth of what’s considered a risk to the supply chain has grown to include risks to the digital supply
chain—the electronic products we rely on and the data that flows through them.
Discussions about digital supply-chain security typically prioritise the potential for disruption or
malicious alterations of the supply chain. Examples include cyberattacks, altered components
inserted into the supply chain and limited access to critical supplies such as semiconductors. That
kind of risk from well-resourced state and non-state actors is already well understood by governments
thinking about supply-chain security.58 As we noted in the section on ‘The PRC’s data ecosystem’, the
PRC’s sophisticated offensive cyber capability and its ability to obtain data through those methods are
also well known. But a digital supply chain threat doesn’t necessarily require malicious alterations or
cyber intrusions into a network.
The SolarWinds supply-chain attack of 2020 is one example of a supply-chain cyberattack perpetrated
through the malicious insertion of software. In that case, threat actors, probably of Russian origin,59
compromised the software update service for the SolarWinds Orion platform to facilitate the
distribution of malicious code to Orion customers.60
Another cybersecurity risk in the supply chain that’s hidden in plain sight comes from ‘white labelling’
of original equipment manufacturer (OEM) products.61 That was the case with US-headquartered
Honeywell, which came under scrutiny in 2018 for selling Dahua cameras under its own brand, as
Dahua was banned in the US under the National Defense Authorization Act.62 A simple example of
risk for customers in this situation is that they may be monitoring cybersecurity vulnerabilities for
Honeywell products, not knowing that in fact they should also be monitoring vulnerabilities for the
underlying Dahua product.
Other areas of discussion include vendor trustworthiness. The 5G vendor debate within Australia a few
years ago brought to light the importance of the ownership and control of network infrastructure.63
More broadly, it made organisations consider the risk of the vendors whose equipment their
organisations’ data would be passing through and the obligations that those vendors have to their
‘home’ governments.64 Australia’s lead cybersecurity agency, the Australian Cyber Security Centre, in
its guidance to organisations on identifying digital supply-chain risks, addresses this need to take into
consideration foreign control, influence and interference.65
18 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
While these discussions are likely to lead to important policy responses that address some digital
supply-chain vulnerabilities, they don’t capture the full scope of risk that currently exists. In the
SolarWinds and Honeywell examples above, those charged with ensuring cybersecurity usually look
for changes to normal activity as an indicator of a problem or threat. In cases where the risk lies within
standard data exchange processes, therefore, it could be easily missed.
3.1 Downstream data access: the GTCOM case study
The ASPI ICPC policy brief Engineering global consent focused on Global Tone Communication
Technology Co. Ltd (GTCOM), which is a subsidiary of a state-owned enterprise directly controlled
by the Central Propaganda Department of the CCP that collects bulk data globally in support of
the party-state’s propaganda and state security objectives.66 The data ecosystem emerging from
GTCOM’s commercial partnerships includes some of the PRC’s largest and most important technology
companies. For GTCOM, strategic cooperation with globally recognisable PRC-based companies—
notably Huawei and Alibaba Cloud—provides assistance in two key areas in the form of:
• the opportunity to conduct bulk data collection by providing translation services to both
companies, which have deeper market penetration
• the development of or access to capabilities that support its bulk data collection.
As Figure 7 shows, GTCOM has commercial partnership agreements that provide it with access to bulk
data from other PRC-based technology companies.
Data transfers can occur through processes built directly into the ecosystem. A technology company
such as GTCOM provides an important case study in how the data ecosystem could reach far beyond
the PRC’s data regulatory regime.
19

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Figure 7: GTCOM and the global data collection ecosystem concept
Sources: ASPI authors’ illustration.
20 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
3.2 Processing power
The party-state prioritises data collection domestically and globally. As we’ve described above, it’s
building an ecosystem that enables access to any bulk data collected through commercial enterprises.
It further recognises that technology will eventually catch up to its ideas for processing and generating
specific outputs. Being able to collect data is useful, but it’s the ability to access and aggregate data for
analysis and derive useful insights from it that’s powerful.
The business model of internet giants such as Facebook, Google, ByteDance and Tencent heavily
relies on data and the use of artificial intelligence. They collect large volumes and many varieties of
data from users of their service platforms. For example, they may collect such things as user platform
preferences, platform behaviours (such as how long it took an individual user to click from one page
to another), how long the user stayed on a page, what products they put into their shopping cart and
who their friends are, as well as real-world information such as the running routes of the user and the
user’s home location. The data is aggregated to generate profiles of individual users for marketing and
advertising purposes, and also to improve the platform. That in turn leads to greater user engagement
and provides additional opportunities to collect more data. Data brokers perform a similar aggregation
and analysis task, but they usually use data that they’ve mined freely from the internet or purchased
from other sources.
The concern isn’t necessarily that data is being collected, but rather the ability to infer sensitive details
about individuals from the aggregation of seemingly innocuous bits of data from a variety of sources.
A single geolocation coordinate out of context isn’t meaningful, but, using location data from a single
mobile device collected over time, it’s possible to identify an individual in a household and their
pattern of life. All that’s needed is to identify their three primary locations—home, work and one other
regularly used location.
That kind of data can be used to target individuals, such as by identifying and tracking the movements
of the US President,67 and can identify sensitive military locations en masse,68 but it can also be used to
create convenience. Google Search results provide popular times, wait times and visit durations for all
users searching for a local business by using ‘aggregated and anonymised data from users who have
opted in to Google Location History’.69
The use of big data analytics to monitor operations in smart cities can bring greater efficiency benefits
to operations, facilitate data sharing and assist with decision-making and situational awareness
overall. However, that same data, in the hands of adversaries, could give them macro-scale insights
that would otherwise be difficult to obtain. If those systems are under the control of adversaries, the
concern isn’t just about others having access to the data but also about adversaries’ ability to control
or modify the data. As a consequence, the information used to create convenience, improve efficiency
and enhance situational awareness is the same information that can be used by an adversary.
The ability of some PRC-based technology companies to process big data is sufficiently large.
According to reporting in Foreign Policy, they’ve been used by the party-state to carry out intelligence
tasks. According to ‘current and former officials’ cited in the report, this has included the acquisition
of datasets from large data breaches, such as the 2014 cyber intrusion into the US Office of Personnel
Management.70 It’s big data analysis like this that the US Central Intelligence Agency believes enabled
21

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
the exposure of its undercover officers in Africa and Europe.71 The question that requires further
research and analysis is why those PRC-based companies were chosen. For instance, were they chosen
not just for their processing ability but also because, by ingesting the datasets and combining the data
with their own holdings, they could enrich the information that could be derived from the data?
Commercial businesses aren’t the only entities carrying out large-scale data processing in the PRC.
The party-state is also doing it at the national level. The People’s Bank of China has included a ‘Big
Data Analytics Centre’ as part of the design of the PRC’s ‘Digital Currency / Electronic Payments’
system. The bank’s officials have said that the data collected through the system will be used to
improve macroeconomic policy. The bank will ‘analyse how money is being used, transacted, and
stored; support tracking and surveillance using both static and real-time data; provide data and
analysis inputs for monetary policy; and flag financial fraud’.72
Goals associated with harnessing the strategic power of data are a natural extension of long-enshrined
goals in authoritative party-state documents and embedded in detailed economic policies and plans
to ensure progress toward those goals.73 However, the party-state’s development of theory and policy
is an iterative process and has always involved a degree of experimentation to ensure progress without
too many unintended consequences.74 Control or the preservation of the CCP’s power isn’t a goal unto
itself, but rather a prerequisite for achieving those ambitions. The collection, storage and processing of
big data will play an increasingly key role in those efforts in future.
22 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
4. Recommendations
Adequately evaluating the risks associated with doing business with PRC-based technology
companies, or companies that rely on their technologies in their supply chains, requires an
understanding of the Chinese party-state’s articulation of its own intentions. It also requires an
understanding of the implications of policy and legal documents that signal what steps will be taken
to realise intended outcomes, as well as, of course, analysis of the party-state’s actual behaviour
(domestic and global).
We recommend as follows.
1. Invest resources to better understand the PRC’s and the CCP’s articulation of their own
intentions in order to set the tone for a more informed public debate that will generate
targeted responses to the identified problems.
Incorrect assumptions are often made about the party-state’s intent. In addition, what’s being
articulated and signalled through PRC policy and legal documents is too often ignored or not
placed into the context in which it’s being articulated or signalled (such as being placed in an
appropriate political context) or being described (for example, in the light of the CCP’s view that
data security is a problem of state security, as the party-state defines ‘state security’).
2. Recalibrate data security policy and privacy frameworks to account for the Chinese state’s
use of data to reinforce its political monopoly.
Companies and governments too often assume that other governments’ data and privacy
regulations share the same goals as their own. That isn’t true when it comes to the Chinese
party-state and PRC-based companies, even if common vocabularies are used or if some
policy drivers are similar. In the PRC, unlike in liberal democracies, data security and privacy
concepts (including draft legislation) reinforce the party-state’s monopoly power. Companies and
governments need to recognise this risk and calibrate their policies to account for it.
3. Collaborate with like-minded countries to develop systems for improving risk-based
approaches to improving the regulation of data transfers.
Organisations must assess the value of their data, as well as the value of that data to any potential
party in their supply chain that may have access to it or that might be granted access. In an age
in which information warfare and disinformation campaigns occur across social media platforms
and are among the greatest threats to social cohesion, data that’s about public sentiment is as
strategically valuable as data about more traditional military targets. Risk needs to be understood
in a way that keeps up with the current threat landscape, in which otherwise innocuous data can be
aggregated to carry meaning that can undermine a society or individuals.
4. Take a multidisciplinary approach to due diligence.
Governments, businesses and other organisations need to develop frameworks for conducting
supply-chain reviews that take into account country-specific policy drivers. Developing such a
framework shouldn’t be limited to just assessing a vendor’s risk of exposure to political risk. It
should also include detailed analysis of the downstream actors who have access to the vendor’s
data (and must include analysis of things such as the broader data ecosystem they’re a part of and
the obligations those vendors have to their own governments). Taking this more holistic approach
to due diligence will better ensure that data can be protected in an effective way.
23

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Appendix: The draft Data Security Law and draft
Personal Information Protection Law
Law Article Text
DSL 2 在中华人民共和国境内开展数据处理活动及其安全监管,适用本法。在中华人民共和国境外开展数据处理活动,
损害中华人民共和国国家安全 、 公共利益或者公民 、 组织合法权益的,依法追究法律责任。
This law applies to data-handling activities and security regulation carried out within the territory of the People’s
Republic of China. Data-handling activities carried out outside the territory of the PRC that harm the state security,
the public interest, or the lawful rights and interests of citizens’ and organisations of the PRC, are to be pursued for
legal responsibility in accordance with law.
DSL 4 维护数据安全,应当坚持总体国家安全观,建立健全数据安全治理体系,提高数据安全保障能力 。
The preservation of data security shall adhere to the comprehensive state security outlook, establish and
complete data security governance systems, and increase capacity to ensure data security.
DSL 5 国家保护个 人 、 组织与数据有关的权益,鼓励数据依法合理有效利用,保障数据依法有序自由流动,促进以数据为
关键要素的数字经济发展 。
The state is to protect the rights and interests of individuals and organisations with regard to data; encourage
the lawful, reasonable and effective use of data; ensure the lawful and orderly free flow of data; and promote the
development of a digital economy with data as a key factor.
DSL 6 中央国家安全领导机构负责数据安全工作的决策和统筹协调,研究制定 、指导实施国家数据安全战略和有关重
大 方 针 政 策。
The central state security leading mechanism is responsible for decision-making and overall coordination on data
security work, and researching, drafting and guiding the implementation of national data security strategies and
relevant major guidelines and policies.
DSL 7 各地区 、各部门对本地区 、 本部门工作中产生 、 汇总 、 加工的数据及数据安全负主体责任。 工业 、 电信 、交通 、 金
融 、 自然资源 、 卫生健康 、 教育 、 科技等主管部门承担本行业 、 本领域数据安全监管职责 。 公安机关 、 国家安全
机关等依照本法和有关法律 、 行政法规的规定,在各自职责范围内承担数据安全监管职责 。 国家网信部门依照
本法和有关法律 、行政法规的规定,负责统筹协调网络数据安全和相关监管工作 。
Each region and department bears primary responsibility for that region’s or department’s efforts on data
production, aggregation and processing, as well as data security. Regulatory departments such as for industry,
telecommunications, communications, finance, natural resources, health, education, science and technology
are to undertake data security regulatory duties in the corresponding sector. Public security organs, state
security organs and so forth are to undertake data security regulation duties within the scope of their duties in
accordance with the provisions of this Law, relevant laws and administrative regulations. The state cybersecurity
and informatisation departments are to take responsibility for overall coordination of network data security and
relevant regulatory efforts in accordance with this Law, relevant laws and administrative regulations.
DSL 11 国家积极开展数据领域国际交流与合作,参与数据安全相关国际规则和标准的制定,促进数据跨境安全 、 自由流
动。
The state is to actively carry out international exchanges and cooperation in the data field, participate in the
formulation of international rules and standards related to data security, and promote the cross-border secure and
free flow of data.
DSL 14 国家实施大数据战略,推进数据基础设施建设, 鼓励和支持数据在各行业 、 各领域的创新应用 。 县级以上人民
政府应当将数字经济发展纳入本级国民经济和社会发展规划,并根据需要制定数字经济发展规划。
The state is to implement a big data strategy, advancing the establishment of data infrastructure, and encouraging
and supporting innovative applications of data in each industry and field. People’s governments at the county
level or higher shall include the development of the digital economy in the national economic and social
development plans for that level, and draft development plans for the digital economy as needed.
DSL 15 国家支持数据开发利用和数据安全技术研究,鼓励数据开发利用和数据安全等领域的技术推广和商业创新,培
育 、 发展数据开发利用和数据安全产品和产业体系 。
The state is to support research into data use and development and data security techniques, encourage the
spread and commercial innovation in areas such as the use and development of data and data security, and foster
and develop the use and development of data, data security products and industrial systems.
24 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Law Article Text
DSL 16 国家推进数据开发利用技术和数据安全标准体系建设 。 国务院标准化行政主管部门和国务院有关部门根据各
自的职责,组织制定并适时修订有关数据开发利用技术 、 产品和数据安全相关标准 。 国家支持企业 、 社会团体和
教育 、 科研机构等参与标准制定 。
The state is to advance the establishment of a system of standards for data development and exploitation
technologies and data security. Within the scope of their respective duties, the State Council administrative
departments in charge of standardisation and other relevant State Council departments are to organise the
formulation and appropriate revision of standards related to technology and products for the development and
use of data and to data security. The state is to support enterprises and social groups, educational or research
bodies and so forth participating in drafting standards.
DSL 19 国家支持高等学校、 中等职业学校、 科研机构和 企业等开展数据开发利用技术和数据安全相关教育和培训,采
取 多种方式培养数据开发利用技术和数据安全专业人才,促进人才 交流 。
The state is to support schools of higher education, secondary vocational schools, scientific research institutions,
enterprises and so forth in carrying out education and training related to data use and development and data
security, employing diverse methods to cultivate professional data use and development and data security talent,
and promote professional exchanges.
DSL 34 公安机关、 国家安全机关因依法维护国家安全或者侦查犯罪的需要调取数据,应当按照国家有关规定,经过严格
的批准手续,依法进行,有关组织 、 个 人应当予以配合 。
Public security organs and state security organs retrieving data as necessary to lawfully preserve state security
or investigate crimes shall follow relevant state provisions and complete strict approval formalities to do so in
accordance with law, and relevant organisations and individuals shall cooperate.
DSL 51 开展涉及国家秘密的数据处理活动,适用 《中华人民共和国保守国家秘密法》 等法律 、行政法规的规定 。开展
涉及个人信息的数据处理活动,应当遵守个人信息保护法律 、行政法规的规定 。
The Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of State Secrets and other relevant laws and
administrative regulations are to apply to carrying out data-handling activities involving state secrets. The
carrying out of data-handling activities involving personal information shall comply with laws and administrative
regulations on protecting personal information.
PIPL 3 组 织、个人在中华人民共和 国境内处 理自然 人个人信息的活 动,适 用本法。在中华人民共和 国境外 处 理中华人民
共和国境内自然人个人信息的活动,有 下列情形之一的,也适用本法:
(一)以向境内自然人提供产品或者服务为目的;
(二)分析 、 评估境内自然人的行为;
(三)法律 、 行政法规规定的其他情形 。
This law applies to the activities of organisations and individuals handling the personal information of natural
persons within the territory of the People’s Republic of China. This law is also applicable to activities outside
the PRC that handle the personal information of natural persons within the territory of the PRC, in any of the
following circumstances:
(1) for the purpose of providing products or services to natural persons within the territory;
(2) to analyse and assess the conduct of natural persons within the territory;
(3) in other situations provided for by law or administrative regulations.
PIPL 4 个人信息是以电子或者其他方式记录的与已识别或者可识别的自然人有关的各种信息,不包括匿名化处理后的
信息。个人信息的处 理包括个人信息的收 集、存储、使 用、加 工 、传 输、提 供、公 开等。
Personal information is any type of information that identifies or can identify natural persons recorded
electronically or by other means, but does not include anonymised information. Handling of personal information
includes the collection, storage, use, processing, transmission, provision, disclosure etc. of personal information.
PIPL 12 国家积极参与个人信息保护国际规则的制定,促进个人信息保护方面的国际交流与合作,推动与其他国家 、 地区 、
国 际 组 织 之 间 的 个人信息保 护 规 则、标 准 等 的互认。
The state is to actively participate in the formulation of international rules for personal information protection,
promote international exchanges and cooperation on personal information protection, and promote mutual
recognition of rules and standards for the personal information protection with other countries, regions and
international organisations.
25

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Law Article Text
PIPL 19 个人信息 处 理者处 理个人信息 ,有法 律、行政 法 规 规 定 应当保 密或者不需 要告 知 的情 形 的,可以不向个人告 知前
条规定的事项 。 紧急情况 下 为保护自然人的生命健康和财产安全无法及时向个 人告知的,个 人信息处理者应当在
紧 急 情况 消除 后及时告 知。
When personal information handlers handle personal information, where there are circumstances that laws and
administrative regulations provide shall be kept confidential or need not be announced, it is acceptable not to
notify the individual of the matters specified in the preceding article. If an individual cannot be notified in time
to protect the life, health and property safety of natural persons under an emergency, the personal information
handler shall promptly notify the individual after the emergency is eliminated.
PIPL 34 国家机关为履行法定职责处理个 人信息,应当依照法律 、 行政法规规定的权限 、 程序进行,不得超出履行法定职
责 所 必 需 的 范 围 和 限 度。
State organs handling personal information in order to perform their legally prescribed duties shall do so in
accordance with the authority and procedures provided by laws and administrative regulations, and must not
exceed the scope and limits necessary for performing their legally prescribed duties.
PIPL 35 国家机关为履行法定职责处理个 人信息,应当依照本法规定向个 人告知并取得其同意;法律 、 行政法规规定应当
保密,或者告知 、 取得同意将妨碍国家机关履行法定职责的除外 。
State organs handling personal information in order to perform their legally prescribed duties shall notify the
individuals and obtain their consent as provided in this Law, except where laws and administrative regulations
provide that it shall be confidential or where giving notice and obtaining consent would impede the performance
of the state organs’ legally prescribed duties.
Notes
1 Mapping China’s Tech Giants, online .
2 Samantha Hoffman, Engineering global consent: the Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion , ASPI, Canberra,
14 October 2019, online .
3 Hoffman, Engineering global consent: the Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion .
4 ‘Two Chinese hackers working with the Ministry of State Security charged with global computer intrusion campaign targeting intellectual
property and confidential business information, including COVID-19 research’, news release, US Department of Justice, 21 July 2020, online ;
‘Chinese military personnel charged with computer fraud, economic espionage and wire fraud for hacking into credit reporting agency
Equifax’, news release, US Department of Justice, 10 February 2020, online .
5 The Open Systems Interconnection model provides a standard for systems to communicate with each other. It has several layers that data
must pass through, from the user-facing ‘application layer’ and the ‘physical layer’, which is the physical medium that connects systems, in
order to exchange data between systems. In between are layers that define how the data must be presented, packetised and sessionised in
order to travel across the network.
6 Rebecca Heilweil, ‘Why algorithms can be racist and sexist’, Vox , 18 February 2020, online .
7 Jenny Darmody, ‘For smart cities to work, they need to be “neutral and objective”’, Siliconrepublic , 12 May 2021, online .
8 For instance, Karen Hao, ‘This is how AI bias really happens—and why it’s so hard to fix’, MIT Technology Review , 4 February 2019, online .
9 Carla Hobbs, Europe’s digital sovereignty: from rulemaker to superpower in the age of US–China rivalry , European Council On Foreign Relations,
30 July 2020, online .
10 Adam Satariano, Monika Pronczuk, ‘Europe, overrun by foreign tech giants, wants to grow its own’, New York Times , 19 February 2020, online .
11 ‘Dahua and Hikvision co-author racial and ethnic PRC police standards’, IPVM , 30 March 2021, online ; Leo Kelion, ‘Huawei patent mentions use
of Uighur-spotting tech’, BBC , 13 January 2021, online .
12 Read about ‘key personnel’ in ‘China: Police “big data” systems violate privacy, target dissent’, Human Rights Watch , 19 November 2017,
online.
13 ‘ 国家大数据战略’ [National Big Data Strategy], People’s Daily , 12 November 2015, online .
14 See Chapter 28, Section 2 in ‘ 中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展’ [Outline of the 13th Five-Year Plan for the National Economic and Social
Development of the People’s Republic of China], Gov.cn , 17 March 2016, online.
15 ‘ 中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和2035年远景目标纲要’ [Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year
Plan for National Economic and Social Development and long-range objectives for 2035], PRC Government, 13 March 2021, online .
16 ‘ 共建 共治 共享——民进中央“提升基层治理效能 ， 促进社会和谐稳定”重点考察调研综述’ [Co-construction, co-governance, and
co-sharing: Summary of Central Committee of the China Association for Promoting Democracy’s key investigations on ‘improving the
effectiveness of grassroots governance and promoting harmony and stability of the society’], National Committee of the Chinese People’s
Political Consultative Conference, 9 September 2020, online ; ‘国家大数据战略——习近平与“十三五”十四大战略’ [National Big Data
Strategy: Xi Jinping and the fourteen grand strategies of the ‘13th five-year-plan’], Xinhua , 12 November 2015, online ; ‘第四届互联网大数据与
社会治理南京智库峰会举行’ [The 4th Internet Big Data and Social Governance Nanjing Think Tank Summit was held], Xinhua , 13 November
2020, online ; Fengli Wang, Li Zhang, ‘ 大数据技术提升社会治理能力’ [Big data technology enhances social governance capabilities], China
Social Science Net , 10 June 2020, online .
17 Samantha Hoffman, ‘Programming China: the Communist Party’s autonomic approach to managing state security’, PhD thesis, University of
Nottingham, 29 September 2017.
18 For more on this topic, see the ‘Service-oriented management’ section in Samantha Hoffman, ‘Grasping power with both hands: social credit,
the mass line, and party control’, China Brief , 10 October 2018, online .
26 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
19 Maya Wang, ‘China’s algorithms of repression: reverse engineering a Xinjiang police mass surveillance app’, Human Rights Watch ,
May 2019, online.
20 For instance, the description of Guizhou’s National Defense Mobilization Command Information System as being reliant on the ‘Guizhou
Cloud’ big-data platform, which is described as being inclusive of dozens of ‘thematic clouds’ and clouds’ prefecture-level administrative
divisions. ‘ 国防动员 ， 再不牵手大数据就晚了’ [National defence mobilisation, it would be too late to hold hands with big data (if not doing
it now)], Xinhuanet , 6 June 2016, online; ‘成功案例’ [Successful cases], Cinasoft, online ; ‘公司简介’ [Company introduction], Cinasoft, online ;
Cheng Miao, Feng Xinyi, ‘ 贵州大数据智库平台 ： 助推政府管理和社会治理创新’ [Guizhou big data think tank platform: boosting government
management and social governance innovation], Xinhuanet, 19 January 2018, online ; Hu Xiao, ‘“云上贵州”平台上线 建设“7+N”多云’
[‘Guizhou Cloud’ platform was launched, constructed ‘7+n’ clouds] , People’s Daily, 20 October 2014, online ; ‘贵州携阿里云造中国“数据之都’
[Guizhou and Alibaba Cloud jointly build China’s ‘data capital’], People’s Daily , 22 December 2014, online .
21 ‘ 透析国家安全视野中的大数据发展问题’ [Analysis of the development of big data from the perspective of state security], CPC News ,
9 November 2016, online .
22 Nigel Inkster, China’s cyber power , Routledge, Adelphi, London, for the Institute of International and Strategic Studies, 2016, 24.
23 ‘拍案 丨 看看这三个案例 ， 青年学子可要绷紧国家安全这根弦’ [Take a look a these three cases: young students must tighten the string of
state security], Xinhua , 15 April 2021, online .
24 ‘委员 ： 电脑操作系统太依赖进口 威胁国家安全’ [Committee member: [Our] computer operating systems rely too much on imports,
threatening national security], China News , 10 March 2009, online ; ‘专家谈XP退休 ： 严重依赖国外技术 中国信息安全形势严峻’ [Experts
discuss XP retirement: relying heavily on foreign technology, China’s information security situation is severe], People’s Daily , 8 April
2014, online; ‘人民日报整版讨论： 抓住信息化发展的历史机遇’ [People’s Daily full-page discussion: Seize the historical opportunity of
informatisation development], People’s Daily , 12 April 2019, online .
25 Jianguo Hou, ‘把科技自立自强作为国家发展的战略支撑’ [Taking self-reliance of science and technology as a strategic support for national
development], Qstheory , 16 March 2021, online ; ‘中共中央 国务院印发 《国家创新驱动发展战略纲要》’ [The Central Committee of the
Communist Party of China and the State Council issued the ‘Outline of the National Strategy of Innovation-Driven Development’], Xinhua ,
19 May 2016, online.
26 See the 2015 ‘Notice from the State Council on issuing the action outline for promoting the development of big data’, online .
27 ‘Chinese standards going global an unavoidable trend’, Global Times , 28 April 2020, online .
28 The number in brackets corresponds with citations for claims in the graphic’s text:
 [1] Many of the party-state’s founding generation shared with the PRC’s other reformers and revolutionaries a vision of a modern China
becoming both wealthy and strong. See John Delury, Orville Schell, Wealth and power: China’s long march to the twenty-first century , Random
House, 16 July 2013. Xi Jinping calls this the party’s ‘original aspiration’. In his speech to the 19th Party Congress, Xi stated that ‘The original
aspiration and the mission of Chinese Communists is to seek happiness for the Chinese people and rejuvenation for the Chinese nation.’ See
Xi Jinping, ‘Secure a decisive victory in building a moderately prosperous society in all respects and strive for the great success of socialism
with Chinese characteristics for a new era’, Xinhua , 18 October 2017, online.
 [2] Samantha Hoffman, Engineering global consent: the Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion ; Liza Tobin, ‘Xi’s vision for
transforming global governance: a strategic challenge for Washington and its allies’, Texas National Security Review , November 2018, 2(1),
online.
 [3] ‘新华国际时评 ： 破解全球治理赤字难题需要新钥匙’ [Xinhua international commentary: A new key is needed to solve the problem of
global governance deficit], Xinhua, 24 January 2019, online .
 [4] Fengrong Zuo, ‘全球治理中的国际话语权’ [International discourse power in global governance], China Worker Net , 22 November 2019,
online.
 [5] Nadège Rolland, China’s vision for a new world order , NBR special report no. 83, National Bureau of Asian Research, 27 January 2020, online .
29 The Counter Espionage Law (2014), the State Security Law (2015), the Foreign Non-governmental Organisation Management Law (2016), the
Cybersecurity Law (2016) and the Intelligence Law (2017), among others.
30 The Australian Cyber Security Centre, in its guidance to organisations for identifying cyber supply-chain risks, covers this under ‘Foreign
control, influence and interference’. See Identifying cyber supply chain risks , Australian Cyber Security Centre, January 2021, online ; Max
Smolaks, ‘No backdoor, no backdoor … you’re a backdoor! Huawei won’t spy for China or anyone else, exec tells MPs’, The  Register,
11 June 2019, online.
31 Samantha Hoffman, ‘China’s state security strategy: “Everyone is responsible”’, The Strategist, 11 December 2017, online; ‘全民国家安全教
育日 这20个法 律 知 识你懂 吗？’ [National State Security Education Day: Do you understand these 20 legal trivia?]’, People’s Liberation Army
Daily, 7 April 2017, online.
32 Samm Sacks, ‘Data security and US–China tech entanglement’, Lawfare , 2 April 2020, online .
33 Rob Davies, Helen Davidson, ‘The strange case of Alibaba’s Jack Ma and his three-month vanishing act’, The  Guardian, 23 January 2021,
online.
34 Karishma Vaswani, ‘Alibaba accepts record China fine and vows to change’, BBC , 12 April 2021, online .
35 ‘Jack Ma shows why China’s tycoons keep quiet’, New York Times , 22 April 2021, online .
36 See ‘Thematic snapshots’ in the ‘Analysis’ section of the Mapping China’s Technology Giants project. ‘Thematic snapshot: Privacy policies’
covers the publicly available privacy policies for the 27 companies tracked in the project, online .
37 ‘ 习近平谈法治最新金句 剖析高级干部走上犯罪道路原因’ [Xi Jinping’s latest key quotes on the rule of law analyse the reasons why senior
cadres commit crimes], CPC News , 15 February 2019, online ; Yixin Chen, ‘习近平法治思想是全面依法治国的行动指南’ [Xi Jinping’s thought
on the rule of law is an action guide for comprehensively relying upon the law to rule the country], National People’s Congress of the PRC,
14 May 2021, online; Jiafu Wang, ‘依法治国 ， 建设社会主义法治国家’ [Relying upon the law to rule the country to build a socialist country
ruled by law], Public Law, 1997, online; ‘党的领导是推进全面依法治国的根本保证’ [The leadership of the party is the fundamental guarantee
for advancing the rule of law comprehensively], Legal Daily , 30 December 2020, online ; Dalin Fu, ‘坚持党对全面依法治国的领导’ [Persist in
the party’s leadership of comprehensively governing the country relying on law], Qstheory , 13 January 2021, online ; Qingshan Qu, ‘正确认识
和把握党和法的关系’ [Correctly understand and handle the relationship between the party and the law], Guangming Daily , 16 February 2015,
online.
38 中华人民共和国数据安全法（草案） （ 二次审议稿）[Data Security Law of the People’s Republic of China (draft) (second deliberation)],
NPC.gov.cn, April 2021, online ; 中华人民共和国个人信息保 护 法 (草案) (二次审议稿), [Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s
Republic of China (draft) (second deliberation)], NPC.gov.cn , April 2021, online .
39 ‘China’s top legislature schedules standing committee session’, Xinhua , 26 May 2021, online .
27

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
40 See Appendix: articles 2, 5, 6, 7, 14, 15, 16, 19 of the draft DSL and Article 3 of the draft PIPL; see also Chuanying Lu, ‘ 鲁 传 颖：数 据 安 全 立 法，
需平衡好各方诉求’ [Lu Chuanying: Data security legislation needs to balance the demands of all parties], Global Times , 27 May 2020, online .
41 Draft DSL, Article 4.
42 Draft DSL, Article 6.
43 The number in brackets corresponds with citations for claims in the graphic’s text.
 [1] ‘中华人民共和国国家安全法’ [State Security Law of the People’s Republic of China], Gov.cn , 1 July 2015, online .
 [2] ‘中华人民共和国国家安全法’ [State Security Law of the People’s Republic of China], Gov.cn , 1 July 2015, online .
 [3] The concept of ‘comprehensive state security outlook’ articulated as it is today includes numerous component parts, in addition to those
highlighted in the graphic. Rather than being new under Xi Jinping, the comprehensive state security outlook has most clearly come out
of the CCP’s conversation on its ability to respond to perceived threats, which has become increasingly distinct ever since the Tiananmen
Massacre in 1989. By the late 1990s and early 2000s, many of the parts of state security included in Xi Jinping’s ‘outlook’ were already being
discussed as a part of state security. The 2001 Science of Military Strategy, for example, said that ‘state security’ is a key ‘national interest’
and is a ‘combination of political, economic, military, cultural, information, energy and biological environment situations’. It added: ‘While
traditional security still exists, we cannot neglect the threat of economic, political and cultural fields. Security in non-traditional fields such
as “economic security”, “political security”, culture and others are also important factors of state security.’ One shift under Xi Jinping has
been the removal of any ambiguity about the idea that every individual and entity is responsible for state security. An annual State Security
Education Day is held on 15 April, In 2016, for instance, Xi Jinping emphasised that ‘We must be proactive, take precautions, [react/learn] from
clues that reveal a trend, nip [problems] in the bud, take the first move, take the initiative, and be prepared to deal with any forms of conflict,
risk and challenge, do well at preparing for every kind of struggle [in the] economic, political, cultural, societal, diplomatic, military [realms].
All levels and everyone should take responsibility [for it].’ See also ‘ 习近平这样谈总体国家安全’ [Xi Jinping talks about comprehensive
state security], Science and Technology Daily , 11 April 2020, online ; Dazhi Yang, ‘政治安全是国家安全的根本’ [Political security is the root of
state security], Qstheory , 20 April 2018, online ; Xiaofeng Yan, ‘人民安全是国家安全的基石’ [The people’s security is the cornerstone of state
security], PLA Daily , 12 June 2020, online .
 [4] Andrew S Erickson, Adam P Liff, ‘Installing a safety on the “loaded gun”? China’s institutional reforms, National Security Commission
and Sino-Japanese crisis (in)stability’, Journal of Contemporary China , 26 October 2015, 25(98), online ; Weixing Hu, ‘Xi Jinping’s “big power
diplomacy” and China’s Central National Security Commission’, Journal of Contemporary China , 8 December 2015, 25(98):163–177, online ;
David M Lampton, ‘Xi Jinping and the National Security Commission: policy coordination and political power’, Journal of Contemporary China ,
18 March 2015, 24(95):759–777, online ; Joel Wuthnow, ‘Decoding China’s new “National Security Commission”’, CNA  Brief, November 2013,
online; Joel Wuthnow, ‘China’s much-heralded NSC has disappeared’, Foreign Policy , 30 June 2016, online .
 [5] ‘林铎在省委国家安全委员会第一次会议上强调全面贯彻落实总体国家安全观 努力推动国家安全工作上台阶唐仁健出席’ [Lin Duo
emphasised at the first meeting of the State Security Committee of the Provincial Party Committee to fully implement the overall state
security concept and strive to promote state security work, Tang Renjian attended], Gansu Daily , 29 December 2018, online ; ‘河南省级机构改
革：设 党 委 机 构18个 政府机构42个’ [Henan Provincial Institutional Reform: Set up 18 party committees and 42 government agencies],
Sina News, 6 November 2018, online .
 [6] ‘全民国家安全教育日 这20个法 律 知 识你懂 吗？’ [National State Security Education Day: Do you understand these 20 legal trivia?],
People’s Liberation Army Daily , 7 April 2017, online; ‘中共中央印发 《中国共产党政法工作条例》’ [The Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China issued the ‘Regulations on the Political and Legal Work of the Communist Party of China’], Xinhua , 18 January 2019, online .
 [7] Samantha Hoffman, Peter Mattis, ‘Managing the power within: China’s Central State Security Commission’, War on the Rocks , 18 July 2016,
online.
44 The term ‘central state security leading mechanism’ ( 中央国家安全领导机构) is used in legal documents to refer to the Central State Security
Commission (CSSC; 中央国家安全委员会) because the CSSC is a party body. See ‘ 全民国家安全教育日 这20个法 律 知 识你懂 吗？’ [State
Security Education Day: Do you understand these 20 legal trivia?], People’s Liberation Army Daily , 7 April 2017, online.
45 Draft DSL, Article 7.
46 Dominic Meagher, ‘Has Hong Kong’s national security law created secret police with Chinese characteristics?’, The Strategist , 14 July 2020,
online.
47 Draft PIPL, Article 3.
48 William Yang, ‘Hong Kong: National security law targets overseas activists’, DW News , 18 August 2020, online .
49 Draft PIPL, Article 34, also see Article 35 on notification requirements.
50 ‘Data security business advisory: Risks and considerations for businesses using data services and equipment from firms linked to the
People’s Republic of China’, US Department of Homeland Security, 22 December 2020, online .
51 ‘ 开创我国标准化事业新局面——学习贯彻习近平同志关于标准化工作的重要论述’ [Create a new situation in China’s standardisation
business—study and implement Comrade Xi Jinping’s important exposition on standardisation], People’s Daily , 6 September 2015, online .
52 Draft DSL, Article 16.
53 ‘Standardisation Law of the People’s Republic of China’, Standardisation Administration of China, 23 March 2018, online . The Standardisation
Law was revised and adopted at a meeting of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress in November 2017 and came into
force on 1 January 2018.
54 ‘China—Standards for trade’, Export.gov , 30 July 2019, online .
55 ‘Dahua and Hikvision co-author racial and ethnic PRC police standards’, IPVM , 30 March 2021, online . See also Samantha Hoffman,
Double-edged sword: China’s sharp power exploitation of emerging technologies , National Endowment for Democracy, April 2021, online .
56 ‘ 组织机构’ [Organisation], Standardisation Administration of China, online .
57 Draft DSL, Article 11; draft PIPL, Article 12.
58 For instance, see US President Biden’s comments in a speech corresponding with the signing of an executive order on supply-chain security:
‘Remarks by President Biden at signing of an executive order on supply chains’, transcript, The White House, 24 February 2021, online .
59 Cyber Security & Infrastructure Security Agency, ‘Joint Statement by the Federal Bureau Of Investigation (FBI), the Cybersecurity And
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), the office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), and the National Security Agency (NSA)’,
US Government, 5 January 2021, online ; Andrew Roth, ‘Code deployed in US cyber-attack linked to suspected Russian hackers’, The  Guardian,
11 January 2021, online .
28 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
60 The number of organisations known to have downloaded the malicious update was approximately 18,000, but the number affected could be
much higher. They included both US Government and private networks and large corporations such as Microsoft, whose CEO, Brad Smith,
called it ‘the largest and most sophisticated attack the world has ever seen’. ‘SolarWinds hack was “largest and most sophisticated attack”
ever: Microsoft president’, Reuters , 14 February 2021, online ; David E Sanger, Nicole Perlroth, Julian E Barnes, ‘As understanding of Russian
hacking grows, so does alarm’, New York Times , 2 January 2021, online .
61 An original equipment manufacturer (OEM) produces products or components and sells them more cheaply in bulk to another company,
sometimes without its own company branding (white labelling). The product can then be branded by the purchasing company. See ‘OEM
software’, Looker, no date, online ; ‘Original equipment manufacturer (OEM): introduction, pros & cons’, Intrepidsourcing , no date, online .
62 ‘Dahua OEM directory’, IPVM, 5 May 2021, online ; John Honovich, ‘Bosch dropping Dahua’, IPVM , 13 February 2020, online ; ‘Honeywell hides
selling US Gov banned Chinese video surveillance’, IPVM , 10 October 2018, online ; Chris Burt, ‘Bosch considers dumping Dahua cameras
after biometric ethnicity-warning revelations’, Biometric , 19 February 2021, online ; John Honovich, ‘3 weeks later, Honeywell still cannot say
whether they are vulnerable to Dahua wiretapping [now admits]’, IPVM , 27 August 2019, online .
63 Danielle Cave, Elsa Kania, Tom Uren, Fergus Hanson, Peter Jennings, Michael Shoebridge, Samantha Hoffman, Jessica Clarence, Greg Austin,
Huawei and Australia’s 5G network , ASPI, Canberra, 10 October 2018, online .
64 Danielle Cave, ‘Huawei highlights China’s expansion dilemma: espionage or profit?’ The  Strategist, 15 June 2018, online ; Elsa Kania, ‘Much ado
about Huawei (Part 2)’, The  Strategist, 28 March 2018, online ; Samantha Hoffman, ‘China’s state security strategy: “Everyone is responsible”’,
The Strategist, 11 December 2017, online; Samantha Hoffman, ‘“Dangerous love”: China’s all-encompassing security vision’, The National
Interest, 17 May 2016, online.
65 Identifying cyber supply chain risks , Australian Cyber Security Centre, January 2021, online .
66 Hoffman, Engineering global consent: the Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion .
67 Stuart A Thompson, Charlie Warzel, ‘How to track President Trump’, New York Times, 20 December 2019, online .
68 Richard Pérez-Peña, Matthew Rosenberg, ‘Strava fitness app can reveal military sites, analysts say’, New York Times , 29 January 2018, online .
69 ‘Popular times, wait times, and visit duration’, Google My Business Help , online.
70 Zach Dorfman, ‘How China’s tech giants are giving China a vital edge in espionage’, Foreign Policy , 23 December 2020, online .
71 Zach Dorfman, ‘China used stolen data to expose CIA operatives in Africa and Europe’, Foreign Policy, 21 December 2020, online .
72 Samantha Hoffman, John Garnaut, Kayla Izenman, Matthew Johnson, Alexandra Pascoe, Fergus Ryan, Elise Thomas, The flipside of China’s
central bank digital currency , ASPI, Canberra, 14 October 2020, online .
73 Sebastian Heilmann, Oliver Melton, ‘The reinvention of development planning in China, 1993–2012’, Modern China , 24 August 2013, online ;
Dan Tobin, How Xi Jinping’s ‘New Era’ should have ended US debate on Beijing’s ambitions , Center for Strategic and International Studies,
8 May 2020, online .
74 Timothy R Heath, China’s new governing party parad igm, Routledge, 28 February 2019; Sebastian Heilmann, Elizabeth J Perry (eds), Mao’s
invisible hand: the political foundations of adaptive governance in Chi na, Harvard Contemporary China Series 17, Harvard University Press,
1 May 2011.
29

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Acronyms and abbreviations
CCP Chinese Communist Party
DSL Data Security Law
GTCOM Global Tone Communication Technology Co. Ltd
ICPC International Cyber Policy Centre
OEM original equipment manufacturer
PIPL Personal Information Protection Law
PRC People’s Republic of China
SAC Standardisation Administration of China
30 Policy Brief: Supply chains and the global data collection ecosystem

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Some previous ICPC publications

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
TW
ENTY YEARS OF ASPI STRATEGY
2001 - 2021
