
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Mapping more of China’s
technology giants
Fergus Ryan, Danielle Cave and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu
Issues paper
Report No. 24/2019
AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the authors
Fergus Ryan is an Analyst working with the International Cyber Policy Centre.
Danielle Cave is Deputy Director of the International Cyber Policy Centre.
Vicky Xiuzhong Xu is a Researcher working with the International Cyber Policy Centre.
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Dr Samantha Hoffman and Nathan Ruser for their research contributions to this report and to the broader Mapping China’s
Technology Giants project. Thank you to Fergus Hanson, Michael Shoebridge and anonymous peer reviewers for their valuable feedback on
report drafts. And thank you to Cheryl Yu and Ed Moore for their research and data collection efforts.
What is ASPI?
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute was formed in 2001 as an independent, non‑partisan think tank. Its core aim is to provide the
Australian Government with fresh ideas on Australia’s defence, security and strategic policy choices. ASPI is responsible for informing
the public on a range of strategic issues, generating new thinking for government and harnessing strategic thinking internationally.
ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre (ICPC) is a leading voice in global debates on cyber and emerging technologies and their impact
on broader strategic policy. The ICPC informs public debate and supports sound public policy by producing original empirical research,
bringing together researchers with diverse expertise, often working together in teams. To develop capability in Australia and our region,
the ICPC has a capacity building team that conducts workshops, training programs and large ‑scale exercises both in Australia and
overseas for both the public and private sectors. The ICPC enriches the national debate on cyber and strategic policy by running an
international visits program that brings leading experts to Australia.
The work of ICPC would be impossible without the financial support of our partners and sponsors across government, industry and civil
society. ASPI is grateful to the US State Department for contributing funding to this research project.
Important disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in relation to the subject matter covered. It is provided with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering any form of professional or other advice or services. No person should
rely on the contents of this publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional.
ASPI
Tel +61 2 6270 5100
Email enquiries@aspi.org.au
www.aspi.org.au
www.aspistrategist.org.au
 facebook.com/ASPI.org
 @ASPI_ICPC
© The Australian Strategic Policy Institute Limited 2019
This publication is subject to copyright. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 , no part of it may in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, microcopying, photocopying, recording or otherwise) be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
without prior written permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the publishers. Notwithstanding the above, educational institutions
(including schools, independent colleges, universities and TAFEs) are granted permission to make copies of copyrighted works strictly for
educational purposes without explicit permission from ASPI and free of charge.
First published November 2019.
ISSN 2209 ‑9689 (online),
ISSN 2209 ‑9670 (print)
Cover image: This image is from ASPI’s China’s tech giants website: https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au . ASPI’s International Cyber Policy
Centre allows this image to be republished under the Creative Commons License Attribution ‑Share Alike. The site can also be embedded
into other websites via the menu tab.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Issues paper
Report No. 24/2019
Fergus Ryan, Danielle Cave and Vicky Xiuzhong Xu
Mapping more of China’s
technology giants
AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
Executive summary 03
The updated database 04
Methodology 05
These companies differ in their size, scope and global presence 07
TikTok as a vector for censorship and surveillance 09
Meiya Pico: from mobile data extraction to the Belt and Road’s‘safety’ and security corridor 11
CloudWalk and data colonialism in Zimbabwe 12
BeiDou: China’s satellite and space race 14
Foreign investment 16
All roads lead to Xinjiang 18
Conclusion 22
Notes 23
Acronyms and abbreviations 26
02
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
This second report accompanies the Mapping China’s Technology Giants website.
Read our first report on the original dataset online. It’s one of ASPI’s most read
reports of all time.
Executive summary
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre has updated the public database that maps the global
expansion of key Chinese technology companies. This update adds a further 11 companies and
organisations: iFlytek, Megvii, ByteDance (which owns TikTok), SenseTime, YITU, CloudWalk, DJI,
Meiya Pico, Dahua, Uniview and BeiDou.
Our public database now maps 23 companies and organisations and is visualised through our
interactive website, Mapping China’s Technology Giants. The website seeks to give policymakers,
academics, journalists, government officials and other interested readers a more holistic picture of
the increasingly global reach of China’s tech giants. The response to phase 1 of this project—it quickly
became one of ASPI’s most read products—suggests that the current lack of transparency about some
of these companies’ operations and governance arrangements has created a gap this database is
helping to fill.
This update adds companies working mainly in the artificial intelligence (AI) and surveillance tech
sectors. SenseTime, for example, is one of the world’s most valuable AI start‑ups. iFlytek is a partially
state‑owned speech recognition company. Meiya Pico is a digital forensics and security company
that created media headlines in 2019 because of its monitoring mobile app MFSocket.1 In addition,
we’ve added DJI, which specialises in drone technologies, and BeiDou, which isn’t a company but the
Chinese Government’s satellite navigation system.
We also added ByteDance—an internet technology company perhaps best known internationally
for its video app, TikTok, which is popular with teenagers around the world. TikTok is also attracting
public and media scrutiny in the US over national security implications, the use of US citizens’ data
and allegations of censorship, including shadow banning (the down‑ranking of particular topics via the
app’s algorithm so users don’t see certain topics in their feed).
Company overviews now include a summary of their activities in Xinjiang.2 For some companies,
including ByteDance and Huawei, we are including evidence of their work in Xinjiang that has not
being reported publicly before. For most of these companies, the surveillance technologies and
techniques being rolled out abroad—often funded by loans from the Export–Import Bank of China
(China Eximbank)3—have long been used on Chinese citizens, and especially on the Uyghur and
other minority populations in Xinjiang, where an estimated 1.5 million people are being arbitrarily
held in detention centres.4 Some of these companies have actively and repeatedly obscured their
work in Xinjiang, including in hearings with foreign parliamentary committees. This project now
includes evidence and analysis of those activities in order to foster greater transparency about their
engagement in human rights abuses or ethically questionable activities in the same way Western firms
are held to account by Western media and civil society actors, as they should be.
03

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
In this report, we include a number of case studies in which we delve deeper into parts of the dataset.
This includes case studies on TikTok as a vector for censorship and surveillance, BeiDou’s satellite
and space race and CloudWalk’s various AI, biometric data and facial recognition partnerships with
the Zimbabwean Government. We also include a case study on Meiya Pico’s work with China’s Public
Security Ministry on Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) aid projects in Southeast Asia and Central Asia.
Those projects include the construction of digital forensics labs and cyber capacity training, including
for police forces across Asia.
We have also investigated the role that foreign investment plays in the global expansion of some of
these companies, particularly in China’s surveillance and public security sector.
The updated database
Our public database now maps out 23 companies and organisations. On the Mapping China’s
Technology Giants website you’ll find a dataset that geo‑codes and analyses major points of overseas
presence, including 5G relationships; ‘smart cities’ and ‘public security’ solutions; surveillance
relationships; research and university partnerships; submarine cables; terrestrial cables; significant
telecommunications and ICT projects; and foreign investment. The website does not map out
products and services, such as equipment sales.
Previously, in April 2019, we mapped companies working across the internet, telecommunications and
biotech sectors, including Huawei, Tencent, Alibaba, Baidu, Hikvision, China Electronics Technology
Group (CETC), ZTE, China Mobile, China Telecom, China Unicom, Wuxi AppTec Group and BGI. This
dataset has also been updated, and new data points have been added for those companies, including
on 5G relationships, smart cities, R&D labs and data centres.
At the time of release this updated research project now maps and tracks:
• 26,000+ data points that have helped to geo‑locate 2,500+ points of overseas presence for the
23 companies
• 447 university and research partnerships, including 195+ Huawei Seeds for the Future university
partnerships
• 115 smart city or public security solution projects, most of which are in Europe, South America
and Africa
• 88 5G relationships in 45 countries
• 295 surveillance relationships in 96 countries
• 145 R&D labs, the greatest concentration of which is in Europe
• 63 undersea cables, 20 leased cables and 49 terrestrial cables
• 208 data centres and 342 telecommunications and ICT projects spread across the world.
Other updates have also been made to the website, often in response to valuable feedback from
policymakers, researchers and journalists. Updates have been made to the following:
• The landing ‘splash page’5
• How to use this tool6
• Glossary.7
04
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Terrestrial cables have now been added and can be searched through the filter bar
(via ‘Overseas presence’)
The original report that accompanied the launch of the project was translated into Mandarin
in August 2019.
In addition to this dataset, each company has its own web page, which includes an overview of the
company and a summary of its activities with the Chinese party‑state. The overviews now include a
summary of each company’s activities in Xinjiang. This research was added for a number of reasons.
First, we needed to compile the information in one place for journalists, civil society groups and
governments. Second, these companies aren’t held to account by China’s media and civil society
groups, and it’s clear that many have obscured their activities in Xinjiang. Some have even provided
incorrect information in response to direct questions from foreign governments. For example, a
Huawei executive told the UK House of Commons Science and Technology Committee on 10 June
2019 that Huawei’s activities in Xinjiang occurred only via ‘third parties:’8
Chair Sir Norman Lamb: But do you have products and services in Xinjiang Province in terms of
some sort of contractual relationship with the provincial government?
Huawei Executive: Our contracts are with the third parties. It is not something we do directly.
That’s not correct. Huawei works directly with the Chinese Government’s Public Security Bureau
in Xinjiang on a range of projects. Evidence for this—and similar—work can now be found via each
company’s dedicated Mapping China’s Technology Giants web page and is also analysed from page 18.
Methodology
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre began this research project due to a lack of publicly available
quantitative and qualitative data, especially in English, on the overseas activities of these key
technology companies. Some of the companies disclose little in the way of policies that affect data,
security, privacy, freedom of expression and censorship. What information is available is spread across
a wide range of sources and hasn’t been compiled in one location. In‑depth analysis of the available
sources also requires Chinese‑language capabilities and an understanding of other issues, such as
the relationships the companies have with the state and how Chinese state financing structures work.
For example, some of the companies, especially Huawei, conduct a lot of their work in developing
countries through China Eximbank loans. Importantly, the use of internet and other archiving services
is vital, as Chinese web pages are often moved, altered or deleted.
This research relied on open‑source data collection that took place primarily in English and Chinese.
Data sources included company websites, corporate information, tenders, media reporting, databases
and other public sources.
The following companies—which work across the telecommunications, technology, internet,
surveillance, AI and biotech sectors—are now present on the Mapping China’s Technology Giants
website (new additions are in red text):
05

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
• Alibaba
• Baidu
• BeiDou
• BGI
• ByteDance
• China Electronics Technology Group (CETC)
• China Mobile
• China Telecom
• China Unicom
• CloudWalk
• Dahua
• DJI
• Hikvision (a subsidiary of CETC)
• Huawei
• iFlytek
• Megvii
• Meiya Pico
• SenseTime
• Tencent
• Uniview
• WuXi AppTec Group
• YITU
• ZTE.
The size and complexity of these companies, and the speed at which they’re expanding, mean that this
dataset will inevitably be incomplete. For that reason, we encourage researchers, journalists, experts
and members of the public to continue to contribute and submit data via the online platform in order
to help make the dataset more complete over time.
For tips on how to get the most out of the map, navigate to ‘How to use this tool’ on the website. When
you’re first presented with the map, all data points are displayed. Click the coloured icons and cables
for more information. To navigate to the list of companies, click ‘View companies’ in the left blue panel.
There’s a filter bar at the bottom of the screen. Click the items to select. To reset your search selection,
click ‘Reset’ in the filter bar.
The yellow triangle icons on the map are data points of particular interest in which we invested
additional research resources.
06
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
These companies differ in their size, scope and
global presence
They may not be household names in the West, but the market size of many of the Chinese
companies outlined in this report is larger than many of their more well‑known counterparts outside
China. iFlytek, a voice recognition tech company established in 1999, isn’t yet a household name
outside China but has 70% of the Chinese voice recognition market and a market capitalisation of
Ұ63 billion (US$9.2 billion). Newcomer ByteDance, an internet technology company with a focus on
machine‑learning‑enabled content platforms, was established only in 2012 but is already valued at
around US$78 billion, making it the world’s most valuable start‑up.
Many of the companies outlined in this report have skyrocketed in value by capitalising on China’s
surge in security spending in Xinjiang and elsewhere as a large, sprawling surveillance apparatus is
constructed. Some have been, in effect, conscripted into spearheading the development of AI in the
country—a goal of particular strategic importance to the party‑state.
Other companies we examine in this report, such as Dahua Technology, Megvii and Uniview, aren’t well
known but have significant global footprints. Dahua, for example, is one of the world’s largest security
camera manufacturers. Between them Hikvision 9 and Dahua supply around one‑third of the global market
for security cameras and related goods, such as digital video recorders. 10
All Chinese tech companies have deep ties to the Chinese state security apparatus, but, perhaps
more than the others, the companies in this report occupy a space in which the lines between the
commercial imperatives of private companies (and some state‑backed companies) and the strategic
imperatives of the party‑state are blurred.
Several of the companies we examine—including iFlytek, SenseTime, Megvii and Yitu—have been
designated as official ‘AI Champions’ by the party‑state, alongside Huawei, Hikvision and the ‘BATs’
(Baidu,11 Alibaba12 and Tencent;13) which were featured in our previous report. These ‘champions’,
having been identified as possessing “core technologies”, have been selected to spearhead AI
development in the country, with the aim of overtaking the US in AI by 2030. 14
Gregory C Allen, writing for the Center for a New American Security, cited SenseTime executives as
saying the title:
… gave the companies privileged positions for national technical standards‑setting and also was
intended to give the companies confidence that they would not be threatened with competition
from state‑owned enterprises.15
Speaking in December 2018, SenseTime co‑founder Xu Bing alluded to the uniqueness of this
privileged position:
We are very lucky to be a private company working at a technology that will be critical for the
next two decades. Historically, governments would dominate nuclear, rocket, and comparable
technologies and not trust private companies.16
07

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Historically, the party‑state drew on the power of a few state‑owned enterprises to help it achieve its
strategic goals. But in order to become a world leader in AI by 2025—an express aim of the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP)— the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has demonstrated its ability to move
away from those cumbersome organisations in favour of smaller, more agile companies not wholly
owned by the state. This has proven to be a highly successful—and mutually beneficial—model.
Chinese AI and surveillance companies benefit from a highly favourable regulatory environment
in which concerns over the potential use of invasive systems of surveillance to erode civil liberties
are largely and substantively ignored by design, although they’re sometimes discussed in the
Chinese media.17
Companies that we examine in this report, such as YITU, CloudWalk, iFlytek and SenseTime, have
access to enormous customer databases that are generating huge amounts of proprietary data—the
essential ingredient for improving AI and machine‑learning algorithms.
AI giant SenseTime has access to a database of more than 2 billion images, at least some of which,
SenseTime CEO Xu Li told Quartz,18 come from various government agencies, giving the company a
distinct advantage over its foreign competitors.
The global expansion of these companies—from research partnerships with foreign universities
through to the development of operational ‘smart city’ or ‘public security’ projects—raises important
questions about the geostrategic, political and human rights implications of their work.
Users of the website will now find more than 26,000 datapoints that have helped to geo‑locate 2,500+
points of overseas presence for the 23 companies and organisations. But it’s important to note that
the presence of the companies’ products in overseas markets is far larger than the map can indicate.
Many of the companies’ relationships are business to business, and their products are integrated as
part of other companies’ solutions. For example, iFlytek’s speech recognition software is used in the
voice assistant in Huawei smartphones, and YITU provides its facial recognition and traffic monitoring
software to Huawei’s smart cities solutions. So, while Huawei’s smart city solutions are mapped,
the companies that provide certain technologies and component parts for smart cities can’t always
be captured.
This illustrates a complex problem associated with data and privacy protection in ‘internet of things’
devices that is tackled in Dr Samantha Hoffman’s ASPI report Engineering global consent: the Chinese
Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion.19 Companies can claim that they don’t misuse the
data that their products collect, but those claims don’t always take into account how component‑part
manufacturers whose technologies are integrated into smart cities and public security services, for
example, collect and use citizens’ data.
08
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
TikTok as a vector for censorship and
surveillance
Unlike China’s first generation of social media tech giants, which stumbled in their international
expansion,20 second‑generation start‑ups such as ByteDance are proving to be much more
sure‑footed. TikTok, a short‑video app, is the company’s most successful foreign export, having grown
a global audience of more than 700 million in just a few years.21 ByteDance achieved that meteoric
growth, ironically enough, by ploughing US$1 billion into ads on the social platforms of its Western
rivals Facebook, Facebook‑owned Instagram and Snapchat.22
The app has managed to maintain its ‘stickiness’ for users—mostly teens—by virtue of the AI‑powered
advanced algorithm undergirding it. The remarkable success of the app enabled ByteDance to become
the world’s most valuable start‑up in October 2018 after it secured a US$3 billion investment round
that gave it a jaw‑dropping valuation of US$75 billion.23
TikTok has already attracted the ire of regulators around the world, including in Indonesia, India,
the UK and the US, where the company made a $US5.7 million settlement with the Federal Trade
Commission for violating the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act.
But beyond the expected regulatory missteps of a fast‑growing social media platform, ByteDance is
uniquely susceptible to other problems that come with its closeness to the censorship and surveillance
apparatus of the CCP‑led state. Beijing has demonstrated a propensity for controlling and shaping
overseas Chinese‑language media. The meteoric growth of TikTok now puts the CCP in a position
where it can attempt to do the same on a largely non‑Chinese speaking platform—with the help of an
advanced AI‑powered algorithm.
In September 2019, The Guardian revealed clear evidence of how ByteDance has been advancing
Chinese foreign policy aims abroad through the app via censorship. The newspaper reported
on leaked guidelines from TikTok laying out the company’s approach to content moderation.
The documents showed that TikTok moderators were instructed to ‘censor videos that mention
Tiananmen Square, Tibetan independence, or the banned religious group Falun Gong.’24
Unlike Western social media platforms, which have traditionally taken a conservative approach
to content moderation and tended to favour as much free speech as possible, TikTok has been
heavy‑handed, projecting Beijing’s political neuroses onto the politics of other countries. In the
guidelines, as described by The Guardian, the app banned ‘criticism/attack towards policies, social
rules of any country, such as constitutional monarchy, monarchy, parliamentary system, separation of
powers, socialism system, etc.’ Many historical events in foreign countries were also swept up in the
scope of the guidelines. In addition to a ban on mentioning the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989,
the May 1998 riots in Indonesia and the genocide in Cambodia were also deemed verboten.
TikTok has even barred criticism of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, as well as depictions of
‘non‑Islamic gods’ and images of alcohol consumption and same‑sex relationships—neither of which
is in fact illegal in Turkey. Also prohibited is criticism of a list of ‘foreign leaders or sensitive figures’,
09

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
including the past and present leaders of North Korea, US President Donald Trump, former South
Korean President Park Geun‑hye and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Despite this heavy‑handed approach, a number of bad actors have been able to use the app to
promote their agendas. On 23 October 2019, the Wall Street Journal reported that Islamic State
has been using the app to share propaganda videos and has even uploaded clips of beheadings
of prisoners.25 Motherboard also uncovered violent white supremacy and Nazism on the app in
late 2018.26
ByteDance confirmed The Guardian’s report and the authenticity of the leaked content‑moderation
guidelines but said the guidelines were outdated and that it had updated its moderation policies.
Unconvinced, senior US lawmakers went on to request an investigation into TikTok on national
security grounds.
In late October 2019, US Senator Marco Rubio appealed to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to
launch an investigation by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the US into TikTok’s acquisition
of US video‑sharing platform Musical.ly,27 citing reports of censorship on the app, including a
15 September Washington Post article that provided evidence of TikTok’s censorship of reports on the
Hong Kong protests.28
ByteDance said that the Chinese Government doesn’t order it to censor content on TikTok: ‘To be clear:
we do not remove videos based on the presence of Hong Kong protest content,’ said a ByteDance
spokesman cited by the New York Times.29 But a former content moderator for TikTok also told the
Times that ‘managers in the United States had instructed moderators to hide videos that included any
political messages or themes, not just those related to China’.
Speaking on the condition of anonymity, the former content moderator said that the policy was
to, in the newspaper’s words, ‘allow such political posts to remain on users’ profile pages but to
prevent them from being shared more widely in TikTok’s main video feed’—a practice known as
‘shadow banning’.
The concerns of other US Congress members extend from the app’s use of censorship to curate and
shape information flows and export CCP media narratives to data privacy and the potential for the app
to be used as a tool of surveillance in the service of the Chinese party‑state.
On 24 October, senators Chuck Schumer and Tom Cotton penned a letter asking Acting Director of
National Intelligence Joseph Maguire to determine whether TikTok’s data collection practices pose a
national security risk.30
David Carroll, an associate professor of media design at Parsons School of Design, discovered that
TikTok’s privacy policy in late 2018 indicated that user data could be shared ‘with any member or
affiliate of [its] group’ in China. TikTok confirmed to him that ‘data from TikTok users who joined the
service before February 2019 may have been processed in China.’31
In November, regulators took action. Reuters reported that the US Government had launched a
national security review of ByteDance’s US$1 billion acquisition of Musical.ly.32
10
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Meiya Pico: from mobile data extraction to the
Belt and Road’s ‘safety’ and security corridor
Inside China and at its borders, people are being asked to hand over their phones for police
inspections. Within minutes, police can connect, extract and analyse phone and personal user data on
the phone. In online chatter on Chinese platforms about the matter, people mostly express their fears
of police discovering applications for ‘jumping the Great Firewall’, but police can extract more than just
a list of installed applications. They can extract and access call and message logs; contact lists and
calendars; location information; audio, video and documents; and application data.
In June 2019, Asia Society ChinaFile editor Muyi Xiao noticed multiple online reports on Chinese social
media sites of Beijing and Shanghai police spot‑checking people’s phones and installing a mobile
app called ‘MFSocket’.33 She investigated further and found similar reports from Guangdong and
Xinjiang from as early as 2016. One citizen reported that their employer had asked them and other
colleagues to report to a police station, where, after they had their ID cards inspected and their photos
and fingerprints taken, MFSocket was installed on their phones. In this particular case, the citizen had
Google’s suite of apps installed (Google is available only outside China), and he was questioned about
that.34 It isn’t clear whether these users were under suspicion for criminal activity, but one affected
individual was reportedly going to the police station to update their ID, and another was riding their
scooter and was stopped by police.35 Muyi Xiao’s investigations led her to the app’s developer—Meiya
Pico, a prominent player in China’s digital forensics sector.
The MFSocket phone app is the client application for Meiya Pico’s mobile phone forensics suite.36
Once a person’s mobile phone is connected to the forensics terminal, the MFSocket app is pushed to
the phone. When it’s installed, the operator is able to extract phone and personal user data from the
phone, including contacts, messages, calendar events, call record data, location information, video,
audio, a list of apps, system logs37 and almost 100 software applications.38
The functionality of MFSocket is neither unique nor suspicious; nor is it unusual for a digital forensics
company to sell such software. What is of concern is the seemingly arbitrary nature of its use by police
in China. It’s also not the only mobile data extraction app used in China. The Fengcai or BXAQ app,39
also known as ‘MobileHunter’,40 for example, has been installed onto the phones of foreign journalists
crossing from Kyrgyzstan into Xinjiang. Similarly to MFSocket, it collects personal and phone data.41
Beyond China’s borders, Meiya Pico has provided training to Interpol42 and sells its forensics and
mobile hacking equipment to the Russian military.43 Through financial support provided by China’s
Ministry of Public Security, Meiya Pico also has a unique role in BRI projects. A report on Chinese
information controls by the Open Technology Fund suggests that this could be part of a ‘safety
corridor’ between China and Europe,44 linking safety and security products and services with foreign
aid projects.45
Since 2013, Meiya Pico has been working with the Ministry of Public Security on BRI‑focused foreign aid
projects,46 constructing digital forensics laboratories in Central Asia and Southeast Asia,47 including in
Vietnam48 and Sri Lanka.49 Meiya Pico claims to have provided, under the instruction of the ministry,50
11

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
more than 50 training courses to police forces in 30 countries51 as part of the BRI (Figure 1).52 For
these projects, Meiya Pico reportedly sends professional and technical personnel to each location
to conduct in‑depth technical communication and exchanges.53 Chinese state media have reported
that these projects enhance a country’s ability to fight cybercrime through technical and equipment
assistance and support.54
Figure 1: Meiya Pico and BRI projects
Source: Meiya Pico, Belt and Road , no date, online .
CloudWalk and data colonialism in Zimbabwe
The draconian techno‑surveillance system that China is perfecting in Xinjiang and steadily expanding
to the rest of the country is increasingly seen as an alternative model by non‑democratic regimes
around the world. In the first Mapping China’s tech giants report, we examined how Chinese technology
companies are closely entwined with the CCP’s support for Zimbabwe’s authoritarian regime. From
the country’s telco infrastructure through to social media and cybercrime laws, the PRC’s influence
is pervasive.
In March 2018, the Zimbabwean Government took this approach to a new level when it signed an
agreement with CloudWalk Technology to build a national facial recognition database and monitoring
system as part of China’s BRI program of international infrastructure deals.55
The agreement was reached between a ‘special adviser to Zimbabwe’s Presidential Office’, the Minister
of Science and Technology in Nansha district of Guangzhou and CloudWalk executives, according to a
Science Daily (科技日报) report.56 Under the deal, Zimbabwe will send biometric data on millions of its
citizens to China to assist in the development of facial recognition algorithms that work with different
ethnicities and will therefore expand the export market for China’s product—an arrangement that
had no input from ordinary Zimbabwean citizens. In exchange, Zimbabwe’s authoritarian government
12
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
will get access to CloudWalk’s technology and the opportunity to copy China’s digitally enabled
authoritarian system.
Former Zimbabwean Ambassador to China Christopher Mutsvangwa told The Herald, a Zimbabwean
newspaper, that CloudWalk had donated facial recognition terminals to the country and that the
terminals are already being installed at every border post and point of entry around the southern
African nation: ‘China has proved to be our all‑weather friend and this time around, we have
approached them to spearhead our AI revolution in Zimbabwe.’ 57
The arrangement is paradigmatic of a new form of colonialism called ‘data colonialism’, in which
raw information is harvested from developing countries for the commercial and strategic benefit of
richer, more powerful nations that hold AI supremacy.58 Writing in the New York Times, Kai‑Fu Lee,
the former Google China head and doyen of China’s AI industry, outlined how these kinds of colonial
arrangements are set to ‘reshape today’s geopolitical alliances’:59
[I]f most countries will not be able to tax ultra‑profitable AI companies to subsidize their workers,
what options will they have? I foresee only one: Unless they wish to plunge their people into
poverty, they will be forced to negotiate with whichever country supplies most of their AI software—
China or the United States—to essentially become that country’s economic dependent, taking
in welfare subsidies in exchange for letting the ‘parent’ nation’s AI companies continue to profit
from the dependent country’s users. Such economic arrangements would reshape today’s
geopolitical alliances.
The CloudWalk–Zimbabwe deal, Science Daily notes, is a first for the Chinese AI industry in Africa and
serves a clear geostrategic aim: ‘[It] will enable China’s artificial intelligence technology to serve the
economic development of countries along the “belt and road initiative” route.’
The arrangement will not only help bring the Zimbabwean regime’s authoritarian practices further
into the digital age, but will also enable the PRC—through state‑backed and other nominally private
companies—to export those means for other countries to use to surveil, repress and manipulate
their populations.
Facial recognition technology is notoriously bad at detecting people with dark skin, making the data
that the Zimbabwean Government is trading with CloudWalk highly prized.60 By improving its facial
recognition systems for people with dark skin, CloudWalk is effectively opening up whole new markets
around the world for its technology, while Zimbabwe perceives CloudWalk as ‘donating’ its technology
to the country.
In exchange for the private biometric details of the Zimbabwean citizenry, CloudWalk’s technology
will be deployed in the country’s financial industry, airports, bus stations, railway stations and,
as the Science Daily puts it, ‘any other locations requiring face recognition to effectively maintain
public security’.
According to The Herald, Zimbabwe signed another agreement with CloudWalk in April 2019, under
which the Chinese firm will provide facial recognition for smart financial service networks, as well as
13

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
intelligent security applications at airports and railway and bus stations. The new deal, according to
the paper, was reached during a visit to China by Zimbabwean President Mnangagwa and forms part of
China’s BRI in Africa.61
‘The Zimbabwean Government did not come to Guangzhou purely for AI or facial recognition
technologies; rather it had a comprehensive package plan for such areas as infrastructure, technology
and biology,’ CloudWalk CEO Yao Zhiqiang said at the time, according to the paper.
BeiDou: China’s satellite and space race
Unlike other entities featured in this report, the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (BeiDou) isn’t a
company; rather, it’s a centrally controlled satellite constellation and associated service that provides
positioning, navigation and timing information. It also presents itself as a completely functional and
improved alternative to the US‑controlled Global Positioning System (GPS).
The development of BeiDou began after the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1996, when missile tests by the
Chinese military were ineffective due to suspected US‑directed disruption of the GPS. After that failure,
the ‘Chinese military decided, no matter how much it would cost, [that China] had to build its own
independent satellite navigation system.’62
The first generation of the system consisted of three satellites that provided rudimentary positioning
services to users in China. However, in 2013, China reached its first agreements to export the service to
other countries. Since then, BeiDou has upped the tempo of its global expansion and engagement.
For increased accuracy, positional satellites such as the BeiDou constellations need to precisely
determine their orbital position. At this fine scale, satellite orbits aren’t regular across the globe, and
modelling them within the millisecond relies on a global network of reference stations and onboard
atomic clocks. The reference stations share data containing information on how long signals take to
reach the receiver from the satellite, and then precise orbital determination can be more accurately
modelled by trilaterating (similar to triangulating – using distances rather than angles) those signals
(Figure 2). A wide geographical spread of reference stations allows the orbit to be precisely determined
over a larger area.63 By having stations or receivers overseas, including in Australia, for example, BeiDou
is able to more precisely determine post‑processing adjustments over Australia, and thereby provide
more precise positional data to an end user.
14
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Figure 2: An infographic explaining how base stations can improve GNSS positional accuracy
Source: An introduction to GNSS , Hexagon, no date, online.
In 2013, BeiDou signed an agreement with Brunei to supply the country with the technology for
military and civilian use at a heavily subsidised price.64 Following Chinese Premier Li Keqiang’s 2013
visit to Islamabad, Pakistan became the first country in the world to sign an official cooperation
agreement with the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System in both the military and civilian sectors.
Pakistan was granted access to the system’s post‑processed data service, which provides far more
precise location services and accompanying encryption services.65 These additional features allow
for more precise guidance for missiles, ships and aircraft.66 In recent years agreements have also been
reached with other countries including the United States and Russia to establish interoperability
between different GNSS satellite constellations.
In the run‑up to the 3rd generation of BeiDou’s satellite constellation, the service began to more
aggressively pursue internationalisation. Agreements with countries in South and Southeast Asia were
signed, providing access to BeiDou services and allowing BeiDou to construct permanent reference
stations across the region and increase its positional accuracy outside China’s borders. In 2014, it was
announced that China was planning to construct 220 reference stations in Thailand and a network of
1,000 across Southeast Asia.67 These newer stations improve the precise post‑processing accuracy of
the satellite signals, which in turn increases the precision of signals received by end users.68
15

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
In 2014, China Satellite Navigation System Management Office and Geoscience Australia established
a similar agreement, but on a smaller scale. They met in Beijing with representatives of Wuhan
University. The two sides reportedly agreed to establish a formal cooperation mechanism.69
Wuhan University was to provide Geoscience Australia with three continuously operating reference
stations equipped with satellite signal receivers constructed by China Electronic Technology Group
(CETC). CETC is one of China’s largest state‑owned defence companies and was covered in the original
dataset of Mapping China’s Technology Giants.70 By using CETC‑constructed receivers, GA was provided
access to additional signals that were unavailable to commercial off‑the‑shelf receivers. GA manages
the communications of these sites, and also receives access to the global Wuhan University’s network
of overseas tracking data.71
BeiDou’s presence in Australia has previously attracted academic and media scrutiny. Professor
Anne‑Marie Brady has been critical of Australia’s engagement with BeiDou because of its role in
guiding China’s military technologies:72
Australia is playing a small part in helping China to get a GPS system as effective as the US system.
China is aiming to have a better one than the US has by 2020, and so is Russia. They need ground
stations to coordinate their satellites and they need them in the Pacific. Their first ground station in
the Pacific region was built in Perth.
The three BeiDou ground facilities in Australia are at Yarragadee Station (Western Australia; the first
one built), Mount Stromlo (Australian Capital Territory) and Katherine (Northern Territory) and are
operated by Geoscience Australia. They were built in 2016 and have been operating for over three
years.73 No data is sent directly from these (or any) receivers back to the BeiDou satellites, and detailed
positional and signal data is provided publicly. These data streams are widely used by industry and
civilian end‑users.
The stations are a small part of Australia’s GNSS network, which then publicly provides precise
positional and signal data. But it’s worth noting that Wuhan University has close links to the People’s
Liberation Army (PLA) and has been previously accused by the US and Taiwanese Governments of
carrying out cyberattacks. 74
Foreign investment
The detention of an estimated 1.5 million members of ethnic minority groups,75 chiefly Uyghur, in
so‑called re‑education camps in China’s far western region of Xinjiang is a human rights violation on a
massive scale.76 For Chinese security companies, however, it is a win.
Many of the AI and surveillance companies added to our Mapping China’s Technology Giants project
have capitalised on China’s surge in security spending, particularly in Xinjiang, in recent years.
Spending on security‑related construction in Xinjiang tripled in 2017, according to an analysis of
government expenditure by Adrian Zenz for the Jamestown Foundation.77
16
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
For Chinese security, AI and surveillance companies, Xinjiang has become, as Charles Rollet put it in
Foreign Policy, ‘both a lucrative market and a laboratory to test the latest gadgetry’.78 The projects
there, he notes, ‘include not only security cameras but also video analytics hubs, intelligent monitoring
systems, big data centres, police checkpoints, and even drones.’
But China’s burgeoning surveillance state isn’t limited to Xinjiang. The Ministry of Public Security
has ploughed billions of dollars into two government plans, called Skynet project (天网工程)79 and
Sharp Eyes project (雪亮工程),80 that aim to comprehensively surveil China’s 1.4 billion people by 2020
through a video camera network using facial recognition technology.
China will add 400 million security cameras through 2020, according to Morgan Stanley, making
investing in companies such as Hikvision and Dahua—which have received government contracts
totalling more than US$1 billion81—extremely enticing for investors seeking high returns. Crucially,
the gold rush hasn’t been limited to Chinese firms and investors.
Foreign investors, either passively or actively, are also profiting from China’s domestic security and
surveillance spending binge. Investment funds controlling around US$1.9 trillion that measure their
performance against MSCI’s benchmark Emerging Markets Index funnel capital into companies
such as Hikvision82, Dahua83 and iFlytek,84 which have profited from the development of Xinjiang
detention camps.
The market valuation of SenseTime, one of a few companies handpicked by the party‑state to lead
the way in China’s AI development, soared in 2018 on the back of increased government funding for its
national facial recognition surveillance system.
Those massive government contracts have helped SenseTime attract top venture capital and private
equity firms as well as strategic investors around the world, including Japanese tech conglomerate
Softbank Group’s Saudi‑backed Vision Fund. US venture fund IDG Capital supplied ‘tens of millions of
dollars’ in initial funding to the company in August 2014.85
Other major shareholders include e‑commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd, London‑based
Fidelity International (a subsidiary of Boston‑based Fidelity Investments), Singaporean state
investment firm Temasek Holdings, US private equity firms Silver Lake Partners and Tiger Global
Management, and the venture capital arm of US telco Qualcomm.
More than 17 US universities and public pension plans have put money into vehicles run by some
of these venture capital funds, according to an Australian Financial Review report citing historical
PitchBook data.86
SenseTime rival, Megvii Technology, has also benefited from foreign investment, including from a
Macquarie Group fund that sunk $US30 million ($44 million) into the facial recognition start‑up.87
Macquarie declined to comment when questioned about the investment by the Australian Financial
Review. Other firms such as Goldman Sachs Group Inc, have stated they’re reviewing their involvement
in Megvii’s planned initial public offering after the U.S. government placed it on the US Entity List for
alleged complicity in Beijing’s human rights abuses in China.88
17

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Two of America’s biggest public pension funds—the California State Teachers’ Retirement System
and the New York State Teachers’ Retirement System—own stakes in Hikvision, as the Financial Times
reported in March 2019.89 Since at least 2018, Meiya Pico shares have been included in the FTSE Russell
Global Equity Index.90
Even if these companies aren’t listed on foreign bourses or are receiving money from foreign venture
capital funds, they might still be getting investments from companies such as the BATs—Baidu, Alibaba
and Tencent—that are traded on US stock exchanges.91
But, more often than not, the investments are made directly and wittingly by active funds that
are seeking to maximise profits off the back of the boom in surveillance technologies used across
China. To put it plainly, Western capital markets have funded mass detentions and an increasingly
sophisticated repressive apparatus in China.
Some funds that have done their human rights and national security due diligence have started to
divest themselves of some of these companies. At least seven US equity funds have divested from
Hikvision, for instance.92 But many have not.
‘A lot of investors talk about ethical investing but when it comes to Hikvision and Xinjiang they are
happy to fill their boots,’ one fund manager who sold out of Hikvision told the Financial Times in March
2019. ‘It is pretty hypocritical.’93
All roads lead to Xinjiang
In November 2019, internal Communist Party documents—obtained by the International Consortium
of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ)—provided documentary evidence of how authorities in Xinjiang are
using data and artificial intelligence to pioneer a new form of social control.94 The documents showed
how authorities are using a data management system called the Integrated Joint Operation Platform
(IJOP)—previously reported on by Human Rights Watch—to predictively identify those suspected
of harbouring extremist views and criminal intent.95 Among the documents, a bulletin published on
25 June 2017, reveals how the IJOP system detected about 24,412 “suspicious” people in southern
Xinjiang during one particular week. Of those people, 15,683 were sent to “education and training”—
a euphemism for detention camps—and 706 were “criminally detained”.96
A month before this leak, in October 2019, the US Government added many of the AI and surveillance
companies in this dataset—including Dahua Technology, iFlytek, Megvii Technology, SenseTime,
Xiamen Meiya Pico Information Co. Ltd, Yitu Technologies and Hikvision97—to the US Entity List
because of their roles in human rights violations in Xinjiang.98
However, Chinese tech companies’ activities in Xinjiang go beyond surveillance and extend to areas
like propaganda and other coercive measures.
For example, we have found that TikTok’s parent company ByteDance—which is not on the US entity
list for human rights violations in Xinjiang—collaborates with public security bureaus across China,
18
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
including in Xinjiang where it plays an active role in disseminating the party‑state’s propaganda
on Xinjiang.
Xinjiang Internet Police reportedly “arrived” on Douyin—a ByteDance and video‑sharing app—and built
a “new public security and Internet social governance model” in 2018.99 In April 2019, the Ministry of
Public Security’s Press and Publicity Bureau signed a strategic cooperation agreement with ByteDance
to promote the “influence and credibility” of police departments nationwide.100 Under the agreement,
all levels and divisions of police units from the Ministry of Public Security to county‑level traffic police
would have their own Douyin account to disseminate propaganda. The agreement also reportedly says
ByteDance would increase its offline cooperation with the police department, however it is unclear
what this offline cooperation is.
Tech companies have been piling into Xinjiang since the early 2010s. Huawei has been working for
the Karamay Police Department on cloud computing projects since 2011,101 despite its debunked
claims to work only with third parties.102 ZTE held its first Smart Cities Forum in Urumqi in 2013,103
and its ‘safe city’ solution has been largely used in surveilance and policing.104 In 2010, iFlytek set up
a subsidiary in Xinjiang and a laboratory to develop speech recognition technology,105 especially in
minority languages—technologies that are now used by the Xinjiang Government to track and identify
minority populations.106
A surveillance industry boom was born out of the central government’s 2015 policy to prioritise
‘stability’ in Xinjiang107 and the national implementation of the Sharp Eyes surveillance project from
2015 to 2020.108 As of late 2017, 1,013 local security companies were working in Xinjiang;109 that figure
excludes some of the largest companies operating in the region, such as Dahua and Hikvision, which
had already won multimillion‑dollar bids to build systems to surveil streets and mosques.110
Also in 2017, even with the central government halting some of the popular ‘PPP’ projects (public–
private partnerships that channel private money into public infrastructure projects) that were debt
hazards111 and tech companies becoming more cautious about investing in those projects, Xinjiang
was an exception for about a year. Tech companies continued to hunt for opportunities in Xinjiang
because funding for surveillance‑related PPP projects in Xinjiang comes directly from defence and
counterterrorism expenditure.112 However, in 2018, the debt crackdown eventually reached Xinjiang
and a number of PPP projects there were also suspended. 113
A significant policy that encourages technology companies to profit from the situation in Xinjiang is
the renewed ‘Xinjiang Aid’ scheme (援疆政策). Dating from the 1980s, these policies channel funds
from other provincial governments to Xinjiang. Since the mass detentions in 2017 this scheme has
encouraged companies in other provinces to open subsidiaries or factories in Xinjiang—factories that
former detainees are forced to work in.114
A company can contribute to the Xinjiang Aid program, and the broader situation in the region, in
many different ways. In 2014, for example, Alibaba began to provide cloud computing technologies
for the Xinjiang Government in areas of policing and counterterrorism.115 In 2018, as part of Zhejiang
Province’s Xinjiang Aid efforts, Alibaba was set to open large numbers of e‑commerce service stations
in Xinjiang, selling clothes and electronics.116 There’s no direct evidence that suggests Alibaba sells
19

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
products sourced from forced labour. But clothing companies that have recently opened up factories
in Xinjiang, because of favourable polices and an abundance of local labour—which can include forced
labour117—have relied on Alibaba’s platforms to sell clothes to China, North America, Europe and the
Middle East.118
Most of ByteDance’s activities in Xinjiang fall under the “Xinjiang Aid” initiative and the company’s
cooperation with Xinjiang authorities is focused on Hotan, a part of Xinjiang that has been the target of
some of the most severe repression. The area is referred to by the party‑state as the most “backward
and resistant”.119 According to satellite imagery analysis conducted by ASPI, there are approximately
a dozen suspected detention facilities in the outskirts of Hotan.120 The city has seen an aggressive
campaign of cemetery, mosque and traditional housing demolition since November 2018, which
continues today.
In November 2019, Beijing Radio and Television Bureau announced its “Xinjiang Aid” measures in
Hotan, to “propagate and showcase Hotan’s new image”—after more than two years of mass detention
and close surveillance of ethnic minorities had taken place there. These measures include guiding and
helping local Xinjiang authorities and media outlets to use ByteDance’s news aggregation app for Jinri
Toutiao (Today’s Headlines) and video‑sharing app Douyin to gain traction online.121
A Tianjin Daily article reported this April that after listening to talks by representatives from ByteDance’s
Jinri Toutiao division, Hotan Propaganda Bureau official Zhou Nengwen (周能文) said he was excited
to use the Douyin platform to promote Hotan’s products and image.122
Technology companies actively support state projects, even when those projects have nothing to
do with tech. Also under the Xinjiang Aid umbrella, telecom companies such as China Unicom send
their ‘most politically reliable’ employees to Xinjiang123 and deploy fanghuiju (访惠聚) units to villages
in Xinjiang. ‘Fanghuiju’ is a government initiative that sends cadres from government agencies,
state‑owned enterprises and public institutions to regularly visit and surveil people.124 The China
Unicom fanghuiju units were reportedly tasked with changing the villages, including villagers’ thoughts
that are religious or go against CCP doctrines.125
Adding some of China’s more well‑known technology and surveillance companies to the US Entity
List was largely symbolic—after Huawei, Dahua and Hikvision were blacklisted in the US, Uniview’s
president told reporters that, at a time when ‘leading Chinese technology companies are facing
tough scrutiny overseas’, companies such as Uniview had the opportunity to grow and pursue their
overseas strategies.126
Unfortunately, it’s extremely difficult for international authorities to sanction the circa 1,000
homegrown local Xinjiang security companies. However, as companies such as Huawei seek to expand
overseas, foreign governments can play a more active role in rejecting those that participate in the
Chinese Government’s repressive Xinjiang policies.
For example, the timeline of Huawei’s Xinjiang activities should be taken into consideration
during debates about Huawei and 5G technologies. Huawei’s work in Xinjiang is extensive and
includes working directly with the Chinese Government’s public security bureaus in the region. The
announcement of one Huawei public security project in Xinjiang—made in 2018 through a government
20
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
website in Urumqi127—quoted a Huawei director as saying, ‘Together with the Public Security Bureau,
Huawei will unlock a new era of smart policing and help build a safer, smarter society.’128 In fact,
some of Huawei’s promoted ‘success cases’ are Public Security Bureau projects in Xinjiang, such as
the Modular Data Center for the Public Security Bureau of Aksu Prefecture in Xinjiang.129 Huawei also
provides police in Xinjiang with technical support to help ‘meet the digitization requirements of the
public security industry’.130
In May 2019, Huawei signed a strategic agreement with the state‑owned media group Xinjiang
Broadcasting and Television Network Co. Ltd at Huawei’s headquarters in Shenzhen. The agreement,
which aims at maintaining social stability and creating positive public opinion, covered areas including
internet infrastructure, smart cities and 5G.131
In 2018, when the Xinjiang Public Security Department and Huawei signed the agreement to establish
an ‘intelligent security industry’ innovation lab in Urumqi. Fan Lixin, a Public Security Department
official, said at the signing ceremony that Huawei had been supplying reliable technical support
for the department.132 In 2016, Xinjiang’s provincial government signed a partnership agreement
with Huawei.133 The two sides agreed to jointly develop cloud computing and big‑data industries
in Xinjiang. As mentioned above, Huawei began to work in cloud computing in Karamay (a Huawei
cloud‑computing ‘model city’ in Xinjiang)134 as early as 2011 in several sectors, including public
security video surveillance.
In 2014, Huawei participated in an anti‑terrorism BRI‑themed conference in Urumqi as ‘an important
participant of’ a program called ‘Safe Xinjiang’—code for a police surveillance system. Huawei was said
to have built the police surveillance systems in Karamay and Kashgar prefectures and was praised by
the head of Xinjiang provincial police department for its contributions in the Safe Xinjiang program.
Huawei was reportedly able to process and analyse footage quickly and conduct precise searches
in the footage databases (for example, of the colour of cars or people and the direction of their
movements) to help solve criminal cases.135
Since mass detentions began in Xinjiang over two years ago, state‑affiliated technology companies
such as those covered in this report have greatly expanded their remit and become a central part of
the surveillance state in Xinjiang. Xinjiang’s crackdown on religious and ethnic minorities has been
completed across the region. It has used and continues to use several different mechanisms of
coercive control, such as arbitrary detention, coerced labour practices136 and at‑home forced political
indoctrination. Technology companies are intrinsically linked with many of those efforts, as the state’s
crackdown offers ample opportunities for incentivised expansion and profitability.137
21

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Conclusion
The aim of this report is to promote a more informed debate about the growth of China’s tech giants
and to highlight areas where their expansion raises political, geostrategic, ethical and human rights
concerns. 
The Chinese tech companies in this report enjoy a highly favourable regulatory environment and
are unencumbered by privacy and human rights concerns. Many are engaged in deeply unethical
behaviour in Xinjiang, where their work directly supports and enables mass human rights abuses. 
The CCP’s own policies and official statements make it clear that it perceives the expansion of Chinese
technology companies as a crucial component of its wider project of ideological and geopolitical
expansion, and that they are not purely commercial actors.138 The PRC’s suite of intelligence and
security laws which can compel individuals and entities to participate in intelligence work139, and the
CCP committees embedded within the tech companies (Chinese media has reported Huawei has more
than 300 for example140) highlight the inextricable links between industry and the Chinese party ‑state.
These close ties make it difficult for them to be politically neutral actors. For western governments and
corporations, developing risk mitigation strategies is essential, particularly when it comes to critical
technology areas. 
Some of these companies lead the world in cutting‑edge technology development, particularly in the
AI and surveillance sectors. But this technology development is focused on servicing authoritarian
needs, and as these companies go global (an expansion often funded by PRC loans and aid) this
technology is going global as well. This alone should give Western policymakers pause. 
Increasing technological competition has the potential to deliver many benefits across the spectrum,
but the benefits will not always accrue without good policy.  If the West is going to continue to support
the global expansion of these companies, it should, at a minimum, better understand the spectrum of
policy risks and hold these companies to the same levels of accountability and transparency as it does
its own corporations. 
22
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
1 ‘Chinese police use app to spy on citizens’ smartphones’, Financial Times , 3 July 2019, online.
2 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Explore a company’, online .
3 China Eximbank is wholly owned by the Chinese Government. More detail can be found in Danielle Cave, Samantha Hoffman, Alex Joske,
Mapping China’s technology giants , ASPI, Canberra, 2019, 10, online .
4 Lucas Niewenhuis, ‘1.5 million Muslims are in China’s camps—scholar’, SupChina , 13 March 2019, online .
5 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Welcome to Mapping China’s Tech Giants ’, online.
6 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘How to use this tool’, online .
7 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Glossary’, online .
8 Science and Technology Committee, ‘Oral evidence: UK telecommunications infrastructure’, HC 2200, House of Commons,
10 June 2019, online.
9 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Hikvision (controlled by CATC)’, online .
10 Charles Rollet, ‘In China’s far west, companies cash in on surveillance program that targets Muslims’, Foreign Policy , 13 June 2018, online .
11 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Baidu’, online.
12 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Alibaba’, online.
13 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Tencent’, online.
14 Sarah Dai, ‘China adds Huawei, Hikvision to expanded ‘national team’ spearheading country’s AI efforts,’ South China Morning Post,
30 August 2019, online .
15 Gregory C Allen, Understanding China’s AI strategy: clues to Chinese strategic thinking on artificial intelligence and national security , Center for a
New American Security, 6 February 2019, online .
16 Allen, Understanding China’s AI strategy .
17 ‘Xinhua comment: when will the legal “sword” of personal information protection come out of its sheath?’ ( 新 华 网 评：个人 信 息 保 护 的 法 律“
利剑”何时出鞘?), Chongqing News ( 华龙网), 24 July 2016, online.
18 Josh Horwitz, ‘The billion ‑dollar, Alibaba ‑backed AI company that’s quietly watching people in China’, Quartz , 16 April 2018, online .
19 Samantha Hoffman, Engineering global consent: the Chinese Communist Party’s data-driven power expansion, ASPI, Canberra,
14 October 2019, online .
20 Steven Millward, ‘WeChat’s global expansion has been a disaster’, TechInAsia , 25 May 2016, online .
21 By Mariam Cheik ‑Hussein, ‘Irreverent app TikTok is pulling in millions of dollars from Australia’, AdNews , 7 July 2019, online.
22 Sara Fischer, ‘Chinese app downloads surge in US’, Axios , 10 July 2019, online.
23 ‘ByteDance is said to secure funding at record $75 billion value’, Bloomberg, 26 October 2018, online .
24 Alex Hern, ‘Revealed: how TikTok censors videos that do not please Beijing’, The Guardian , 25 September 2019, online .
25 Georgia Wells, ‘Islamic State’s TikTok posts include beheading videos’, Wall Street Journal , 23 October 2019, online .
26 Joseph Cox, ‘TikTok has a Nazi problem’, Vice , 19 December 2018, online .
27 Marco Rubio, letter to Steven Mnuchin, 9 October 2019, online .
28 Drew Harwell, Tony Romm, ‘TikTok’s Beijing roots fuel censorship suspicion as it builds a huge US audience’, Washington Post ,
16 September 2019, online .
29 Jack Nicas, Mike Isaac, Ana Swanson, ‘TikTok said to be under national security review’, New York Times , 1 November 2019, online .
30 Tony Romm, Drew Harwell, ‘TikTok raises national security concerns in Congress as Schumer, Cotton ask for federal review’, Washington Post ,
25 October 2019, online .
31 David Carroll, ‘Is TikTok a Chinese Cambridge Analytica data bomb waiting to explode?’, Quartz , 7 May 2019, online.
32 Greg Roumeliotis, Yingzhi Yang, Echo Wang, Alexandra Alper, ‘Exclusive: US opens national security investigation into TikTok—sources’,
Reuters, 2 November 2019, online .
33 Muyi Xiao, Twit ter, 21 June 2019, online .
34 ManYo, ‘MFSocket中文扫盲贴 ‘Meiya Pico’s Surveillance Tool’, Medium , 1 July 2019, online; Kenneth Tan, Twit ter, 20 June 2019, online .
35 Muyi Xiao, Twit ter, 21 June 2019, online .
36 Product code: DC ‑4501, DC‑4700 or FL‑900; ‘[OPPO R9S series phone] How to manually install MFSocket plugin’ ( 【OPPO R9S系 列 手 机】手
动安装MFSocket 插件的方法), China Data Investigations , accessed: 18 Nov 19, online ; ‘Meiya Pico mobile phone forensics product has been
updated!’ (美亚柏科手机取证产品系列更新啦 ！), QQ forum, accessed: 18 Nov 19, online .
37 Elliot Anderson, ‘MFSocket: a Chinese surveillance tool’, Medium , 26 June, online ; ‘Analysing Uncle Police’s Android Trojan’ ( 分析警察叔叔的
Android 木马), SanCai XiaoSanJin , 13 Sep 2016, online ; ‘MFSocket.apk’, Hybrid Analysis , 22 November 2019, online .
38 ‘iDC‑4501 mobile forensics system’, Meiya Pico, no date, online ; Victor Gevers, Twit ter, 25 June, online .
39 Hilary Osborne, Sam Cutler, ‘Chinese border guards put secret surveillance app on tourists’ phones’, The Guardian , 3 July 2019, online;
Motherboard (VICE), ‘bxaq’, GitHub , June 2019, online.
40 ‘Analyzing MobileHunter’, Dwuid.com , 2 July 2019, online.
41 Analysis-report Chinese police app ‘BXAQ’ 03.2019 , Cure53, 7 May 2019, online .
42 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2169
43 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2166
44 Meiya Pico, ‘Meiya Pico joined the NELB–ILEC Forum at Lianyungang from Sep 26 to 30’, 21 September 2019, online .
45 Open Technology Fund, Examining the expanding web of Chinese and Russian information controls , 17 September 2019, online .
46 ‘[Meiya Pico] Congratulations on the successful running of the official handover ceremony of Vietnamese Ministry of Public Security digital
forensics laboratory that the PRC Ministry of Public Security assisting in’ ([ 美亚柏科]贺中国公安部援助越南公安部电子数据取证实验室移
交仪式成功举行), JRJ.com, 18 Sep 2018, online .
47 For example, in Vietnam.
48 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2165
49 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2162
Notes
23

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
50 Meiya Pico, Belt and Road , no date, online .
51 Meiya Pico, ‘Meiya Pico supports “Belt and Road” to develop international cooperation’ ( 美亚柏科支持“一带一路”促进国际合作), Meiya Pico,
accessed: Nov 2019, online .
52 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2198; https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2203
53 ‘[Meiya Pico] Congratulations on the successful running of the official handover ceremony of Vietnamese Ministry of Public Security digital
forensics laboratory that the PRC Ministry of Public Security assisting in’ ([ 美亚柏科]贺中国公安部援助越南公安部电子数据取证实验室移
交仪式成功举行), JRJ.com, 18 Sep 2018, online .
54 ‘[Meiya Pico] Congratulations on the successful running of the official handover ceremony of Vietnamese Ministry of Public Security digital
forensics laboratory that the PRC Ministry of Public Security assisting in’ ([ 美亚柏科]贺中国公安部援助越南公安部电子数据取证实验室移
交仪式成功举行), JRJ.com, 18 Sep 2018, online .
55 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑1881
56 Fu Xueyuan (符雪苑), ‘Exporting black technology to Africa, China’s “Eagle Eye” to serve Zimbabwe’ ( 向非洲出口黑科技 中国“鹰眼”将服务津
巴布韦), Science Daily ( 科技日报), 12 April 2018, online .
57 Problem Masau, ‘Zimbabwe: Chinese tech revolution comes to Zimbabwe’, allAfrica , 9 October 2019, online .
58 Yuval Noah Harari, ‘Who will win the race for AI?’, Foreign Policy , no date, online .
59 Kai‑Fu Lee, ‘The real threat of artificial intelligence’, New York Times , 24 June 2017, online.
60 Steve Lohr, ‘Facial recognition is accurate, if you’re a white guy’, New York Times , 9 February 2018, online .
61 Problem Masau, ‘Zimbabwe: Chinese tech revolution comes to Zimbabwe’, allAfrica , 9 October 2019, online .
62 Two of our missiles failed to launch in 1996, the US military suspected to had tempered with the GPS system (96 年我2枚导弹发射失败 GPS疑
被美军做手脚), 环球网 (Global Times Online ), 31 Dec 2012, online .
63 An introduction to GNSS , Chapter 5, ‘Resolving errors’, Hexagon, no date, online .
64 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2051
65 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2059
66 Maria Abi ‑Habib, ‘China’s “Belt and Road” plan in Pakistan takes a military turn’, New York Times , 19 December 2018, online ; Omer Mubarak,
‘Beidou: a GPS alternative for Pakistan’s naval vessels’, ResearchGate , January 2013, online .
67 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2050
68 Li Xiang, Zhou Lihua, Liu Kun, ‘BeiDou reaches new heights’, Asia Weekly , 19 September 2014, online .
69 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑2062; ‘Sino‑Australian satellite navigation cooperation meeting held in Beijing, news
release, September 2014, BeiDou, online (in Chinese).
70 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘China Electronics Technology Group (CETC)’, online .
71 Email exchange with John Dawson, Director of Positioning, National Positioning and Infrastructure Branch, Position and Community Safety
Division, Geoscience Australia, 26 November 2019.
72 Fergus Hunter, Peter Hartcher, ‘Australia “helping” China develop its rival system to American GPS’, Sydney Morning Herald ,
28 January 2019, online .
73 Danielle Cave, Brendan Thomas ‑Noone, ‘CSIRO cooperation with Chinese defence contractor should raise questions’, The Guardian ,
3 June 2017, online.
74 https://unitracker.aspi.org.au/universities/wuhan ‑university/
75 Niewenhuis, ‘1.5 million Muslims are in China’s camps—scholar’.
76 Fergus Ryan, Danielle Cave, Nathan Ruser, Mapping Xinjiang’s ‘re-education’ camps , ASPI, Canberra, 1 November 2018, online ; Austin Ramzy,
Chris Buckley, ‘“Absolutely no mercy”: leaked files expose how China organized mass detentions of Muslims’, New York Times , 16 November
2019, online.
77 Adrian Zenz, ‘Xinjiang’s re ‑education and securitization campaign: evidence from domestic security budgets’, China Brief , Jamestown
Foundation, 5 November 2918, 18(17), online .
78 Rollet, ‘In China’s far west, companies cash in on surveillance program that targets Muslims’.
79 Zhang Zihan, ‘Beijing’s guardian angels?’, Global Times , 10 October 2012, online .
80 ‘Share: Sharp Eyes overall plan’ ( 分享 | 雪亮工程整体方案), Sohu (搜狐), 12 July 2017, online.
81 Marion Smith, ‘Buying stock in these Chinese companies makes you complicit in terror on Uighurs’, Washington Post , 18 April 2019, online .
82 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Hikvision (controlled by CATC)’, online .
83 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/company/dahua
84 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/company/iflytek
85 CK Tan and James Hand‑Cukierman, ‘Face recognication trailblazer SenseTime rushes to be next Google’, Nikkei Asian Review ,
9 August 2019, online .
86 ‘China blacklists and the great investor unwinding’, Australian Financial Review , 13 October 2019, online .
87 afr.com/technology/us ‑blacklisting‑ for‑macquarie ‑linked‑ai‑start ‑up‑threatens ‑ipo‑20191010‑p52zit
88 Joshua Franklin, Julie Zhu, ‘Goldman evaluating role in China’s Megvii IPO after U.S. blacklist’, Reuters, 9 October 2019, online .
89 ‘US pressure building on investors in China surveillance group’, Financial Times , 29 March 2019, online .
90 ‘Development history’, Meiya Pico website , online.
91 US Securities and Exchange Commission, ‘Form F ‑6EF Tencent Holding Limited/adr: Registration of American depository receipt shares,
immediately effective’, 10 December 2018, online .
92 ‘US pressure building on investors in China surveillance group’.
93 ‘US pressure building on investors in China surveillance group’.
94 International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, ‘Read the China Cables Documents’, 24 November 2019, online .
95 Human Rights Watch, ‘China’s Algorithms of Repression: Reverse Engineering a Xinjiang Police Mass Surveillance App’, 1 May 2019, online .
96 Dylan Welch, Ariel Bogle, Echo Hui, Stephen Hutcheon, ‘The China Cables: Leak reveals the scale of Beijing’s repressive control over Xinjiang’,
ABC, 25 November 2019, online .
97 Hikvision was included in the original dataset of companies for Mapping China’s Technology Giants .
24
Mapping more of China’s technology giants: AI and surveillance

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
98 Bureau of Industry and Security, ‘Addition of certain entities to the Entity List, 9 October 2019,’ Department. of Commerce, US Government,
online.
99 National internet police units arrive on Douyin to create new public security and Internet social governance model ( 全国网警单位入驻抖音
打造公安网络社会治理新模式), Yaxin net (亚心网), 14 Sept 2018, online.
100 News and Propaganda Bureau of the Ministry of Public Security signed a strategic cooperation agreement with ByteDance ‑‑ and also
ceremony for new media of police department across the nation to arrive at Jinri Toutiao, Douyin ( 公安部新闻宣传局与字节跳动战略合作
签 约；暨 全 国 公 安 新 媒 体 矩 阵入 驻 今 日 头 条 抖 音 仪 式 举 行), China Police Net (中国警察网), 25 Apr 2019, online .
101 Xinjiang holds hands with Huawei Cloud, promotes ‘Tianshan Cloud’ application ( 新疆携手华为企业云 推进“天山云”应用), Huawei Cloud
website (华为云网站), 15 Dec 2015, online .
102 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Huawei’, online.
103 ZTE helps Xinjiang Smart City Summit, highlight corporate’s social responsibility ( 中兴通讯助力新疆智慧城市高峰论坛 彰显企业社会责任),
ZTE, 25 Oct 2013, online .
104 D1Net ‑ News from 28th June (《企业网D1Net》6月28日讯), D1Net(《企业网D1Net》), 28 Jun 2013, online (in Chinese).
105 iFlytek and Xinjiang University jointly built a laboratory ( 科 大 讯飞 与 新 疆 大 学 共 建 联 合 实 验 室), ifeng.com (凤凰网), 2 Apr 2010, online
(in Chinese).
106 Alexandra Harney, ‘Risky partner: Top US universities took funds from Chinese firm tied to Xinjiang security’, Reuters , 13 June 2019, online .
107 The central government puts forward five requirements for the development of Xinjiang, attaches importance to economic and social
development and people’s livelihood ( 中央对新疆发展提出五点要求 重视经济社会与民生发展), Xinhua News ( 新华网), 1 Oct 2015, online .
108 Associated Press, ‘China’s Sharp Eyes surveillance system puts the security focus on public shaming’, South China Morning Post ,
30 October 2018, online
109 Xiling Information Company in ‑depth report ‑ Xinjiang security market boom, performance turning point appears ( 熙菱信息公司深度-新疆
安防市场爆发 ， 业绩拐点已现), Sinolink Securities ( 国金证券), 3 December 2018, online .
110 Pishan County social faicial recognition control system PPP construction project bidding results ( 皮山县社会面防控体系PPP建设项目成交
结果公示)，China International Bidding Network ( 中国国际招标网), 18 Aug 2017, online (in Chinese).
111 ‘China overhauls $2.69 trillion public–private projects as debt fears rise’, Reuters , 17 November 2017, online.
112 Xiling Information Company in ‑depth report ‑ Xinjiang security market boom, performance turning point appears ( 熙菱信息公司深度-新疆
安防市场爆发 ， 业绩拐点已现), Sinolink Securities ( 国金证券), 3 December 2018, online .
113 Frank Tang, ‘Xinjiang halts all government projects as crackdown on debt gets serious’, South China Morning Post , 4 April 2018, online .
114 Chris Buckley, Austin Ramzy, ‘China’s detention camps for Muslims turn to forced labor’, New York Times , 16 December 2018, online
115 Jack Ma: Alibaba will increase modern logistics investment, improve logistics technologies and applications ( 马云 ： 阿里巴巴将在新疆加大
现代物流投资, Logistics Technology and Application ( 物流技术与应用), 24 Nov 2014, online (in Chinese).
116 Writing the new chapter well: industrial Xinjiang Aid (写好产业援疆的浙江篇章), Zhejiang Xinjiang Aid website (浙江援疆网), 30 July 2018, online.
117 Chris Buckley, Austin Ramzy, ‘China’s detention camps for Muslims turn to forced labor’, New York Times , 16 December 2018, online .
118 Yecheng Xiaoxiang Textile Co., Ltd. ( 叶城潇湘纺织有限公司), 51jobs (51同城), online.
119 Lily Kuo, ‘‘If you enter a camp, you never come out’: inside China’s war on Islam, The Guardian , 11 January 2019, online .
120 Satellite imagery analysis conducted by ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre Researcher Nathan Ruser.
121 Beijing Bureau launches radio, television and online audiovisual assistance for Xinjiang ( 北京局开展广播电视和网络视听对口援疆工作),
Beijing Bureau of State Administration of Radio and Television ( 国家广播电视总局北京局), 4 Nov 2019, online.
122 Tianjin Assist Xinjiang, strong friendship ( 天津援疆 情深意长), Tianjin Daily (天津日报), 20 March 2019, online.
123 Selfless dedication, social responsibility and bravery on the Tianshan Mountain ‑ China Unicom Group’s first anniversary of Xinjiang Aid
(无私奉献映天山 社会责任勇担当——中国联通集团对口援疆一周年巡礼), XInjiang Daily(《新疆日报》), 18 Oct 2019, online .
124 Human Rights Watch, China’s algorithms of repression: reverse engineering a Xinjiang police mass surveillance app , no date, online .
125 China Unicom said it had invested over Ұ54 million in Xinjiang initiatives including ‘ fanghuiju’.
126 Wang Cong, ‘Chinese mock US hysteria in reported blacklisting of surveillance technology companies’, Global Times , 22 May 2019, online .
127 “Safe and smart Xinjiang” joint innovation lab in Urumqi high ‑tech zone ‑ new city district ( 平安新疆 智慧同行” 联合创新实验室落户乌鲁木
齐高新区 新市区), Urumqi high ‑tech zone ‑ new city district ( 乌鲁木齐高新技术产业开发区 新市区)，11 May 2018, online.
128 Nathan Vanderklippe, ‘Huawei’s partnership with China on surveillance technology raises concerns for foreign users’, The Globe and Mail ,
14 My 2018, online.
129 Success Cases Huawei Data Center Facility Solution Success Cases, Docbox, online .
130 Nathan Vanderklippe, ‘Huawei’s partnership with China on surveillance technology raises concerns for foreign users’, The Globe and Mail ,
14 My 2018, online.
131 Xinjiang Broadcasting and Television Network Co., Ltd. and Huawei Company signed a strategic cooperation agreement ( 新疆广电网络股份
有限公司与华为公司签署战略合作协议), Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Radio and Television Bureau ( 新疆维吾尔自治区广播电视局),
24 May 2019, online.
132 “Safe and smart Xinjiang” joint innovation lab in Urumqi high ‑tech zone ‑ new city district ( 平安新疆 智慧同行” 联合创新实验室落户乌鲁木
齐高新区 新市区), Urumqi high ‑tech zone ‑ new city district ( 乌鲁木齐高新技术产业开发区 新市区)，11 May 2018, online.
133 Xinjiang holds hands with Huawei Cloud, promotes ‘Tianshan Cloud’ application ( 新疆携手华为企业云 推进 “天山云” 应用), Huawei Cloud
website (华为云网站), 15 Dec 2015, online .
134 Xinjiang holds hands with Huawei Cloud, promotes ‘Tianshan Cloud’ application ( 新疆携手华为企业云 推进 “天山云” 应用), Huawei Cloud
website (华为云网站), 15 Dec 2015, online .
135 Deeply cultivating the Xinjiang security market, Huawei assist the first China ‑Asia‑European Security Expo ( 深 耕 新 疆 安 防 市 场，华 为 助 力 首
届中国-亚欧安防博览会), Security knowledge website ( 安防知识网), 12 Aug 2014, online.
136 Nathan Ruser, ‘What satellite imagery reveals about Xinjiang’s “re ‑education” camps and coerced labour’, The Strategist , 16 July 2019, online.
137 Human Rights Watch, China’s algorithms of repression .
138 Danielle Cave, Samantha Hoffman, Alex Joske, Mapping China’s technology giants , ASPI, Canberra, 2019, 10, online .
139 Samantha Hoffman, Elsa Kania, ‘Huawei and the ambiguity of China’s intelligence and counter ‑espionage laws’, ASPI Strategist,
13 September 2018, online .
140 Mapping China’s Tech Giants , ‘Huawei’, online.
25

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Acronyms and abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
BRI Belt and Road Initiative
CCP Chinese Communist Party
CETC China Electronics Technology Group
GPS Global Positioning System
ICT information and communication technology
PPP public–private partnership

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Some previous ICPC publications

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
