
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Mapping China’s
technology giants
Danielle Cave, Samantha Hoffman, Alex Joske,
Fergus Ryan and Elise Thomas
Issues Paper
Report No. 15/2019

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the authors
Danielle Cave is Deputy Head of ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre.
Dr Samantha Hoffman is a Fellow at the International Cyber Policy Centre.
Alex Joske is a Researcher working with the International Cyber Policy Centre.
Fergus Ryan is an Analyst working with International Cyber Policy Centre.
Elise Thomas is a Researcher working with the International Cyber Policy Centre.
What is ASPI?
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute was formed in 2001 as an independent, non‑partisan think tank. Its core aim is to provide the
Australian Government with fresh ideas on Australia’s defence, security and strategic policy choices. ASPI is responsible for informing the
public on a range of strategic issues, generating new thinking for government and harnessing strategic thinking internationally.
ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre
The ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre’s mission is to shape debate, policy and understanding on cyber issues, informed by original
research and close consultation with government, business and civil society.
It seeks to improve debate, policy and understanding on cyber issues by:
1. conducting applied, original empirical research
2. linking government, business and civil society
3. leading debates and influencing policy in Australia and the Asia–Pacific.
The work of ICPC would be impossible without the financial support of our partners and sponsors across government, industry and civil
society. ASPI is grateful to the US State Department for providing funding for this research project.
Important disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in relation to the subject matter covered. It is provided with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering any form of professional or other advice or services. No person should
rely on the contents of this publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional.
ASPI
Tel +61 2 6270 5100
Fax + 61 2 6273 9566
Email enquiries@aspi.org.au
www.aspi.org.au
www.aspistrategist.org.au
www.aspi.org.au/icpc/home
 facebook.com/ASPI.org
 @ASPI_ICPC
© The Australian Strategic Policy Institute Limited 2019
This publication is subject to copyright. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 , no part of it may in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, microcopying, photocopying, recording or otherwise) be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
without prior written permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the publishers. Notwithstanding the above, educational institutions
(including schools, independent colleges, universities and TAFEs) are granted permission to make copies of copyrighted works strictly for
educational purposes without explicit permission from ASPI and free of charge.
First published April 2019
Cover image: This image is from ASPI’s China’s tech giants website: https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/ . ASPI’s International Cyber Policy
Centre allows this image to be republished under the Creative Commons License Attribution ‑Share Alike. The site can also be embedded
into other websites via the menu tab.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Issues Paper
Report No. 15/2019
Mapping China’s
technology giants
Danielle Cave, Samantha Hoffman, Alex Joske,
Fergus Ryan and Elise Thomas

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
Executive summary 03
Introduction 04
The database 05
Methodology 06
China’s tech firms & the CCP 07
Enabling & exporting digital authoritarianism 08
Surveillance cities: Huawei’s ‘smart cities’ projects 10
Censorship and suppression: aiding authoritarianism in Zimbabwe 11
National ID programs: Venezuela’s ‘Fatherland Card’ 12
Shaping politics and policy in Belarus 13
Controlling information flows—WeChat and the future of social messaging 14
Enabling human rights abuses in China: Uyghurs in Xinjiang 16
Future strategic implications 17
Conclusion 19
Notes 20
Acronyms and abbreviations 23
02 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Executive summary
Chinese technology companies are becoming increasingly important and dynamic actors on the
world stage. They’re making important contributions in a range of areas, from cutting‑edge research
to connectivity for developing countries, but their growing influence also brings a range of strategic
considerations. The close relationship between these companies and the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) raises concerns about whether they may be being used to further the CCP’s strategic and
geopolitical interests.
The CCP has made no secret about its intentions to export its vision for the global internet. Officials
from the Cyber Administration of China have written about the need to develop controls so that ‘the
party’s ideas always become the strongest voice in cyberspace.’1 This includes enhancing the ‘global
influence of internet companies like Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu [and] Huawei’ and striving ‘to push China’s
proposition of internet governance toward becoming an international consensus’.
Given the explicitly stated goals of the CCP , and given that China’s internet and technology companies
have been reported to have the highest proportion of internal CCP party committees within the
business sector,2 it’s clear these companies are not purely commercial actors.
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre has created a public database to map the global expansion
of 12 key Chinese technology companies. The aim is to promote a more informed debate about the
growth of China’s tech giants and to highlight areas where this expansion is leading to political and
geostrategic dilemmas. It’s a tool for journalists, researchers, policymakers and others to use to
understand the enormous scale and complexity of China’s tech companies’ global reach. The dataset
is inevitably incomplete, and we invite interested users to help make it more comprehensive by
submitting new data through the online platform.
Our research maps and tracks:
• 17,000+ data points that have helped to geo‑locate 1700+ points of overseas presence for these
12 companies;
• 404 University and research partnerships including 195+ Huawei Seeds for the Future
university partnerships;
• 75 ‘Smart City’ or ‘Public Security Solution’ projects, most of which are in Europe, South America
and Africa;
• 52 5G initiatives, across 34 countries;
• 119 R&D labs, the greatest concentration of which are in Europe;
• 56 undersea cables, 31 leased cable and 17 terrestrial cables;
• 202 data centres and 305 telecommunications & ICT projects spread across the world.
03

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Introduction
China’s technology, internet and telecommunications companies are among the world’s largest and
most innovative. They’re highly competitive, and many are leaders in research and development.
They’ve played a central role in bringing the benefits of modern technology to hundreds of millions of
people, particularly in the developing world.
As a function of their increasingly global scale and scope, China’s tech giants can exert increasing
levels of influence over industries and governments around the world. The close relationship between
Chinese companies and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) means that the expansion of China’s tech
giants is about more than commerce.
A key research question includes: What are the geostrategic, political and human rights implications
of this expansion? By mapping the global expansion of 12 of China’s largest and most influential
technology companies, across a range of sectors, this project contributes new data and analysis to
help answer such questions.
All Chinese companies are subject to China’s increasingly stringent security, intelligence,
counter‑espionage and cybersecurity laws.3 That includes, for example, requirements in the CCP
constitution4 for any enterprise with three or more full party members to host internal party
committees, a clause in the Company Law5 that requires companies to provide for party activity
to take place, and a requirement in the National Intelligence Law to cooperate in and conceal
involvement in intelligence work.6
Several of the companies included in this research are also directly complicit in human rights abuses
in China, including the reported detention of up to 1.5 million Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang.7 From
communications monitoring to facial recognition that enables precise and pervasive surveillance,
advanced technology—from these and other companies—is crucial to the increasingly inescapable
surveillance net that the CCP has created for some Chinese citizens.
Every year since 2015, China has ranked last in the annual Freedom on the Net Index.8 The CCP has
made no secret of its desire to export its concepts of internet and information ‘sovereignty’,9 as well
as cyber censorship,10 around the world.11 Consistent with that directive, this research shows that
Chinese companies are playing a role in aiding surveillance and providing sophisticated public security
technologies and expertise to authoritarian regimes and developing countries that face challenges to
their political stability, governance and rule of law.
In conducting this research, ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre (ICPC) has used open‑source
information in English and Chinese to track the international operations and investments of 12 major
Chinese technology companies: Huawei, ZTE, Tencent, Baidu, China Electronics Technology Group
Corporation (CETC), Alibaba, China Mobile, China Telecom, China Unicom, Wuxi, Hikvision and BGI.
This research has been compiled in an online database that ICPC is making freely accessible to the
public. While it contains more than 1,700 projects and more than 17,000 data points, it’s not exhaustive.
We welcome and encourage members of the public to help us make this dataset more complete by
submitting data via the website.
04 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
The database
Throughout 2018, ICPC received frequent questions from media and stakeholders about the
international activities of Chinese technology companies; for example, about Huawei’s operations in
particular regions or how widespread the use of Baidu or WeChat is outside of China.
These were always difficult questions to answer, as there’s a lack of publicly available quantitative and
qualitative data, and some of these companies disclose little in the way of policies that affect data,
security, privacy, freedom of expression and censorship. What information is available is spread across
a wide range of sources and hasn’t been compiled. In‑depth analysis of the available sources also
requires Chinese‑language capabilities, an understanding of Chinese state financing structures, and
the use of internet archiving services as web pages are moved, altered or even deleted.
A further impediment to transparency is that Chinese media are under increasing control from the
CCP and publish few investigative reports, which severely limits the available pool of media sources.
The global expansion and influence of US internet companies, particularly Facebook, for example, has
rightly received substantial attention and scrutiny over the past few years. Much of that scrutiny has
come from, and will continue to come from, independent media, academia and civil society. However,
the same scrutiny is often lacking when it comes to Chinese tech and social media companies.
The sheer capacity of China’s giant tech companies, their reach and influence, and the unique
party‑state environment that shapes, limits and drives their global behaviour set them apart from
other large technology companies expanding around the world.
This project seeks to:
1. Analyse the global expansion of a key sample of China’s tech giants by mapping their major points
of overseas presence.
2. Provide the public with an analysis of the governance structures and party‑state politics from which
those companies have emerged and with which they’re deeply entwined.
05

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Methodology
To fill this research gap, ICPC sought to create an interactive global database to provide policymakers,
academics, journalists, government officials and other interested readers with a more holistic picture
of the increasingly global reach of China’s tech giants.
A complete mapping of all Chinese technology companies globally would be impossible within
the confines of our research. ICPC has therefore selected 12 companies from across China’s
telecommunications, technology, internet and biotech sectors:
• Alibaba
• Baidu
• BGI
• China Electronics Technology Group (CETC)
• China Mobile
• China Telecom
• China Unicom
• Hikvision (a subsidiary of CETC)
• Huawei
• Tencent
• Wuxi
• ZTE.
This dataset will continue to be updated during 2019. This research relied on open‑source information
in English and Chinese. This has included company websites, corporate information, tenders, media
reporting, databases and other public sources.
The size and complexity of these companies, and the speed at which they’re expanding, means this
dataset will inevitably be incomplete. For that reason, we encourage researchers, journalists, experts
and members of the public to contribute and submit data via the online platform in order to help make
the dataset more complete over time.
06 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
China’s tech firms & the CCP
The CCP’s influence and reach into private companies has increased sharply over the past decade.
In 2006, 178,000 party committees had been established in private firms.12 By 2016, that number had
increased sevenfold to approximately 1.3 million.13 Today, whether the companies, their leadership,
and their employees like it or not, the CCP is present in private and public enterprise. Often the
activity of party committees and party ‑building activity is linked to the CCP’s version of the concept of
‘corporate social responsibility’14—a concept that the party has explicitly politicised. For instance, in
the publishing industry, corporate social responsibility includes political responsibility15 and protecting
state security.16 Internet and technology companies are believed to have the highest proportion of CCP
party committees in the private sector.17
This expanding influence and reach also extends to foreign companies. For example, by the end of
2016, the CCP’s Organisation Department claimed that 70% of China’s 100,000 foreign enterprises
possessed party organisations. 18 Expanding the party’s reach and role inside private enterprises
appears to have been a priority since party chief Jiang Zemin’s ‘Three Represents’ policy, which
opened party membership to businesspeople, became CCP doctrine in 2002.
All the companies mapped as a part of this project have party committees, party branches and
party secretaries. For example, Alibaba has around 200 party branches; 19 in 2017 it was reported that
Tencent had 89 party branches;20 and Huawei has more than 300.21
Sometimes, the relevance and significance of the CCP’s presence within technology companies
is dismissed or trivialised as merely equivalent to the presence of government relations or human
resources departments in Western corporations. However, the CCP’s expectations of these
committees is clear.22 The CCP’s constitution states that a party organisation ‘shall be formed in
any enterprise … and any other primary‑level work unit where there are three or more full party
members’.23 Article 32 outlines their responsibilities, which include encouraging everyone in the
company to ‘consciously resist unacceptable practices and resolutely fight against all violations of
party discipline or state law’. Article 33 states that party committees inside state‑owned enterprises
are expected to ‘play a leadership role, set the right direction, keep in mind the big picture, ensure
the implementation of party policies and principles, and discuss and decide on major issues of their
enterprise in accordance with regulations’.24
The establishment and expansion of party committees in private enterprises appears to be one of the
ways in which Beijing is trying to reduce financial risks and exercise control over the economy. Because
entities ‘cannot be without the party’s voice’ and ‘must safeguard the state‑owned assets and interests
from damage’,25 the party committees are expected to weigh in on major decisions and policies,
including the appointment and dismissal of important cadres, major project investment decisions and
large‑scale capital expenditures.26 Although this guidance is longstanding practice in state‑owned
enterprises, it also appears to be taking root in private enterprises. Conducting a review of corporate
disclosures in 2017, the Nikkei Asian Review identified 288 companies listed in China that ‘changed their
articles of association to ensure management policy that reflects the party’s will’.27 In 2018,
07

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
26 publicly listed Chinese banks revised their articles of association to support party committees
and the establishment of subordinate discipline inspection committees. Many of the revised articles
reportedly include language requiring party consultation before major decisions are made.28
This control mechanism is explicit in the party’s vetting of business leaders. For example, although he’s
not a party member, Baidu CEO Robin Li is a member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative
Conference, the country’s primary ‘united front’ body.29 The party conducts a comprehensive
assessment of any of the business executives brought into official advisory bodies managed by the
United Front Work Department, the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and the
National People’s Congress. Two of the four criteria – which relates to a business person’s political
inclinations – include, their ‘ideological status and political performance’, as well as their fulfillment of
social responsibilities. And second, their personal compliance with laws and regulations.30
Enabling & exporting digital authoritarianism
The crown jewel of Chinese foreign policy under Xi Jinping is the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which
is to be a vast global network of infrastructure intended to enable the flow of trade, people and ideas
between China and the rest of the world.31 Technology, under the banner of the Digital Silk Road, is a
key component of this project.
China’s ambitions to influence the international development of technological norms and standards
are openly acknowledged.32 The CCP recognises the threat posed by an open internet to its grip on
power—and, conversely, the opportunities that dominance over global cyberspace could offer by
extending that control.33
In a 2017 article published in one of the most important CCP journals, officials from the Cyber
Administration of China (the top Chinese internet regulator) wrote about the need to develop controls
so that ‘the party’s ideas always become the strongest voice in cyberspace.’34 This includes enhancing
the ‘global influence of internet companies like Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu [and] Huawei’ and striving ‘to
push China’s proposition of internet governance toward becoming an international consensus’.
Officials from the Cyberspace Administration of China have written that ‘cyberspace has become a new
field of competition for global governance, and we must comprehensively strengthen international
exchanges and cooperation in cyberspace, to push China’s proposition of Internet governance toward
becoming an international consensus.’35 China’s technology companies are specifically referenced as a
part of this effort: ‘The global influence of Internet companies like Alibaba, Tencent, Baidu, Huawei and
others is on the rise.’36
Western technology firms have attracted heated criticism for making compromises in order to
engage in the Chinese market, which often involves constraining free speech or potentially abetting
human rights abuses.37 This attention is warranted and should continue. However, strangely, global
consumers have so far been less critical of the Chinese firms that have developed and deployed
sophisticated technologies that now underpin the CCP’s ability to control and suppress segments of
China’s population38 and which can be exported to enable similar control of other populations.
08 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
The ‘China model’ of digitally enabled authoritarianism is spreading well beyond China’s borders.
Increasingly, the use of technology for repression, censorship, internet shutdowns and the targeting of
bloggers, journalists and human rights activists are becoming standard practices for non‑democratic
regimes around the world.
In its 2018 Freedom on the net report, Freedom House singled out China as the worst abuser of human
rights on the internet. The report also found that the Chinese Government is actively seeking to export
its moral and ethical norms, expertise and repressive capabilities to other nations. In addition to the
Chinese Government’s efforts, Freedom House specifically called out the role of the Chinese tech
sector in facilitating the spread of digital repression. It found that Chinese companies:
have supplied telecommunications hardware, advanced facial‑recognition technology, and data
analytics tools to a variety of governments with poor human rights records, which could benefit
Chinese intelligence services as well as repressive local authorities. Digital authoritarianism is being
promoted as a way for governments to control their citizens through technology, inverting the
concept of the internet as an engine of human liberation.39
Reporters Without Borders has also sounded the alarm over the involvement of Chinese technology
companies in repressing free speech and undermining journalism. As part of an extensive report on
the Chinese Government’s attempts to reshape the world’s media in its own image, it concluded that:
From consumer software apps to surveillance systems for governments, the products that China’s
hi‑tech companies try to export provide the regime with significant censorship and surveillance
tools … In May 2018, the companies were enlisted into the China Federation of Internet Societies
(CFIS), which is openly designed to promote the Chinese Communist Party’s presence within them.
Chinese hi‑tech has provided the regime with an exceptional influence and control tool, which it is
now trying to extend beyond China’s borders.40
Pushing back against both the practices of digital authoritarianism and the norms and values that
underpin such practices requires a clear‑eyed understanding of the way they’re being spread. For
example, a study of the BRI has found that the ways in which some BRI projects, including digital
projects, are structured create serious concerns about the erosion of sovereignty for host nations,
such as when a recipient government doesn’t have full control of the operations, management, digital
infrastructure or data being generated through those projects.41
Sovereign governments are, of course, ultimately responsible for their actions. For some, particularly
Western governments, this includes being transparent and accountable in their use of technology for
surveillance and information control. And, if they aren’t, the media, civil society and the public have
avenues to hold them to account. However, companies also have responsibilities in this space, which is
why many sensitive and dual‑use technologies are subject to export controls. The need for companies
to be held accountable for how new technologies are used is particularly acute in developing
countries, where the state may be less able or less willing to do so because of challenges arising from
governance, legislative and regulatory capacity, transparency and corruption.
09

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
The following case studies have been selected as illustrations of the ways in which Chinese technology
companies, often with funding from the Chinese Government, are aiding authoritarian regimes,
undermining human rights and exerting political influence in regions around the world.
Surveillance cities: Huawei’s ‘smart cities’ projects
An important and understudied part of the global expansion of Chinese tech companies involves the
proliferation of sophisticated surveillance technologies and ‘public security solutions’.42 Huawei is
particularly dominant in this space, including in developing countries where advanced surveillance
technologies are being introduced for the first time.
Through this research and as of April 2019, we have mapped 75 Smart City‑Public Security projects,
most of which involve Huawei.43 Those projects—which are often euphemistically referred to as ‘safe
city’ projects—include the provision of surveillance cameras, command and control centres, facial and
licence plate recognition technologies, data labs, intelligence fusion capabilities and portable rapid
deployment systems for use in emergencies.
The growth of Huawei’s ‘public security solution’ projects has been rapid. For example, the company’s
‘Hisilicon’ chips reportedly make up 60% of chips used in the global security industry.44 In 2017, Huawei
listed 40 countries where its smart‑city technologies had been introduced;45 in 2018, that reach had
reportedly more than doubled to 90 countries (including 230 cities). Because of a lack of detail or
possible differences in definition, this project currently covers 43 countries.46
This research has found that, in many developing countries, exponential growth is being driven by
loans provided by China Exim Bank (which is wholly owned by the Chinese Government).47 The loans,
which must be paid back by recipients,48 are provided to foreign governments, and it’s been reported
in academia and the media that the contractors used must be Chinese companies.49 In many of the
examples examined, Huawei was awarded the primary contract; in some cases, the contract was
managed by a Chinese state‑owned enterprise and Huawei played a ‘sub‑awardee’ role as a provider
of surveillance equipment and services.50
Smart‑city technologies can impart substantial benefits to states using them. For example, in
Singapore, increased access to digital services and the use of technology that exploits the ‘internet of
things’ (for traffic control, health care and video surveillance) has led to increased citizen mobility and
productivity gains.51
However, in many cases, Huawei’s safe‑city solutions focus on the introduction of new public security
capabilities, including in countries such as Ecuador, Pakistan, the Philippines, Venezuela, Bolivia
and Serbia. Many of those countries rank poorly, some very poorly, on measures of governance
and stability, including the World Bank’s governance indicators of political stability, the absence of
violence, the control of corruption and the rule of law.52
Of course, the introduction of new public security technologies may have made cities ‘safer’ from a
crime prevention perspective, but, unsurprisingly, in some countries it’s created a range of political
and capacity problems, including alleged corruption; missing money and opaque deals;53 operational
and ongoing maintenance problems;54 and alleged national security concerns.55
10 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Censorship and suppression: aiding authoritarianism in Zimbabwe
The example set by the Chinese state is increasingly being looked to by non‑democratic regimes—and
even some democratic governments—as proof that a free and open internet is neither necessary
nor desirable for development. ‘If China could become a world power without a free Internet, why do
African countries need a free internet?’ one unnamed African leader reportedly asked interviewers
from the Department of Media Studies at the University of Witwatersrand.56
The business dealings of Chinese technology companies in Zimbabwe, for example, are closely
entwined with the CCP’s support for the country’s authoritarian regime. China is Zimbabwe’s largest
source of foreign investment, partly as a result of sanctions imposed by Western countries over human
rights violations by the regime. Zimbabwean President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s first visit outside of
Africa after his election was to China, where he thanked President Xi Jinping and China for supporting
Zimbabwe against Western sanctions and called for even deeper economic and technical cooperation
between the two nations.57
Chinese companies play a central role in Zimbabwe’s telecommunications sector. Huawei has won
numerous multimillion‑dollar contracts with state‑owned cellular network NetOne, some of which
have been the subject of corruption allegations.58 Several of Huawei’s Zimbabwe projects have been
financed through Chinese Government loans.59
ZTE also has a significant footprint in the country (and has also been the subject of corruption
allegations).60 This has included a $500 million loan, in partnership with China Development Bank, to
Zimbabwe’s largest telco, Econet, in 2015.61 ZTE has previously provided equipment, including radio
base stations, for Econet’s 3G network.62 Zimbabwean telecommunications providers currently owe
millions of dollars to Huawei and ZTE, as well as Ericsson, which reportedly led to network disruptions
in March 2019.63
The CCP and Chinese companies haven’t just helped to cushion Zimbabwe’s leaders against the
impact of sanctions. They’re also providing both a model and means for the regime’s authoritarian
practices to be brought forward into the digital age, both online and offline.
The Zimbabwean Government has been considering draconian new laws to restrict social media
since at least 2016, when the official regulator issued an ominous warning to internet users against
‘generating, passing on or sharing such abusive and subversive materials’.64 In the same year, a law was
passed to allow authorities to seize devices in order to prevent people using social media.65
In early 2019, the government blocked social media and imposed internet shutdowns in response to
protests against fuel price increases. Information Minister Energy Mutodi stated that ‘social media was
used by criminals to organize themselves … this is why the government had to … block [the] internet,’
as he announced plans for forthcoming cybercrime laws to criminalise the use of social media to
spread ‘falsehoods’.66
The government has openly been looking to China as a model for controlling social media,67
including by creating a cybersecurity ministry, which a spokesperson described as ‘like a trap used
to catch rats’.68
11

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Parts of this ‘trap’ reportedly come from China. In 2018, it was reported that China, alongside Russia
and Iran, had been helping Zimbabwe to set up a facility to house a ‘sophisticated surveillance system’
sold to the government by ‘one of the largest telecommunications companies’ in China.69 Given the
description and context, it seems plausible that this company may be Huawei or ZTE.
‘We have our means of seeing things these days, we just see things through our system. So no one can
hide from us, in this country,’ said former Intelligence Minister Didymus Mutasa.70
The government is increasingly looking to expand its surveillance from the online space into the
real world. It’s signed multiple agreements with Chinese companies for physical surveillance
systems, including a highly controversial planned national facial recognition system with Chinese
company CloudWalk.71
It’s also interested in developing its own indigenous facial recognition technology, and is working with
CETC subsidiary Hikvision to do it.72 Hikvision is already supplying surveillance cameras for police and
traffic control systems.73 In 2018, Zimbabwean authorities signed a memorandum of understanding
with the company to implement a ‘smart city’ program in Mutare. This included the donation of facial
recognition terminals equipped with deep‑learning artificial intelligence (AI) systems.
In a media statement, the government stated:
The software is meant to be integrated with the facial recognition hardware which will be made
locally by local developers in line with the government’s drive to grow the local ICT sector making
Zimbabwe to be the number one country in Africa to spearhead the facial recognition surveillance
and AI system nationwide in Zimbabwe.74
National ID programs: Venezuela’s ‘Fatherland Card’
Chinese tech companies are involved in national identity programs around the world. One of the most
concerning examples is playing out amid the political and humanitarian crisis in Venezuela.
A Reuters investigation in 2018 uncovered the central role played by ZTE in inspiring and implementing
the Maduro regime’s ‘Fatherland Card’ program.75 The Fatherland Card (Carnet de la Patria) records
the holder’s personal data, such as their birthday, family information, employment, income, property
owned, medical history, state benefits received, presence on social media, membership of a political
party and history of voting.
Although the card is technically voluntary, without it Venezuelans can be denied access to
government‑subsidised food, medication or gasoline.76 In the midst of Venezuela’s political crisis,
registering for a ‘voluntary’ card is no choice at all for many. In fact, people in Caracas are queuing for
hours to get hold of one, despite the risks of handing over personal data to the increasingly unstable
and repressive Maduro regime.77
According to Reuters, ZTE was contracted by the government to build the underlying database and
accompanying mobile payment system. A team of ZTE employees was embedded with Cantv, the
Venezuelan state telecommunications company that manages the database, to help secure and
monitor the system. ZTE has also helped to build a centralised government video surveillance system.
12 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
There are concerns that the card program is being used as a tool to interfere in the democratic
process. During the 2018 elections, observers reported kiosks being set up near or even inside voting
centres, where voters were encouraged to scan their cards to register for a ‘fatherland prize’.78 Those
who did so later received text messages thanking them for voting for Maduro (although they never did
get the promised prize).
Authorities claim that the cards record whether a person voted, but not whom they voted for. However,
an organiser interviewed by Reuters claimed to have been instructed by government managers to tell
voters that their votes could be tracked. Regardless of the truth of the matter, even the rumours that
the government may be watching who votes for it—or, perhaps more pertinently, against it—could be
expected to influence the way people vote.
In the context of the current crisis, this technologically enabled population control takes on an even
sharper edge. Cyberspace has emerged as a key battleground in the struggle between the Maduro
regime and the Venezuelan opposition led by Juan Guaidó.
In addition to selective social media blocks79 and total internet shutdowns,80 there’s also evidence of
more insidious attacks. For example, a website set up by the opposition to coordinate humanitarian
aid delivery was subject to a DNS hijacking attack, including the theft of the personal data of
potentially thousands of pro‑opposition volunteers.81
Cantv, Venezuela’s government‑run telecommunications company, is reportedly ‘dependent on
agreements with ZTE and Huawei to supply equipment and staff and ... Cantv sends its employees to
China to receive training.’82 These deals are financed through the Venezuela China Joint Fund. China
is known as something of an international leader in DNS blocking and manipulation, and the Chinese
Government is strongly supporting the Maduro regime, including by targeting social media users in
China who post or share content critical of Maduro.83
Shaping politics and policy in Belarus
In some parts of the world, Chinese technology companies are helping shape the politics and policy of
new technologies through the development of high‑level relationships with national governments. This
is particularly concerning in the case of non‑democratic countries.
Often referred to as ‘Europe’s last dictatorship’, Belarus has been under the control of authoritarian
strongman Aleksandr Lukashenko since 1994.84 In recent years, ties with China have come to play
an increasingly significant role not only in Belarus’s delicate diplomatic relations with its powerful
neighbours, but also in its very indelicate domestic policies of violent repression. This has included the
use of digital technologies for mass surveillance and the targeted persecution of activists, journalists
and political opponents.85
Huawei has been supplying video surveillance and analysis systems to the Lukashenko regime since
2011 and border monitoring equipment since at least 2014.86 Also in 2014, Huawei’s local subsidiary,
Bel Huawei Technologies, launched two research labs for ‘intellectual remote surveillance systems’.
Through the labs, Huawei provides ‘laboratory‑based training ... for the specialists of Promsvyaz,
Beltelekom, HSCC and other organisations’.87
13

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Over the past several years, collaboration between the Belarusian Government and Chinese
technology companies has expanded rapidly, in line with Belarus’s engagement with the BRI and with
deepening diplomatic and economic ties between Lukashenko’s regime and the CCP .88
In March 2019, Belarus unveiled a draft information security law. ‘It is purely our own product. We
didn’t borrow it from anyone,’ State Secretary of the Security Council Stanislav Zas told Belarusian
state media.89
A day later, China’s ambassador to Belarus spoke to the same outlet about how ‘Belarusian and
Chinese companies [have] managed to establish intensive cooperation in the area of cyber and
information security’, and about the desire of both countries to ‘expand cooperation in the sphere of
cybersecurity’.90
‘Both countries have good practice in this field. We are going to even deeper cooperate [sic] and share
experience,’ the Chinese ambassador said.
Huawei has played an especially prominent role in this process at multiple levels. It has continued
and expanded the training it provides to Belarusians, including sending students to study in China
and signing an agreement with the Belarusian State Academy of Communications for a joint
training centre.91
Huawei is also exerting political and policy influence. In May 2018, the company released its National
ICT priorities for the Republic of Belarus.92 The proposal includes recommendations for ‘public safety’
technologies, such as video surveillance and drones, and a citizen status identification system.
‘Belarus has not yet widely deployed integrated police systems, and thus can refer to the solution
adopted in Shenzhen,’ the document notes. This is likely to be a reference to the facial recognition
program implemented by Shenzhen police to ‘crack down on jaywalking’.93
During a meeting with the chairman of Huawei’s board, Guo Ping, for the launch of the plan, then
Belarusian Prime Minister Andrei Kobyakov expressed his hope that:
the accumulated experience and prospects of cooperation will play an important role in the
development of information and communication technologies in Belarus and in making friendship
between our countries stronger. The Belarusian government counts on further effective interaction
and professional cooperation.94
Controlling information flows—WeChat and the future of social messaging
Launched in 2011, WeChat quickly became China’s dominant social network but has largely struggled
to build up a significant user base overseas. Still, of the social media super‑app’s 1.08 billion monthly
active users,95 an estimated 100–200 million are outside China.96
Southeast Asia provides the most fertile ground for WeChat outside of China: the app has 20 million
users in Malaysia; 17% of the population of Thailand use it;97 and it’s the second most popular
messaging app in Bhutan and Mongolia.98
14 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
The potential for WeChat to substantially grow its user base overseas remains, particularly as it hits a
wall in user growth in China99 and overseas expansion becomes more of an imperative.
To the extent that it’s being used outside of mainland China, WeChat poses significant risks as a
channel for the dissemination of propaganda and as a tool of influence among the Chinese diaspora.
WeChat is increasingly used by politicians in liberal democracies to communicate with their
ethnic Chinese voters, which necessarily means that communication is subject to CCP censorship
by default.100
In one instance, in September 2017 Canadian parliamentarian Jenny Kwan posted a WeChat message
of support for Hong Kong’s Umbrella Movement—a series of pro‑democracy protests that took place in
2014—only to have it censored by WeChat.101
In 2018, Canadian police received complaints about alleged vote buying taking place on WeChat.102
A group called the Canada Wenzhou Friendship Society was reportedly using the app to offer voters a
$20 ‘transportation fee’ if they went to the polls and encouraging them to vote for specific candidates.
Because WeChat is one of the main conduits for Chinese‑language news, censorship controls help
Beijing to ensure that news sources using the app for distribution report only news that serves the
CCP’s strategic objectives.103
WeChat is not only a significant influence and censorship tool for the CCP , but also has the potential to
facilitate surveillance. An Amnesty International study ranking global instant messaging apps on how
well they use encryption to protect online privacy gave WeChat a score of 0 out of 100.104 Content that
passes through WeChat’s servers in China is accessible to the Chinese authorities by law.105
15

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Enabling human rights abuses in China:
Uyghurs in Xinjiang
Many of the repressive techniques and technologies that Chinese companies are implementing abroad
have for a long time been used on Chinese citizens. In particular, the regions of Tibet and Xinjiang are
often at the bleeding edge of China’s technological innovation.
The complicity of China’s tech giants in perpetrating or enabling human rights abuses—including the
detention of an estimated 1.5 million Chinese citizens106 and foreign citizens107—foreshadows the
values, expertise and capabilities that these companies are taking with them out into global markets.
From the phones in people’s pockets to the tracking of 2.5 million people using facial recognition
technology108 to the ‘re‑education’ detention centres,109 Chinese technology companies—including
several of the companies in our dataset—are deeply implicated in the ongoing surveillance, repression
and persecution of Uyghurs and other Muslim ethnic minority communities in Xinjiang.
Many of the companies covered in this report collaborate with foreign universities on the same kinds
of technologies they’re using to support surveillance and human rights abuses in China. For example,
CETC—which has research partnerships with the University of Technology Sydney,110 the University
of Manchester111 and the Graz Technical University in Austria112—and its subsidiary Hikvision are
deeply implicated in the crackdown on Uyghurs in Xinjiang. CETC has been providing police in Xinjiang
with a centralised policing system that draws in data from a vast array of sources, such as facial
recognition cameras and databases of personal information. The data is used to support a ‘predictive
policing’ program, which according to Human Rights Watch is being used as a pretext to arbitrarily
detain innocent people.113 CETC has also reportedly implemented a facial recognition project that
alerts authorities when villagers from Muslim‑dominated regions move outside of prescribed areas,
effectively confining them to their homes and workplaces.114
Huawei provides the Xinjiang Public Security Bureau with technical support and training.115 At the
same time, it has funded more than 1,200 university research projects and built close ties to many of
the world’s top research institutions.116 The company’s work with Xinjiang’s public security apparatus
also includes providing a modular data centre for the Public Security Bureau of Aksu Prefecture in
Xinjiang and a public security cloud solution in Karamay. In early 2018, the company launched an
‘intelligent security’ innovation lab in collaboration with the Public Security Bureau in Urumqi.117
According to reporting, Huawei is providing Xinjiang’s police with technical expertise, support and
digital services to ensure ‘Xinjiang’s social stability and long‑term security’.
Hikvision took on hundreds of millions of dollars worth of security‑related contracts in Xinjiang
in 2017 alone, including a ‘social prevention and control system’ and a program implementing
facial‑recognition surveillance on mosques.118 Under the contract, the company is providing 35,000
cameras to monitor streets, schools and 967 mosques, including video conferencing systems that are
being used to ‘ensure that imams stick to a “unified” government script’.119
Most concerningly of all, Hikvision is also providing equipment and services directly to re‑education
camps. It has won contracts with at least two counties (Moyu120 and Pishan121) to provide panoramic
cameras and surveillance systems within camps.
16 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Future strategic implications
The degree to which nations and communities around the world are coming to rely on Chinese
technology companies for critical services and infrastructure, from laying cables to governing their
cities, has significant strategic implications both now and for many years into the future:
• Undermining democracy: Perhaps the greatest long‑term strategic concern is the role of Chinese
technology companies—and technology companies from other countries that aid or engage in
similar behaviour—in enabling authoritarianism in the digital age, from supplying surveillance
technologies to automating mass censorship and the targeting of political dissidents, journalists,
human rights advocates and marginalised minorities. The most challenging issue is the continued
export around the world of the model of vicious, ubiquitous surveillance and repression being
refined now in Xinjiang.
• Espionage and intellectual property thef t: The espionage risks associated with Chinese
companies are clearly laid out in Chinese law, and the Chinese state has a well‑established track
record of stealing intellectual property.122 This risk is only likely to increase as ‘smart’ technology
becomes ever more pervasive in private and public spaces. From city‑wide surveillance to the
phones in the pockets of political leaders (or, in a few years, the microphones in their TVs and
refrigerators), governments, the private sector and civil society alike need to seriously consider how
to better protect their information from malicious cyber actors.
• Developing technologies: Chinese companies are leading the field in research and development
into a range of innovative, and strategically sensitive, emerging technologies. Their global expansion
provides them with key resources, such as huge and diverse datasets and access to the world’s best
research institutions and universities.123
Fair competition between leading international companies to develop these crucial technologies is
only to be expected, and Chinese tech companies have made enormous positive contributions to
the sum total of human knowledge and innovation.
However, the strategic, political and ideological goals of the CCP—which has directed and funded
much of this research—can’t be ignored. From AI to quantum computing to biotechnology,
the nations that dominate those technologies will exercise significant influence over how the
technologies develop, such as by shaping the ethical norms and values that are built into AI
systems, or how the field of human genetic modification progresses. Dominance in these fields will
give nations a major strategic edge in everything from economic competition to military conflict.
• Military competition: In cases of military competition with China, the Chinese Government would
of course seek to leverage, to its own advantage, its influence over Chinese companies providing
equipment and services to its enemies. This should be a serious strategic consideration for nations
when they choose whether to allow Chinese companies to be involved in the build‑out of critical
infrastructure such as 5G networks, especially given the CCP’s increasing assertiveness and
coercion globally.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
This issue is particularly acute for countries already experiencing tensions over China’s territorial
claims in regions such as the South China Sea. For example, in 2016, after a ruling by a UN‑backed
tribunal dismissed Chinese claims, suspected Chinese hackers attacked announcement and
communications systems in two of Vietnam’s major airports, including a ‘display of profanity and
offensive messages in English against Vietnam and the Philippines’.124 A simultaneous hack on a
Vietnamese airline led to the loss of more than 400,000 passengers’ data. Vietnam’s Information
and Communications Minister said that the government was ‘reviewing Chinese technology and
devices’ in the wake of the attack.125 Cybersecurity firm FireEye says that it’s observed persistent
targeting of both government and corporate targets in Vietnam that’s suspected to be linked to the
South China Sea dispute.126
5G infrastructure build outs should be an area of particular concern. An article in the China National
Defence Report in March 2019127 discusses the military applications for China of 5G in the move to
‘intelligentised’ warfare. ‘[A]s military activities accelerate towards extending into the domain of
intelligentization, air combat platforms, precision‑guided munitions, etc. will be transformed from
‘accurate’ to ‘intelligentized.’ 5G‑based AI technology will definitely have important implications for
these domains,’ write the authors, who appear to be researchers affiliated with Xidian University
and the PLA’s Army Command Academy.
18 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Conclusion
Chinese companies have unquestionably made important and valuable contributions to the
technology industry globally, from contributing to cutting edge research and pushing the boundaries
of developing technologies, to enabling access to affordable, good quality devices and services for
people around the world. They are not going anywhere, and they are going to continue to play a
vital role in the ways in which governments, companies and citizens around the world connect with
one another.
At the same time, however, it is important to recognise that the activities of these companies are not
purely commercial, and in some circumstances risk mitigation is needed. The CCP’s own policies and
official statements make it clear that it perceives the expansion of Chinese technology companies as a
crucial component of its wider project of ideological and geopolitical expansion. The CCP committees
embedded within the tech companies and the close ties (whether through direct ownership, legal
obligations or financing agreements including loans and lucrative contracts) between the companies
and the Chinese government make it difficult for them to be politically neutral actors, as much as
some of the companies might prefer this. There is also a legitimate question about whether global
consumers should demand greater scrutiny of Chinese technology firms that facilitate human rights
abuses in China and elsewhere.
Governments around the world are struggling with the political and security implications of working
with Chinese corporations, particularly in areas such as critical infrastructure, for example in 5G, and in
collaborative research partnerships that might involve sensitive or dual‑use technologies. Part of this
struggle is due to a lack of in‑depth understanding of the unique party‑state environment that shapes,
limits and drives the global behaviour of Chinese companies. This research project aims to help plug
that gap so that policymakers, industry and civil society can make more informed decisions when
engaging China’s tech giants.
19

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Notes
1 Sarah Cook, ‘China’s cyber superpower strategy: implementation, internet freedom implications, and US responses’, written
testimony to House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, Freedom House, 28 September 2018, online; Kania et al.,
‘China’s strategic thinking on building power in cyberspace: a top party journal’s timely explanation translated’.
2 Emily Feng, ‘Chinese tech groups display closer ties with Communist party’, Financial Times, 11 October 2017, online; Zhang Lin,
‘Chinese Communist Party needs to curtail its presence in private businesses’, South China Morning Post , 25 November 2018, online;
China Organisation personnel, ‘China’s internet companies are surging with a “party building tide”’ [ 我国互联网企业涌动’党建潮’],
CPCnews.cn, 26 March 2018, online.
3 Samantha Hoffman, Elsa Kania, ‘Huawei and the ambiguity of China’s intelligence and counter ‑espionage laws’, The Strategist,
13 September 2018, online.
4 Constitution of the Communist Party of China, revised and adopted on 24 October 2017, online.
5 People’s Republic of China Company Law, online (in Chinese).
6 Hoffman & Kania, ‘Huawei and the ambiguity of China’s intelligence and counter ‑espionage laws’.
7 Chris Buckley, Amy Qin, ‘Muslim detention camps are like “boarding schools,” Chinese official says’, New York Times, 12 March 2019,
online; Fergus Ryan, Danielle Cave, Nathan Ruser, Mapping Xinjiang’s ‘re-education’ camps , ASPI, Canberra, 1 November 2018, online.
8 ‘China: not free: 88/100’, Freedom on the net 2018, Freedom House, Washington DC, 2018, online.
9 Jun Mai, ‘Xi Jinping renews “cyber sovereignty” call at China’s top meeting of internet minds’, South China Morning Post ,
3 December 2017, online.
10 Josh Rogin, ‘White House calls China’s threats to airlines “Orwellian nonsense”’, Washington Post, 5 May 2018, online (paywall).
11 Samantha Hoffman, Social credit: technology-enhanced authoritarian control with global consequences , ASPI, Canberra,
28 June 2018, online.
12 Wu Jiao, ‘Party membership up in private firms’, China Daily, 17 July 2007, online.
13 Michael Martina, ‘Exclusive: In China, the party’s push for influence inside foreign firms stirs fears’, Reuters, 24 August 2017, online.
14 Jun Hong (君虹), ‘The Evolution of Corporate Social Responsibility in China’ ( 中国企业社会责任的演变), Red Flag Manuscript
(红旗文稿), 9 March 2019, online.
15 ‘Social responsibility and party building work of publishing companies’, CCP News Network, 30 July 2013, online (in Chinese)
16 Samantha Hoffman, ‘China’s state security strategy: “everyone is responsible”’, The Strategist, 11 December 2017, online.
17 Emily Feng, ‘Chinese tech groups display closer ties with Communist Party’, Financial Times, 11 October 2017, online (paywall); Zhang
Lin, ‘Chinese Communist Party needs to curtail its presence in private businesses’, South China Morning Post , 25 November 2018,
online; China Organisation personnel, ‘China’s internet companies are surging with a “party building tide”’.
18 ‘Foreign businesses admire their party workers as a “symbol of excellence”’, China Daily, 22 November 2017, online.
19 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/company/alibaba .
20 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/company/tencent .
21 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/company/huawei .
22 Chauncey Jun, ‘What communists do in China’s tech companies’, Inkstone, 4 December 2018, online.
23 Article 30, Constitution of the Communist Party of China, online; Article 19, Company Law: online.
24 Article 30, Constitution of the Communist Party of China.
25 Wei Mengchu (魏梦楚) , ‘Party building is also a productive force.’ ( 党建也是生产力), Qiushi (求是), 21 December 2015, online.
26 This formulation is the ‘Three Majors, One Big’ ( 三重一大). [胡荣良, ‘国企’三重一大 ‘决策实践与理性选择’’], Guangming Daily,
1 March 2015, online.
27 Yu Nakamura, ‘More companies are writing China’s Communist Party into their charters’, Nikkei Asian Review, 24 August 2017, online.
28 Matthew Miller, ‘China’s banks embrace Communist Party committees in risk crackdown’, Reuters, 27 June 2018, online.
29 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/company/baidu .
30 ‘Wang Jianlin, Dong Wenbiao and others step down as “vice ministers”, Richard Liu and Lei Jun take office.’
(王 健 林、董 文 标 等 卸 任“副部长”，刘 强 东、雷 军 等 上 任), Sohu (（搜 狐), 1 December 2017, online.
31 Daniel Kliman, Rush Doshi, Kristine Lee, Zack Cooper, Grading China’s Belt and Road, Asia–Pacific Program, Center for a new American
Security, online.
32 Elsa Kania, Samm Sacks, Paul Triolo, Graham Webster, ‘China’s strategic thinking on building power in cyberspace: a top party
journal’s timely explanation translated’, New America, 25 September 2017, online.
33 Adam Segal, ‘When China rules the web: technology in service of the state’, Foreign Affairs, September–October 2018, online; Samm
Sacks, ‘Beijing wants to rewrite the rules of the internet’, The Atlantic, 18 June 2018, online; Elliott Zaagman, ‘Cyber sovereignty and
the PRC’s vision for global internet governance’, China Brief, Jamestown Foundation, 5 June 2018, online.
34 Sarah Cook, ‘China’s cyber superpower strategy: implementation, internet freedom implications, and US responses’, written
testimony to House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, Freedom House, 28 September 2018, online; Kania et al.,
‘China’s strategic thinking on building power in cyberspace: a top party journal’s timely explanation translated’.
20 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
35 Elsa Kania, Samm Sacks, Paul Triolo, Graham Webster, ‘China’s strategic thinking on building power in cyberspace: a top party
journal’s timely explanation translated’, New America, 25 September 2017, online.
36 Elsa Kania, Samm Sacks, Paul Triolo, Graham Webster, ‘China’s strategic thinking on building power in cyberspace: a top party
journal’s timely explanation translated’, New America, 25 September 2017, online.
37 David Meyer, ‘Biotech giant Thermo Fisher stops selling DNA sequencers in repressive Chinese region’, Fortune, 21 February 2019,
online; Pui‑Wang Tam, ‘Daily report: Facebook courts China with censoring software’, New York Times, 23 November 2016, online; Paul
Mozur, ‘In China, Facebook tests the waters with a stealth app’, New York Times, 11 August 2017, online; Ryan Gallagher, ‘Google is
conducting a secret “performance review” of its censored China search project’, The Intercept, 28 March 2019, online; Arjun Kharpal,
‘Microsoft says facial recognition firm that Beijing allegedly uses to track Muslims is lying about a “partnership”’, CNBC, 15 March 2019,
online; Lindsay Gorman, Matt Schrader, ‘US firms are helping build China’s Orwellian state’, Foreign Policy, 19 March 2019, online;
Andy Greenberg, ‘Apple’s China ‑friendly censorship caused an iPhone ‑crashing bug’, Wired, 10 July 2018, online.
38 ‘China has turned Xinjiang into a zone of repression—and a frightening window into the future’, Washington Post, 23 February 2019,
online (paywall); Financial Times, online (paywall); ‘Big Data fuels crackdown in minority region’, news release, Human Rights Watch,
26 February 2018, online.
39 Freedom on the net 2018: the rise of digital authoritarianism , Freedom House, Washington DC, 2018, online.
40 China’s pursuit of a new world media order, Reporters Without Borders, no date, online.
41 For example, Zimbabwe’s strategic partnership with CloudWalk Technology; Kliman et al., Grading China’s Belt and Road.
42 ‘A better connected world’, BBC Future, no date, online.
43 Huawei refers to these projects or solutions as ‘safe cities’, ‘smart cities’, ‘public security projects’ and ‘public safety projects’.
44 Zhang Dong, ‘Tackling security, does Huawei have a chance?’, trans. Jeffrey Ding, 31 August 2018, online.
45 Matt Schrader, Huawei’s Smart Cities and CCP influence, at home and abroad , Jamestown Foundation, 19 June 2018, online.
46 ‘Huawei Safe Cities: Serbian Security Guards Pioneer of Major Event Protection’
(华为平安城市 ： 塞尔维亚安全卫士 重大赛事保障先锋), Huawei website, 22 August 2019, online.
47 http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑749, http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑371, http://chinatechmap.
aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑394, http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑1667, http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/
marker‑491, http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑388, http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑436, http://
chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑490.
48 Danielle Cave, ‘Witnessing an opaque Pacific power shift’, The Interpreter, 5 September 2016, online.
49 Matthew Dornan, Philippa Brant, ‘Chinese assistance in the Pacific: agency, effectiveness and the role of Pacific island governments’,
Asia and the Pacific Policy Studies , 11 June 2014, online; Veneranda Langa, ‘$1bn China Exim Bank loan conditions too stringent’,
Zimbabwe Situation, 30 December 2016, online; G Smith, G Carter, XJ Mao, A Tararia, E Tupou, WT Xu, The development needs of Pacific
island countries, UNDP China, Beijing, 2014, online.
50 http://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑749.
51 Navin Sregantan, ‘Singapore tops global smart city performance ranking in 2017: study’, Business Times, 13 March 2018, online.
52 World Bank, Worldwide governance indicators , online.
53 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑749; Charles Rollet, ‘Ecuador’s all ‑seeing eye is made in China’, Foreign Policy,
9 August 2018, online.
54 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#//map/marker ‑388.
55 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑1667.
56 Emeka Umejei, ‘The imitation game: will China’s investments reshape Africa’s internet?’, Power 3.0, 6 December 2018, online.
57 Justina Crabtree, ‘Zimbabwe is intent on “leapfrogging 18 years of isolation” with China’s help’, CNBC, 3 April 2018, online.
58 Tawanda Zinyama, Contracting out: the role of public procurement in Zimbabwe , University of Zimbabwe, no date, online.
59 ‘NetOne secures Huawei financing; ICT Minister under the spotlight’, TeleGeography, 3 January 2018, online; Nkechinyere
Uwajumogu, ‘Foreign direct investment and sub ‑Saharan Africa’s domestic entrepreneurial development: a comparison between
China’s inflow and United States of America’s inflow’, ResearchGate, August 2017, online.
60 ‘ZTE solar tender “under probe”’, Sunday Mail, 27 March 2016, online.
61 ‘Econet secures $500 million loan facility from the Chinese government’, myZOL, 4 December 2015, online.
62 ‘Ericsson, ZTE resume work with Econet’, Zimbabwe Independent , 8 August 2008, online.
63 Tatira Zwinoira, ‘Network disruptions to continue’, NewsDay, 7 March 2019, online.
64 Potraz, ‘Warning over social media abuses’, Bulawayo 24News, 6 July 2016, online.
65 Peta Thornycroft, ‘New Zimbabwe law allows seizure of smartphones and laptops as Mugabe turns on social media’, The Telegraph,
7 August 2016, online.
66 ‘Zimbabwe activists push back on social media restrictions’, VOA News, 7 February 2019, online.
67 ‘Govt to regulate social media’, Sunday News, 10 April 2019, online.
68 Andres Kunambura, ‘Mugabe explains functions of cyber security ministry’, Nehanda Radio, 11 October 2017, online.
69 Itai Mushekwe, ‘China, Russia and Iran helping Zimbabwe to set ‑up own NSA’, Bulawayo 24News, 23 March 2018, online.
70 Mushekwe, ‘China, Russia and Iran helping Zimbabwe to set ‑up own NSA’.
71 Amy Hawkins, ‘Beijing’s Big Brother tech needs African faces’, Foreign Policy, 24 July 2018, online.
72 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑159.
21

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
73 ‘Chinese company to mount surveillance cameras’, NewsDay, 31 August 2018, online.
74 Farai Mudzingwa, ‘Government Acknowledges Facial Recognition System In The Works’ Techzim, 13 June 2018, online.
75 Angus Berwick, ‘How ZTE helps Venezuela create China ‑style social control’, Reuters, 14 November 2018, online.
76 Jim Wyss, Cody Weddle, ‘Venezuela’s Maduro aims to turn empty stomachs into full ballot boxes’, Miami Herald, 16 May 2018, online;
Fabiola Zerpa, Patricia Laya, ‘In Venezuela, the only way to cheap gas is through Big Brother’, Bloomberg, 29 August 2018, online.
77 Gaby J Miller, ‘Of fear & hope: embracing the Carnet de la Patria’, Caracas Chronicles, 11 January 2018, online.
78 Scott Smith, Joshua Goodman, ‘Venezuela keeps voting stations open amid light turnout’, CTV News, 20 May 2018, online.
79 ‘Social media shutdown in Venezuela is a warning of what is to come as political tensions rise’, AccessNow, 22 January 2019, online.
80 ‘Evidence of regional internet blackouts across Venezuela’, Netblocks, 27 January 2019, online.
81 ‘DNS manipulation in Venezuela in regards to the humanitarian aid campaign’, Kaspersky, 13 February 2019, online.
82 Angus Berwick, ‘Service? Don’t rely on Venezuela’s state telecoms firm Cantv’, Reuters, 23 November 2018, online.
83 ‘China targets Twitter users critical of Venezuela’s Maduro’, Radio Free Asia, 11 February 2019, online.
84 Peter Pomerantsev, ‘Europe’s last dictatorship keeps surprising everyone’, Washington Post, 25 March 2017, online (paywall).
85 Belarus: ‘It’s enough for people to feel it exists’: civil society, secrecy and surveillance in Belarus, Amnesty International, 7 July 2016, online.
86 Paul Sonne, ‘Belarus talking to China firm about gear’, Wall Street Journal, 21 December 2011, online; ‘Huawei to help Belarus create
security surveillance system’, BellSA, 25 August 2011, online; ‘Belarus–China project on Brest frontier post complete’, Pravo.by,
23 August 2013, online.
87 ‘Huawei opens two laboratories in Belarus’, news release, Belarusian–Chinese Intergovernmental Committee on Cooperation,
8 September 2014, online.
88 Elise Thomas, ‘China, Belarus and the bear in the room’, The Strategist, 31 January 2019, online.
89 ‘Draft Belarus information security concept presented to head of state’, Belarus News, 12 March 2019, online.
90 ‘Belarus, China interested in tighter cooperation in cyber security’, Belarus News, 13 March 2019, online.
91 ‘Cooperation with Belarusian universities as [ sic] important for Huawei’, Belarus News, 25 September 2018, online; ‘Huawei,
Belarusian State Academy of Communications to set up joint training center’, Belarus News, 2 May 2018, online.
92 ‘Huawei releases proposal for Belarus national ICT priorities, helping build an IT Belarus’, news release, Huawei, 16 May 2018, online.
93 Vicky Xiuzhong Xu, Bang Xiao, ‘Chinese authorities use facial recognition, public shaming to crack down on jaywalking, criminals’,
ABC News, 20 March 2018, online.
94 ‘Belarus counts on lasting effective cooperation with Huawei’, Belarus News, 15 May 2018, online.
95 Emma Lee, ‘WeChat claims 1.08 billion users in latest “one minute” data report’, TechNode, 19 November 2018, online.
96 Tim Culpan, ‘The world’s most powerful app is squandering its lead: WeChat is leaving money on the table’, Bloomberg,
23 July 2018, online.
97 Ben Halder, ‘WeChat, China’s weapon of mass propaganda?’, Ozy, 12 October 2018, online.
98 Halder, ‘WeChat, China’s weapon of mass propaganda?’.
99 Rita Liao, ‘The next phase of WeChat’, TechCrunch, 10 January 2019, online.
100 Nikhil Sonnad, ‘WeCensor: What happens when you try to send politically sensitive messages on WeChat’, Quartz, 18 April 2018, online.
101 Yaqui Wang, ‘How China’s censorship machine crosses borders—and into Western politics’, news release, Human Rights Watch,
20 February 2019, online.
102 Melanie Green, ‘Vancouver elections could lead to erosion of trust, racist backlash, experts say’, The Star Vancouver,
14 October 2018, online.
103 Tom Sear, Michael Jensen, Titus C Chen, ‘Opinion: How digital media blur the border between Australia and China’, news release,
UNSW Sydney, 19 November 2018, online.
104 How private are your favourite messaging apps? , Amnesty International, 21 October 2016, online.
105 Celia Chen, ‘Here’s what happens with your data when you use a Chinese messaging app’, South China Morning Post ,
4 January 2018, online.
106 Buckley & Qin, ‘Muslim detention camps are like “boarding schools,” Chinese official says’.
107 Megha Rajagopalan, ‘This Australian baby boy has spent his whole life trapped in China’s police state. Now his dad wants him out’,
Buzzfeed News , 19 February 2019, online.
108 Erin Handley, ‘China’s mass surveillance of Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang Province revealed in data security flaw’, ABC News,
9 February 2019, online.
109 Ryan et al., Mapping Xinjiang’s ‘re-education’ camps, online.
110 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑87.
111 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑86.
112 https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑49.
113 Shai Oster, ‘China tries its hand at pre ‑crime: Beijing wants to identify subversives before they strike’, Bloomberg, 4 March 2016,
online; ‘China: Big Data fuels crackdown in minority region’, news release, Human Rights Watch, 26 February 2018, online.
114 ‘China uses facial recognition to fence in villagers in far west’, Bloomberg, 18 January 2018, online.
115 Nathan Vanderklippe, ‘Huawei’s partnership with China on surveillance technology raises concerns for foreign users’, The Globe and
Mail, 14 May 2018, online.
22 Issues Paper: Mapping China’s tech giants

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
116 For example: https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑1042; Meng Wanzhou, ‘Why Huawei values collaboration with
universities’, Nikkei Asian Review, 24, January 2019, online.
117 Nathan Vanderklippe, ‘Huawei’s partnership with China on surveillance technology raises concerns for foreign users’, The Globe and
Mail, 14 May 2018, online.
118 AFP, ‘“No cracks, no blind spots, no gaps”: Chinese firms cash in on Xinjiang’s growing police state’, Hong Kong Free Press,
27 June 2018, online,
119 Ben Dooley, ‘Chinese firms cash in on Xinjiang’s growing police state’, AFP, 27 June 2018, online.
120 Emily Feng, ‘China steps up surveillance on Xinjiang Muslims’, Financial Times, 18 July 2018, online.
121 Charles Rollet, ‘Evidence of Hikvision’s involvement with Xinjiang IJOP and re ‑education camps’, IPVM, 2 October 2018, online.
122 Adam Segal, Samantha Hoffman, Fergus Hanson, Tom Uren, Hacking for cash: is China stealing Western IP?, ASPI, Canberra,
25 September 2018, online.
123 For example: https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑1276, https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑87,
https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑49, https://chinatechmap.aspi.org.au/#/map/marker ‑1174.
124 Charlie Osborne, ‘Chinese hackers take down Vietnam airport systems’, ZDNet, 1 August 2016, online.
125 Bloomberg, ‘Spyware deluge hits Vietnam sites amid South China Sea spat’, Business Times, 10 August 2016, online.
126 Matthew Tostevin, ‘Chinese cyber spies broaden attacks in Vietnam, security firm says’, Reuters, 31 August 2017, online.
127 Elsa Kania, ‘5G and the Future of AI on the battlefield’, Battlefield Singularity, 9 April 2019, online.
Acronyms and abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
BAT Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent
BRI One Belt, One Road Initiative
CCP Chinese Communist Party
CETC China Electronics Technology Group Corporation
ICPC International Cyber Policy Centre
23

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Some previous ICPC publications

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
