
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
When the winner
takes it all
Big data in China and the battle for privacy
Lotus Ruan
Issues Paper
Report No.5/2018

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the author
Lotus Ruan is a researcher at The Citizen Lab, University of Toronto. Her research focuses on the interplay of the state and private
companies in terms of internet management and innovation in the digital age with an area focus on China. Prior to joining University of
Toronto, Lotus received her master’s degree in Asia Pacific Policy Studies at the University of British Columbia and worked as a journalist
and news editor in China for two years. She also frequently writes about Chinese politics and social issues for English media outlets
including Foreign Policy, The Diplomat, and Tech in Asia.
What is ASPI?
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) was formed in 2001 as an independent, non‑partisan think tank. Its core aim is to provide
the Australian Government with fresh ideas on Australia’s defence, security and strategic policy choices. ASPI is responsible for informing
the public on a range of strategic issues, generating new thinking for government and harnessing strategic thinking internationally.
ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre
The ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre’s mission is to shape debate, policy and understanding on cyber issues, informed by original
research and close consultation with government, business and civil society.
It seeks to improve debate, policy and understanding on cyber issues by:
1. conducting applied, original empirical research
2. linking government, business and civil society
3. leading debates and influencing policy in Australia and the Asia–Pacific.
We thank all of those who contribute to the ICPC with their time, intellect and passion for the subject matter. The work of the ICPC would
be impossible without the financial support of our various sponsors .
Important disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in relation to the subject matter covered. It is provided with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering any form of professional or other advice or services. No person should
rely on the contents of this publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional person.
ASPI
Tel +61 2 6270 5100
Fax + 61 2 6273 9566
Email enquiries@aspi.org.au
www.aspi.org.au
www.aspistrategist.org.au
 facebook.com/ASPI.org
 @ASPI_ICPC
www.aspi.org.au/icpc/home
© The Australian Strategic Policy Institute Limited 2018
This publication is subject to copyright. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 , no part of it may in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, microcopying, photocopying, recording or otherwise) be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
without prior written permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the publishers.
First published June 2018.
Cover image: Laptop showing facial recognition technology © Ivan Marc/shutterstock.com.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
When the winner
takes it all
Big data in China and the battle for privacy
Lotus Ruan
Issues Paper
Report No.5/2018

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
Introduction 03
An ambitious big data vision supported by China’s internet companies 04
Big data and public security 05
Diminishing rights: China’s data laws and regulations 07
Lack of transparency and accountability 10
International implications 12
Conclusion 14
Notes 15
Acronyms and abbreviations 16
02 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Introduction
If data is the new oil, China is oil super‑r ich. Data is the essential ingredient for artificial intelligence (AI)
and is underpinning a wideranging revolution. China’s massive population, lack of privacy protections,
controlled tech sector and authoritarian system of governance give it a huge edge in collecting the
data needed for that revolution (Figure 1). But the Chinese state and Chinese businesses are also
using this wealth of data to pursue state and business goals without the constraints present in other
jurisdictions. A lack of privacy protections and rule‑o f‑l aw protections leaves Chinese citizens at
the whim of sophisticated, and often state‑c ontrolled, data‑d riven technologies. Private companies
are not only sharing users’ personal data with the authorities in compliance with China’s regulatory
environment such as the most recent Cybersecurity Law but many of those companies—including the
industry leaders—are building their business model predominantly around the needs of the state.
The success of these technologies in enabling potential mass surveillance and exerting a chilling effect
on individuals deserves more attention.
Figure 1: Top 20 internet populations, by country
Note: At 31 December 2017, China had 772 million internet users. The proportion of internet users using mobile phones has reached an impressive 97.5%.
This paper examines Chinese state policy on big data industries and analyses the laws and regulations
on data collection that companies in China are required to comply with. It also looks at how those
rules may affect foreign companies eyeing the China market. Case studies are included to demonstrate
the ongoing tensions between big data applications and privacy. The paper concludes by outlining the
implications and lessons for other countries.
03

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
An ambitious big data vision supported by
China’s internet companies
China’s State Council has laid out an ambitious road map outlining its AI vision, which includes
creating a US$150 billion industry and becoming the world leader in AI by 2030.1 Enormous state
financial backing aside, a controlled tech industry,2 huge data availability and relatively scant privacy
protections mean that China is well placed to become a global AI leader; or, to be more accurate,
a leader in the development of big‑data‑driven technologies.
China’s online ecosystem is unique compared to Western equivalents. Unlike their Silicon Valley
competitors, Chinese technology and internet companies typically design their products to include not
just one, but various types of services. Tencent’s WeChat, for example, China’s most popular mobile
chat application, is more than an instant messaging app: it’s an all‑in‑one superapp. A billion active
WeChat users now use it to chat with their friends and families, communicate with supervisors and
work colleagues, play games, hail taxis, make online purchases and conduct financial investments.3
WeChat is now even used to handle sensitive government paperwork, such as visa applications, and
could soon be used for entry into Hong Kong.4
Tencent vowed—openly and ambitiously—to become the fundamental platform for the Chinese
internet: a platform ‘as vital as the water and electricity resources in daily life’.5 Alibaba’s Alipay, China’s
Paypal‑like e‑payment service, has incorporated social functions through which it encourages users to
share location data, personal information and purchasing habits with others. Combined with China’s
real‑name registration system,6 these consolidated functions enable the government and industry
to effortlessly profile individual users. In addition, even when an individual’s information has been
anonymised, their identity can still be re‑identified by any interested parties if they have access to two
or more sets of data to find the same user in both. In other countries, such identification would attract
public concern, but research indicates that there’s a lack of awareness and a willingness to trade off
privacy for lower cost services among Chinese consumers.7 For example, research that compared
global consumers’ views on sharing personal information online found that consumers in China had a
more lackadaisical attitude towards privacy protection than consumers in most Western countries.8
Big data analytics offers invaluable insights to inform the use and delivery of public goods, including
increased public safety, law enforcement, resource allocation, urban planning9 and healthcare
systems.10 But how data is collected and used affects a country’s digital ecosystem and its citizens’
social and political participation. How China’s regulatory environment handles these interactions is
analysed in the following section.
04 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Big data and public security
China is placing huge bets on big data, and a range of policies have been introduced over the past two
years to flesh out the government’s vision. On October 18 2017, Chinese President Xi Jinping promoted
the integration of the internet, big data and AI with the real‑world economy in his 19th Party Congress
report.11 But China’s interest in big data can be dated to as early as the early 2010s. In July 2012, the
State Council specifically mentioned the importance of ‘strengthening the development of basic
software—especially those that are able to handle large volumes of data’—in a policy document in
its 12th Five‑Year Plan . The current administration has beefed up the conceptualisation of China’s
big data vision. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, for example, proposed the concept of ‘Internet Plus’
(互联网+),12 calling for the integration of mobile internet, cloud computing, big data and the ‘internet
of things’ with modern manufacturing in his March 2015 Government Work Report.13
In the months following Li’s report, China’s central government released a number of top‑down
designs and guidelines on big data policies (Table 1). By the end of 2016, various government
bureaucracies14 and more than 20 provincial and municipal governments issued their own regulations
and development plans for big data industries.15 Unsurprisingly, most of these government initiatives
and policies have a special interest in developing and supporting big data technologies that can be
applied to the security sector. Security experts argue that contribution to the emerging social credit
system is likely as part of these related initiatives.16
Statistics from 2016 show that most of the government’s domestic government investment in big data
industries has gone to public security projects.17
05

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Table 1: Major big data policies issued by the Chinese Government
Title Issuer Date issued Main takeaways
Made in China 2025
《中国制造2025》, online.
State Council May 2015 Lays out a road map for the transformation and
upgrade of China’s traditional and emerging
manufacturing industry, with a focus on big data, cloud
computing, the internet of things and related smart
technologies. a
Action Outline for
Promoting the
Development of Big Data
《促进大数据发展行动纲
要》, online.
State Council August 2015 Provides a top‑down action framework for promoting
big data. Details yearly goals such as establishing
a platform for sharing data between government
departments by the end of 2017, a unified platform for
government data before the end of 2018, and nurturing
a group of 500 companies in the industry, including
10 leading global enterprises focused on big data
application, services and manufacturing by the end
of 2020.
It is widely perceived to be a programmatic document
guiding the long‑term development of China’s big
data industries.
Outline of the 13th
Five‑Year Plan for the
National Economic and
Social Development of the
People’s Republic of China
《中华人民共和国经济和
社会发展第十三个五年规
划纲要》, online.
National
People’s
Congress
March 2016 Identifies big data as a ‘fundamental strategic resource’
(基础性战略资源). Pushes for further sharing of data
resources and applications. Lists big data applications
as one of the eight major informatisation projects.
It’s the first time China incorporated big data into
state‑centric strategy plans. b
The National Scientific and
Technological Innovation
Planning for the 13th Five
Years
《 ’十 三 五 ’国 家 创 新 规
划》, online.
State Council July 2016 Prioritises big ‑data‑driven breakthroughs in
AI technologies.
Development Plan for
Big Data Industries
(2016–2020)
《大数据产业发展规划
（2016‑2020年）》, online.
Ministry of
Industry and
Information
Technolog y
December
2016
Sets an overarching goal for China’s big data industries:
by 2020, related industry revenue should exceed
1 trillion RMB, with a compound annual growth rate
of 30%.
a 徐永华,陈怀宇, 陈亦恺, Anthony Marshall, 何志强,夏宇 飞, 温占鹏,张龙,孙春华, ‘中国制造业走向2025 构建以数据洞察为驱动的新价值网络’,
IBM商业价值研究院, 中国电子信息产业发展研究院, 13 October 2015 online.
b 林巧婷, ‘我国首次提出推行国家大数据战略’ 中央政府门户网站, 3 November 2015 online.
In the outline of the 13th Five‑Year Plan, big data applications were listed as one of the eight major
‘informatisation’ projects. Informatisation (信息化)—the process by which the political, social and
economic interactions in a society have become networked and digitised—cannot be overstated
when analysing China’s big data vision, especially in the public security sector. Over the past two
decades, the Ministry of Public Security has taken an adaptive approach to this trend. It has made
continuous efforts18 to harness the advances of information and communications technologies for
security operations—a process called ‘public security informatisation’ (公安信息化). At its core, public
security informatisation relates to shifting police work from reactive to pre‑emptive through the use
06 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
of data collection and synthesis. “Security” is a broad concept when applied by the Chinese state and
is sufficiently broad to enable the control and censoring of public debate in ways that may affect the
power or standing of the ruling Chinese Communist Party.
A few statistics help put these concepts and policies in context. Across China, there’s a network of
approximately 176 million surveillance cameras—expected to grow to 626 million by 202019—that
monitor China’s 1.4 billion citizens. Powered by big‑data‑driven facial recognition technology, these
cameras are able to identify a person’s name, identification card number, gender, clothing and more.
Meanwhile, Chinese police have reportedly been collecting DNA samples, fingerprints, iris scans, and
blood types of all residents, using questionable methods, in places such as Xinjiang.20
Backed by an oceanic amount of data and advanced analytic technologies, Chinese public security
forces are emerging as a powerful and dominant intelligence and security sector.21 The interest
from the public security forces in using big data to support government systems for faster and more
extensive surveillance and social control largely explains the rapid rise of China’s big data industries.22
Private companies are not only sharing users’ personal data with the authorities in compliance with
China’s Cybersecurity Law,23 the National Intelligence Law24 and other relevant internet management
regulations, but many of them—including the industry leaders25—are building their business model
predominantly around the needs of the state.
Diminishing rights: China’s data laws and
regulations
On the other end of the spectrum of the all‑encompassing, data‑driven analytic technologies are
citizens’ de facto diminishing rights to privacy and growing challenges of protecting individuals’
data security. In contrast to the wide scope of central‑ and local‑level policy initiatives and
government‑backed projects on big data collection and use, there’s no uniform law or a national
authority to ensure or coordinate data protection in China. Privacy advocates have been striving to
have a national privacy protection law passed since 2003.26 Fifteen years later, the National People’s
Congress, China’s highest legislative body, still has not included such uniform law in its agenda.27
A number of articles in China’s recent Cybersecurity Law pertain to data collection and privacy
protection. However, they take a state‑centric approach, expanding the government’s direct
involvement in companies’ operations. Missing in this approach is any support for an independent
privacy watchdog or support for independent civil society organisations. For now, regulations on data
protection remain largely domain‑specific, such as those relating to telecommunications and online
banking, which are issued by different ministries or local governments (Table 2 summarises the main
relevant regulations in China).
07

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Table 2: Chinese laws, regulations and guidelines on data collection
Title Issuer Date issued Relevance
Information Security
Technology: Guidelines
for Personal Information
Protection Within Public
and Commercial Services
Information Systems
《信息安全技术公共及商用
服务信息系统个人信息保护
指南》, online.
General Administration
of Quality Supervision,
Inspection and
Quarantine &
Standardisation
Administration of
China
November 2012 Establishes basic principles for personal
data collection, processing and transfers,
including the principles of ‘parity of
authority and responsibility’, ‘minimum
necessary and not excessive’ and ‘consent of
the individual’.
Remains non‑compulsory for companies.
Decision on Strengthening
Information Protection on
Networks
《关于加强网络信息保护的
规定》, online.
Standing Committee of
the National People’s
Congress
December 2012 Specifies that the state protects ‘electronic
information by which individual citizens
can be identified and which involves the
individual privacy of citizens’.
Provisions on Protecting
the Personal Information of
Telecommunications and
Internet Users
电信和互联网用户个 人信息
保护规定, online.
Ministry of Industry
and Information
Technolog y
July 2013 Regulates how telecommunications and
internet service providers may collect and
use users’ personal data.
Regulation on the
Administration of Credit
Investigation Industry
征信业管理条例, online.
State Council January 2013 Encompasses China’s grand plan of building
a ‘social credit system’.
Regulates the collection, storage and
processing of personal information by credit
investigation enterprises.
Article 14 points out that ‘credit investigation
institutions are prohibited from collecting
information about the religious belief,
genes, fingerprints, blood type, disease
or medical history of individuals, as
well as other individual information the
collection of which is prohibited by laws or
administrative regulations.’
Amendment (IX) to the
Criminal Law of the People’s
Republic of China
刑 法 修正 案（九）, online.
Standing Committee of
the National People’s
Congress
August 2015 Criminalises the sale or provision of citizens’
personal data, with a penalty of up to seven
years imprisonment.
Cybersecurity Law
网络安全法, online.
Standing Committee of
the National People’s
Congress
November 2016 Article 76 (5) defines ‘personal information’
in legal documents for the first time.
‘Personal information’ refers to all kinds
of information, recorded electronically
or through other means, that can
determine the identity of natural persons
independently or in combination with other
information, including, but not limited
to, a natural person’s name, date of birth,
identification number, personal biometric
information, address and telephone number.
E‑commerce Law (draft)
电子商务法 （ 草案 ）
Under review by
Standing Committee of
the National People’s
Congress
May be passed in
2018
Regulates data collection by
e‑commerce operators.
08 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Title Issuer Date issued Relevance
Interim Security Review
Measures for Network
Products and Services
《网络产品和服务安全审
查 办 法（试 行）》, online.
Cyberspace
Administration of
China
May 2017 Specifies that a cybersecurity review will
include reviewing risks that product or
service suppliers illegally collect, store,
process or use user ‑r elated information
while providing products or services.
Information Security
Technology: Personal
Information Security
Specification
《信息安全技术 个人信息
安全规范》, online.
General Administration
of Quality Supervision,
Inspection and
Quarantine &
Standardisation
Administration of
China
December 2017
(took effect in
May 2018)
Clarifies the definition of ‘personal sensitive
information’, which includes information on
one’s wealth, biometrics, personal identity,
online identity identifiers and so on.
Remains non‑co mpulsory for companies.
The lack of a legal framework on privacy protection has led to open disputes over who has access to
user data. One of the most high‑profile cases is the dispute between Tencent, China’s first internet
giant to enter the elite US$500 billion tech club,28 and Huawei, the Chinese telecom equipment and
smartphone maker. Huawei was seeking to collect user data from Tencent’s WeChat, China’s most
popular chat app, installed on its Honor Magic phone. The data would help Huawei advance its AI
projects. Tencent was quick to object, claiming it would violate user privacy and demanded that the
Chinese
Government intervene.29 Huawei argued that users have the right to choose whether and with
whom their data is shared. The government suggested the two companies ‘follow relevant laws and
regulations’,30 but existing regulations fail to specify who can collect and process user data.31 It’s still
unclear how the two settled the dispute—or even whether they’ve settled it.32
Huawei and Tencent aren’t the first Chinese tech giants to rub shoulders over access to data.
In June 2017, Alibaba’s logistics arm, Cainiao, and China’s biggest private courier, SF Express, were in a
month‑long stand‑off over access to consumer data. The fight was eventually resolved with the State
Post Bureau’s intervention.33 Cainiao and SF Express both cited noble‑sounding reasons, such as ‘data
security’ and ‘user privacy’, for refusing to share data with each other, but the dispute was really about
protecting their commercial interests and determining who had access to merchant and shopper data
on China’s US$910 billion online retail market.34 In the case of Huawei versus Tencent, it’s about who
may get to dominate the AI race with the help of massive amounts of data, including users’ chat logs.
Due to a void in the current legal framework, it’s likely that disputes between companies over user data
access will continue.
09

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Lack of transparency and accountability
Most of the regulations are aimed at holding companies and individuals—rather than government
bodies—accountable for data collection and protection. By contrast, government authorities now
have access to more sensitive personal data than ever (through either court orders or surveillance).
In addition, law enforcers are requiring companies to ensure a longer period of data retention and
zero exemptions from real‑name registration policies.
In June 2016, for example, China’s Cyberspace Administration issued the Provisions on the
Administration of Mobile Internet Applications Information Services (移动互联网应用程序服务
管理规定),35 which require, among other things, that:
• app providers and app stores cooperate with government oversight and inspection
• app providers keep records of users’ activities for 60 days
• app providers ensure that new app users register with their real names by verifying users’ mobile
phone numbers, other identifying information, or both.
In September 2016, Chinese authorities issued new regulations stating explicitly that user logs,
messages and comments on social media platforms such as WeChat Moments—a feature that
resembles Facebook’s timeline feed—can be collected and used as ‘electronic data’ to investigate
legal cases.36 Cases of WeChat users being arrested for ‘insulting police’37 or ‘threatening to blow up
a government building’38 on Moments indicate that the feature may be subject to monitoring by the
authorities or the company.
Observers have raised concerns over authorities’ use of big‑data‑driven and AI‑enabled technologies
such as facial recognition and voice recognition, which may lead to an all‑seeing police state. iFlytek,
a Chinese information technology company designated by the Ministry of Science and Technology
to lead the country’s speech recognition development, has partnered with the Ministry of Public
Security to develop a joint research lab. According to a report by the company, it has also partnered
with local telecommunication companies in eastern Anhui Province to establish a surveillance
system that ‘notifies public security departments as soon as a suspicious voice is detected’.39 In the
highly restricted Xinjiang region, local authorities are reportedly collecting highly sensitive personal
information, including DNA samples, fingerprints and iris scans.40
A case that demonstrates ongoing tensions between big data applications and privacy concerns in
China is the building of a national social credit system 社会信用体系 (SCS), which is the subject of a
forthcoming ICPC policy brief by Samantha Hoffman. The SCS, currently planned for a full launch by
2020, aims to aggregate data on the country’s 1.4 billion citizens and assign each person a credit rating
based on their socioeconomic status and online behaviour.41 So far, there’s little detail on exactly
how the system will unfold. Some companies and local governments have created their own systems
(such as Tencent’s Tencent Credit,42 Alibaba’s Sesame Credit43 and many other social credit products
developed by smaller players).44 While a final reward and punishment mechanism remains uncertain,
existing reports show some consistent themes. For example, based on their social credit score and
10 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
behaviours that affect one’s credit, a citizen’s access to aeroplane or express train travel will be
denied and their privileges, such as faster visa approval and easier access to apartment rentals,
will be restricted if the person has a bad social credit score.
The justifications for this scheme include the idea that it’s a remedy for the deficit of trust in society.45
Southern Metropolis Daily, a Guangzhou‑based liberal‑leaning newspaper, surveyed 700 people on
their attitudes towards China’s social credit system in 2014.46 It found that even though 40% of the
respondents expressed privacy concerns, 80% were in support of this national program because
‘it helps build a society of trust’ and ‘provides a safer and more reliable environment for business’.
Yet, the complete lack of transparency and clarity on data protection raise the alarming prospect of
big‑data‑enabled mass surveillance in China and other authoritarian states.
Both Alibaba47 and Tencent48 have rolled out their own versions of social credit systems, which
offer a holistic assessment of character based on vaguely defined categories and non‑transparent
algorithms.49 According to material collected by researchers at the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab,
the chief credit data scientist of Alibaba’s Ant Financial, Yu Wujie, has said, ‘If you regularly donate to
charity, your credit score will be higher, but it won’t tell you how many payments you need to make
every month … but [development] in this direction [is undertaken with] the hope that everyone will
donate.’50 Tencent has revealed little about its credit system thus far, but the company already has
access to a huge amount of users’ social data, including chat logs, via WeChat, QQ and many of its
gaming products.
Due to the lack of data protection laws, few, including state regulators, have an understanding of what
kinds of data a private company can access and use.51 It’s also unclear whether online comments and
activities deemed undesirable by the government would negatively affect a person’s creditworthiness.
The scheme is wide open to abuse by government authorities, including in tracking dissidents and
exerting chilling effects on ordinary citizens.52
11

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
International implications
The tensions between privacy protection and data collection will be felt not only in China. In recent
years, companies and governments in both authoritarian and democratic countries have vowed to
develop big‑data‑based surveillance technologies and tighten internet management in the name of
public and national security.53
At the international level, cross‑border transfers of personal information, courtesy of the increasingly
interdependent global economy in the age of big data, have become a pressing issue for private
and state actors. Following the enactment of the Cybersecurity Law, which sets data localisation
requirements, China has released administrative documents and guidelines detailing the conditions
companies need to meet for data export (Table 3).
Table 3: Regulations on cross-border data transfer or data export
Title Issuer Date issued Relevance
Cybersecurity Law
网络安全法, online.
Standing
Committee of
the National
People’s
Congress
November 2016 Article 37: Personal information and important data
collected and generated by critical information
infrastructure operators in China must be stored
domestically. For information and data that is
transferred overseas due to business requirements,
a security assessment will be conducted in
accordance with measures jointly defined by
China’s cyberspace administration bodies and the
relevant departments under the State Council.
Related provisions of other laws and administrative
regulations shall apply.
Circular of the State Internet
Information Office on the
Public Consultation on the
Measures for the Assessment
of Personal Information and
Important Data Exit Security
(Draft for Soliciting Opinions)
《个人信息和 重 要 数 据出境
安全评估办法 （ 征求意见稿）
》, online.
Cyberspace
Administration
of China
April 2017 Extends the scope of outbound data security
assessment. While the Cybersecurity Law requires
security evaluations to be conducted on critical
information infrastructure operators (关键信息
基础设施运营者), the measures stipulate that all
network operators ( 网络运营者) must go through
the check.
Establishes the basic framework for outbound
data security assessment, including its processes,
responsible parties and main focuses.
Information Security
Technology: Guidelines for
Data Cross‑Border Transfer,
online.
Security Assessment (second
draft), online.
《信息安全技术 数据出境安
全评估指南 (第二稿） 》
National
Information
Security
Standardisation
Technical
Committee
August 2017 Clarifies the definition of data cross ‑border transfer,
which is ‘the one ‑time or continuous activity
in which a network operator provides personal
information and important data collected and
generated by network or other means in the
course of operations within the territory of China to
overseas institutions, organisations or individuals
by means of directly providing or conducting
business, providing services or products, etc.’
Further breaks down the conditions for initiating
security self ‑assessment, government assessment
and their processes.
Details what is ‘important data’ and ‘personal data’.
Non‑compulsory for companies.
12 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Under these regulations, foreign companies will have to either invest in new data servers in China
that may be subject to monitoring by the government or incur new costs to partner with a local
server provider, such as Tencent or Alibaba. Apple’s recent decision to migrate its China iCloud data
to Guizhou Big Data and Amazon’s sell‑off of its China cloud assets to its local Chinese partner are
just two examples of how China’s tightening rules on data retention and transfers may affect foreign
companies. By requiring data localisation, the Chinese Government is bringing data under Chinese
jurisdiction and making it easier to access user data and penalise companies and individuals seen as
violating China’s vaguely defined internet laws and regulations.
Meanwhile, Chinese‑manufactured tech devices and applications that have taken over large portions
of overseas markets are raising questions about data security. The Australian Defence Department
has recently banned staff and serving personnel from downloading WeChat, China’s most popular
social media app, onto their work phones.54 The heads of six top US intelligence agencies, including the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency, told
the Senate Intelligence Committee in February that they would not advise Americans to use products
or services from Chinese telecommunications companies Huawei and ZTE. In April 2018, the tension
escalated into a seven‑year ban imposed by the US Commerce Department, prohibiting American
companies from selling parts and software to ZTE, although at the time of publishing it’s unclear
whether this ban will be enforced or overturned.55 In December 2017, the Ministry of Defence in India
issued a new order to the Indian armed forces requiring officers and all security personnel to remove
more than 42 Chinese apps, including Weibo, WeChat and UC Browser, which were classified
as ‘spyware’.
13

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Conclusion
This paper highlights the conflict between the fast‑developing big data technologies and citizens’
diminishing rights to privacy and data security in China. A review of major Chinese big‑data‑related
policy initiatives shows that many of those policies reflect special interest from Chinese authorities,
its public security forces in particular, in potentially using data‑driven analytic technologies for more
effective and extensive surveillance and social control.
Compared to the growing number of regulations and national plans that support the research and
development of big data technologies, there’s a lack of data protection laws and guidelines to hold
relevant parties, especially the government, accountable for the collection and use of personal data.
The ambivalent legal framework of data security and privacy protection, which enables state use of
collected data, has led to multiple incidences of commercial disputes over access to users’ data. It’s
likely we’ll see more such cases in the future.
Addressing these conflicts and advocating for the protection of users’ rights to privacy in China—where
the state dominates every sector of society and suppresses civil society—is not easy. The Chinese
state’s approach is a reminder to users, both in China and elsewhere, of the importance of protecting
personal privacy and online security.
Using China as a case study also offers a number of takeaways for policymakers in other countries.
International developments, such as ongoing privacy issues with Facebook data, show that tension
between governments, businesses and users in the age of big data is not unique to any country.
To that end, the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation has set a good example for containing
companies’ exploitation of personal data.
There’s a trend, in China and elsewhere, for governments to use the excuse of ‘protecting user privacy’
to justify a more powerful state and more state involvement in private companies’ and organisations’
operations. Civil society groups, whenever and wherever possible, should assume a stronger role
in addressing these challenges and raising awareness . A US‑based study released in April 2018, for
example, highlighted consumer misconceptions about privacy while using popular browsers, including
that they would ‘prevent geolocation, advertisements, viruses, and tracking by both the websites
visited and the network provider’.56 Further work and support are needed to equip users with sufficient
knowledge to understand how data‑related technologies work and what those technologies mean to
them in everyday life.
The attractiveness of the Chinese state’s surveillance and social control systems to other authoritarian
states means we may see other states adopt them, unless the negative aspects of these approaches
are made more transparent. The consequences of reduced personal freedom combined with greater
state control of societies and individuals are disturbing for advocates of the vitality and strength of
open societies. Beyond these concerns, the strategic consequences of the tight integration of the
Chinese tech sector with the Chinese state is an area for further analysis.
14 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Notes
1 中华人民共和国国务院, ‘国务院关于印发 新一代人工智能发展规划的通知’, 国务院, 8 July 2017, online.
2 China has permitted only some foreign direct investment through Chinese entities with partial or full foreign ownership in many tech sectors.
See more detailed analysis by Paul Edelberg, ‘Is China Really Opening Its Doors to Foreign Investment?’, China Business Review, 8 November
2017, online and Jianwen Huang, ‘China’, The Foreign Investment Regulation Review ‑ Edition 5, October 2017, online.
3 Yang Ruan, Cheek, Social media in China: what Canadians need to know; Nicole Jao, ‘WeChat now has over 1 billion active monthly users
worldwide’, Technode, 5 March 2018, online.
4 Mason Hinsdale, ‘Tencent wants to make WeChat a digital travel ID’, Jing Travel, 6 June 2018, online.
5 马化腾, ‘互联网像水和电一样成为‘传统行业’, Digitaling.com, 12 August 2014, online.
6 Catherine Shu, ‘China attempts to reinforce real ‑name registration for internet users’, Techcrunch.com, 1 June 2016, online.
7 Hui Zhao, Haoxin Dong, ‘Research on personal privacy protection of China in the era of big data’, Open Journal of Social Sciences, 19 June 2017,
5:139–145, online.
8 Boston Consulting Group, Data privacy by the numbers, March 2014, online.
9 Linda Poon, ‘Finally, Uber releases data to help cities with transit planning’, CityLab.com, 11 January 2017, online.
10 Linda Lew, ‘How Tencent’s medical ecosystem is shaping the future of China’s healthcare’, Technode.com, 11 February 2018, online.
11 习近平, ‘决胜全面建成小康社会 夺取新时代中国特色社会主义伟大胜利——在中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会上的报告’, Xinhua,
18 October 2017, online.
12 State Council of the People’s Republic of China, Premier Li and Internet Plus, 31 December 2015, online.
13 ‘China unveils Internet Plus action plan to fuel growth’, Xinhua, 4 July 2015, online.
14 数据委, ‘2016年中国大数据相关政策盘点’, 中国数据分析行业网, 21 December 2016, online.
15 国家信息中心, 南海大数据应用研究院, ‘2017中国大数据发展报告’, 1 March 2017, online.
16 For example see Dr Samantha Hoffman’s upcoming June 2018 ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre paper on China’s Social
Credit System, online.
17 2017 Report of the big data development in China.
18 王歆,公安信息化行业发展研究, 17 June 2015, online.
19 Josh Chin, Liza Lin, ‘China’s all ‑seeing surveillance state is reading its citizens’ faces’, Wall Street Journal, 26 June 2027, online.
20 ‘China: minority region collects DNA from millions’, Human Rights Watch, 13 December 2017, online.
21 Edward Schwarck, ‘Intelligence and informatization: the rise of the Ministry of Public Security in intelligence work in China’, The China Journal,
28 March 2018, online.
22 Rachel Botsman, ‘Big data meets Big Brother as China moves to rate its citizens’, Wired, 21 October 2017, online.
23 For example, according to Article 28 of China’s Cybersecurity Law, ‘Network operators shall provide technical support and assistance to public
security organs and state security organs which are in accordance with the law safeguarding national security and investigating criminal
activities.’; online.
24 ‘National Intelligence Law of the People’s Republic of China’, Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, 27 June 2017, online.
25 ‘Backing Big Brother: Chinese facial recognition firms appeal to funds’, Reuters, 13 November 2017, online.
26 年巍, ‘新华网评 ： 个人信息保护的法律 “利剑” 何时出鞘’, Xinhua, 23 July 2016, online.
27 齐爱民, ‘中华人民共和国个人信息保护法（草案）2017版’, Sohu, 12 November 2017, online.
28 Jon Russell, ‘Tencent becomes the first Chinese tech firm valued over $500b’, Techcrunch, 20 November 2017, online.
29 Yang Jie, Alyssa Abkowitz, Dan Strumpf, ‘Two China Tech Titans Wrestle Over User Data’, Wall Street Journal, 3  August 2017, online.
30 杨鑫倢, ‘工信部回应华为腾讯数据之争 ： 正组织调查 ， 敦促企业规范搜集’ , 澎湃, 8 August 2017, online.
31 周源, ‘华为腾讯数据冲突将成行业常态 个人用户几无存在感’ , 财经, 5 August 2017, online.
32 银昕, ‘复盘华为 、 腾讯数据争夺战 数据该如何’ 确权’ ？’ , 中国经济周刊, 16 January 2018, online.
33 王梦妍, ‘菜鸟网络和顺丰同意从今日12时起全面恢复数据传输t’ , 中央人民广播电台, 16 January 2018,
34 Josh Ye, ‘Cainiao, SF Express in standoff over data, causing confusion among Chinese online shoppers’, South China Morning Post,
2 June 2017, online.
35 ‘Provisions on the Administration of Mobile Internet Applications Information Services’, Lawinfochina.com, 28 June 2016, online.
36 周子静, ‘公检法机关办理刑事案件时 ， 可查看个人朋友圈 、 微博 、 网盘等’ , 澎湃, 20 September 2016, online.
37 ‘ 收到违停告知书后发微信侮辱交警 ， 安徽阜阳一女子被拘5日’, 澎湃, 5 April 2017, online.
38 ‘ 陕西男子发朋友圈称想炸镇政府 被行政拘留五日’ , 科技猎, 17 March 2017, online.
39 ‘ 听声 “识” 骗子 这项技术让安徽省内电话诈骗骤降八成’, CNbeta.com, 28 February 2017, online.
40 ‘China: minority region collects DNA from millions’, Human Rights Watch, 13 December 2017, online.
41 ‘ 国务院关于印发社会信用体系建设规划纲要（2014—2020年）的 通 知’, 中华人民共和国国务院, 27 June 2014, online.
42 ‘ 腾讯信用’ , 腾讯网, online.
43 ‘ 芝麻信用’, Zhima Credit, online.
15

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
44 ‘ 自如信用’, Ziroom.com, online.
45 Amy Hawkins, ‘Chinese citizens want the government to rank them’, Foreign Policy, 24 May 2017, online.
46 熊晓艳,罗韵姿, ‘建信用体系 忧隐私安全’ , 南方都市报, 13 May 2014, online.
47 ‘Sesame Credit’, Wikipedia, online.
48 Josh Horwitz, ‘China’s Tencent is quietly testing a “social credit score” based on people’s online behavior’, Quartz, 9 August 2017, online.
49 Shazeda Ahmed, ‘Cashless society, cached data: security considerations for a Chinese social credit system’, The Citizen Lab,
24 January 2017, online.
50 Kumar, ‘你的信用积分够追姑娘吗？’, WTT: What the Tech, 16 February 2017, online.
51 Lucy Hornby, Sherry Fei Ju, Louise Lucas, ‘China cracks down on tech credit scoring’, Financial Times, 4 February 2018, online.
52 Jon Penney, ‘Chilling effects: online surveillance and Wikipedia use’, Berkeley Technology Law Journal, 27 April 2016, 31(1):117, online.
53 George Joseph, ‘How police are watching you on social media’, CityLab, 14 December 2016, online.
54 Angus Grigg, ‘Australia’s Defence Department bans Chinese app Wechat’, The Australian Financial Review, 11 March 2018, online and Danielle
Cave, Fergus Ryan, Tom Uren, ‘Defence says no to WeChat’, The Strategist, 13 March 2018, online.
55 Steve Stecklow, Karen Freifeld, Sijia Jiang, ‘US ban on sales to China’s ZTE opens fresh front as tensions escalate’, Reuters, 16 April 2018, online.
56 Yuxi Wu, Panya Gupta, Miranda Wei, Yasemin Acar, Sascha Fahl, Blase Ur, ‘Your secrets are safe: how browsers’ explanations impact
misconceptions about private browsing mode’, in WWW 18: Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, Lyon, France,
23–27 April 2018, online.
Acronyms and abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
EU European Union
SCS social credit system
16 Issues Paper: When the winner takes it all: Big data in China and the battle for privacy

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
WHAT’S
YOUR
STRATEGY?
Stay informed via the field’s leading think tank,
the Australian Strategic Policy Institute.
The Strategist, ASPI’s commentary and
analysis website, delivers fresh ideas
on Australia’s defence and strategic
policy choices as well as encouraging
discussion and debate among interested
stakeholders in the online strategy
community. Visit and subscribe to
an email digest at www.aspistrategist.
org.au.
 facebook.com/ASPI.org
 @ASPI_org
Supported by
To find out more about ASPI go to www.aspi.org.au
or contact us on 02 6270 5100 and enquiries@aspi.org.au.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
