
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Degrees of Separation
A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China
Decoupling – Final Report
AUTHOR
Stephanie Segal
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Matthew Reynolds
Brooke Roberts
OCTOBER 2021
A Report of the CSIS Economics Program

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Degrees of Separation
A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China
Decoupling – Final Report
AUTHOR
Stephanie Segal
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Matthew Reynolds
Brooke Roberts
OCTOBER 2021
A Report of the CSIS Economics Program

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
II | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research
organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S.
senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president
and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—
nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity
and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making
real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis,
and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that
aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and
the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the
thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be
understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20036
202-887-0200 | www.csis.org

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
III | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
Acknowledgments
Throughout this study, the CSIS Economics Program has received invaluable support and intellectual
input from experts and former policymakers through a series of roundtables and other discussions.
Their insights are critical to the content of the report, and we thank all who participated and
contributed. The author and contributing authors alone are responsible for the report’s findings and
recommendations and any errors in fact, analysis, or omission.
The authors of this report would also like to thank the many people at CSIS who have contributed
their time and insights to this project over the past 18 months. The team is especially grateful to Jude
Blanchette, Gerard DiPippo, Matthew P. Goodman, Grace Hearty, Scott Kennedy, William A. Reinsch,
Lindsey Sheppard, and John Schaus, who provided excellent strategic advice throughout the lifecycle
of the project. This report is the product of critical research, drafting, and logistical support from CSIS
research associates Dylan Gerstel, Matthew Reynolds, and Brooke Roberts. Thank you to Megan Zsorey
for her impeccable administrative support and to the CSIS Economics Program’s incredible stable of
interns who contributed both research and creativity to this project, including Conrad Bertez, Adam
Braver, Reid Fennerty, Hannah Grothusen, Noah Riley, Isaac Robinson, and Akhil Thadani. Finally, we
would like to thank our talented colleagues in the CSIS External Relations Department—Jeeah Lee,
Katherine Stark, and Phillip Meylan—who tirelessly managed the publication process.
This report is made possible through the generous support of the Smith Richardson Foundation. We
are grateful for the opportunity to analyze in depth the U.S.-China economic relationship, and we hope
our findings can inform U.S. policy and processes going forward.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
IV | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Contents
Executive Summary VI
Introduction 1
1 | Framework 3
Components of the Framework 4
Naming the Risk 4
Identifying and Prioritizing U.S. Objectives 4
Assessing Effectiveness 5
Adhering to the Rule of Law 6
Process for Assessment 6
2 | Chinese Motivations 7
China’s Motivations 7
China’s Motivations: Global or Regional? Ideological or Pragmatic? 8
Implications for Degrees of Separation 9
3 | U.S. Objectives 11
U.S. Objectives and Policy toward China 11
Geostrategy 13
Economics 14
Values-Based (Human Rights and Civil Society) 15
Global Rules and Norms 16
Global Public Goods 18
Technology and Innovation 19
Prioritization 20
4 | Case Studies 21
Research Collaboration in Artificial Intelligence 21
Applying the Framework 22
Identifying and Prioritizing U.S. Objectives 22
Assessing Effectiveness of Restrictions 24
Adhering to the Rule of Law 28
Final Assessment 29
Biotechnology and Human Genomic Data Sharing 31
Applying the Framework 31
Identifying and Prioritizing U.S. Objectives 32
Assessing Effectiveness of Restrictions 34
Adhering to the Rule of Law 38
Final Assessment 40

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
V | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
Capital Market Linkages and Cross-Border Portfolio Flows 41
Applying the Framework 41
Identifying and Prioritizing U.S. Objectives 43
Assessing Effectiveness of Restrictions 45
Adhering to the Rule of Law 48
Final Assessment 48
5 | Key Findings 49
Research Collaboration in Artificial Intelligence 50
Biotechnology and Human Genomic Data Sharing 51
Capital Market Linkages and Cross-Border Portfolio Flows 51
About the Author & Contributing Authors 52
Endnotes 53

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
VI | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Executive Summary
W
ork on Degrees of Separation began in the spring of 2020, just as Covid-19 was shutting
down the global economy and redefining our perception of risk and understanding of
interconnectedness. At that time, U.S.-China relations were described as at their “lowest
point” since normalization.1 Eighteen months and one U.S. administration later, we are still grappling
with a deadly pandemic and struggling to balance the risks and benefits of engaging with China.
The interim report, published in February, concluded that wholesale decoupling of the U.S.
and Chinese economies is neither feasible nor beneficial to advancing U.S. interests. But it also
acknowledged the many areas of tension in the relationship and the failure of past bilateral
engagement to adequately address these tensions, thereby requiring a different approach. This final
report presents a framework for assessing specific economic activities as candidates for targeted
decoupling, along with findings from three illustrative case studies designed to test it. The hope is
that such a framework, which forces the identification of risks as well as U.S. objectives, can boost
transparency and predictability, lessen regulatory uncertainty, and support engagement between the
United States and China in areas that do not unacceptably compromise U.S. national security. A few
cross-cutting themes emerged in designing and testing the framework:
Assessments of the costs and benefits of U.S-China engagement are highly subjective. Naming the
risk, identifying and prioritizing specific U.S. objectives, and assessing the impact of both engagement
and restrictions are all subjective exercises. In general, many private sector and academic participants
tend to favor closer engagement and see greater downsides to innovation from aggressively restricting
activities. Professionals with national security backgrounds are far more circumspect. While everyone
is entitled to an (educated) opinion, the final assessment should be grounded in an understanding of
the risks and benefits of engagement, recognizing there will be trade-offs, along with an understanding

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
VII | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
of U.S. objectives and their prioritization. A consistent approach will go some way toward securing
meaningful coordination with allies and partners and will be a helpful guide for the private sector.
The study team struggled to agree on whether to assess U.S.-China economic engagement based
on “overall benefit” to the United States or “net benefit” relative to China’s gains. The latter is
particularly challenging because it depends not only on the innovation but how it is applied in each
country context. Traditionally, the United States has engaged with China under the premise that
Chinese economic growth also benefits the United States. That calculus changed under the last
administration, evidenced by the imposition of tariffs and other measures that entailed economic costs
on both sides. The study team ultimately decided that assessment of economic objectives will consider
overall benefits within certain constraints, acknowledging there will be pressure to demonstrate net
benefit to the United States.
Some degree of technological and data fragmentation is inevitable. The emergence of data as a driver
of economic activity and innovation has fundamentally changed the perception of risk. Since the start
of the Degrees of Separation project, it has become increasingly clear that policies in China and the
United States will lead to greater technological and data fragmentation. The emphasis on standard
setting and new initiatives to coordinate policies and positions with U.S. allies and partners that
exclude China offer the clearest sign yet of a U.S. strategy to lead among like-minded countries and
implicitly accept, if not urge, fragmentation. Importantly, while the report identifies a move toward
fragmentation, supported in some instances by the illustrative case studies, “targeted decoupling”
should not be confused with disengagement. On the contrary, when tensions rise, the case for
engagement strengthens.
Ultimately, U.S. leadership hinges on smart offense. China (and others) will continue to innovate,
based on an increasing reliance on domestic talent and capital. Defensive measures will be important
in some instances, but the United States will only lead with a strong offense that leverages U.S.
openness and alliances, especially when it comes to global talent.
A more comprehensive listing of the project’s findings, including those specific to each case study, can
be found in the final section of this report. The authors are grateful for the opportunity to conduct this
research, engage with counterparts inside and outside government, and openly share the results.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
1 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Introduction
T
he CSIS Economics Program launched Degrees of Separation last year to establish clearer
objectives for U.S. engagement with China and to assess whether disengagement from specific
economic activities can help in meeting such objectives.
The project’s interim report, published in February 2021, provides a historical frame for U.S.-China
engagement since the normalization of relations in the 1970s.2 It notes that support for closer ties,
economic and otherwise, in the bilateral relationship was grounded in the belief that such ties would
advance U.S. objectives. The emergence of the United States as the world’s lone superpower, along
with reform and liberalization in China through the early part of this century, appeared to validate this
approach, even as technology leakage and dislocations associated with China’s increasing integration
with the global economy were slow to be appreciated. While U.S. and Chinese political and security
interests did not generally align during this period, it was not until China achieved the economic scale
and technological and military capacity to visibly challenge the current system that a revised approach
to China—one involving separation or decoupling of U.S. and Chinese activities—gained traction, at
least among some analysts and as relates to certain activities, as necessary for achieving U.S. objectives.
As recognized in the interim report, restrictions on certain activities are warranted, but a wholesale
decoupling is neither feasible nor advantageous to the United States. Where to draw that line is
a major challenge for policymakers seeking to balance the benefits and risks of engagement with
a strategic competitor Degrees of Separation aims to bring a common analytical approach to these
judgments, starting from a shared risk assessment and grounded in the achievement of U.S. objectives.
This second and final Degrees of Separation report is organized as follows: Section 1 presents the
elements of a framework built around U.S. objectives that can be used to assess specific activities

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
2 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
as candidates for targeted decoupling. Section 2 briefly examines the range of views on Chinese
motivations, recognizing the role such views play in the calibration of U.S. policy toward China.
Section 3 articulates U.S. objectives in six priority areas relevant to U.S.-China relations: (1)
geostrategy; (2) economics; (3) values-based; (4) global rules and norms; (5) global public goods; and
(6) technology and innovation. Section 4 tests the framework looking at three areas at the heart of
U.S.-China competition: artificial intelligence (AI); biotechnology; and capital markets integration and
cross-border portfolio flows. Informed by the findings from these case studies, Section 5 summarizes
key findings and draws lessons that can help manage both the U.S.-China bilateral relationship and
the U.S. relationship with allies and partners going forward.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
3 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
1
Framework
P
olicy actions designed to restrict economic engagement between the United States and China have
increased in recent years alongside the deterioration in U.S.-China relations. Such actions include
tightening of controls on technology transfer to China under reforms to U.S. investment screening
and export control regimes as well as initiatives to guard against the theft of intellectual property, protect
critical infrastructure, and ensure supply chain integrity. At the same time, the definition of national
security has expanded to include economic security, widening the coverage of activities subject to
national security reviews. The changing landscape has complicated activities for businesses, investors,
researchers, and other actors who until recently had viewed continued engagement as a given.
The identification of China as a strategic competitor of the United States acknowledges the need to
separate or “decouple” certain sensitive activities, but absent a process and criteria for making these
judgements, decisions may appear ad hoc at best—or run counter to U.S. objectives at worst. Degrees
of Separation introduces a framework to approach such assessments and support policy coherence and
effectiveness. The framework consists of four basic components:
1. Naming the risk presented by U.S.-China engagement in sensitive activities;
2. Identifying and prioritizing U.S. objectives, specifically those affected by U.S.-China engagement;
3. Assessing effectiveness of restricting specific activities; and
4. Adhering to the rule of law as a condition to ensure any action taken is consistent with U.S. law
and international obligations.
The goal in developing such a framework is to advance a consistent, analytical approach to deciding
when restrictions are appropriate to advance U.S. objectives. Such an approach has the potential to

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
4 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
yield greater convergence—at a minimum, a common understanding of risks, objectives, and factors
that are relevant to effectiveness—and enhance transparency and predictability for those affected
by regulation and other official actions as a result. While complete transparency may not always be
possible, the public should understand the basis for decisionmaking, including U.S. objectives and the
rationale for restricting certain activities.
“Naming the risk” and “identifying and prioritizing U.S. objectives” are admittedly subjective exercises,
informed by analysis and policy statements that reflect an official view of China and U.S.-China
engagement. The “effectiveness” component of the framework is more objective—relying to a greater
degree on sector-specific technical expertise—and can help protect the United States from taking
actions that might otherwise impede achievement of U.S. objectives. In addition, the focus on specific
activities, as opposed to entire sectors, is consistent with a targeted approach to U.S.-China decoupling.3
Components of the Framework
NAMING THE RISK
Naming the risk presented by a given activity will vary by point of view, but there are common
starting points relevant to all activities evaluated under the framework. In particular, the National
Security Strategy is a foundational document given its presidential authorship, relevance to the U.S.
government as a whole, and attention to “all elements (political, economic, military and other) of
national power of the United States.”4 In addition, the National Intelligence Council’s Global Trends
report, published every four years, aims to “provide an analytic framework for policymakers early in
each administration as they craft national security strategy and navigate an uncertain future.”5 Other
relevant official documents include periodic issue-specific reports to Congress, for example, Reports
on Human Rights Practices, Reports on Foreign Trade Barriers, and other strategic planning documents
such as the National Defense Strategy (unclassified summary), the Director of National Intelligence
Annual Threat Assessment, and State Department-authored Integrated Country Strategies.6
Ad hoc reviews, for example, the Biden administration’s 100-Day Supply Chain Reviews and Sectoral
Supply Chain Assessments ordered by executive order, and focused analysis, such as special reports
from the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, are also influential in articulating
relevant risks.7 While the majority of references used to name the risk presented by a specific type of
engagement are official documents, they are informed by a range of perspectives, including views from
outside government.
IDENTIFYING AND PRIORITIZING U.S. OBJECTIVES
As detailed in the Degrees of Separation interim report, U.S.-China engagement was driven historically by
various objectives, starting with geopolitical objectives and evolving over time to emphasize economic,
technological, values-based, and “global” objectives such as global public goods and global rules and
norms.8 The evolution reflects China’s rapid ascension, increased weight in the world, and, in the view
of many policymakers and China experts, increased assertiveness on the global stage. To quote the
economic historian Adam Tooze, “Whether you’re for or against, China shapes our common future.”9
As with risk assessment, and as detailed in Section 2, the identification of forward-looking U.S. objectives
relies on official documents and statements from Biden administration officials along with specific policy
actions. In evaluating a given activity, the framework calls for an assessment of how these objectives

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
5 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
are affected by U.S.-China engagement in that activity, and specifically whether engagement is positive,
negative, neutral, or ambiguous in terms of advancing U.S. objectives. For those activities where U.S.-
China engagement is positive or neutral for U.S. objectives, no further review is required. For activities
assessed to be negative or ambiguous, potential restrictions will be reviewed for effectiveness.
The framework recognizes that certain objectives may be in conflict. For example, efforts to promote
global public goods such as climate and pandemic response and preparedness may be at odds with
protecting U.S. leadership in a given technology. Likewise, values-based objectives may conflict with
geostrategic ones. Therefore, prioritization of objectives is a de facto reality when deciding a course of
action. For case studies evaluated under the framework, objectives will be prioritized when they are at
odds with one another.
Finally, an important question emerges when assessing activities against economic objectives: should
the analysis measure “overall benefit” or “net (relative) benefit” from U.S.-China engagement in a
given activity? Traditionally, the United States has engaged with China under the premise that Chinese
economic growth also benefits the United States, with little focus on which country benefits “more”
from that engagement. That calculus arguably changed under the last administration, evidenced by the
imposition of tariffs and other measures that imposed economic costs on both sides. It is the study
team’s assessment that economic objectives will prioritize overall benefits within certain constraints,
acknowledging there will be pressure to demonstrate net benefit to the United States.
ASSESSING EFFECTIVENESS
While there is an obvious appeal to severing economic linkages with a strategic competitor, such
separation—even when feasible—may not necessarily advance U.S. objectives. In this regard, even
when engagement in a given activity is potentially negative or ambiguous for U.S. objectives, actions
to restrict engagement should only be taken when they lead to a better outcome. This requires an
“effectiveness check” with two main components:
Leadership: For a given activity, the framework calls for an assessment of leadership in that sector
or industry and an understanding of the relative positions of the United States, China, and any
significant third countries. Making such an assessment is necessary to avoid restricting an area where
the United States does not lead, or where leadership is unclear, to avoid undermining U.S. innovation
through isolation.
Allies and Partners: Notwithstanding China’s inward turn under President Xi, decades of “reform
and opening” have transformed China into the world’s largest trading nation, the largest source of
international students and foreign tourists, and, at least for 2020, the leading destination for foreign
direct investment in the world. Roughly two-thirds of all countries, including U.S. allies Japan,
Australia, and Korea, trade more with China than with the United States. Recent developments in
China, including in the property and energy sectors, have revealed significant vulnerabilities in China’s
economic model; however, areas of weakness should not be pretext for doubting the seriousness of
China as an economic competitor to the United States. China’s economy is still expected to gain ground
on the United States over the medium term and given current trends, could surpass the United States as
the world’s largest economy in the next decade.10 As detailed in the interim Degrees of Separation report,
even if the United States were to maintain its position as the world’s leading economy, China’s current
scale and interconnectedness make a wholesale decoupling strategy nearly impossible to implement.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
6 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
Against this backdrop, the Biden administration has declared the importance of working with allies
and partners “to address common challenges, share costs, and widen the circle of cooperation.” 11 At
the same time, officials have indicated they do not expect countries “to act against their interests.”
What this balancing act looks like in practice for most countries will come down to the decisions on
specific activities rather than major changes in their broad approaches to China, though there may
be some exceptions.
ADHERING TO THE RULE OF LAW
Adhering to the rule of law is the final component in the framework. It is also the most
straightforward and perhaps the most consequential. In brief, this component asks if an activity, or
any action to restrict it, is in accordance with U.S. law and international obligations. The rule of law
screen has important implications for predictability and the investment climate, and it plays a key role
in differentiating the United States and other liberal democracies from China and other authoritarian
regimes. It is not a coincidence that legal and regulatory uncertainty has been cited as a reason for
significant cutbacks on new investments in China.12 In some areas, such as data governance and
ethical standards, the inclusion of the rule of law in the framework may highlight the need for new
rules or multilateral mechanisms.
Process for Assessment
The Interim National Security Strategy Guidance calls for a modernization of both “national security
institutions and processes,” and the proposed framework pertains to the latter.13 It is intended to
complement existing mechanisms, including the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS); the export control regime and End-User Review Committee; sanctions regimes; and
more recent innovations, including the supply chain reviews and assessments already in use and
designed to prevent economic engagement from compromising national security.
Of course, a framework is not a panacea, but the discipline of articulating specific risks, identifying
U.S. objectives, and making a realistic assessment of U.S. and Chinese strengths and positions in the
world would present a common starting point for analysis under existing mechanisms and can yield
more coherent and effective policy. Importantly, the use of a framework can bring greater clarity and
predictability to U.S. policy, something that is needed if companies, research institutions, and allies
and partners are to work in common cause. Surely that is an important objective across all policy areas,
and none more so than in the high-stakes arena of U.S.-China relations.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
7 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
2
Chinese Motivations
T
he Degrees of Separation project does not aim to settle the debate surrounding China’s ambitions,
motivations, and capabilities. Instead, to the greatest extent possible, the authors have
endeavored to develop a framework that is agnostic on this front, focusing instead on U.S.
objectives. Nevertheless, the questions surrounding China’s motivations, ambitions, and capabilities
are inescapable as they inform risk assessments, U.S. objectives, and, ultimately, policy.
The Interim National Security Strategic Guidance identifies risks to U.S. economic, diplomatic,
military, and technological leadership posed by China. In addition, there is a broader framing in which
leadership in these areas translates ultimately to ideological leadership. President Joe Biden himself
has advanced this framing, citing a competition between two systems, one democratic, the other
autocratic, in which China under President Xi Jinping is “deadly earnest about becoming the most
significant, consequential nation in the world.”14
China’s Motivations
While Degrees of Separation attempts to clarify U.S. objectives as they relate to economic engagement
with China, neither the proposed framework nor the resulting recommendations can ignore the
relevance of Chinese objectives and tactics in calibrating U.S. policy. China’s economic rise—fueled in no
small part by the very policies of economic reform, opening, and engagement championed by the United
States—has been fundamental to supporting China’s more muscular foreign policy. Whether it is the
modernization of the People’s Liberation Army, the use of economic coercion against allies and partners
of the United States, or the ambitious Belt and Road Initiative, it has become clear that China has
discarded the old dictum of “hiding strength and biding time.” The key question now is, “to what end?”

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
8 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
CHINA’S MOTIVATIONS: GLOBAL OR REGIONAL? IDEOLOGICAL OR PRAGMATIC?
Some China scholars see global ambitions written in Beijing’s recent turn. In his recent book,
Rush Doshi argues that since 1989, China has deployed three grand strategies to first blunt U.S.
power, then build strength, and now expand its power globally.15 Through the deployment of these
distinct strategies, each developed in response to shifting perceptions of U.S. power and intentions,
Beijing aims to first establish regional hegemony and then ultimately displace the United States
as the global superpower. Peter Mattis, a senior advisor for global democratic resilience with the
National Democratic Institute, comes to a similar conclusion about China’s ambitions.16 Working
from authoritative documents such as Party Congress work reports, Mattis places slogans such
as “community of common destiny for mankind” and “a new type of international relations” in
intellectual and political context to define the contours of China’s ambitions as global in scale.
Other scholars are more conservative in their analysis of China’s ambitions. While not ruling out a
future bipolar distribution of power, Nadège Rolland, a senior fellow and China expert with the National
Bureau of Asian Research, sees more evidence that Beijing seeks “partial hegemony” rather than a total
displacement of the United States.17 A “partial hegemony” exercised over the “Global South”—defined
broadly as the developing world—is sufficient to provide the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) with a
sense of regime security in the face of the perceived existential threat posed by the U.S.-led international
system. Echoing this view is Oriana Skylar Mastro, a center fellow at the Freeman Spogli Institute for
International Studies at Stanford University.18 Mastro, an expert on Chinese military and security policy,
argues that it is not in China’s interest to replace the United States as the sole superpower, as that would
constrain rather than expand its freedom of maneuver. Instead, according to this view, China wants
dominance over its near abroad and sufficient strength to project its power internationally.
Still other scholars attribute China’s actions less to global or regional ambitions and more to the
CCP’s goal of self-preservation, noting that China’s economic growth is “indissoluble from the
party’s continued power,” for Xi and his cohort.19 This view provides a pragmatic explanation for
Xi’s consolidation of power and nationalist rhetoric, which has corresponded with a slowing of
China’s economic growth. Since Deng declared it was glorious to become rich, the CCP has staked its
legitimacy, in part, on sustained economic growth. As returns from capital investment slow, and as
China seeks to avoid the middle-income trap, the CCP must make the difficult transition to a new
economic growth model, one predicated on increasing consumer consumption and innovation.20 As
Beijing grows increasingly confident across most domains, injecting a greater amount of nationalism
into the political arena may be a strategy to shore up CCP legitimacy in the face of strong economic
and demographic headwinds.21
More sympathetic, and less ideological, analyses view China’s rise as consistent with “the historical
trend toward multipolarity.”22 In this telling, China is simply doing what all great powers do:
developing the economy, which in turn leads to greater military strength and demands for security
commensurate with great power status. Still other scholars see China’s recent assertive actions as not
only a natural outgrowth of great power politics, but also a reaction to a hostile West which seeks to
ensure China will not become “number one.”23
There are economic aspects to each of these interpretations; regardless of which view most accurately
depicts China’s “true” aspirations, analysts can objectively observe that under Xi Jinping, the CCP and
state sector have reasserted themselves in China’s economy in a drive to achieve technological leadership

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
9 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
and broader political goals. In recent years, China scholars have noted the emergence of “Party-state
capitalism” or “CCP Inc.”24 State capital has expanded beyond state-owned enterprises to private sector
firms and interventions to stabilize financial markets.25 Since 2015–16, China has launched a new
wave of industrial policies under the banner of the “Innovation-driven Development Strategy,” with
government industrial guidance funds proliferating as a major tool to steer development.26
China’s 14th Five-Year Plan (2021–25) and Xi’s “New Development Paradigm” prioritize technological and
material self-sufficiency in response to a “complex” and “turbulent” international environment.27 Unlike the
13th Five-Year Plan (2016–20), the 14th no longer calls for expanding the service sector and instead seeks to
maintain manufacturing’s share of China’s economy, likely reflecting Chinese leaders’ fixation on material
self-sufficiency.28 The CCP has called on private firms to help China break the U.S. “tech blockade.”29 In
2021, Beijing has enacted a sweeping set of regulations aimed largely at digital technology firms, and Xi
has pushed for “common prosperity,” most likely in an effort to rein in private national champions, redirect
capital toward priority sectors, and shape China’s domestic political narrative by addressing rising income
inequality ahead of Xi’s expected third term as general secretary of the CCP in 2022.30
Chinese president Xi Jinping is applauded by delegates as he arrives at the opening of the National People’s
Congress at the Great Hall of the People.
Source: Kevin Frayer/Getty Images
Implications for Degrees of Separation
While this report will not settle the debate, it is worth noting that the grander the perception of
China’s ultimate ambitions—and more importantly of its capabilities—the more defensive the response,

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
10 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
pointing to a potentially dangerous moment in U.S.-China relations. Bilateral ties, most especially
economic linkages, have long been thought to reduce the risk of miscalculation and escalation. That
thinking, prevalent since the normalization of relations more than 40 years ago, is now being tested.
The perception of a China bent on displacing the United States as the global superpower may alter the
calculus in Washington as to whether economic growth, so fundamental to military strength, can ever
truly be separated from national security concerns. By tying the assessment of engagement in specific
economic activities to the achievement of U.S. objectives, the authors hope to provide an analytical
framework to answer the question of whether the United States benefits from such engagement.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
11 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
3
U.S. Objectives
U
nder the proposed framework, U.S. objectives are central to assessing the costs and benefits of a
“targeted decoupling” strategy. The study team has developed notional U.S. objectives based on
official documents, statements from senior administration officials, and specific policy actions.
Building on analysis from the interim report, U.S. objectives are grouped into six main areas covering:
(1) geostrategy; (2) economics; (3) values-based (human rights and civil society); (4) global rules and
norms; (5) global public goods; and (6) technology and innovation. In evaluating a given activity, the
framework is used to assess how these objectives are affected by U.S.-China engagement in that activity
and whether engagement is positive, negative, neutral, or ambiguous in terms of advancing U.S. objectives.
Some activities will call for the prioritization of objectives, as policy actions will likely entail trade-offs.
U.S. Objectives and Policy toward China
The Biden administration took the unusual step of issuing the Interim National Security Strategic
Guidance (INSSG) in March 2021 to “convey President Biden’s vision for how America will engage
with the world, and to provide guidance for departments and agencies to align their actions as the
administration begins work on a National Security Strategy.”31 The INSSG outlines three core national
security priorities, all of which are relevant to U.S.-China relations: (1) protecting the security of the
American people, including from threats such as climate change, pandemics, and cyberattacks; (2)
expanding economic prosperity and opportunity through equitable and inclusive growth; and (3)
realizing and defending democratic values. The INSSG also singles out China as a unique challenge
to U.S. national security given its capacity to use “economic, diplomatic, military, and technological
power to mount a sustained challenge to a stable and open international system.”32

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
12 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
President Biden himself has acknowledged a “growing rivalry with China.”33 The INSSG, along with a
series of official reports, briefings, speeches, and early policy actions, suggests a deeply skeptical view
of China and the CCP. In line with the INSSG, which refers to “a more assertive and authoritarian
China,” the Department of Defense calls China “the United States’ number one pacing challenge.”34
William Burns, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, has referred to China as “an adversarial
power,” intent on replacing the United States as the world’s most powerful and influential nation.35
(For more detail, see Section 2 on Chinese motivations.)
At the same time, the administration has identified certain areas where U.S. objectives can only
be advanced through engagement with China. In an October speech at CSIS, United States Trade
Representative (USTR) Katherine Tai referred to the U.S-China relationship as “complex and
competitive” and one of “profound consequence” for the entire world, noting that resolution of
contentious issues will require direct engagement with China. To this end, the INSSG commits to
conducting “practical, results-oriented diplomacy with Beijing and to working to reduce the risk of
misperception and miscalculation,” and it welcomes “the Chinese government’s cooperation on issues
such as climate change, global health security, arms control, and nonproliferation where our national
fates are intertwined.”36 The tension in the U.S. approach to China is perhaps unavoidable, but it also
underscores the need for a more precise identification and prioritization of U.S. objectives and for
mechanisms to evaluate and manage these tensions.
Table 1: Notional U.S. Objectives
AREA OBJECTIVES
Geostrategic Safeguard regional stability and prevent Chinese aggression, particularly
toward Taiwan.
Support non-proliferation.
Cooperate on rogue states and the threat of terrorism.
Enforce maritime norms.
Deter conflicts in new frontiers, including outer space and the Arctic.
Economic Pursue sustainable, equitable, and balanced growth.
Ensure fairness in the economic relationship.
Safeguard global financial stability.
Enhance supply chain resilience.
Values-based Protect human rights.
Support democracy.
Resist authoritarianism.
Global rules and norms Enforce and update global trade rules.
Establish normative technology standards.
Accept fragmentation in data and other technical standards.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
13 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Global public goods Fight climate change.
Strengthen global public health and pandemic preparedness.
Support low-income countries and development.
Technology & Innovation Maintain U.S. technological leadership and set technical standards.
Maintain a military and intelligence-gathering advantage.
Ensure supply chain integrity.
Enforce intellectual property protection.
Source: Author’s original research and analysis.
GEOSTRATEGY
The normalization of the U.S.-China relationship in the 1970s was driven primarily by the strategic
imperatives of the Cold War and the threat of the Soviet Union.37 Although that shared concern no
longer exists, a range of geostrategic objectives remain integral to U.S. regional and global leadership
and relevant to U.S.-China engagement.
Key geostrategic objectives relevant to the U.S.-China relationship include:
 ▪ Safeguarding regional stability and preventing Chinese aggression, particularly toward Taiwan;
 ▪ Supporting non-proliferation;
 ▪ Cooperating on rogue states and the threat of terrorism;
 ▪ Enforcing maritime norms; and
 ▪ Deterring conflicts in new frontiers, including outer space and the Arctic.
Senior Biden administration officials have identified Afghanistan, Myanmar (Burma), and North Korea
as potential areas for constructive engagement between the United States and China, noting the
possible alignment of interests and China’s importance in Asia. Even after a tense March 2021 meeting
with his Chinese counterpart, Secretary of State Antony Blinken emphasized that “on Iran, on North
Korea, on Afghanistan, on climate, our interests intersect.”38
At the same time, “geopolitical competition” with China is a common theme echoed by the White
House. Senior officials have described a change in Chinese behavior, citing Chinese actions in the
South China Sea and across the Taiwan Strait, and elsewhere, that challenge the longstanding U.S.
objective of maintaining regional security and preventing Chinese aggression, especially toward
Taiwan.39 Among geostrategic objectives, Taiwan and the broader topic of maritime navigation and the
U.S.-led alliance system in Asia stand out as areas where U.S. and Chinese interests diverge. On the
former, U.S. officials recently reiterated the U.S. commitment to Taiwan as “rock solid” and highlighted
U.S. assistance to Taiwan “in maintaining a sufficient self-defense capability.”40 On the latter, President
Biden described the “enhanced security trilateral partnership between Australia, the United Kingdom
and the United States” (AUKUS) as a new phase of trilateral security cooperation “to maneuver and
defend against rapidly evolving threats.”41 Underscoring the fact that tensions over Taiwan and the
broader issue of maritime shipping routes are not simply a bilateral issue, Group of Seven (G7) leaders
highlighted “the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait” and encouraged the
“peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues.”42

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
14 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
ECONOMICS
While economic and commercial considerations were not a central motivation for initial U.S.
engagement with Beijing in the early 1970s, the normalization of relations between the United
States and China beginning in the late 1970s created a climate conducive to economic integration in
the decades that followed. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, economic rationale emerged as a
dominant force for enhancing bilateral engagement, and one that continues today, notwithstanding
escalating tensions. At the same time, the construct of “economic security as national security,”
articulated in President Trump’s National Security Strategy and repeated in President Biden’s INSSG,
challenges the traditional economic objectives of market reform, global integration, balanced growth,
and market access associated with the U.S.-China relationship.
Key economic objectives relevant to the U.S.-China relationship include:
 ▪ Pursuing sustainable, equitable, and balanced growth;
 ▪ Ensuring fairness in the economic relationship;
 ▪ Safeguarding global financial stability; and
 ▪ Enhancing supply chain resilience.
For nearly four decades, up until the Trump administration, U.S. policy sought to empower economic
reformers in Beijing by advocating for China’s greater participation in the global economy and using
bilateral dialogues to encourage further liberalization and defuse tensions. While the approach succeeded in
integrating China into the global trading system, fueling Chinese and global growth in the process, it failed
to resolve fundamental differences with the United States on issues ranging from human rights to the role
of the state (and the CCP) in the economy. Exacerbating these tensions, China has proven willing to use its
economic power to advance a vision for Asia and the world that often conflicts with U.S. interests.
Citing the failure of engagement, President Trump launched a trade war with China in 2018 that
quickly expanded to encompass technology and finance. Still, the Trump administration continued
to engage with China, signing the Phase One trade deal in January 2020, which consisted of Chinese
commitments for $200 billion in U.S. goods purchases, further financial-sector opening, and intellectual
property protections.43 The agreement put further tariff escalation on hold but did not take on newly
contentious aspects of U.S.-China economic engagement, for example, cross-border data flows, supply
chain integration, cross-border investment, and joint investment in innovation. Where these areas of
engagement had once been considered opportunities to create positive change in China, they are now
commonly perceived as potential threats to U.S. national security and competitive advantage.
President Biden and senior administration officials frequently reference the deeply competitive nature
of the economic relationship.44 All four of the White House’s 100-Day Supply Chain Reviews—in
semiconductor manufacturing and advanced packaging; large capacity batteries; critical minerals
and materials; and pharmaceuticals and advanced pharmaceutical ingredients—name China for
its aggressive use of measures “well outside globally accepted fair trading practices” to capture
global market share in critical supply chains and explicitly recommend that supply chain resilience
be incorporated into the U.S. trade policy approach toward China.45 Along with keeping in place
the Trump-era tariffs, the administration has also added new Chinese entities to the Commerce
Department’s Entity List, citing their involvement in China’s “destabilizing military modernization
efforts, and/or weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programs.”46

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
15 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Regarding cross-border financial flows, CFIUS reforms contributed to a sharp decline in Chinese
direct investment in the United States. In 2020, bilateral FDI flows were at their lowest level since
2009, while two-way venture capital flows also declined. Amendments to a Trump-era executive
order reframed prohibitions on U.S. investment in “Communist Chinese Military Companies” to
“Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies,” maintaining the prohibition on U.S. investment
in designated company securities.47 President Biden’s pick to head the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), Gary Gensler, confirmed the agency’s intention to delist foreign companies from
U.S. exchanges unless U.S. regulators are allowed to review the companies’ audit papers. Separately,
the SEC announced a pause in allowing new listings of Chinese companies on U.S. exchanges until
risks associated with the ownership structure—specifically the use of offshore shell companies, known
as “Variable Interest Entities,” to work around Chinese prohibitions on foreign ownership—are better
understood and comprehensively disclosed to investors.48
Notwithstanding these recent actions, the broad themes of economic competition and links to
national security, and the global pandemic, the current reality remains one of deep economic
connection between the two economies and between each economy and the rest of the world.
Bilateral trade between the United States and China expanded modestly in 2020 despite the pandemic
and is on track to increase significantly in 2021.
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has called for maintaining economic integration in terms of trade,
capital flows, and technology, where possible, while acknowledging the need to evaluate national
security risks and take action when warranted.49 Similarly, Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo said
that the administration needs to help U.S. businesses export to China, even as competition intensifies,
stating that, “even with respect to China, we need to do business there, we need to export there,” a
sentiment echoed by USTR Tai, who called ending trade with China an unrealistic outcome.50
President Biden’s approach to economic issues acknowledges China’s centrality in the global economy
while seeking to modify Chinese behavior through multilateral pressure. In his first address to a
joint session of Congress, Biden outlined a foreign policy for the middle class, “making sure that
every nation plays by the same rules in the global economy, including China.”51 Similarly, in his first
press conference, he said Washington would “insist that China play by the international rules: fair
competition, fair practices, fair trade” and work with allies to “hold China accountable.”52
The U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC), with its explicit focus on global trade challenges
from non-market economy policies and practices, demonstrates a serious effort to develop a
multilateral approach to dealing with China and held its first meeting in September 2021. However,
even under optimistic assumptions, the TTC and other multilateral mechanisms will take time to
deliver results. It is the study team’s assessment that economic objectives will prioritize overall
economic benefit, while the maintenance of tariffs, new investment prohibitions, expanded export
controls, and supply chain reviews, among other tools, could signal a break with the decades-old
policy of economic engagement, or a continued engagement but with enhanced focus on enforcement,
transparency, reciprocity, and net benefit to the United States.
VALUES-BASED (HUMAN RIGHTS AND CIVIL SOCIETY)
While a values-based agenda did not drive the initial opening with Beijing in the early 1970s, over the
years Washington came to view bilateral engagement as a mechanism for building domestic support

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
16 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
in China for openness, human rights, and democratic choice. The souring in relations between the
United States and China, exacerbated by the pandemic, has meant that efforts to promote values-based
outcomes through bilateral engagement are more limited now than any time in the past 20 years.
Key values-based objectives relevant to the U.S.-China relationship include:
 ▪ Protecting human rights;
 ▪ Supporting democracy; and
 ▪ Resisting authoritarianism.
The Biden administration describes American values as a core strength that provides the United States
with a comparative advantage over China and that serves as a predicate for U.S. policy toward China.53
U.S. officials consistently highlight the threat to human rights and fundamental freedoms posed by
a more assertive China. For its part, China describes U.S. efforts at values promotion as “a tool to
pressure other countries and meddle in their affairs.”54
The March 2021 meeting between Secretary of State Antony Blinken and National Security Advisor
Jake Sullivan and their counterparts Yang Jiechi and Wang Yi featured public sparring over Tibet, Hong
Kong, and Xinjiang, topics that Beijing views as off-limits for discussion.55 The rhetoric on both sides
leaves little reason to be optimistic, at least in the near term, on the prospects for direct bilateral
engagement to advance U.S. values-based objectives. Rather, the Biden administration calls for “joining
with likeminded allies and partners to revitalize democracy the world over.”56
The focus on values has both translated to specific policy actions and served as a unifying theme with
disparate partners. In March, the United States, in tandem with the European Union, United Kingdom,
and Canada, imposed sanctions on Chinese officials connected to human rights abuses in Xinjiang.57
In July, the United States updated an advisory on the “Risks and Considerations for Businesses and
Individuals with Exposure to Entities Engaged in Forced Labor and other Human Rights Abuses linked
to Xinjiang, China,” warning that “businesses and individuals that do not exit supply chains, ventures,
and/or investments connected to Xinjiang could run a high risk of violating U.S. law.”58 Values-based
objectives can be seen in other areas of economic policy as well. For example, the 100-Day Supply
Chain Review urges an approach to supply chain resilience that focuses on “building trade and
investment partnerships with nations who share our values—valuing human dignity, worker rights,
environmental protection, and democracy.”59 The use of forced labor is also reported to have emerged
as a “top item” in the Biden administration’s trade agenda.60 Values-based objectives have also played
a major role in ambitious strategic initiatives intended to increase multilateral pressure on China,
including AUKUS; the Quad, consisting of Australia, India, Japan, and the United States; and the TTC.
An upcoming virtual Summit for Democracy is planned for December to further demonstrate broad
cooperation among allies and partners centered on three themes: defending against authoritarianism,
fighting corruption, and promoting respect for human rights.61 Less than one year into the Biden
administration, values have emerged as a unifying theme with implications across a range of policy areas.
GLOBAL RULES AND NORMS
As U.S. policymakers sought to integrate China into the global economy, they also attempted to
encourage compliance with global rules and incorporate China into existing global governance
structures. The Trump administration largely abandoned that effort, citing the failure of multilateral

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
17 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
approaches to discipline China and the vulnerability of multilateral institutions to co-option and
coercion by China, and opted instead for unilateral action. Biden’s election brought a renewed U.S.
commitment to multilateral approaches, but one focused on building coalitions of “like-minded”
countries to meet the challenges posed by China’s state-directed model.
Key global rules and norms objectives relevant to the U.S.-China relationship include:
 ▪ Enforcing and updating global trade rules;
 ▪ Establishing normative technology standards; and
 ▪ Accepting fragmentation in data and other technical standards.
While the Biden administration has expressed support for the World Trade Organization, there is limited
visibility on specific proposals and goals for the institution, and most experts are pessimistic, at least in
the near term, about the prospects for reaching consensus on fundamental institutional reform.62 A 2020
CSIS Trade Commission report urged a “new trade compact” of advanced market economies committed
to “principles of reciprocity, transparency, market-driven outcomes, and rule of law” to set a new agenda
for emerging trade rules.63 The seeds of such an approach can be seen in the U.S.-EU Summit statement,
which includes a commitment to “stand together to protect our businesses and workers from unfair trade
practices, in particular those posed by non-market economies that are undermining the world trading
system,” and is advanced by the creation of the EU-U.S. TTC (see below).64
On technology standards, the Biden administration inherited intense domestic pressure for the United
States to defend its lead in the area of technical norms and standards. For example, the National
Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, an independent commission established by the FY
2019 National Defense Authorization Act to advance the development of artificial intelligence and
associated technologies to “comprehensively address the national security and defense needs of the
United States,” calls on the United States to “use diplomacy and leverage its global partnerships to
advocate for establishing privacy-protecting technical standards and norms in international bodies,
and . . . work with like-minded nations to ensure that other nations have an alternative to embracing
China’s technology and methods of social control and access to technologies that protect democratic
values like privacy.”65
The commitment to promoting shared norms and forging new agreements on emerging technologies
is similarly emphasized in the INSSG, which observes that such technologies “remain largely
ungoverned by laws or norms designed to center rights and democratic values, foster cooperation,
establish guardrails against misuse or malign action, and reduce uncertainty and manage the risk
that competition will lead to conflict.”66 It calls for shaping “ethical and normative frameworks” and
emerging technology standards to boost U.S. security, economic competitiveness, and values.67
This emphasis on leadership in technology standards is also reflected in the TTC, which includes
a working group on technology standards tasked with developing approaches for coordination
and cooperation in critical and emerging technology standards, including AI and other emerging
technologies.68 Similarly, the Quad’s critical and emerging technologies working group includes a
technical standards workstream with explicit focus on advanced communications and AI.69 While there
is a long way to go from working group to actual standards, the emphasis on standard-setting work in
settings that exclude China offers the clearest proof yet of a U.S. strategy to lead among like-minded
countries and implicitly accept, if not urge, fragmentation in technology standards.70

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
18 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
GLOBAL PUBLIC GOODS
The National Intelligence Council’s Global Trends 2040 report lists “climate change, disease, financial
crises, and technology disruptions” among the shared global challenges that “often lack a direct
human agent or perpetrator” and are likely to “manifest more frequently and intensely in almost every
region and country.”71 The report conceives of solutions to these challenges as global public goods.
Enlisting Chinese support for global public goods emerged as an objective of U.S.-China engagement
in the last 20 years before faltering during the Trump administration. The Biden administration has
reengaged Beijing in these efforts, most notably on climate change. Efforts on global public health—an
obvious global public good amid a pandemic—have been more challenging, with the U.S. intelligence
community’s “Unclassified Summary of Assessment on COVID-19 Origins” charging Beijing with
hindering the global investigation into the disease’s origins.72
Key global public goods objectives relevant to the U.S.-China relationship include:
 ▪ Fighting climate change;
 ▪ Strengthening global public health and pandemic preparedness; and
 ▪ Supporting low-income countries and development.
Climate remains an avenue for cooperation with Beijing. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate
John Kerry visited Shanghai in April 2021 and signed the “U.S.-China Joint Statement Addressing
the Climate Crisis” just one week before President Biden hosted a Leaders Summit on climate
which included the participation of President Xi.73 Kerry has since returned to China, making him
an exception in terms of senior administration travel to China thus far in the Biden presidency. A
collaborative approach to China on climate can be complimented with efforts to work with likeminded
countries to apply pressure. As one example, Xi’s announcement at the United Nations General
Assembly that China would end financing of coal-fired power projects abroad came shortly after an
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) proposal to end official financing
for unabated coal power which garnered the support of the United States, European Union, United
Kingdom, Canada, and South Korea, among others.
While climate is generally thought of as an objective that argues in favor of U.S.-China engagement
given the importance of China to reaching global emissions targets, there are also aspects of dealing
with the climate crisis that push in the other direction. For example, the White House release of
the 100-Day Supply Chain Reviews notes that the centrality of climate change to U.S. economic
and national security means “we cannot afford to be agnostic to where these (decarbonization)
technologies are manufactured and where the associated supply chains and inputs originate.”74
Relations on global public health, the pandemic response, and future pandemic preparedness have
taken a hit due to China’s initial handling of the outbreak, its lack of transparency related to Covid-
19’s origins, and the willingness of the Trump administration to politicize the pandemic. Still, at the
technical level, and in particular as it relates to future pandemic preparedness, there is a recognition
that China has to be part of any credible strategy, but also that the international system as currently
configured is poorly equipped to deal with the needed coordination.75
Similarly, there is a recognition that China’s participation is essential to assisting low-income
countries, not least due to China’s role as the largest official bilateral creditor to this group. Through
Group of Twenty (G20) statements, both countries have committed to coordinate to end the Covid-19

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
19 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
pandemic and have agreed, in theory if not in practice, with multilateral proposals to deliver debt
relief to low-income countries. However, these proposals have a mixed track record at best. Finally,
both countries share the nominal goal of helping low-income countries develop, although they have
conflicting visions of how to do so.76
TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION
Until the Trump administration, Washington actively encouraged closer research and development
cooperation between China and the United States. In January 2011, the Obama administration
extended the U.S.-China Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology, renewing 32 years of
bilateral cooperation and noting the achievements of prior collaboration.77 The Trump administration
deviated from this policy, only including a brief line on cooperation as part of the Phase One trade
deal: “The Parties agree to carry out scientific and technological cooperation where appropriate.”78
While the Biden administration has toned-down the Trump-era rhetoric linking Chinese-born
scientists in the United States with espionage efforts, a return to prior levels of collaboration appears
highly unlikely. The Department of Justice’s “China Initiative”—designed to identify and prosecute
those involved in trade secret theft or economic espionage for the Chinese state—remains active, with
12 cases pursued so far this year.79
Key technology and innovation objectives relevant to the U.S.-China relationship include:
 ▪ Maintaining technological leadership and setting technical standards;
 ▪ Maintaining a military and intelligence-gathering advantage;
 ▪ Ensuring supply chain integrity; and
 ▪ Enforcing intellectual property protection.
The INSSG identifies “a revolution in technology that poses both peril and promise,” noting a race
to develop and deploy emerging technologies that could shape the economic and military balance
among states. Similarly, the National Intelligence Council’s Global Trends 2040 report describes a race
for technological dominance that is “inextricably intertwined” with the broader U.S.-China rivalry.80
Indeed, China continues to invest and reform policies to close the science and technology gap with the
West, a goal described as “arguably China’s top strategic priority.”81 The INSSG also commits to “sustain
America’s innovation edge” and calls for “resources for investments in the cutting-edge technologies
and capabilities that will determine our military and national security advantage in the future.”82
The Biden administration has advanced efforts on both the “offensive” and “defensive” sides of the
technology race. On offense, it has announced its support for the U.S. Innovation and Competition
Act, which would authorize more than $250 billion in new spending to bolster U.S. competitiveness
in key technologies, including semiconductor fabrication. If passed, it would follow on the National
Artificial Intelligence Act of 2020, passed as part of the FY 2021 NDAA, which establishes the National
AI Initiative to “ensure continued United States leadership in artificial intelligence research and
development.”83 Technology cooperation also features prominently in multilateral initiatives with
the Quad, the European Union, and in AUKUS. On defense, the administration has continued many
Trump-era policies designed to scrutinize U.S.-China technology linkages stemming from direct
investment and U.S.-China integration in technology supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
20 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
As highlighted by the ongoing work of the China Initiative, the United States continues to have
concerns over Beijing’s protection and outright theft of intellectual property (IP). In an April 2021
report, USTR recognized that Beijing recently amended several IP laws, but warned that they “fall
short of the full range of fundamental changes needed to improve the IP landscape in China.”84 Still,
the report notes that engagement with Beijing “has been demonstrating progress” in implementing IP
commitments under the Phase One trade deal, and USTR Tai’s comments this month make clear U.S.
intentions to engage with China specifically to take stock of performance on Phase One commitments.
Prioritization
Biden administration officials have underscored the complex and multifaceted nature of U.S.-
China engagement, highlighting the challenges in managing a relationship that is central to many
administration objectives. The INSSG recognizes that “strategic competition does not, and should not,
preclude working with China when it is in our national interest to do so.”85 Similarly, in his first major
speech, Secretary of State Blinken outlined the U.S. posture toward China as “competitive when it should
be, collaborative when it can be, and adversarial when it must be.”86 Implementing such an approach will
require carefully managing conflicting priorities and a clash of objectives between U.S. stakeholders.
While difficult to assess which of objectives will have priority ex ante, it is possible to glean from
official statements and administration documents which areas have the explicit focus of President
Biden and his key advisers:
 ▪ Support for shared values has emerged as a central theme to contrast the United States and like-
minded nations with China. Support for human rights and defense of democracy consistently
appear in the Biden administration’s foreign policy and are incorporated across policy areas and
bilateral, regional, and plurilateral engagements.
 ▪ Similarly, technological leadership is portrayed as determinative to global leadership, while
the intersection of technology with values makes these two areas mutually reinforcing. Not by
accident, technology has been a dominant theme emerging from regional engagements that
exclude China.
 ▪ However, values-based and technological objectives sit uncomfortably alongside the “existential
risk” that is the climate crisis. This tension is clearly expressed in the Biden administration’s first
budget request, which identifies the climate crisis and the ambitions of an autocratic China as
“the great challenges of our time.”87
These considerations will ultimately play out in practice as decisions to allow or restrict U.S.-China
engagement in specific activities. The next section uses illustrative case studies to test the framework
and its application in making such determinations.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
21 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
4
Case Studies
T
o test the framework, the research team selected three case studies: research collaborations
in artificial intelligence; biotechnology and human genomic data sharing; and capital
market linkages and cross-border portfolio flows. Each area features in U.S.-China strategic
competition and entails tradeoffs which must be assessed when determining whether engagement
advances U.S. objectives.
Research Collaborations in Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) describes a collection of technologies capable of solving problems and
performing tasks without explicit human guidance.88 While the origins of AI can be traced back to
the 1950s, AI has been perceived as a strategic technology only in the last decade. The final report of
the U.S. National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence (NSCAI), a bipartisan commission
charged with making recommendations to “advance the development of AI, machine learning, and
associated technologies to comprehensively address the national security and defense needs of the
United States,” characterizes AI technologies as “the most powerful tools in generations for expanding
knowledge, increasing prosperity, and enriching the human experience.”89
Extending far beyond national security and defense uses, AI technologies promise to drive disruption
and value creation across nearly all industries in the decade ahead. AI’s potential to support technical
improvements and innovations, leading to economy-wide productivity gains, makes it a general-
purpose technology (GPT), a label that also explains why AI is so central to all aspects of U.S.-China
competition.90 As a GPT, AI has the potential to affect entire economic systems due to its broad
applications and ability to influence the development of other emerging technologies.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
22 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK
Naming the Risk
Notwithstanding its focus on national security and defense, the NSCAI’s final report provides a broad
framing as to what is at stake regarding AI competition, recognizing AI as an inspiring technology
that will be used “in the pursuit of power.” As identified in Section 1, the national power of the United
States has political, economic, military, and other aspects, all of which will be affected by AI.
 ▪ Political: AI has the potential to improve the human condition but can also empower
authoritarian regimes, including through the export of surveillance technologies.
 ▪ Economic: AI is an economic engine on its own, with some analysts estimating the market value
of AI technologies at nearly $2 trillion.91 More significant is AI’s role as a GPT, where the greatest
effect will be in its application across a myriad of sectors, accelerating the pace of innovation and
conveying first-mover advantage to the actor most adept at applying AI technologies.
 ▪ Military and Intelligence Gathering: AI will underpin next-generation weapons systems and
warfighting capabilities and provide governments with enhanced abilities to gather and process
data, conduct intelligence and surveillance operations, and act on program-generated analysis.92
China’s Military-Civil Fusion strategy, which aims to convert civilian-use technology to military
uses, poses a unique challenge in differentiating commercial activities from military and
intelligence-related activities.
 ▪ Other: Potential flaws in AI models pose serious challenges to the technology’s responsible and
ethical use, and the misuse of AI applications, such as facial recognition and characterization,
could violate basic human rights. U.S. government officials have noted China’s high-tech
surveillance against Uyghurs, Kazakhs, and other members of Muslim minority groups in the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.93
For the purposes of this case study, and to provide a hypothetical but tangible example to test the
framework, this section narrows the focus to research collaborations in AI. Against a backdrop of
increased signs of technology decoupling, AI research linkages may be more enduring given the open
nature of various components of the AI stack, such as open-source software, public data sets, and the
high degree of connectedness between U.S. and Chinese researchers in the AI ecosystem (see text
box). The question this case study seeks to answer is whether U.S.-China engagement in research
collaborations in AI is positive, negative, neutral, or ambiguous for achieving identified U.S. objectives.
If research collaborations in AI are determined to be negative or ambiguous for achieving U.S.
objectives, the study team will evaluate the potential effectiveness of restricting such collaborations.
IDENTIFYING AND PRIORITIZING U.S. OBJECTIVES
AI competition implicates all six areas of U.S. objectives under the framework: (1) geostrategic; (2)
economic; (3) values-based; (4) global rules and norms; (5) global public goods; and (6) technology
and innovation. Of these, the study team identifies seven objectives as the most affected by U.S.-China
research collaborations (Figure 1).

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
23 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Figure 1: Areas Impacted by U.S.-China Research Collaborations in AI
U.S. OBJECTIVES: FOCUS AREAS AND SPECIFIC GOALS ASSESSMENT RATIONALE
Technology and Innovation
Maintaining U.S. technological leadership and setting
technical standards
Leadership will depend on elements not uniquely
controlled by one side or the other
Maintaining a military and intelligence-gathering advantage Collaboration will reveal capabilities to partners
Economic
Pursuing sustainable, equitable, and balanced growth Productivity gains from technological advances
will not be zero-sum
Global Rules and Norms
Establishing normative technology standards Agreement on normative standards is a condition
of research collaboration
Accepting fragmentation in data and other technical
standards
Collaborations require interoperability and entail
sharing of data and results
Values-Based
Protecting human rights Use of research findings and application of
technology advances will be determinative
Resisting authoritarianism Use of research findings and application of
technology advances will be determinative
Impact of Research Collaborations on U.S. Objectives •• Positive •• Negative •• Neutral •• Ambiguous
Source: Author’s original research and analysis.
Assessment
Research collaboration in AI was chosen as a case study precisely because it represents a strategic
area where U.S. and Chinese actors are already highly interconnected. As expected, the assessment
indicates there are both benefits and downsides to collaboration in terms of advancing U.S. objectives.
The authors judge U.S.-China engagement in AI research collaborations as positive for the economic
objective of balanced growth, where the economies of both the United States and China will benefit
from the research collaborations.94 Such collaborations are also judged to be positive for establishing
normative standards to address ethical issues around AI.95 On the other hand, U.S.-China engagement in
AI research collaborations appears negative for the technology and innovation objective of maintaining
a military and intelligence-gathering advantage, as well as for the objective of accepting fragmentation
in data and other technical standards. The fact that research collaboration is assessed to advance the goal
of establishing normative technology standards but does not support fragmentation presents a possible
tension: in theory, it is possible to strive for common normative standards for AI, for example, in the area
of AI ethics, independent of technical or data standards; in practice, however, a project’s development
will require collecting and processing data, defining technical requirements, and ensuring regulatory
compliance such that any single project will entail both normative and technical standards.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
24 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
The remaining values-based objectives of protecting human rights and resisting authoritarianism
as well as maintaining U.S. technological leadership in AI are assessed to be ambiguously affected
by research collaborations. For the former, collaborations can help advance certain standards, for
example, on an AI system’s data security and privacy, but they might also support an innovation
with an eventual application outside of the control of the researchers themselves. For the latter,
U.S. participants benefit from access to Chinese data and China’s deep pool of AI talent, and the
collaboration itself provides insight into the technological capabilities inside China. Chinese
participants will similarly benefit from U.S.-side contributions, including data, world-class U.S.-based
talent, and insight into cutting-edge research. In brief, research collaborations benefit both sides,
but the “net impact” of such collaboration—whether the United States or China gains more than the
other—will depend on how innovations are applied.
As anticipated, the assessment of the impact of research collaborations on individual objectives ranges
from positive to negative, while the prioritization of values-based and technology and innovation
objectives yields an ambiguous overall assessment. Therefore, the next step in the framework calls for
consideration of restrictions based on their likely effectiveness.
ASSESSING EFFECTIVENESS OF RESTRICTIONS
The fact that AI is “dual-use, often open-source, and diffusing rapidly” makes it particularly challenging
to control in the conventional sense. Experts have warned that efforts to control certain aspects of the
AI ecosystem could be ineffective and therefore counterproductive to U.S. leadership in AI.96 Similarly,
the acting undersecretary for industry and security at the Bureau of Industry and Security for the U.S.
Department of Commerce indicated that unilateral controls could harm U.S. technological innovation
and leadership if unilateral controls are “backfilled” by other countries.97 Therefore, an assessment of
the likely effectiveness of restrictions is necessary to avoid inadvertently undermining U.S. objectives.
The framework looks to leadership in AI and the views of U.S. allies and partners regarding AI
competition as key inputs into this assessment.
Leadership
Controls are generally intended to protect a lead. When leadership is contested, such controls are
potentially self-defeating, as they risk lowering visibility into the gains of competitors. Dozens of
countries have implemented national AI strategies in recent years, but leadership in AI innovation
is primarily a contest between the United States and China, followed by the European Union. In the
2021 update, Who is Winning the AI Race: China, the EU or the United States?, Daniel Castro and Michael
McLaughlin of the Center for Data Innovation assess the United States still has a substantial overall
lead in AI, with China closing the gap in some areas and Europe lagging behind.
Data on cited AI conference papers, considered a useful metric to assess the quality of AI research,
show the United States with significantly more cited AI conference papers than China or the European
Union over the last decade. However, China surpassed the United States for the first time last year
in global AI journal citations, accounting for 20.7 percent versus 19.8 percent from the United States
and 11 percent from the European Union. China also leads in the total number of peer-reviewed AI
publications, accounting for 22.4 percent of the world total, versus 16.4 percent from the European
Union and 14.6 percent from the United States. The vast majority of peer-reviewed AI papers globally
are affiliated with the academic field, accounting for 95.4 percent in China, 89.6 percent in the United
States, and 81.9 percent in the European Union.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
25 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Figure 2: AI Journal and Conference Citations, 2020
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
United States China European Union
AI Journal Citations, 2020 AI Conference Citations, 2020
Source: Artificial Intelligence Index, Measuring Trends in Artificial Intelligence (Stanford, CA: Stanford University, 2021),
https://aiindex.stanford.edu/report/.
Figure 3: Number of Academic-Corporate Peer-Reviewed AI Publications, 2015–19
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
United States European Union China
Source: Artificial Intelligence Index, Measuring Trends in Artificial Intelligence (Stanford, CA: Stanford University, 2021),
https://aiindex.stanford.edu/report/.
According to Stanford University’s Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence 2021 AI Index Report, industry-
university research centers and corporate contributions to university research have proliferated since
the 1980s. From 2015 to 2019, the United States published nearly 8,000 academic-corporate peer-
reviewed AI papers, versus just under 4,000 in the European Union and around 3,700 in China. In
addition, large technology firms have increased their participation in major AI conferences. A recent
report on technology leadership from the consultancy Bain & Company noted that a small number of
large cloud service providers (CSPs), based in the United States and China, will fuel the AI industry due
to their access to the enormous amounts of data needed to effectively train AI models.98 These CSPs also

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
26 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
have the AI talent needed “to build and operate bespoke, large-scale systems,” as well as the computing
architecture needed to handle the massive computing workloads associated with AI innovation.99
Talent acquisition and an “expanding (technology) talent crunch” merit special attention in evaluating
AI leadership in the context of research collaborations is evaluated. The NSCAI report refers to the
talent needed to make AI breakthroughs as “the holy grail” in AI competition. While universities have
increased the number of AI-focused faculty and AI courses offered, the United States is not growing
its domestic AI talent pool fast enough to keep pace with growing demand. International students
therefore remain a vital source of AI talent, with roughly two-thirds of all AI PhD graduates in North
America hailing from abroad. Among recent international AI PhD graduates in the United States,
81.8 percent elect to stay in the United States, a higher “stay rate” relative to other known graduate
specialties.100 Recognizing the importance of AI talent to innovation, nearly two dozen countries
have opened programs aimed at attracting top-tier AI researchers, and Canada, France, the United
Kingdom, and China have enacted policies aimed at attracting high-tech talent through immigration
reform.101 Notwithstanding these efforts, the United States maintains its lead in cultivation and
retention of foreign AI talent, but its position is threatened by technology rivals as well as limits on
U.S. immigration policies.
China has invested large amounts of capital in talent cultivation and recruitment. Programs such
as the Thousand Talents and “Plan 111” are well-documented efforts to grow China’s human capital
base. As noted above, China’s investment in building its talent base has paid dividends in the form of
increased AI research publications and citations as well as AI-related patents filed, although AI patent
data by geographic origin is incomplete. In 2017, the United States had 62.4 top AI researchers per 1
million workers, compared to 19.4 for the European Union and 3.2 for China.102
While many experts judge the United States to currently lead in AI, China’s advantages in data
quantity, AI adoption, domestic talent development, and state direction are cited as factors that could
ultimately lead to China’s success in “winning the AI arms race.”103 However, some AI researchers
underscore the uncertainty around the trajectory of AI and its applications and caution against
overstating China’s advantages, as such overstatement provokes insecurity and possibly a more
aggressive posture on both sides.104 This case study heeds that warning and does not attempt to answer
the question of whether the United States or China is better positioned to “win” the AI competition.
Rather, the evidence points to dynamic and ongoing competition in which both, along with a handful
of others, led by the European Union, are able to compete at the cutting edge of AI innovation.
Allies and Partners
U.S. officials frequently comment that engagement with allies is critical to addressing national security
and foreign policy concerns related to China, and U.S. officials indicate they are engaged in discussions
with allied countries, especially suppliers of certain technologies of concern, to coordinate on common
controls and policies. Certain EU member countries, along with the United Kingdom, Australia,
Canada, and Japan, are close historical allies with advanced capability in AI. This study looks to their
national AI strategies as well as recent statements and actions to assess the likelihood that they would
follow the United States were it to restrict certain research collaborations in AI.
National and regional strategies put forth a vision for country or regional leadership in AI and in the
application of AI for specific sectors such as healthcare. To the extent the United States or China are

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
27 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
named in these strategies, it is to reinforce the need to invest in national AI development to compete.
Most strategies include a commitment to pursue the ethical development of AI systems, but in general
they do not specify what ethical development would entail.
Over the past year, a series of official announcements point to a concerted effort to coordinate AI
innovation with a handful of strategic U.S. allies. Last September the United States and the United
Kingdom signed the Declaration of the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland on Cooperation in Artificial Intelligence Research and Development,
which announced that the two countries “intend to advance our shared vision and work toward an
AI R&D ecosystem” to include, inter alia, furthering researcher and student collaboration, promoting
research and development in AI, focusing on challenging technical issues, and protecting against
efforts to adopt and apply these technologies in the service of authoritarianism and repression.105
The declaration marked the first international agreement on AI R&D signed by either country.
In March 2021, the leaders of Australia, India, Japan, and the United States announced the Quad
Critical and Emerging Technology Working Group.106 While the announcement did not explicitly
mention AI cooperation, it referenced shared principles on technology design, development, and
use and coordination on technology standards, and the working group was featured in a July speech
by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the NSCAI Global Emerging Technology Summit.107
In June, EU and U.S. leaders launched the EU-U.S. Trade and Technology Council (TTC) as a forum
“to coordinate approaches to key global trade, economic, and technology issues and to deepen
transatlantic trade and economic relations based on shared democratic values.”108 Among the 10
TTC working groups is “technology standards cooperation” which will include collaboration on AI,
export controls, and the misuse of technology threatening security and human rights. Also in June,
the U.S. National Science Foundation and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada announced their first formal partnership to support collaborations between U.S. and Canadian
researchers “in areas of mutual interest and national investment, such as AI and quantum.”109 The
National AI Initiative also directs the president to “support opportunities for international cooperation
with strategic allies, as appropriate, on the research and development, assessment, and resources for
trustworthy artificial intelligence systems.”110 More recently, President Biden remarked that AUKUS
will “bring together our sailors, our scientists, and our industries to maintain and expand our edge in
military capabilities and critical technologies,” including in artificial intelligence.111
These announcements, which in at least one case includes a mechanism for common funding of AI
research, represent steps toward a loose technology alliance. Some, for example, the TTC, are nascent
at best and already showing signs that such an alliance may be premature. Others, such as between
the United States and Canada and the United States and the United Kingdom, appear more concrete.
Some EU member leaders, notably President Emmanuel Macron of France and Germany’s outgoing
chancellor Angela Merkel, also explicitly reject the idea of taking sides, with the former indicating
he would oppose joining together against China as a “scenario of the highest possible [potential for
conflict]” while also indicating France and the United States share the same values and history.112 In
short, there is ample evidence of a desire to coordinate with the United States, but coordination may
not necessarily include a willingness to restrict engagement with China.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
28 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts

U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken delivers remarks at the National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence (NSCAI) Global Emerging Technology Summit.
Source: Jim Watson/Pool/AFP/Getty Images
ADHERING TO THE RULE OF LAW
The framework’s rule of law component applies a legal review to any activity, disqualifying research
collaboration by a U.S. person with any foreign entity that appears on the Commerce Department’s
Entity List without a license and the export (including of deemed exports) of any item that appears on
the Commerce Control List (CCL) of the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) without a license. In
this respect, the rule of law component highlights the role of existing mechanisms in managing risks
stemming from research collaborations.
End-User Controls
The Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) maintains restricted party lists,
such as the Entity List, which identifies entities subject to a licensing policy or presumption of denial
for all items subject to BIS jurisdiction.113 Thus far in 2021, the Commerce Department added seven
Chinese entities to the Entity List due to concerns involving their support for China’s military, military
modernization, or its weapons of mass destruction programs; 14 Chinese entities for being implicated
in human rights violations; and another five Chinese entities for acquiring or attempting to acquire
U.S. technology to support military modernization.114

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
29 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Unilateral Export Controls, Including Deemed Exports
The BIS also enforces the EAR, which regulates the exports, re-exports and transfers (in-country) of
dual-use items (e.g., commercial items that also have a military application). The release of technology
or source code subject to the EAR to a foreign person in the United States is considered a deemed export.
The EAR includes the CCL, which lists those “dual-use” items subject to licensing requirements for
export. The CCL is periodically updated, including for the addition of new controls related to emerging
technologies.115 In January 2020, the BIS issued an interim final rule imposing controls on software
specially designed to automate the analysis of geospatial imagery, marking the first control on AI
software following passage of the Export Control Reform Act, which called on the BIS to expand controls
to include “emerging” and “foundational” technologies that are essential to U.S. national security.
Multilateral Export Controls
Elements of the AI stack such as computers, microelectronics, and software can be subject to
multilateral controls under the Wassenaar Arrangement, which is one of four multilateral export control
regimes and deals with munitions and dual-use goods and technologies. Wassenaar’s 42 members
include the United States, India, Russia, and many U.S. allies with advanced AI capabilities, such as
Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Korea, and the United Kingdom. China is not a member.
FINAL ASSESSMENT
Research collaborations in AI benefit both the United States and China, while the prioritization of
values-based and technology and innovation objectives yields an overall ambiguous assessment of
the impact of such collaborations on U.S. objectives, warranting an evaluation of the effectiveness
of restrictions. While the United States is assessed to currently lead in AI, the evidence points to
a dynamic and ongoing competition in which both the United States and China, along with the
European Union, are able to compete at the cutting edge of AI innovation. The effectiveness of
restrictions on research collaborations is hindered by the open nature of the AI ecosystem and the
mobility of talent. Effectiveness of controls could be supported by working with allies and partners;
however, they also view the United States as a competitor in AI and are less likely to adopt restrictions
on research collaborations. As such, programs to foster closer coordination among allies and partners
are preferable to restrictions which have the potential to undermine U.S. leadership in AI.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
30 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
Components of the AI Stack
A robust AI industry requires four main components: talent, data, algorithms, and microelectronics (or compute).
Talent: An AI-capable workforce is essential not only to build, use, and maintain complex models but
also to implement wide adoption of the technology.116 Uneven investment in human capital has placed a
premium on talent acquisition. The think tank Marco Polo estimates that in 2019 about 20 percent of top-
tier AI researchers completed undergraduate studies in the United States versus 29 percent in China. Still,
the United States remains by far the most attractive destination, with an estimated 59 percent of top-tier
AI researchers working in the United States.117 International students are a vital source of AI talent for U.S.
companies, with roughly two-thirds of all AI graduates hailing from abroad.118 By contrast, the number of
domestic-born participants in U.S. AI graduate programs has not increased since 1990. Nearly two-dozen
countries have opened programs aimed at poaching top-tier AI researchers in the United States.119
Data: Data are the raw materials used to train machine-learning programs, with system performance
directly tied to the quantity, quality, and representativeness of data used. Data sets that are larger,
more complete, and accurately describe the target minimize algorithm bias and result in higher model
performance. Data sharing advances innovation. However, open and accessible data sets must be
differentiated from data with sensitive national security concerns. Data describing intelligence or
performance are already commonly controlled, and these types of data tend to be more fragmented
and difficult to collect than those used commercially.120
Software: The core of AI research is built on open-source algorithms and models known as fundamental
or general-purpose research. General-purpose software provides other developers with frameworks
and tools to create specialized, narrow-purpose programs. In general, AI researchers hold strong
commitments to maintaining the open-source nature of general-purpose algorithms, since freely
and widely shared algorithms benefit from the network effects of their broad adoption. In contrast,
AI application software is much narrower in scope and applies technology for specific end uses and
end users.121 Application-specific software requires large amounts of resources to train and produce,
and companies seeking to protect their profits in this area generally invest heavily in anti-piracy and
protection measures.122 While not all application-oriented AI is protected this way, highly specialized
model variants and large commercial ventures generally are and can be amenable to export controls.
Microelectronics: Microelectronics, such as semiconductors chips, sensors, and transistors, provide
the computing power and surrounding technology necessary to run complex AI models, and AI has
been called “the defining computing workload that [will] underpin the success” of semiconductor
developers and manufacturers.123 Advances in chip design and processing ability have driven the bulk
of progress in AI over the last decade, and the leap to quantum computing promises even greater
growth. The demand for trusted microelectronics, with minimal supply-chain and security risks,
will continue to increase as AI technology is adopted into military and intelligence structures.124
Microelectronics has also been the most aggressively targeted component of the AI stack by
U.S. government action so far. The CCL limits the export of a wide range of related technologies,
including semiconductor manufacturing equipment and materials to China, through export license
requirements. More recently, the BIS has enacted more stringent controls on specific “end users”
through its entity list, blocking firms such as Huawei, Fujian Jinhua, and the Semiconductor
Manufacturing International Corporation from access to U.S.-origin technology.125 While controls
have dampened Huawei’s revenue, they have also likely spurred Chinese onshoring efforts of key chip
research and development capabilities at the expense of U.S. firms.126

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
31 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Biotechnology and Human Genomic Data Sharing
Biotechnology—the creation of products through biological processes—has been around for centuries
(think of baking bread and brewing beer). More advanced biotechnologies such as genome editing
technologies, which allow scientists to edit the DNA of living organisms, were first developed in the
1900s. But it was not until 2009 and the invention of a “simpler, faster, cheaper and more accurate”
genome editing tool known as Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats or “CRISPR”
that biotechnology began to factor so prominently into discussions of U.S.-China competition. As the
National Intelligence Council’s Global Trends 2040 report notes, biotechnology “will enable societies to
reduce disease, hunger, and petrochemical dependence.”127 McKinsey & Company’s 2020 Bio Revolution
report further estimates that biotechnologies hold the potential to alleviate 45 percent of the world’s
disease burden and produce 60 percent of the world’s material goods, including alternative fuels.128
With such significant and far-reaching applications, biotechnology is forecast to be a major driver of
innovation, competitive advantage, and future economic growth.
APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK
Naming the Risk
There is already competition among global powers to innovate and harness new biotechnology
capabilities, which in turn will produce strategic and economic advantages. As a dual-use technology,
biotechnology also serves many military and defense applications, with the Department of Defense’s
Future of Defense Task Force Report 2020 identifying biotechnology as “creating new domains of
warfare that are being aggressively pursued by potential adversaries, including China.”129 As with AI,
biotechnology innovation can be expected to impact the balance of political, economic, military, and
security aspects of national power.
 ▪ Political: Biotechnology provides authoritarian regimes with greater means to control and subvert
citizens, particularly those with opposing views or from minority groups. According to Human
Rights Watch, the Chinese government has used DNA and other biomedical data, without
informed consent, to identify ethnic Uyghurs, in violation of scientific and human rights norms.130
 ▪ Economic: Biotechnology can drive economic growth through innovation in the health,
agricultural, industrial, and environmental sectors. In addition, biotechnology fundamentally
enables the production of novel goods that the world is not currently able to produce with
petrochemicals or through traditional manufacturing processes. The first country to develop
enhanced biomanufacturing capabilities—the ability to produce biomolecules for use in various
goods—will have a significant advantage over economic competitors.131
 ▪ Military and Intelligence Gathering: Biotechnologies with enhanced material properties or
other capabilities, such as thermal resistance and enhanced filtration, can be leveraged for
use in military gear, while further advances in genome editing stand to augment combatant
performance.132 Both the United States and China have prioritized advances in biotechnology
in their military strategies. Biomedical data may also be used for non-traditional intelligence-
gathering and surveillance purposes.133
• Biodefense: Biotechnologies are powerful dual-use technologies that may be used by malicious
actors for the development of weapons of mass destruction or in acts of terrorism.134
• Biosafety: The unintentional release of pathogens or genetically modified organisms
threatens the health of global citizens and ecosystems.135

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
32 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
• Biosecurity: The intentional misuse, theft, or unethical use of biotechnologies, such as
human genome editing similarly endangers the health and security of global citizens.136 This
threat was underscored in 2018 when a Chinese scientist became the first to edit the genes
of twin human embryos. This was in violation of China’s 2003 Guidelines for Ethical Principles
in Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research and highlighted the need for global development and
enforcement of ethical standards in biotechnology.137
 ▪ Other: Biotechnology is uniquely dependent on data to innovate.138 Access to data provides
economic advantages, where the greater quantity, quality, and diversity of data can translate into
superior innovations. However, allowing access to data also enables cyber and insider threats,
which risk the misuse, manipulation, damage, or erasure of data, as well as intellectual property
or trade secret theft, threatening biosecurity. Further, the use of AI technologies in biotechnology
research allows for greater volumes of data to be processed and more rigorously analyzed,
heightening the benefits and risks to data sharing and access.139 China currently amasses the most
cross-border data in the world—double that of the United States—due in part to asymmetric data
flows between the United States and China.140
To provide a hypothetical but tangible example to test the framework, this case study centers on
biotechnology in the health sector and, more specifically, the sharing of human genomic data between
the United States and China (see footnote).141 Against the backdrop of a heightened focus on data
as a national security risk, and alongside the knowledge that data sharing can accelerate innovation
and improve outcomes, the question this case study seeks to answer is whether U.S.-China human
genomic data sharing is positive, negative, neutral, or ambiguous for achieving identified U.S. objectives.
If this study determines the sharing of human genomic data between the United States and China
is negative or ambiguous for achieving U.S. objectives, the study team will evaluate the potential
effectiveness of restricting such collaborations.
IDENTIFYING AND PRIORITIZING U.S. OBJECTIVES
Biotechnology competition encompasses all six areas of U.S. objectives under the framework: (1)
geostrategic; (2) economic; (3) values-based; (4) global rules and norms; (5) global public goods; and
(6) technology and innovation. Within these areas, the study team identifies seven objectives as the
most affected by the sharing of human genomic data between the United States and China (Figure 4).
Assessment
Biotechnology was chosen as a case study given the multidimensional nature of the opportunities and
risks it presents, as well as the considerable economic and research linkages that already exist between the
United States and China. The case study narrows the focus to human genome data, reflecting the highly
sensitive nature of collected data and the reality of asymmetric data flows between the two countries.
There are both benefits and downsides in terms of advancing U.S. objectives when human genomic
data are shared between the United States and China. The authors judge that data sharing positively
impacts economic growth, promotes the development of normative technology standards, and
strengthens global public health and pandemic preparedness. Economically, data sharing allows
countries to amass greater volumes of data, verify and inform pre-held data, and increase the diversity
of data sets, which together support the pace and quality of innovation. And while the resulting
economic gains can accrue to both the United States and China, it is worth noting that Chinese

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
33 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
human genetic resources (HGR) regulations require that any patent rights resulting from “exploratory
research” under U.S. and Chinese collaboration be shared jointly by U.S. and Chinese parties.142 Data
sharing strengthens global public health by improving the situational awareness of underlying health
conditions, especially during a health crisis, and laying the foundation for medical advances and
more rapid responses (e.g., new vaccine development). It also promotes the development of global
normative technology standards, essential in an area with such rapid and consequential innovations.
Figure 4: Areas Impacted by U.S.-China Human Genomic Data Sharing
U.S. OBJECTIVES: FOCUS AREAS AND SPECIFIC GOALS ASSESSMENT RATIONALE
Technology and Innovation
Maintaining U.S. technological leadership and setting
technical standards
Leadership will depend on elements not uniquely
controlled by one side or the other
Maintaining a military and intelligence-gathering advantage
Asymmetric data flows provide China with advantages
in using U.S. human genomic data for military
applications and intelligence-gathering means
Economic
Pursuing sustainable, equitable, and balanced growth Productivity gains from genomic data sharing will
not be zero-sum
Values-Based
Protecting human rights
Chinese historical use of genomic data and
application of technology advances have violated
human rights norms
Global Rules and Norms
Establishing normative technology standards Many normative standards regarding genomic data
sharing and application are absent or underdeveloped
Accepting fragmentation in data and other technical standards Collaboration requires sharing genomic data
Global Public Goods
Strengthening global public health and pandemic preparedness Sharing genomic data will inform global public health
efforts and advance medical practices and treatments
Impact of U.S.-China Human Genomic Data Sharing on U.S. Objectives •• Positive •• Negative •• Neutral •• Ambiguous
Source: Author’s original research and analysis.
Sharing human genomic data inherently goes against, and thus negatively impacts, the U.S. objective
of data fragmentation and technical standards, as it entails linking American and Chinese researchers,
labs, firms, and data repositories rather than fragmenting these information channels. There is also
a negative impact on the protection of human rights insofar as China has been shown to use the
collection of biometric data for purposes of minority group identification and in violation of human
rights norms; therefore, the possible targeting of individuals using unique genomic data cannot be

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
34 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
discounted. Finally, the impact of data sharing for maintaining U.S. military and intelligence-gathering
advantage is also assessed to be negative given the asymmetric nature of data collection, which puts
the United States at a disadvantage.
The remaining U.S. objective—maintaining technological leadership—is determined to be ambiguously
impacted by U.S.-China sharing of human genomic data. Sharing data grants the United States access
to Chinese genetic information that can be used to advance health-related innovations and also
provides the United States with insights into Chinese biotechnology advancements. China reaps the
same benefits from sharing genomic data with the United States, and as previously noted, Chinese
regulations require that any patent rights resulting from “exploratory research” under U.S. and Chinese
collaboration be shared jointly by U.S. and Chinese parties. The current asymmetry in U.S.-China data
flows stands to advantage China in technology innovation and may risk future U.S. dependence on
China for innovative biotechnologies, including biopharmaceuticals. Yet, whether the United States or
China gains relatively more will ultimately depend on other factors that contribute to innovation, for
example, funding, talent, intellectual property protection, and dissemination efforts, as well as how
innovations are ultimately applied, with some experts observing that the United States lags behind
China when it comes to translating basic research into applications.
The assessment and prioritization of U.S. objectives are highly subjective, but the framework can
motivate discussion of relevant U.S. objectives and how their achievement would be affected by
genomic data sharing. Given that sharing of human genomic data was found to be “negative” or
“ambiguous” for achieving several U.S. objectives, along with the study team’s estimation that values-
based (protecting human rights) and technology and innovation (maintaining military and intelligence-
gathering advantage) objectives are among the administration’s top priorities, the next step in the
framework calls for the consideration of restrictions to data sharing based on their likely effectiveness.
ASSESSING EFFECTIVENESS OF RESTRICTIONS
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) warns that stringent data protections
could “reduce innovation in ways that harm both businesses and consumers.”143 At the same time,
the inherent uniqueness of biometric data makes it difficult if not impossible to “de-identify” or
anonymize, raising the stakes for granting access to data and under what conditions.144 Given the role
of human genomic data in fueling innovation and advances in health, policymakers are challenged to
balance the protection of such data and support for innovation and technological leadership in a field
as dynamic as biotechnology.
Leadership
The United States is the world leader in biotechnology innovation across a range of metrics (see
below), followed by the European Union, Japan, and the United Kingdom. However, in recent years,
China’s drive to develop its domestic biotechnology capabilities has made it an increasingly important
player with aspirations of matching U.S. leadership. Biotechnology was identified in 2015 as one of
10 key sectors for development under Made in China 2025, and China’s 14th Five-Year Plan, formally
adopted in March, lists biotechnology as a continued technology focus.
To better assess the comparative positions of the U.S. and Chinese biotechnology industries, this
case study focuses on the health sector and, more specifically, biologics—biologically derived medical
treatments, including biopharmaceuticals—which represents the largest segment of the biotechnology

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
35 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
industry in both revenue and use of human genomic data.145 As of 2019, the U.S. biologics market,
estimated at $118 billion, dwarfed China’s market, estimated at $4.7 to $6.2 billion.146 Within these
markets, the United States leads in the development of innovative biologics—drugs with novel
capabilities. In contrast, China predominantly produces less innovative “biosimilars,” which replicate
the qualities of drugs that are already on the market, but at a lower cost.147 The United States also leads
China in the share of global biotechnology publications (33 percent versus 15 percent) and share of
global biotechnology patents (36.4 percent versus 7.9 percent).148
Notwithstanding the United States’ current leadership position, some experts worry that China’s
structural advantages may help it close the gap in certain areas, a sentiment reflected in the U.S.
National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence’s (NSCAI) warning that “the United States
cannot afford to look back in 10 years and be ‘surprised’ by the biotechnology equivalent of Huawei.”149
These structural advantages include a large and growing domestic market for biologics to fund new
research and development, a less restrictive regulatory environment regarding genomic editing, and a
top-down government approach to biotechnology investment and innovation that some experts view
as helpful to achieving China’s ambitions.150
Most importantly, though, China amasses significant volumes of data, including human genomic data
used in biologics innovations. In a recent speech, National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan noted that, “the
dramatic growth of China’s biotechnology sector shows Beijing’s interest in the convergence of advanced
biotech and AI . . . and the foresight that this revolution will be driven by amassing genomic data.”151
Recognizing its potential to boost innovation and economic competitiveness, China has centered its
biotechnology development strategy around acquiring data, investing in health data collection centers,
data processing infrastructure, and data access channels with other states.152 As relates to its interactions
with the U.S. biotechnology sector, a 2019 Gryphon Scientific report produced for the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC) identifies two primary ways China has accessed
U.S. genomic data: investments and partnerships.153 According to the report, China made $1.5 billion
in foreign direct investment (FDI) in the U.S. biotechnology industry between 2000 and 2017, peaking
in 2017.154 Looking at a broader metric, Rhodium Group reports that between 1990 and 2020, Chinese
FDI in U.S. health, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology totaled $10.7 billion, of which $10.5 billion was
invested after 2013.155 In both cases, the recent surge in Chinese investments was made through mergers
and acquisitions, rather than greenfield investment, and by private companies. Such investments have
provided China with access to American health data, genomic data, and proprietary technologies, as
exemplified by BGI Group’s 2013 acquisition of U.S. sequencing company Complete Genomics. That
acquisition gave BGI Group, already one of the world’s largest genomics companies, access to Complete
Genomics’ DNA sequencing technology and a base of operations in the United States.156
FDI from China has dropped significantly since the 2018 Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act (FIRRMA). FIRRMA expanded Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS) jurisdiction over foreign investments in critical technologies, including biotechnology
and life sciences, requiring mandatory filings in certain instances. Since the passage of FIRRMA,
Chinese FDI in the United States has dropped by 80 percent, while Chinese FDI in U.S. health,
pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology has declined by 79 percent.157
China has also rapidly invested in partnerships with U.S. universities, labs, hospitals, and companies,
offering diagnostic and other health services in which they have low production cost advantages.158

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
36 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
These partnerships can be measured by the number of Chinese companies that hold College of
American Pathologists (CAP) accreditations, which are required for participation in U.S. health
markets.159 As of 2021, at least 76 Chinese companies are CAP accredited, giving them direct access to
U.S. medical and health data via their participation in the U.S. healthcare system.160
Figure 5: Annual Foreign Direct Investment in Health, Pharmaceuticals, and Biotechnology
Industry (USD, millions)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Chinese FDI in the United States U.S. FDI in China
Source: “U.S. China Investment Project, ” Rhodium Group and the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations,
https://www.us-china-investment.org/about.
The USCC and the United States’ Defense Innovation Unit (DIU) find that China’s access to U.S.
data is, in part, due to relatively lower data protections in the United States, particularly for genomic
data.161 The United States lacks a comprehensive federal data or privacy protection framework such
as the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) or China’s Personal Information
Protection Law (PIPL). While the United States, through the Department of Health and Human
Services and the HIPAA Privacy Rule, regulates access to personal health information and oversees
clinical research and drug development activities, it does not apply to “de-identified” or anonymized
data and does not necessarily apply to data used solely for research purposes or data used by direct-to-
consumer (DTC) genetic testing companies, such as 23&Me, since researchers and DTCs are often not
considered “covered entities” under HIPAA. 162 HIPAA is also not enforceable internationally.163 More
generally, the United States largely relies on an open-science (and thus open-data) policy, particularly
in research collaborations, to help foster innovation.164 This raises a debate around the relative benefits
of open-data policies and the associated security risks.
China’s access to U.S. data is not reciprocal. While U.S. FDI in China’s biotechnology is on par with
Chinese levels, as demonstrated in Figure 5, U.S. investments have targeted access to Chinese consumer
markets and low-cost manufacturing rather than data.165 China also has a robust data protection regime
in place that severely restricts foreign access to Chinese health or genomic information. China’s 1998
Human Genetic Resources (HGR) Regulations, revised in 2019, and 2020 Biosecurity Law stipulate that
foreign entities cannot collect, store, use, transfer, or export human genomic data obtained in China
unless given approval by the Human Genetic Resources Administration Office of China (HGRAC) under

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
37 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.166 Similarly, under China’s 2017 Cybersecurity Law, the
cross-border transfer of personal data is prohibited.167 All foreign entities must also work with a Chinese
partner, and the partnership must be approved once more by the HGRAC.168 The HGR regulations also
require that all intellectual property produced through these partnerships be shared between the two
countries.169 Furthermore, Chapter III of China’s PIPL states that all personal information must pass a
security assessment conducted by the Cyberspace Administration of China before it can be transferred
outside of the state. This includes biometric data.170
While many experts predict that the United States will continue to lead in biotechnology innovation,
particularly in the development of biologics, China’s advantages in data access, combined with its AI
capabilities, are factors that could help China potentially close the gap with the United States. There
are, however, several uncertainties regarding the trajectories of the U.S. and Chinese biotechnology
industries. These include questions surrounding whether the United States will enact federal data
legislation to better safeguard American genomic data and if China can successfully transition from
the production of low-cost “me-too” drugs to the development of innovative biologics. This case study,
therefore, does not attempt to answer the question of whether the United States or China is better
positioned to lead the “bio-revolution.” Instead, this assessment signals that close competition in
biotechnology between the United States and China, along with Europe and Japan, is inevitable.
Allies and Partners
The Biden administration has consistently emphasized the importance of allied cooperation in
technological competition with China to protect both national security interests and America’s
innovative edge. U.S. allies with the most developed biotechnology industries include the European
Union, Japan, and the United Kingdom. This study analyzes the national biotechnology strategies of
these select allies, as well as their recent statements and actions, to assess the likelihood that they
would coordinate policies related to restricting data flows to China, particularly in human genomic data.
Unsurprisingly, the strategies put forward by U.S. allies aim to enhance each country or region’s
respective biotechnology research, development, and use capabilities in order to enhance economic
growth, manufacturing capabilities, health innovations, and sustainability efforts. Allies are also
committed to ethical biotechnology standards, particularly in genome editing, and to addressing
biosafety risks, including the development of new pathogens. China and the United States are both
characterized as technological competitors and potential collaborators. China, however, is also noted
as a potential threat to allied economic security and democratic values.
Several partnerships have recently been created to coordinate biotechnology research and
development efforts across countries. The Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership, launched
in February 2021, includes an agreement on “threat reduction programs to improve biosafety,
biosecurity, and biological norms for mitigating biological risks associated with life sciences research
and biotechnology advances.”171 In addition, the Quad—a strategic dialogue between the United States,
Australia, Japan, and India—announced a new Critical and Emerging Technology Working Group in
March, which focuses on pushing forward joint technology development opportunities, including in
biotechnology.172 More recently, the Quad announced that it will also “monitor trends in critical and
emerging technologies, starting with advanced biotechnologies, including synthetic biology, genome
sequencing, and biomanufacturing.”173

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
38 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
The U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience Partnership is similarly dedicated to “advance[ing]
biotechnology for the global good by focusing on genome sequencing and the principles of openness,
transparency, collaboration, and research integrity.”174 Furthermore, in a joint statement in May
2021, the United States and South Korea committed to co-lead in innovation in next-generation
technologies, including biotechnology.175 And finally, in June 2021, the United States and European
Union noted their intent to “explore the possibility of developing a new research initiative on
biotechnology and genomics, with a view to setting common standards” under a Joint Technology
Competition Policy Dialogue.176
The efforts specified in the various national (or regional) strategies and agreements above, however,
are challenged by conflicting data sharing policies among allies.177 The United States, as previously
mentioned, has a relatively open data policy, with no comprehensive federal data regulation to
guide what data is transferred and how. In sharp contrast, the European Union boasts stringent data
protections, most notably the region’s GDPR, with strict adherence guidelines and high violation
penalties. Lastly, Japan employs a “data free flow with trust” policy, under which data can be shared
freely as long as concerns over privacy, intellectual property infringement, and security are met and
trust is subsequently built. Mechanisms such as bilateral data-sharing frameworks (e.g., a renewed
privacy shield between the United States and European Union), digital trade agreements, and data
trusts (see footnote) hold potential to bridge allied data regimes, but these mechanisms remain
challenging to put into practice.178 More recent efforts, such as the newly announced U.S.-EU Data
Governance and Technology Platforms working group under the TTC, also aim to reconcile allied data
policies, but tangible actions have yet to be realized.179
In summary, while there is a basis for coordinating controls on human genomic data flows to China
among U.S. allies, ensuring that such controls are in accordance with diverse allied data policies will be
a major challenge.
ADHERING TO THE RULE OF LAW
The rule of law component highlights the role of existing mechanisms in managing risks stemming
from human genomic data sharing as well as the importance of evolving data governance and normative
technology standards in controlling access. In particular, data sharing by a “U.S. person” with a foreign
entity is prohibited if the entity appears on the Commerce Department’s Entity List without a license;
the data are listed on the Export Administration Regulations’ (EAR) Commerce Control List (CCL)
without a license; the data are associated with an export listed on the Australia Group’s export control
list; or the data are protected under domestic and international data privacy laws.
End-User Controls
The Department of Commerce’s BIS maintains restricted party lists, such as the Entity List, which
identify entities subject to a licensing policy or presumption of denial for all items subject to BIS
jurisdiction. For example, BGI Group’s subsidiaries Beijing Liuhe BGI and Xinjiang Silk Road BGI were
added to the Entity List in 2020 for their involvement in human rights abuses in Xinjiang involving the
collection of Uyghur genomic data.180
Unilateral Export Controls, Including Deemed Exports
The BIS also enforces the EAR, which regulates the exports, re-exports and transfers (in-country) of
dual-use items (i.e., commercial items that also have a military application). The EAR includes the CCL,

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
39 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
which lists those “dual-use” items subject to licensing requirements for export. The CCL is periodically
updated, including for the addition of new controls related to emerging technologies.181 Biotechnology
equipment, inputs, and products are included in the CCL. More specifically, “genetic elements,” such as
“genomes” (human genetic data), are controlled under ECCN 1C353, meaning their export requires a
license granted by the Department of Commerce and subject to periodic review.182
Multilateral Export Controls
Dual-use biotechnology equipment and software, including design data, can be subject to multilateral
controls under the Australia Group, which is one of the four multilateral export control regimes and
deals with goods and technologies that could be used in the development of chemical and biological
weapons.183 The Australia Group has 43 participating members, including the United States, Australia,
Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Korea, and the United Kingdom. China is not a member.
Investment Reviews
CFIUS has the mission and authority to review transactions involving foreign investments.184 The
president may suspend transactions if such risks are identified. In 2018, FIRRMA expanded the scope
of covered transactions under CFIUS, including noncontrolling investments in U.S. businesses related
to critical technologies or that collect U.S. citizens’ sensitive personal information.185 Such reviews and
potential restrictions on Chinese investments may also hinder Chinese access to U.S. genomic data.
Data Regulations
As previously noted, HIPAA is the primary legislation that safeguards the privacy of American health
data, allowing citizens the right to determine who can and cannot view their medical information.186
In addition to HIPAA, there are two other regulations enforced by the United States pertaining to
health data. The National Institutes of Health’s (NIH) 2008 Genomic Data Sharing Policy maintains
that in order to access genomic data held in NIH databases, researchers must submit a formal request
and be approved by a data access committee.187 The Common Rule, recently revised in 2018, requires
researchers to obtain informed consent from research participants in order to use their genomic
data.188 The United States has not enacted comprehensive federal data protection legislation.
Internationally, three bioethics declarations from the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) affirm an individual’s right to genomic data privacy. These include:
the 1997 Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, the 2003 International
Declaration on Human Genomic Data, and the 2005 Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human
Rights.189 However, with its withdrawal from UNESCO in 2018, the United States is no longer bound
by these declarations. The 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity and the 2010 Nagoya Protocol
on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their
Utilization recognize a state’s sovereign right to determine access to genetic resources, deemed a
national resource, and require entities to obtain prior informed consent from the providing party to
access genetic resources.190 While China is a party to both agreements, the United States is not.
Normative Standards
Many gene therapy treatments remain experimental because the scientific community and policymakers
have yet to address both technical barriers and ethical concerns surrounding genome editing.191
The NIH’s National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) lists several unresolved ethical
considerations, including whether genome editing should be used for non-therapeutic and enhancement

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
40 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
purposes and, relatedly, the impact of gene therapies on health inequality. In December 2015, the U.S.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, the British Royal Society, and the Chinese
Academy of Sciences hosted an International Summit on Human Gene Editing, leading to agreement on
principles to guide the research and clinical use of genome-editing technologies. A second international
Summit on Human Genome Editing was held in 2018. Still, there are no universal regulations for
genome-editing research or applications, and different countries have different regulations.

Chinese scientist He Jiankui speaks at the Second International Summit on Human Genome Editing in Hong Kong.
Source: Anthony Wallace/AFP/Getty Images
FINAL ASSESSMENT
Sharing human genomic data with China can increase the quantity of health data the United States
has access to and can help inform and complement existing U.S. health data quality and diversity—all
key inputs to innovation in the health sector. As the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and
Medicine’s 2020 report Safeguarding the Bioeconomy notes, U.S. open data access and sharing policies
are the reason why the United States is the lead innovator in biotechnology.192 However, the data-
sharing relationship with China is highly asymmetric, and there are severe economic, security, and
human rights risks if the data is misused. Limits on the ability to truly anonymize data further raises
the stakes for who has access to data and under what conditions. Prioritization of U.S. objectives may
well be determinative in this assessment, where human rights objectives and establishing truly global
ethical norms are currently at odds. While restricting data flows could threaten U.S. biotechnology
leadership, augmenting data arrangements with allies and partners would mitigate downside impacts.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
41 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Capital Market Linkages and Cross-Border Portfolio Flows
Despite tensions in the bilateral relationship, cross-border portfolio flows between the United States
and China have increased in recent years, even as foreign direct investment (FDI) and venture capital
investment, to a lesser degree, have declined.193 The U.S.-China Investment Project estimates that
Chinese investors held about $2.1 trillion in U.S. securities at the end of 2020, while U.S. investors
held about $1.2 trillion of Chinese securities.194 Despite large headline numbers, U.S.-China financial
integration lags what would be expected given the size and stage of development of each country’s
economy, reflecting China’s history of capital and financial account restrictions. While China had
been making incremental progress to liberalize its capital account and allow foreign investors direct
access to onshore markets, the recent regulatory crackdown in the technology sector and realization
of vulnerabilities in the property sector have raised awareness of risks associated with investing in
Chinese securities, whether listed in China or offshore. At the same time, U.S. regulatory action to
address gaps in accounting oversight and legal and regulatory uncertainty, along with an updated
executive order prohibiting U.S. investment in Chinese companies implicated in China’s Military-Civil
Fusion (MCF) strategy and surveillance activities, has increased the chances that U.S.-China financial
integration will slow or possibly move in reverse.
Figure 6: Portfolio Investment in China (USD, billions)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Q4 2016 Q4 2017 Q4 2018 Q4 2019 Q4 2020 Q1 2021
Equity and investment fund shares Debt securities
Source: International Monetary Fund, “China, P .R..: Mainland, IIP Standards Presentation (Millions of US Dollars), ” Balance of Payments
and International Investment Position Statistics (BOP/IIP), IMF Data Access to Macroeconomic & Financial Data, https://data.imf.
org/?sk=7A51304B-6426-40C0-83DD-CA473CA1FD52&sId=1542640530277.
APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK
Naming the Risk
Once seen as an avenue to advance U.S. objectives, economic linkages between the United States
and China are now often viewed as a potential threat to U.S. national interests. Analysts skeptical of
U.S.-China economic ties worry about U.S. dependency on China for export markets, critical inputs,
and even human capital.195 These “real economy” dependencies also apply in a financial context,
where the risks include U.S. capital financing activities that pose a threat to U.S. national security
(e.g., investments in companies affiliated with the Chinese military) or that threaten U.S. values (e.g.,

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
42 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
investments in surveillance technologies). Separately, there are risks to financial stability stemming
from the opacity of Chinese financial disclosure and policymaking, limited market communications,
and tendencies toward regulatory action that often appear sudden and punitive, especially to foreign
observers. Given this case study’s focus on official-sector actions and the impact on cross-border
portfolio flows, it relies on past and present administrations’ articulation of risks as well as views of
relevant U.S. regulatory authorities.
 ▪ Risks to National Security: The Trump administration issued Executive Order (EO) 13959, which
accuses China of exploiting U.S. capital to enable the development and modernization of its
military, resulting in “an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy
and economy of the United States.” Using powers granted under the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), EO 13959 prohibited a U.S. person—defined as a U.S. “citizen,
permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States . . . or any person
in the United States”—from transacting in securities linked to a Communist Chinese military
company (CCMC), regardless of where the securities are traded. In June, President Biden amended
the EO and expanded the scope of the national emergency to address threats posed by China’s MCF
strategy. In place of the term CCMC, the amended EO refers to entities involved “in the defense
and related materiel sector or the surveillance technology sector of the economy of the PRC.”196
A working paper posted by the State Department in May 2020 (and still on the State Department
website) describes MCF as a strategy to make the Chinese military the most technologically
advanced in the world. It describes “the elimination of barriers between China’s civilian research
and commercial sectors, and its military and defense industrial sectors” as a key part of the MCF
strategy, making it difficult to clearly distinguish between military and civilian companies.197 While
the Biden administration describes the investment prohibitions as “targeted and scoped,” the very
nature of the MCF potentially implicates a wide range of Chinese companies.
 ▪ Risks to U.S. Values: As noted above, the amended EO expands coverage to also include the risk
of financing Chinese surveillance technology firms “that contribute—both inside and outside
China—to the surveillance of religious or ethnic minorities or otherwise facilitate repression
and serious human rights abuses.”198 As background, the Trump administration established
that China’s repression of ethnic Uyghurs in Xinjiang amounted to genocide, a position also
supported by the Biden administration.199 The U.S. government has found that Chinese firms have
supplied the authorities in Xinjiang with technology to aid the government in its surveillance and
persecution of Uyghurs.200
 ▪ Risks to Financial Stability: In 2020, a speech by the then-chairman of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) highlighted the limitations on U.S. financial regulators to
ensure high-quality disclosure standards in “many emerging markets, including China” due to
reliance on the actions of local authorities. The speech highlighted the PCAOB’s lack of access
to inspect PCAOB-registered accounting firms in China, advising issuers to “clearly disclose the
resulting material risks.”201 Separately, the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), which oversees
the PCAOB, has raised concerns over the use of Variable Interest Entities in sensitive sectors,
highlighting the legal and regulatory uncertainty around such structures.202 In a September
editorial, the SEC chairman wrote that he does not believe “China-related companies currently
are providing adequate information about the risks they face” and, by extension, the risk to U.S.
investors, citing new regulations from Beijing.203 Sudden changes in Chinese regulations have
resulted in market volatility and depressed company valuations.204

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
43 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
 ▪ Other: U.S.-Chinese capital market linkages and cross-border portfolio flows present other
potential risks to U.S. national power. For example, some scholars have highlighted China’s efforts
on environment, social, and governance (ESG) practices, noting the potential for China’s ESG
regime to be used eventually as a tool for Chinese foreign policy, and also the challenges to China
reaching such a goal.205 Still others have pointed to political risks associated with deeper U.S.-
China capital market and financial integration, with many U.S. businesses generally supportive of
closer relations with Beijing given the size of the market and expectation of higher returns relative
to more mature markets.206
Recognizing the wide range of potential risks implicated in capital market integration and cross-border
portfolio flows, this case study narrows the focus to U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies.
Applying the framework, the study team evaluates if U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies
is positive, negative, neutral, or ambiguous for achieving identified U.S. objectives. If such investment
is determined to be negative or ambiguous for achieving U.S. objectives, the study team will evaluate
the potential effectiveness of imposing restrictions.
Identifying and Prioritizing U.S. Objectives
U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies is relevant to most areas of U.S. objectives under
the framework, with the greatest impacts on (2) economic, (3) values-based, (5) global public goods,
and (6) technology and innovation categories. Within these areas, the study team identifies seven
objectives as the most affected:
Assessment
As with the other case studies, there are advantages and disadvantages to U.S.-China engagement in
terms of the impact on achieving U.S objectives. The authors judge that U.S. portfolio investment in
Chinese companies positively impacts economic objectives, specifically economic growth and greater
fairness in the bilateral economic relationship. Access to foreign capital benefits the companies that list
on exchanges, making it more cost effective to raise capital and improving growth prospects. Investors
in those companies, whether foreign or domestic, receive the upside of their participation through asset
price appreciation, dividends and interest, or both, and diversification. In addition, U.S. investor access to
onshore Chinese markets would represent a fairer, more reciprocal U.S.-China economic relationship—
Chinese companies and investors have long enjoyed access to U.S. capital markets, but China has limited
foreign ownership of domestic securities in general and particularly in sensitive sectors.
U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies is also positive for fighting global climate change.
Access to capital will be a factor in determining whether companies (and countries) can transition to
carbon neutrality. To achieve its goal of carbon neutrality by 2060, China is estimated to need more
than $20 trillion in debt financing, of which a portion will be raised on capital markets.207 U.S. and
other foreign investors can help meet that need, while U.S. ESG investors can improve oversight,
promote best practices in measurement and reporting, and help support convergence in global ESG
standards which will benefit global climate finance.
U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies is likely negative for maintaining U.S. technological
leadership. In contrast to economic objectives, which can benefit all participants, the objective of
“leadership” implies relative winners and losers. To the extent U.S. portfolio investment provides
capital to Chinese companies that are competing with the United States for leadership in strategic

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
44 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
technologies, that financing will benefit China.208 This is precisely the argument made in the
original EO 13959, which cautioned against U.S. capital being used to enable the development and
modernization of China’s military. U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies is also judged to be
negative for the values-based objective of resisting authoritarianism, on the grounds that the provision
of capital to Chinese firms supports the Chinese economy overall, which ultimately strengthens the
legitimacy of the CCP. The specific links to companies involved in surveillance technology would also
strengthen techno-authoritarianism by supporting the development of technologies to surveil the
population and also playing a role in exporting China’s authoritarian model abroad.209
Figure 7: Areas Impacted by U.S.-China Capital Market Linkages and Cross-Border
Portfolio Flows
U.S. OBJECTIVES: FOCUS AREAS AND SPECIFIC GOALS ASSESSMENT RATIONALE
Economic
Pursuing sustainable, equitable, and balanced growth
U.S. investments would be consistent with financial
account liberalization; economic upside would
benefit all investors
Ensuring fairness in the economic relationship Access to onshore Chinese markets would represent
a more reciprocal U.S.-China economic relationship
Safeguarding global financial stability Engagement provides U.S. with greater insights but
also exposure to Chinese financial markets
Technology and Innovation
Maintaining U.S. technological leadership and setting
technical standards
Investment in Chinese companies competing for
leadership in strategic technologies will benefit
those companies
Values-Based
Protecting human rights
Dependent on companies that receive funding;
capital grows companies but also exposes them to
shareholder pressure
Resisting authoritarianism Growth in Chinese firms ultimately strengthens the
Chinese state with links to techno-authoritarianism
Global Public Goods
Fighting climate change Transition to carbon free energy sources will require
substantial amounts of capital
Impact of Cross-Border Portfolio Flows on U.S. Objectives •• Positive •• Negative •• Neutral •• Ambiguous
Source: Author’s original research and analysis.
Global financial stability and protecting human rights are both ambiguously impacted by U.S. portfolio
investment in Chinese companies. For the former, engagement provides U.S. investors and the United
States, by extension, with greater insights into the Chinese economy and financial markets, and access
to the Chinese market provides investors with greater diversification. At the same time, investment in

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
45 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Chinese companies exposes investors to underlying credit risk, and there are longstanding concerns
over credit quality as well as a lack of transparency into company financials.210 Furthermore, as the
world’s second-largest economy, economic and financial developments in China have repeatedly moved
global markets, and recent and arguably sudden regulatory actions by Chinese authorities have led to
market volatility. Regarding protecting human rights, the net impact will be dependent on companies
that receive funding. On the one hand, Chinese firms are aiding the Chinese government by supplying
security services with technology to track and surveil not only ethnic Uyghurs in Xinjiang but also
political dissidents and democracy advocates throughout the broader population.211 Indeed, this factored
into the Biden administration’s rationale for expanding EO 13959. On the other hand, a foreign investor
base would also introduce these companies to outside shareholder pressure, which in theory could work
to advance human rights; while such pressure has been applied in a U.S. company context, there is little
evidence to date of shareholder pressure factoring into company operating decisions in China.212
The overall assessment of U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese companies is ambiguous, with a more
positive assessment of the impact on economic and climate-related objectives and a more negative
assessment of the impact on values-based and technology and innovation objectives. Given the
priority assigned to values-based and technology and innovation objectives, the next step in the
framework calls for the consideration of restrictions based on their likely effectiveness. In this case,
the restrictions would be a prohibition on U.S. portfolio investment in Chinese securities.
ASSESSING EFFECTIVENESS OF RESTRICTIONS
Restrictions on capital and financial flows have declined globally since at least the 1970s, with
the United States maintaining among the most liberal capital and financial account regimes in the
world.213 While the United States does not restrict entire classes of capital or financial flows, it does
restrict assets and prohibit financial dealings with individuals and companies owned or controlled by,
or acting for or on behalf of, targeted countries through the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC)
sanctions lists.214 This case study looks to the precedent of EO 13959 and the companies listed on
the Non-SDN-Chinese Military-Industrial Complex (NS-CMIC) list, noting that the EO prohibits
transactions in any publicly traded security of any “person” on the NS-CMIC list, regardless of where
that security is traded, by any U.S. “person.”215
The effectiveness of such controls can be judged narrowly as preventing the listed entity from
accessing U.S. capital or, more broadly, as preventing the entity from accessing financing from the
rest of the world. This case study evaluates the position of U.S. capital markets, specifically equity
exchanges, relative to Chinese alternatives as well as the likelihood that other countries might join
the United States in imposing restrictions on their citizens’ ability to invest in targeted entities. Both
factors are relevant to assessing effectiveness.
Leadership
One consequence of the EO was the announced delisting of named companies from U.S. exchanges.
In the weeks following the initial Trump EO, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) delisted companies
that appeared on the original list, including China Mobil, China Unicom, and China Telecom. All three
companies’ shares already traded in Hong Kong, and their share prices, while well below levels at the
start of 2020, have been stable since the delisting was announced in January 2021. The Wall Street
Journal reported in May that “the delistings have had little practical effect for the telecoms companies,”
noting that “buyers from the Chinese mainland have increased their holdings in the firms.”216

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
46 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
In response to the announced delisting, all three companies advanced plans to list on Chinese
exchanges, with China Telecom making a second listing on the Shanghai Stock Exchange in August.
China Mobile also filed a prospectus for listing in Shanghai, while China Unicom is reportedly
considering a listing of a spin-off on a mainland exchange.217 It remains to be seen whether Chinese
and Hong Kong markets present a viable alternative to U.S. exchanges, which remain the largest and
most liquid in the world, especially for companies looking to raise capital in initial public offerings. The
NYSE and NASDAQ combined have a total market capitalization nearing $60 trillion. The Shanghai and
Shenzhen Stock Exchanges have a combined market capitalization of roughly one-fourth that amount,
while the Hong Kong Stock Exchange has a market capitalization of roughly $6 trillion. In addition,
cross-listing on “more prestigious” exchanges such as the NYSE and NASDAQ has been shown to
result in a higher valuation for the listed company, possibly attributable to firms’ heightened visibility,
stronger corporate governance, and lower informational frictions and capital costs.218
Beijing is promoting the development of its domestic capital markets by simplifying the process for
firms to list on domestic exchanges and easing restrictions on foreign investment. China’s mainland
exchanges have also been linked to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange as part of an effort to create a
“single ‘China’ stock market.”219 On the supply side, market participants believe Chinese companies
listed onshore will be less susceptible to regulatory action by the Chinese authorities, while delistings
from U.S. exchanges can be seen to foster development efforts by giving Chinese companies additional
motivation to list onshore.220

A pedestrian walks past the Shanghai Stock Exchange in Shanghai.
Source: Hector Retamal/AFP/Getty Images

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
47 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Allies and Partners
The potency of restrictions depends not only on where a company trades but, more consequentially,
on demand for the securities. As noted, the EO prohibits any U.S. person—defined as a U.S. “citizen,
permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States . . . or any person in
the United States”—from transacting in securities issued by a company on the NS-CMIC list. Not only
did the EO prevent individual and institutional investors from transacting in the securities of a listed
company, but multiple index providers also removed Chinese stocks from their indices as it became
clear that U.S. investors would be in violation of the EO if they invested in indices which included the
listed companies.
Figure 8: Estimated Market Capitalization of Select Stock Exchanges (USD, trillions)
34.5
24.4
7.2 6.9 5.7 5.6
3.5
0.7
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
NYSE Nasdaq Shanghai Tokyo Hong Kong Shenzhen LSE Singapore
Source: Retrieved via Bloomberg Terminal; “Other Statistics: Market Capitalization, ” Japan Exchange Group, https://www.jpx.co.jp/en-
glish/markets/statistics-equities/misc/02.html; “HKEX Monthly Market Highlights, ” HKEX, September 2021, https://www.hkex.com.hk/
Market-Data/Statistics/Consolidated-Reports/HKEX-Monthly-Market-Highlights?sc_lang=en; and “Singapore Exchange, ” Trading Hours,
https://www.tradinghours.com/markets/sgx#market-cap.
Using global wealth as a rough proxy for demand for global securities, the United States and China
account for about 30 percent and 18 percent of global wealth, respectively. If effectiveness of
restrictions is defined as the ability to deny the target access to global capital, cooperation would
be needed to address the remaining 52 percent of global wealth. In contrast to efforts to boost
coordination on foreign investment screening, for example, initiatives to work with allies and
partners to restrict portfolio investment in Chinese firms appear nascent at best, while there is related
precedent in the form of recent coordinated sanctions actions among the United States, European
Union, United Kingdom, and Canada against Chinese officials in connection with human rights
abuses against ethnic minorities in Xinjiang. While lawmakers in some allied countries have sought a
blacklisting of firms linked to human rights abuses in Xinjiang, such proposals do not appear to have
gained traction.221 Such efforts are also complicated by the difficulty of identifying ownership and the
existence of numerous subsidiaries that challenge effective coverage of targeted firms.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
48 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
ADHERING TO THE RULE OF LAW
The framework’s rule of law component applies a legal review to any activity. For this case study, rule
of law is interpreted to apply to the legality and due process related to actions taken to restrict cross-
border portfolio flows, as well as compliance with regulatory requirements.
Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) Sanctions List
The United States does not restrict entire classes of capital or financial flows, but it does restrict
assets and prohibit certain financial transactions with individuals and companies through sanctions
programs administered by the Treasury Department’s OFAC.222 The relevant sanctions list for this case
study is the NS-CMIC list, and transactions in any publicly traded security of any “person” on the NS-
CMIC list, regardless of where that security is traded, by any U.S. “person” is prohibited.
Regulation and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
The Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 created the SEC to enforce securities laws and especially
disclosure requirements. The SEC enforces investor protections, including statutory disclosure
requirements, enforces securities laws, and regulates securities markets. It has the authority to prevent
companies from listing on U.S. exchanges if they do not meet adequate disclosure requirements, and
it can suspend trading in a stock for a limited time. It also oversees the PCAOB, which oversees audit
quality, including for overseas entities that list on U.S. exchanges.
Judicial Review and Due Process
As relates to EO 13959, at least two Chinese companies successfully challenged the designation as a
“Communist Chinese military company” in U.S. District Court. The cases provide an example of judicial
review in the U.S. system and a check on executive power. Some legal scholars have also questioned
whether China may be using the transparency and due process afforded by the U.S. legal system to its
asymmetric advantage given the absence of such protections in the Chinese system.223
FINAL ASSESSMENT
U.S. investment in portfolio flows is generally judged to be positive for U.S. economic and climate-
related objectives but judged to be negative for maintaining U.S. technological leadership and values-
based objectives. The results for values-based and technology and innovation objectives warrant an
evaluation of the effectiveness of possible restrictions, notwithstanding the positive assessment of
climate-related and economic objectives. U.S. equity markets are the global leaders, and their depth
and liquidity cannot easily be replicated. China is mounting an effort to develop its capital markets and
attract foreign investment, but development will take years to realize and is compromised by capital
account restrictions and lack of rule of law. More relevant for the effectiveness assessment is the
ability to restrict portfolio investment in targeted Chinese companies regardless of where they trade.
It does not appear that other nations are willing to follow the United States’ lead in restricting their
citizens’ ability to transact in Chinese securities, and unlike AI and biotechnology, there are few early
signs of an emerging alliance on portfolio flows, even while efforts to more closely coordinate allies
and partners on FDI screening proceed. While effectiveness arguments go against restrictions, values-
based considerations may override economic ones, at least in specific company cases.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
49 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
5
Key Findings
T
he Degrees of Separation project took place in two phases. The first phase reviewed the history of
U.S.-China engagement dating back to the 1970s with the aim of understanding the motivation
for and results of bilateral engagement. Implicit in the approach was the assumption that
normalized relations with China, and closer ties over the ensuing decades, was a means to advance
U.S. objectives. Those objectives have evolved, from largely geostrategic to increasingly economic. An
emphasis on global public goods and global rules and norms emerged as China reformed and its economy
grew. Values-based objectives, such as the protection of human rights, and technological objectives have
been present since the early days of engagement; while these areas arguably receive greater priority today
than in the past, their potency in making the case for engagement has clearly waned.
The second phase of the project has sought to update objectives for the period from 2021 to 2025,
using achievement of U.S. objectives as the basis for evaluating whether U.S.-China engagement in a
specific activity should be restricted. By doing so, the project seeks to advance a “targeted approach to
decoupling” that restricts engagement only when it advances U.S. objectives. Having developed the
framework, it has been applied to three case studies that sit at the heart of U.S.-China competition:
artificial intelligence (AI), biotechnology, and financial flows. Roundtables convened for each of the
case studies sought expert views from the official and private sectors and included participants from
Canada, the European Union, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. For the study team,
key findings emerged both in developing the framework and in applying it to the case studies:
Elements of the framework, and therefore the assessment itself, are highly subjective. Naming
the risk, identifying and prioritizing U.S. objectives, and assessing the impact of both engagement
and efforts to restrict are all highly subjective. Often “where you stand depends on where you sit.”
In general, private sector and academic participants from the three roundtables favored closer

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
50 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
engagement and saw risks to U.S. competitiveness (e.g., in AI innovation) and effectiveness (e.g., in
public health) from efforts to restrict activity, while professionals with national security backgrounds
were far more circumspect.
Data is a game changer. The emergence of data as a key driver of economic activity and innovation has
fundamentally changed the perception of risk and what qualifies as a potentially risky activity in terms
of the impact on national security. When data is everywhere—and its future applications unknown in
the present—it is difficult to confidently draw the line between risky and safe activities.
As relates to data (and beyond), there is a grudging acceptance of fragmentation as the final
destination. The emphasis on standard setting and new initiatives with U.S. allies and partners that
exclude China offers the clearest sign yet of a U.S. strategy to lead among like-minded countries and
implicitly accept, if not urge, fragmentation. Current U.S. leadership—including in all case study
fields—enables some degree of fragmentation, provided the United States maintains openness in areas
that are essential for innovation (e.g., in human capital).
Values have emerged as a unifying theme among U.S. allies and partners, with implications across a
range of policy areas. In contrast to past practice, which emphasized bilateral engagement with China to
advance values-based objectives, the current environment features values-based objectives as the basis
for corralling the support of allies and partners behind U.S. objectives and countering Chinese influence.
Meaningful efforts are underway to coordinate policies and positions among like-minded countries,
especially in technology policy, but the devil will be in the details. Technology, and AI in particular,
has been a major focus of recent allied commitments, but the majority of pledged efforts have yet to be
concretely acted upon. Data-sharing philosophies and regulations, in particular, remain disjointed.
European allies are the biggest wild card. The AUKUS agreement—a trilateral security pact signed between
Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States—may well prove to be a gamechanger in terms of
affirming where Australia and the United Kingdom fall on the U.S.-China divide. Other allies, and the
European Union especially, remain ambiguous. Much will depend on how narrowly or broadly the United
States decides to pursue decoupling (even if by a different name) and especially on China’s own actions.
In applying the report’s framework to the three case studies—U.S.-China research collaborations in AI,
U.S.-China human genomic data flows in biotechnology, and U.S.-China capital market linkages and
cross-border portfolio flows—the report also yielded sector-specific findings.
Research Collaborations in Artificial Intelligence
 ▪ Cultivation and retention of human talent represents the “holy grail” of AI innovation. It is
also the most difficult component of the AI ecosystem to control without simultaneously
killing competitiveness. In general, any restrictions should focus on end-users rather than on
specific technologies.
 ▪ Competitive advantage stemming from AI will likely depend on its adoption and application.
Given the overall benefits for innovation, research collaborations can benefit both the U.S. and
Chinese economies. However, there are trade-offs for technological leadership, military advantage
and U.S. national security, and values-based objectives such as protecting human rights and
resisting authoritarianism.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
51 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
 ▪ Given these trade-offs and the challenges of imposing restrictions that are effective without
undermining U.S. innovation, the best defense will be a strong offense. Recent funding and new
coordinating mechanisms are to be applauded, as such an approach can maintain U.S. leadership
in AI innovation.
Biotechnology and Human Genomic Data Sharing
 ▪ Sharing human genomic data—a key input to biotechnology innovation in the health sector—
allows firms and states to amass, verify, and diversify data holdings, advancing the pace and
quality of medical discoveries and services. Both the United States and China thus accrue
economic and innovation gains and are better informed and equipped to respond to shared global
public health challenges.
 ▪ U.S.-China human genomic data flows, however, also present significant risks to U.S. objectives,
most notably to U.S. biosecurity and technological leadership and to global bioethics. These risks
stem predominantly from the asymmetric nature of U.S.-China data flows. While the United States
currently leads in biotechnology innovation, China’s data advantage will help it close the gap.
 ▪ China’s strict data regime is unlikely to change, leaving the United States to decide how to react to
the asymmetric data relationship. The focus on technological leadership and values, in partnership
with U.S. allies, points to a more reciprocal approach in the form of less data sharing. Incentivizing
U.S. and allied actors to reduce China’s access to data will be favored over formal restrictions.
Capital Market Linkages and Cross-Border Portfolio Flows
 ▪ Despite the move to more conscious investing, evidenced by the growth in funds dedicated to
environmental, social, and corporate governance (ESG), most global investors will be drawn by
returns unless given a (legal) reason to act otherwise.
 ▪ At the same time, the globalization of capital flows—more accurately wealth—and financial
structuring makes effective targeting of restrictions difficult to achieve. Efforts to keep Chinese
companies off U.S. exchanges will not necessarily constrain their access to capital. A more
effective approach will target the entity, but the bar should be very high; even then, it will be an
uphill battle to convince others to go along.
 ▪ The preeminence of U.S. stock exchanges is not in doubt for the foreseeable future. Efforts to
move Chinese companies off U.S. exchanges are currently warranted on regulatory grounds; still,
delisting may ultimately foster the development of China’s domestic exchanges.
A final key finding is that existing mechanisms go a long way in protecting national security.
Foreign investment screening, unilateral and multilateral export controls, end-user controls, sanctions
lists, formal classification protocols, and financial and (some) data regulation are already in place to
screen risky activities. What is arguably lacking is a common risk assessment and agreement on U.S.
objectives and their prioritization. The resulting clarity will go some way in identifying and securing
meaningful coordination with allies and partners—and will be a helpful guide for the private sector.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
52 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
About the Author &
Contributing Authors
Stephanie Segal is senior fellow of the Economics Program at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies (CSIS), where her research interests include economic competitiveness, U.S.-China economic
relations, and the role of international financial institutions in the global economy. Until 2017, Ms. Segal
served as codirector of the East Asia Office at the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Prior to Treasury, she
was senior economist at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), where she covered a range of emerging
market and advanced country economies. Earlier in her career, Ms. Segal served as an economist in the
Western Hemisphere, South and Southeast Asia, and International Monetary Policy offices at Treasury;
as an adviser to the U.S. director at the IMF; and as an analyst and associate in mergers & acquisitions
at J.P. Morgan in New York. She earned her master's degree from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies and her undergraduate degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Matthew Reynolds is a research associate with the Economics Program at CSIS. Previously, he served
in a variety of staff positions on Capitol Hill, including as a legislative assistant for a senior member
of the House Ways and Means Committee. Matt earned his MA with honors in China studies and
international economics from the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies
(SAIS) and his BA in international relations from Creighton University.
Brooke Roberts is a research associate with the Economics Program at CSIS. Prior to joining CSIS, Brooke
earned her MA in international relations from the University of Chicago. She has previous experience
working with the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) and interning with the U.S. Department of
State’s Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs. For her undergraduate studies, Brooke graduated summa
cum laude and with special departmental honors from George Washington University (GWU) with a BS
in economics and international affairs. Brooke participated in the university’s select Global Bachelor’s
Program, an interdisciplinary research cohort, studying international economics at Fudan University in
Shanghai and at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) in London.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
53 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
Endnotes
1 Barbara Plett Usher, “Why US-China Relations Are at Their Lowest Point in Decades - BBC News,” July 24, 2020, https://
www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-53517439.
2 Stephanie Segal and Dylan Gerstel, Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Interim Report
(Washington, DC: CSIS, February 2021), https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/210203_Se-
gal_Degrees_Separation.pdf.
3 “Mapping the Future of U.S. China Policy,” CSIS, transcript, November 17, 2020, https://www.csis.org/analysis/map-
ping-future-us-china-policy-0.
4 Catherine Dale, National Security Strategy: Legislative Mandates, Execution to Date, and Considerations for Congress, CRS
Report No. RL34505 (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, December 2008), https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/
RL34505.pdf.
5 National Intelligence Council (NIC), Global Trends 2040: A More Contested World (Washington, DC: Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, March 2021), https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/GlobalTrends_2040.pdf.
6 “2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices,” Department of State, March 30, 2021, https://www.state.gov/
reports/2020-country-reports-on-human-rights-practices/; Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, 2021 Nation-
al Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers (Washington, DC: 2021), https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/
reports/2021/2021NTE.pdf; Jim Mattis, Summary of the 2018 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America
(Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2018), https://dod.defense.gov/Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2018-National-De-
fense-Strategy-Summary.pdf; Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence
Community (Washington, DC; April 2021), https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2021-Unclas-
sified-Report.pdf; and “Integrated Country Strategies,” Department of State, n.d., https://www.state.gov/integrated-coun-
try-strategies/.
7 “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains,” The White House, February 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/brief-
ing-room/presidential-actions/2021/02/24/executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains/; and “U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, n.d., https://www.uscc.gov/.
8 Segal and Gerstel, Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Interim Report, 25–26.
9 Kaiser Kuo, “Adam Tooze on the geopolitics of pandemic,” Sinica Podcast, https://supchina.com/podcast/adam-tooze-on-
the-geopolitics-of-the-pandemic/.
10 “World Economic Outlook Database,” International Monetary Fund, n.d., https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/
weo-database/2021/April/download-entire-database.
11 The White House, Interim National Security Strategic Guidance (INSSG) (Washington, DC: 2021), 9, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NSC-1v2.pdf.
12 Wataru Suzuki, “SoftBank to curb China deals amid regulatory uncertainty,” Nikkei Asia, August 10, 2021, https://asia.
nikkei.com/Business/SoftBank2/SoftBank-to-curb-China-deals-amid-regulatory-uncertainty.
13 The White House, INSSG.
14 “Remarks by President Biden in Address to a Joint Session of Congress,” The White House, April 29, 2021, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/04/29/remarks-by-president-biden-in-address-to-a-joint-session-
of-congress.
15 “The long game: China’s grand strategy to displace American order,” Brookings, (public event, August 26, 2021, Washing-
ton, DC), https://www.brookings.edu/events/the-long-game-chinas-grand-strategy-to-displace-american-order/.
16 Peter Mattis, “The Party Congress Test: A Minimum Standard for Analyzing Beijing’s Intentions,” War on the Rocks, Janu-
ary 8, 2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/01/the-party-congress-test-a-minimum-standard-for-analyzing-beijings-in-
tentions/.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
54 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
17 Nadège Rolland, China’s Vision for A New World Order (Washington, DC: National Bureau of Asian Research, January 2020),
NBR Special Report 83, https://www.nbr.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/publications/sr83_chinasvision_jan2020.pdf.
18 Oriana Skylar Mastro, “The Stealth Superpower: How China Hid Its Global Ambitions,” Foreign Affairs, January/February
2019, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/china-plan-rule-asia.
19 Adam Tooze, “Why there is no solution to our age of crisis without China,” New Statesman, July 21, 2021, https://www.
newstatesman.com/world/asia/2021/07/why-there-no-solution-our-age-crisis-without-china.
20 David Shambaugh, China’s Future (Cambridge, UK: Polity Books, 2016).
21 Robert D. Blackwill and Kurt M. Campbell, Xi Jinping on the Global Stage (New York: Council on Foreign Relation Press,
February 2016), https://www.cfr.org/news-releases/cfr-report-chinas-slowing-economy-will-fuel-more-nationalist-for-
eign-policy.
22 Michael D. Swaine, “Chinese Views of U.S. Decline,” China Leadership Monitor, September 1, 2021, https://www.prcleader.
org/swaine-2.
23 Tooze, “Why there is no solution.”
24 Jude Blanchette, “From ‘China Inc.’ to ‘CCP Inc.’: A New Paradigm for Chinese State Capitalism,” China Leadership Monitor,
December 1, 2020, https://www.prcleader.org/blanchette.
25 Hao Chen and Meg Rithmire, “The Rise of the Investor State: State Capital in the Chinese Economy,” Harvard Business
School, Working Knowledge, June 18, 2020, https://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/the-rise-of-the-investor-state-state-capital-in-
the-chinese-economy.
26 Barry Naughton, The Rise of China’s Industrial Policy: 1978 to 2020 (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
2021), https://dusselpeters.com/CECHIMEX/Naughton2021_Industrial_Policy_in_China_CECHIMEX.pdf.
27 “Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-
Range Objectives for 2035,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, translation, May 12, 2021, https://cset.george-
town.edu/wp-content/uploads/t0284_14th_Five_Year_Plan_EN.pdf.
28 Ibid.
29 Lu Zhenhua, “Party Calls on Private Sector to Break U.S. Tech Blockade,” Caixin, January 25, 2021, https://www.caixinglob-
al.com/2021-01-25/party-calls-on-private-sector-to-break-us-tech-blockade-101655472.html.
30 Nis Grünberg, “Party-state capitalism under Xi: integrating political control and economic efficiency,” MERICS, June 15,
2021, https://merics.org/en/party-state-capitalism-under-xi-integrating-political-control-and-economic-efficiency; and
Martin Chorzempa, “China’s Rectification of Tech (and much more),” Peterson Institute for International Economics, Octo-
ber 4, 2021, https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/chorzempa-10-05-2021ppt.pdf.
31 “Interim National Security Strategic Guidance,” The White House, press release, March 3, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/03/03/interim-national-security-strategic-guidance/.
32 The White House, INSSG, 9.
33 “Remarks by President Biden in Press Conference,” The White House, press release, March 25, 2021, https://www.white-
house.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/03/25/remarks-by-president-biden-in-press-conference/.
34 “Secretary of Defense Directive on China Task Force Recommendations,” Department of Defense, press release, June
9, 2021, https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2651534/secretary-of-defense-directive-on-chi-
na-task-force-recommendations/.
35 Julian E. Barnes, “Biden’s C.I.A. Pick Warns of China and Russia at Amicable Confirmation Hearing,” New York Times,
February 24, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/24/us/politics/william-burns-cia-confirmation-hearing.html.
36 White House, INSSG, 21.
37 Henry Kissinger, Diplomacy (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994); and Henry Kissinger, White House Years (Boston: Little
Brown & Co., 1979).

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
55 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
38 “Secretary Antony J. Blinken and National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan Statements to the Press,” Department of State,
March 19, 2021, https://www.state.gov/secretary-antony-j-blinken-and-national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-state-
ments-to-the-press/.
39 “[US Embassy Singapore - LKYSPP Event] Remarks by Kamala Harris, Vice President of the United States,” YouTube video,
posted by Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, August 24, 2021, 1:09:40, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HvgFE9Jx-
En4.
40 “Increasing People’s Republic of China Military Pressure Against Taiwan Undermines Regional Peace and Stability,” Depart-
ment of State, press release, October 3, 2021, https://www.state.gov/increasing-peoples-republic-of-china-military-pres-
sure-against-taiwan-undermines-regional-peace-and-stability/.
41 “Remarks by President Biden, Prime Minister Morrison of Australia, and Prime Minister Johnson of the United Kingdom
Announcing the Creation of AUKUS,” The White House, September 15, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
speeches-remarks/2021/09/15/remarks-by-president-biden-prime-minister-morrison-of-australia-and-prime-minister-
johnson-of-the-united-kingdom-announcing-the-creation-of-aukus/.
42 “Carbis Bay G7 Summit Communiqué,” The White House, press release, June 13, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/brief-
ing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/13/carbis-bay-g7-summit-communique/.
43 “What's in the U.S.-China Phase 1 trade deal,” Reuters, January 15, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trade-
china-details-factbox/whats-in-the-u-s-china-phase-1-trade-deal-idUSKBN1ZE2IF.
44 Vivian Salama and Gordon Lubold, “Biden Says U.S. Wants Competition, Not Confrontation, With China,” Wall Street
Journal, March 25, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/biden-says-u-s-wants-competition-not-confrontation-with-chi-
na-11616701220.
45 In addition, comprehensive supply chain reviews are expected in early 2022 for the defense industrial base; public health
and biological preparedness industrial base; information and communications technology (ICT) industrial base; energy
sector industrial base; transportation industrial base; and the production of agricultural commodities and food products;
along with other areas such as “digital products” that are relevant within more than one defined industrial base.
46 “Addition of Entities to the Entity List,” Federal Registry 86, no. 97 (April 9, 2021), https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/
documents/regulations-docs/federal-register-notices/federal-register-2021/2740-86-fr-040921/file.
47 “Addressing the Threat From Securities Investments That Finance Communist Chinese Military Companies,” Federal Regis-
ter, 85, no. 222 (November 17, 2020), Executive Order 13959, https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/13959.pdf.
48 “Statement on Investor Protection Related to Recent Developments in China,” U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
July 30, 2021, https://www.sec.gov/news/public-statement/gensler-2021-07-30.
49 Alan Rappeport and Keith Bradsher, “Yellen Says China Trade Deal Has ‘Hurt American Consumers’,” New York Times, July
16, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/16/us/politics/yellen-us-china-trade.html.
50 Eric Martin, “Biden Commerce Chief Pledges to Help Businesses Export to China,” Bloomberg, April 28, 2021, https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-04-28/biden-commerce-chief-pledges-to-help-businesses-export-to-china?sref=VZPf-
2pAM.
51 “Biden’s Speech to Congress: Full Transcript,” New York Times, April 29, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/29/us/
politics/joe-biden-speech-transcript.html.
52 “Remarks by President Biden in Press Conference,” The White House, March 25, 2021.
53 Ned Price, “Department Press Briefing – March 8, 2021,” Department of State, March 8, 2021, https://www.state.gov/brief-
ings/department-press-briefing-march-8-2021/.
54 “Remarks by H.E. Wang Yi, State Councilor and Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of China, at the High-level Seg-
ment of the 46th Session of The United Nations Human Rights Council,” Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of
China to the United Nations, February 22, 2021, http://www.china-un.ch/eng/dbdt/t1855687.htm.
55 “China, U.S. hold timely, helpful high-level strategic dialogue,” Xinhua, March 20, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/en-
glish/2021-03/20/c_139824237.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
56 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
56 “Maritime Security in the Indo-Pacific and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,” House Foreign Affairs Committee,
April 29, 2021, https://foreignaffairs.house.gov/2021/4/maritime-security-in-the-indo-pacific-and-the-un-convention-on-
the-law-of-the-sea.
57 “Treasury Sanctions Chinese Government Officials in Connection with Serious Human Rights Abuse in Xinjiang,” Depart-
ment of the Treasury, press release, March 22, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0070.
58 Xinjiang Supply Chain Business Advisory, “Risks and Considerations for Businesses and Individuals with Exposure to
Entities Engaged in Forced Labor and other Human Rights Abuses linked to Xinjiang, China,” Department of State, July 13,
2021, https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Xinjiang-Business-Advisory-13July2021.pdf.
59 The White House, Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based Growth (Washington, DC:
June 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-supply-chain-review-report.pdf.
60 Yuka Hayashi, “U.S. Steps Up Pressure on Businesses Over Forced Labor in China,” Wall Street Journal, August 9, 2021,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-steps-up-pressure-on-businesses-over-forced-labor-in-china-11628501400.
61 “President Biden to Convene Leaders’ Summit for Democracy,” The White House, August 11, 2021, https://www.white-
house.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/08/11/president-biden-to-convene-leaders-summit-for-democracy/.
62 National Intelligence Council (NIC), Global Trends 2040: A More Contested World (Washington, DC: Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, March 2021), https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/GlobalTrends_2040.pdf.
63 CSIS Trade Commission on Affirming American Leadership, Affirming American Leadership: A Call to Action (Washington,
DC: CSIS, September 2020), https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/TradeCommission_
Communique.pdf.
64 “U.S.-EU Summit Statement,” The White House, press release, June 15, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2021/06/15/u-s-eu-summit-statement/.
65 “About,” National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence (NSCAI), https://www.nscai.gov/about/; and NSCAI, Final
Report (Washington, DC: March 2021), https://www.nscai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-Digital-1.pdf.
66 White House, INSSG, 8-9.
67 Ibid., 14.
68 “U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement,” The White House, press release, September 29, 2021,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/09/29/u-s-eu-trade-and-technology-council-inau-
gural-joint-statement/.
69 “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit,” The White House, Statements and Releases, September 24, 2021, https://www.white-
house.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/09/24/fact-sheet-quad-leaders-summit/.
70 In May 2019, OECD member countries adopted the OECD Principles on AI, which call for AI system design that respects
the rule of law, human rights, democratic values, and diversity.
71 NIC, Global Trends 2040.
72 “Unclassified Summary of Assessment on COVID-19 Origins,” Office of the Director on National Intelligence, August 26,
2021, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/Unclassified-Summary-of-Assessment-on-COVID-19-Ori-
gins.pdf.
73 “U.S.-China Joint Statement Addressing the Climate Crisis,” The White House, April 17, 2021, https://www.state.gov/u-s-
china-joint-statement-addressing-the-climate-crisis/.
74 The White House, Building Resilient Supply Chains.
75 NIC, Global Trends 2040.
76 “West and allies relaunch push for own version of China’s Belt and Road,” Financial Times, May 1, 2021, https://www.
ft.com/content/2c1bce54-aa76-455b-9b1e-c48ad519bf27.
77 Rick Weiss, “U.S., China Extend Science and Technology Agreement,” The White House, January 19, 2011, https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2011/01/19/us-china-extend-science-and-technology-agreement.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
57 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
78 U.S. Trade Representative, Economic and Trade Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the People’s Republic of China (Washington, DC: January 2020), https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/agree-
ments/phase%20one%20agreement/Economic_And_Trade_Agreement_Between_The_United_States_And_China_Text.pdf.
79 “Information About the Department of Justice’s China Initiative and a Compilation of China-Related Prosecutions Since
2018,” Department of Justice, June 14, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/nsd/information-about-department-justice-s-chi-
na-initiative-and-compilation-china-related.
80 NIC, Global Trends 2040.
81 “A worrying picture,” Trivium China, August 16, 2021, https://triviumchina.com/2021/08/16/a-worrying-picture.
82 The White House, INSSG, 14, 17.
83 National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020, H.R. 6395-137, https://www.aip.org/sites/default/files/aipcorp/images/
fyi/pdf/national-ai-initiative-act-final.pdf.
84 “USTR releases Annual Special 301 Report on Intellectual Property Protection,” Office of the United States Trade Represen-
tative, April 30, 2021, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2021/april/ustr-releases-annu-
al-special-301-report-intellectual-property-protection.
85 The White House, INSSG, 21.
86 Antony Blinken, “A Foreign Policy for the American People,” (speech, Department of State, Washington, D.C., March 3,
2021), https://www.state.gov/a-foreign-policy-for-the-american-people/.
87 The White House, Budget of the U.S. Government: Fiscal Year 2022 (Washington, DC: May 2021), https://www.whitehouse.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/budget_fy22.pdf.
88 “Artificial Intelligence,” CSIRO, n.d., https://www.csiro.au/en/research/technology-space/ai.
89 NSCAI, Final Report.
90 Timothy F. Bresnahan and Manuel Trajtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies: ‘Engines of Growth?’,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 4148, August 1992, https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w4148/
w4148.pdf.
91 Deloitte China, Global artificial intelligence whitepaper (Beijing: 2019), https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
cn/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/deloitte-cn-tmt-ai-report-en-190927.pdf.
92 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, Final Report, 145.
93 Ibid.
94 The economic objective calls for “Sustainable, equitable and balanced growth.” Whether U.S.-China research collaborations
in AI produce economic growth that is sustainable and equitable will depend on other domestic policies that are beyond
the scope of this case study.
95 The National Institute of Standards and Technology is currently engaged in an effort to create a framework which AI
developers could voluntarily employ to assess the trustworthiness of AI systems. National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act
of 2020, H.R. 6395-137.
96 Carrick Flynn, “Recommendations on Export Controls for Artificial Intelligence,” Center for Security and Emerging Tech-
nology, Issue Brief, February 2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/recommendations-on-export-controls-for-ar-
tificial-intelligence/.
97 Jeremy Pelter, U.S.-China Relations in 2021: Emerging Risks, Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, September 8, 2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-08/Jeremy_Pelter_Testimony.pdf.
98 Acknowledging the tendency toward scale that supports AI innovation, the NSCAI advocates for public sector investments
that would “democratize access to the resources that fuel AI development” in the United States.
99 Paul Renno, Jue Wang, and David Crawford, Artificial Intelligence: Who Will Lead the Next Era? (Boston: Bain & Company,
2021), https://www.bain.com/insights/who-will-lead-the-next-era-of-artificial-intelligence-tech-report-2021/.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
58 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
100 Artificial Intelligence Index, Measuring trends in Artificial Intelligence, Chapter 4, 13.
101 Remco Zwetsloot, Strengthening the U.S. AI Workforce (Washington, DC: Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
2019), 6, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/strengthening-the-u-s-ai-workforce/.
102 Dominic Barton et al., “Artificial Intelligence: Implications for China,” McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & Company,
April 2017, 5, https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/featured%20insights/China/Artificial%20intelligence%20
Implications%20for%20China/MGI-Artificial-intelligence-implications-for-China.ashx; and Daniel Castro, Michael
McLaughlin, and Eline Chivot, “Who Is Winning the AI Race: China, the EU or the United States?,” Center for Data Inno-
vation, August 19, 2019, https://datainnovation.org/2019/08/who-is-winning-the-ai-race-china-the-eu-or-the-united-
states/#_ednref32.
103 Daniel Castro and Michael McLaughlin, Who Is Winning the AI Race: China, the EU, or the United States? — 2021 Up-
date (Washington, DC: Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, January 2021), https://itif.org/publica-
tions/2021/01/25/who-winning-ai-race-china-eu-or-united-states-2021-update.
104 Remco Zwetsloot, Helen Toner, and Jeffrey Ding, “Beyond the AI Arms Race: America, China, and the Danger of Zero-Sum
Thinking,” Foreign Affairs, November 16, 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/review-essay/2018-11-16/beyond-
ai-arms-race.
105 “Declaration of the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on Cooper-
ation in Artificial Intelligence Research and Development: A Shared Vision for Driving Technological Breakthroughs in
Artificial Intelligence,” Department of State, September 25, 2020, https://www.state.gov/declaration-of-the-united-states-
of-america-and-the-united-kingdom-of-great-britain-and-northern-ireland-on-cooperation-in-artificial-intelligence-re-
search-and-development-a-shared-vision-for-driving/.
106 The White House, “Fact Sheet: Quad Summit,” press release, March 12, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2021/03/12/fact-sheet-quad-summit/.
107 The White House “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence Global Emerging Technology Summit,” press release, July 13, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/nsc/brief-
ing-room/2021/07/13/remarks-by-national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-at-the-national-security-commission-on-artifi-
cial-intelligence-global-emerging-technology-summit/.
108 “EU-US launch Trade and Technology Council to lead values-based global digital transformation,” European Commission,
June 15, 2021, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_2990.
109 “New US-Canada partnership announced for collaboration in research and innovation,” National Science Foundation, June
15, 2021, https://www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/announcements/061521.jsp.
110 National Artificial Intelligence Initiative, U.S. Code 15 (2021), https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml;jsessionid=8825DF-
991DABFDFFEEA1C5B8D89DC5F0?req=10+USC&f=treesort&fq=true&num=7545&hl=true&edition=prelim&gran-
uleId=USC-prelim-title12-section4640.
111 “Remarks by President Biden, Prime Minister Morrison of Australia, and Prime Minister Johnson of the United Kingdom
Announcing the Creation of AUKUS,” White House, speeches and remarks, September 15, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/09/15/remarks-by-president-biden-prime-minister-morrison-of-australia-
and-prime-minister-johnson-of-the-united-kingdom-announcing-the-creation-of-aukus/.
112 “Transcript: President Macron on his vision for Europe and the future of transatlantic relations,” Atlantic Council, February
5, 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/news/transcripts/transcript-president-macron-on-his-vision-for-europe-and-
the-future-of-transatlantic-relations/.
113 A 2020 paper from the Center for Security and Emerging Technology endorsed an approach centered on “end-uses and
end-users” for addressing control needs in AI software, trained algorithms, and militarily sensitive data.
114 U.S. Department of Commerce, “Commerce Department Adds 34 Entities to the Entity List to Target Enablers of China’s
Human Rights Abuses and Military Modernization, and Unauthorized Iranian and Russian Procurement,” press release,
July 9, 2021, https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/07/commerce-department-adds-34-entities-enti-
ty-list-target-enablers-chinas.
115 Pelter, U.S.-China Relations in 2021.
116 NSCAI, Final Report, 5.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
59 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
117 “The Global AI Talent Tracker,” Marco Polo, n.d., https://macropolo.org/digital-projects/the-global-ai-talent-tracker/.
118 Remco Zwetsloot et al., Keeping Top AI Talent in the United States (Washington, DC: Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, December 2019), iv, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/Keeping-Top-AI-Talent-in-the-United-
States.pdf.
119 Remco Zwetsloot et al., Strengthening the U.S. AI Workforce (Washington, DC: Center for Security and Emerging Technology,
September 2019), 6, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/strengthening-the-u-s-ai-workforce/.
120 Christine Fox, An Entwined AI Future: Resistance Is Futile (Washington, DC: John Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, 2020),
7, https://www.jhuapl.edu/assessing-us-china-technology-connections/publications.
121 Roszel C. Thomsen II, “Artificial Intelligence and Export Controls: Conceivable but Counterproductive?,” Journal of Internet
Law 22, no. 5 (November 2018), 19, https://t-b.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/AI-and-Export-Controls-Journal-of-In-
ternet-Law-Article.pdf.
122 Carrick Flynn, “Recommendations on Export Controls for Artificial Intelligence,” Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, February 2020, 6, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/Recommendations-on-Export-Con-
trols-for-Artificial-Intelligence-1.pdf.
123 Renno, Wang, and Crawford, Artificial Intelligence.
124 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, 2021 Final Report (National Security Commission on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, 2021), 213, https://assets.foleon.com/eu-west-2/uploads-7e3kk3/48187/nscai_full_report_digi-
tal.04d6b124173c.pdf.
125 Saif M. Khan, “U.S. Semiconductor Exports to China: Current Policies and Trends,” Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, October 2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/U.S.-Semiconductor-Exports-to-China-Cur-
rent-Policies-and-Trends.pdf; and Richard Burke et al., “BIS Issues Rules on the Scope of Entity List Restrictions and
Significantly Limits Activities Involving,” White & Case, August 28, 2020, https://www.whitecase.com/publications/alert/
bis-issues-rules-scope-entity-list-restrictions-and-significantly-limits.
126 Bown, Chad P., “How Trump’s export curbs on semiconductors and equipment hurt the US technology sector,” Peterson
Institute for International Economics, September 28, 2020, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-and-investment-poli-
cy-watch/how-trumps-export-curbs-semiconductors-and-equipment-hurt-us; According to the same study, the effects of
the May 2020 export controls resulted in $17 million lost sales unrelated to Huawei.
127 ODNI, Global Trends 2040.
128 Michael Chui et al., The Bio Revolution: Innovations transforming economies, societies, and our lives (New York: McKinsey
Global Institute, May 2020), https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/life%20sciences/our%20insights/
the%20bio%20revolution%20innovations%20transforming%20economies%20societies%20and%20our%20lives/
may_2020_mgi_bio_revolution_report.pdf.
129 House Armed Services Committee, Future of Defense Task Force Report 2020 (Washington, DC: U.S. Congress, Septem-
ber 2020), 33, https://armedservices.house.gov/_cache/files/2/6/26129500-d208-47ba-a9f7-25a8f82828b0/6D5C-
75605DE8DDF0013712923B4388D7.future-of-defense-task-force-report.pdf.
130 Sui-Lee Wee, “China Uses DNA to Track Its People, With the Help of American Expertise,” New York Times, February
21, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/21/business/china-xinjiang-uighur-dna-thermo-fisher.html; and “Chi-
na: Minority Region Collects DNA from Millions,” Human Rights Watch, December 13, 2017, https://www.hrw.org/
news/2017/12/13/china-minority-region-collects-dna-millions#.
131 Yi-Heng Percival Zhang, Jibin Sun, and Yanhe Ma, “Biomanufacturing: history and perspective,” Journal of Industrial Micro-
biology and Biotechnology 44, no. 4-5 (May 2017), doi:10.1007/s10295-016-1863-2.
132 House Armed Services Committee, Future of Defense.
133 Scott Moore, “China’s Role in the Global Biotechnology Sector and Implications for U.S. Policy,” Brookings, Global China,
April 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/FP_20200427_china_biotechnology_moore.pdf.
134 Kavita M. Berger et al., Roadmap for Biosecurity and Biodefense Policy in the United States (Takoma Park, MD: Gryphon
Scientific, 2018), http://gryphonsci.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Full-Report_Roadmap-of-US-Biosecuri-
ty-and-Biodefense-Policy_2018.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
60 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
135 Ibid.
136 Ibid.
137 Preetika Rana, “How a Chinese Scientist Broke the Rules to Create the First Gene-Edited Babies,” Wall Street Journal, May
10, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-a-chinese-scientist-broke-the-rules-to-create-the-first-gene-edited-ba-
bies-11557506697.
138 Biotechnology involves DNA synthesis and DNA sequencing—the building and ordering of DNA—during which significant
volumes of data are produced. DNA is also inherently a form of data, providing the genomic information of an organism.
139 Arlindo L. Oliveira, “Biotechnology, Big Data, and Artificial Intelligence,” Biotechnology Journal 13, no. 8 (August 2019),
doi:10.1002/biot.201800613.
140 Toru Tsunashima, “China rises as world's data superpower as internet fractures,” Nikkei Asia, November 24, 2020,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Century-of-Data/China-rises-as-world-s-data-superpower-as-internet-fractures; and
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC), “Section 3: U.S.-China Links in Healthcare and Biotech-
nology,” in USCC, 2020 Annual Report to Congress (Washington, DC: December 2020), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/
files/2020-12/Chapter_2_Section_3--U.S.-China_Links_in_Healthcare_and_Biotechnology.pdf.
141 Human genomic data may be used for basic scientific research, to better understand human health conditions, and to
produce novel goods, such as biopharmaceuticals and medical devices.
142 USCC, “Section 3: U.S.-China Links in Healthcare and Biotechnology,” 306.
143 Alan McQuinn and Daniel Castro, “The Costs of an Unnecessarily Stringent Federal Data Privacy Law,” Information
Technology & Innovation Foundation, August 5, 2019, https://itif.org/publications/2019/08/05/costs-unnecessarily-strin-
gent-federal-data-privacy-law.
144 Relevant to the previous case study, complex algorithms, including AI, can be used to “re-identify” previously anonymized
data.
145 Mark Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development: The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement (Takoma Park, MD:
Gryphon Scientific and Rhodium Group, February 2019), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/US-China%20
Biotech%20Report.pdf; and Leyton Nelson, “China’s Healthcare System: Addressing Capacity Shortfalls before and after
COVID-19,” USCC, March 31, 2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/Chinas_Healthcare_System-Address-
ing_Capacity_Shortfalls_before_and_after_COVID-19.pdf.
146 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development.
147 Ibid., 18.
148 Ibid., 14; and “Key biotechnology indicators,” OECD, October 2020, https://www.oecd.org/innovation/inno/keybiotechnol-
ogyindicators.htm.
149 National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, Final Report (Washington, DC: March 2021), https://www.nscai.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-Digital-1.pdf.
150 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development.
151 “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence Global
Emerging Technology Summit,” The White House, press release, July 31, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/nsc/brief-
ing-room/2021/07/13/remarks-by-national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-at-the-national-security-commission-on-artifi-
cial-intelligence-global-emerging-technology-summit/.
152 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development.
153 Ibid.; USCC, “Section 3: U.S.-China Links in Healthcare and Biotechnology”
154 Ibid.
155 “FDI Data,” US-China Investment Hub, n.d., https://www.us-china-investment.org/fdi-data.
156 Andrew Pollak, “Chinese Company to Acquire DNA Sequencing Firm,” New York Times, Dealbook, September 17, 2012,
https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2012/09/17/chinese-company-to-acquire-dna-sequencing-firm/.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
61 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
157 “FDI Data,” US-China Investment Hub.
158 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development.
159 CAPs regulate the quality of data production and collection methods in the United States.
160 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development; and “Accredited Laboratory and Biorepository Directory,” College of
American Pathologists, n.d., https://www.cap.org/laboratory-improvement/accreditation/accredited-laboratory-and-biore-
pository-directory/.
161 Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh, China’s Technology Transfer Strategy: How Chinese Investments in Emerging Technology
Enable A Strategic Competitor to Access the Crown Jewels of U.S. Innovation (Silicon Valley, CA: Defense Innovation Unit
Experimental (DIUx), January 2018), https://admin.govexec.com/media/diux_chinatechnologytransferstudy_jan_2018_(1).
pdf; and Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development.
162 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development; and “Guidance Regarding Methods for De-identification of Protected
Health Information in Accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule,”
Department of Health and Human Services, n.d., https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/special-topics/
de-identification/index.html#coveredentities; and Brown and Singh, China’s Technology Transfer Strategy.
163 “Covered Entities and Business Associates,” HHS, n.d., https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/covered-entities/
index.html; Jordan Harrod, “Health Data Privacy: Updating HIPAA to match today’s technology challenges,” Science in
the News, Harvard University, May 15, 2019, https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2019/health-data-privacy/; Sean Baird,
“GDPR matchup: The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act,” iaap, May 17, 2021, https://iapp.org/news/a/
gdpr-match-up-the-health-insurance-portability-and-accountability-act/.
164 Kirsty Needham and Clare Baldwin, “China’s gene giant harvests data from millions of women,” Reuters, July 7, 2021,
https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/health-china-bgi-dna/; and Brown and Singh, China’s Technology
Transfer Strategy.
165 Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development.
166 USCC, “Section 3: U.S.-China Links in Healthcare and Biotechnology”; John Balzano, China’s Evolving Healthcare Ecosystem:
Challenges and Opportunities, Testimony before the USCC, May 7, 2020, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/
Balzano_Written_Testimony_FINAL.pdf; Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), 2021 National
Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers (NTE) (Washington, DC: October 2020), https://www.phrma.org/-/media/
Project/PhRMA/PhRMA-Org/PhRMA-Org/PDF/P-R/PhRMA-2021-NTE-Submission.pdf; and “Biosecurity Law of the P.R.C.,”
China Law Translate, October 10, 2018, https://www.chinalawtranslate.com/en/biosecurity-law/#_Toc53906405.
167 Rogier Creemers, Paul Triolo, and Graham Webster, “Translation: Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China (Ef-
fective June 1, 2017),” New America, June 29, 2018, https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/
translation-cybersecurity-law-peoples-republic-china/.
168 USCC, “Section 3: U.S.-China Links in Healthcare and Biotechnology”; and Balzano, China’s Evolving Healthcare Ecosystem:
Challenges and Opportunities.
169 Balzano, China’s Evolving Healthcare Ecosystem: Challenges and Opportunities.
170 “The PRC Personal Information Protection Law (Final): A Full Translation,” China Briefing, August 24, 2021, https://www.
china-briefing.com/news/the-prc-personal-information-protection-law-final-a-full-translation/.
171 “Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership,” The White House, Statements and Releases, February 23, 2021,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/02/23/roadmap-for-a-renewed-u-s-canada-part-
nership/.
172 “Fact Sheet: Quad Summit,” The White House.
173 “Fact Sheet: Quad Leaders’ Summit,” The White House.
174 “Fact Sheet: U.S.-Japan Competitiveness and Resilience (CoRe) Partnership,” The White House, Statements and Releases,
April 16, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/04/16/fact-sheet-u-s-japan-com-
petitiveness-and-resilience-core-partnership/.
175 “U.S.-ROK Leaders’ Joint Statement,” The White House, Statements and Releases, May 21, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/05/21/u-s-rok-leaders-joint-statement/.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
62 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
176 “U.S.-EU Summit Statement,” The White House, Statements and Releases, June 15, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/15/u-s-eu-summit-statement/.
177 Such disjointed approaches to data sharing stand to limit the data allies can share with one another and therefore (1) lim-
it research and other engagements that require data sharing and (2) stymie collective innovation gains from data sharing
(improvements to data quantity, quality, and diversity).
178 Data trusts are legal frameworks between data-sharing entities that define data-sharing rights and responsibilities and
hold the involved entities accountable to them. George Zarkadakis, “‘Data Trusts’ Could be the Key to Better AI,” Har-
vard Business Review, November 10, 2020, https://hbr.org/2020/11/data-trusts-could-be-the-key-to-better-ai; and Nigel
Cory, Daniel Castro, and Ellysse Dick, “‘Schrems II’: What Invalidating the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield Means for Transatlantic
Trade and Innovation,” Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, December 3, 2020, https://itif.org/publica-
tions/2020/12/03/schrems-ii-what-invalidating-eu-us-privacy-shield-means-transatlantic.
179 “EU-US launch Trade and Technology Council,” European Commission.
180 “Supplement No. 4 to Part 744 – ENTITY LIST,” Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), July 19, 2021, https://www.bis.doc.
gov/index.php/documents/regulations-docs/2326-supplement-no-4-to-part-744-entity-list-4/file; and Zachary Basu, “U.S.
blacklists Chinese companies tied to Xinjiang gene bank project,” Axios, July 20, 2020, https://www.axios.com/bgi-china-
entity-list-uighur-gene-bank-f3abec43-6482-4c1d-81c6-eebafe3d6a7b.html.
181 Pelter, U.S.-China Relations in 2021.
182 Kimberly Orr, “Compliance with U.S. Export Controls as a Life Science Researcher,” BIS, n.d., https://www.bis.doc.gov/
index.php/documents/product-guidance/1107-bioexport-pdf/file; and “Commerce Control List: Supplement No. 1 to Part
774,” BIS, September 20, 2021, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/regulations-docs/2332-category-1-materi-
als-chemicals-microorganisms-and-toxins-4/file.
183 “The Australia Group,” Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, n.d., https://www.dfat.gov.au/
publications/minisite/theaustraliagroupnet/site/en/index.html.
184 Investment reviews do not inherently restrict data flows. However, considering that investments are a primary means of
access to U.S. genomic data for China, restrictions to Chinese investments in the U.S. biotechnology industry may help
protect American genomic data. “CFIUS Overview,” U.S. Department of the Treasury, n.d., https://home.treasury.gov/poli-
cy-issues/international/the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states-cfius/cfius-overview.
185 Alex Leary and Katy Stech Ferek, “Biden Builds on Trump’s Use of Investment Review Panel to Take On China,” Wall Street
Journal, July 7, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/investment-review-panel-gets-wider-role-under-biden-in-rivalry-
with-china-11625650200.
186 “Your Rights Under HIPAA,” Department of Health and Human Services, n.d., https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-individuals/
guidance-materials-for-consumers/index.html; and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Public Law
104-191, August 21, 1996, https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/PLAW-104publ191/summary.
187 “Privacy in Genomics,” National Human Genome Research Institute, n.d., https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/poli-
cy-issues/Privacy#federal.
188 Ibid.
189 UNESCO, Report of the IBC on Updating Its Reflection On the Human Genome and Human Rights (Paris: October 2015), https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000233258.
190 Secretariat of the Convention of Biological Diversity, Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Eq-
uitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Montreal: Secretary of the
Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations, 2011), https://www.cbd.int/abs/doc/protocol/nagoya-protocol-en.pdf;
United Nations, Convention on Biological Diversity (United Nations, 1992), https://www.cbd.int/doc/legal/cbd-en.pdf.
191 “What is genome editing?,” National Human Genome Research Institute, n.d., https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/
policy-issues/what-is-Genome-Editing.
192 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, Safeguarding the Bioeconomy (Washington, DC: 2020), https://
www.nap.edu/catalog/25525/safeguarding-the-bioeconomy.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
63 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
193 Portfolio investments include cross-border transactions and positions involving debt or equity securities other than those
included in direct investment or reserve assets.
194 Adam Lysenko et al., US-China Financial Investment: Current Scope and Future Potential (Washington, DC: US-China
Investment Project, January 2021), https://rhg.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/US-China-Financial-Investment_
25Jan2021-2.pdf.
195 “What Trade War? Trump Heartland Sees Record Farm Sales to China,” Bloomberg, December 8, 2020, https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-08/china-u-s-farm-ties-are-stronger-and-more-tenuous-than-ever; The White
House, Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based Growth (Washington,
DC: June 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-supply-chain-review-report.pdf; and
Remco Zwetsloot, “China’s Approach to Tech Talent Competition: Policies, Results, and the Developing Global Response,”
Brookings, April 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/FP_20200427_china_talent_policy_zwet-
sloot.pdf.
196 “Executive Order on Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies of the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China,” The White House, June 3, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-ac-
tions/2021/06/03/executive-order-on-addressing-the-threat-from-securities-investments-that-finance-certain-compa-
nies-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china/.
197 “Military-Civil Fusion and the People’s Republic of China,” Department of State, May 2020, https://www.state.gov/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2020/05/What-is-MCF-One-Pager.pdf.
198 “FACT SHEET: Executive Order Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies of the
People’s Republic of China,” The White House, June 3, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-re-
leases/2021/06/03/fact-sheet-executive-order-addressing-the-threat-from-securities-investments-that-finance-cer-
tain-companies-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china/.
199 Mike Pompeo, “Determination of the Secretary of State on Atrocities in Xinjiang,” Department of State, press release,
January 19, 2021, https://2017-2021.state.gov/determination-of-the-secretary-of-state-on-atrocities-in-xinjiang/index.
html; and Department of State, China 2020 Human Rights Report (Washington, DC: March 2021), https://www.state.gov/
reports/2020-country-reports-on-human-rights-practices/china/.
200 Amy K. Lehr and Efthimia Maria Bechrakis, “The United States Blacklisted 28 Chinese Entities over Repression of Muslim
Minorities in Xinjiang. What Does This Mean for Human Rights?” CSIS, Critical Questions, October 11, 2019, https://www.
csis.org/analysis/united-states-blacklisted-28-chinese-entities-over-repression-muslim-minorities-xinjiang.
201 A 2018 statement from the PCAOB chairman noted that China’s state security laws are invoked to limit U.S. regulators’
ability to oversee the financial reporting of U.S.-listed, China-based companies. As a result, for certain China-based
companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges, the SEC and PCAOB have not had access to the books, records, and audit work
papers to an extent consistent with other jurisdictions both in scope and timing. “Emerging Market Investments Entail
Significant Disclosure, Financial Reporting and Other Risks; Remedies are Limited,” PCAOB, April 21, 2020, https://pcao-
bus.org/news-events/speeches/speech-detail/emerging-market-investments-entail-significant-disclosure-financial-re-
porting-and-other-risks-remedies-are-limited_723.
202 “U.S. SEC warns investors of risks from certain Chinese business entities,” Reuters, September 20, 2021, https://www.
reuters.com/business/us-sec-warns-investors-risks-certain-chinese-business-entities-2021-09-20/.
203 Gary Gensler, “SEC Chair: Chinese Firms Need to Open Their Books,” Wall Street Journal, September 13, 2021, https://www.
wsj.com/articles/china-accounting-standards-shell-company-vie-investment-sarbanes-oxley-sec-gensler-11631563524.
204 Such changes include the sudden cancelation of the Ant Financial IPO (November 2020); elimination of the for-prof-
it tutoring sector (“China Bans For-Profit School Tutoring in Sweeping Overhaul,” Bloomberg, July 24, 2021, https://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-24/china-bans-school-curriculum-tutoring-firms-from-going-public); and
freezing data collection for firms listed on overseas exchanges that have not first received a cyber audit (“China Tightens
Rules on Foreign IPOs in New Blow to Tech Firms,” Bloomberg, July 10, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
cles/2021-07-10/china-tightens-foreign-ipo-rules-for-firms-with-large-user-data).
205 Reza Hasmath, “New ESG Practices in China and its Implications for Foreign Actors,” Georgetown Journal of International
Affairs, October 26, 2020, https://gjia.georgetown.edu/2020/10/26/new-esg-practices-in-china-and-its-implications-for-

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
64 | Stephanie Segal, Matthew Reynolds & Brooke Roberts
foreign-actors/.
206 Matt Pottinger, “Beijing Targets American Business,” Wall Street Journal, March 26, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
beijing-targets-american-business-11616783268.
207 “China leads global green-bond sales boom but faces headwinds,” Reuters, March 31, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/arti-
cle/us-china-bond-green/china-leads-global-green-bond-sales-boom-but-faces-headwinds-idUSKBN2BO4FP.
208 Conversely, other countries’ portfolio investments in U.S. companies benefit the United States. Further, this analysis does
not consider whether restrictions might be reciprocated. Given historically positive net portfolio inflows to the United
States, reciprocal restrictions on portfolio investment would likely disadvantage U.S. companies and innovation.
209 Alina Polyakova and Chris Meserole, “Exporting digital authoritarianism: The Russian and Chinese models,” Brookings,
August, 2019, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/FP_20190827_digital_authoritarianism_polyako-
va_meserole.pdf; and Steven Feldstein, The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, September 2019), https://carnegieendowment.org/files/WP-Feldstein-AISurveillance_final1.pdf.
210 “Pushing for More Scrutiny of Chinese Stocks Trade in the U.S.,” Bloomberg, October 1, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2020-10-01/u-s-pressuring-chinese-companies-for-more-transparency-on-finances?sref=VZPf2pAM;
and Division of Economic and Risk Analysis, “U.S. Investors’ Exposure to Domestic Chinese Issuers,” SEC, July 6, 2020,
https://www.sec.gov/files/US-Investors-Exposure-to-Domestic-Chinese-Issuers_2020.07.06.pdf.
211 Chris Buckley and Paul Mozur, “How China Uses High-Tech Surveillance to Subdue Minorities,” New York Times, May 22,
2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/22/world/asia/china-surveillance-xinjiang.html; and Committee on Foreign
Relations, The New Big Brother: China and Digital Authoritarianism (Washington, DC: U.S. Senate, July 2020), https://www.
foreign.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/2020%20SFRC%20Minority%20Staff%20Report%20-%20The%20New%20Big%20
Brother%20-%20China%20and%20Digital%20Authoritarianism.pdf.
212 Karen Yeung, “Growing China human rights concerns risk curbing foreign investment needed to support economy,” South
China Morning Post, April 15, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3129669/growing-china-hu-
man-rights-concerns-risk-curbing-foreign.
213 Menzie D. Chinn and Hiro Ito, “What matters for financial development? Capital controls, institutions, and interactions,”
Journal of Development Economics 81, no. 1 (October 2006): 163–192, doi:10.3386/w11370. Database updated to 2019 on
August 26, 2021.
214 “Specially Designated Nationals And Blocked Persons List (SDN) Human Readable Lists,” U.S. Department of the Trea-
sury, updated October 6, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/specially-designated-nation-
als-and-blocked-persons-list-sdn-human-readable-lists.
215 “Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (NS-CMIC List),” U.S. Department of the Treasury, June
16, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/consolidated-sanctions-list/ns-cmic-list. U.S.
person is defined as any citizen, lawful permanent resident, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any
jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
216 Chong Koh Ping and Alexander Osipovich, “NYSE to Delist Chinese Telecom Carriers After Rejecting Appeals,” Wall
Street Journal, May 7, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/nyse-to-delist-chinese-telecoms-carriers-after-rejecting-ap-
peals-11620394719.
217 Enoch Yiu, “China Mobile aims to raise US$8.6 billion in mainland’s biggest IPO for over a decade to finance 5G net-
work expansion,” South China Morning Post, August 19, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/business/banking-finance/arti-
cle/3145621/china-mobile-aims-raise-us86-billion-mainlands-biggest-ipo.
218 Nicola Cetorelli and Stavros Peristiani, “Firm value and cross-listings: the impact of stock market prestige,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Staff Reports 474, 2010, https://ideas.repec.org/p/fip/fednsr/474.html.
219 Kinger Lau et al., “SH-HK Cinnect: New Regime, unprecedented opportunity,” Goldman Sachs, September 11, 2014,
https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/stock-connect/report.pdf.
220 “Goldman Sachs likes China’s A share market despite Evergrande risks,” CNBC, October 11, 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/
video/2021/10/11/goldman-sachs-likes-chinas-a-share-market-despite-evergrande-risks.html. The Holding Foreign Com-
panies Accountable Act, passed unanimously last year, requires foreign jurisdictions to allow auditors inspection by the
PCAOB or face delisting from U.S. exchanges in 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
65 | Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final Report
221 Sonia Elks, “UK lawmakers call for blacklist of firms linked to Uighur abuses,” Reuters, March 16, 2021, https://www.
reuters.com/article/us-britain-china-rights/uk-lawmakers-call-for-blacklist-of-firms-linked-to-uighur-abuses-idUSKB-
N2B9038.
222 The OFAC was formally created in December 1950, following the entry of China into the Korean War, when President
Truman declared a national emergency and blocked all Chinese and North Korean assets subject to U.S. jurisdiction.
223 Tingting Liu and Lester Ross, “China Rolls Out Five-Year Outline for Government Under Rule of Law,” JDSUPRA, August 17,
2021, https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/china-rolls-out-five-year-outline-for-7508328/.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
COVER PHOTO PETER PARKS/AFP/GETTY IMAGES
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 | www.csis.org
