
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
PAGE 1 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018

Why Tariffs on Chinese ICT
Imports Would Harm the
U.S. Economy
BY ROBERT D. ATKINSO N, STEPHEN J. EZELL, AN D J. JOHN WU | MARCH 2018

As the Trump administration prepares to take action against unfair
Chinese trade practices under its Section 301 review, all options,
including tariffs, appear to be on the table. But applying tariffs on
information and communications technologies (ICT) imported from
China should not be one of them. ICT represents the largest source of
U.S. economic growth—accounting for up to 50 percent of U.S. GDP
growth over the past 10 years.1 Artificially raising the cost of ICT
products by levying tariffs on ICT imports from China would reduce
growth of U.S. ICT investments, which would lower productivity growth,
and thus economic growth. ITIF estimates that a 10 percent tariff levied
on Chinese ICT imports would slow the growth of U.S. output by $163
billion over the next 10 years, and a 25 percent tariff would slow output
by $332 billion. For the average American household, this slower
economic growth would mean $150 to $306 less income in year 10.
While the Trump administration’s goals of confronting China’s unfair
trade practices and reinvigorating U.S. manufacturing are commendable,
applying tariffs on ICT imports would needlessly harm the U.S. economy.

HOW ICT INVESTMENT DRIVES U.S. ECONOMIC GROWTH
ICT goods include goods such as computers, smartphones, servers, routers, and computer
chips. These and related ICT goods (and services) represent the U.S. economy’s most
Raising the cost of
ICT products by
levying tariffs on ICT
imports from China
would reduce growth
in U.S. ICT
investments, which
would lower
productivity growth,
and thus
economic growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
PAGE 2 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
significant driver of economic growth. In fact, ICT investment accounted for 50 percent of
U.S. economic growth from 2005 to 2012 and 35 percent from 2010 to 2016.2
Notwithstanding this outsized economic impact—and even though the United States is
home to 8 of the world’s 14 largest technology companies by revenue—America’s ICT
goods and services sectors contribute just 8 percent to U.S. GDP annually.3 That’s because
the vast majority of economic benefits from ICT, over 80 percent, stem from their
adoption as productivity- and innovation-enhancing capital goods and services.4 ICT
consumption is far more important than ICT production in driving economic growth, a
key reason why ICT tariffs would do far more harm than good to the U.S. economy.
ICT products are such powerful tools because they represent “general-purpose
technologies”—just as electricity and the steam engine were—meaning they represent a set
of technologies that restructure the entire economy and enhance the productivity and
innovative capacity of organizations across all industries. As such, ICT capital has a much
larger impact on improving productivity than non-ICT capital—three to five times larger.5
Consider that the introduction of personal computers, email, and business software has
allowed modern office workers to become nearly five times more productive than their
1970s-era counterparts.6
Low-cost, best-of-breed ICT products are not just crucial to improved productivity, but
also to enabling competitive ICT services trade, which represents a rapidly growing U.S.
sector. For instance, U.S. firms in digitally intensive industries sold $222 billion in goods
and services online in 2012.7 Moreover, from 2011 to 2016, trade in ICT-enabled services
increased by 20 percent annually.8 Tariffs on ICT imports would raise costs for U.S. firms
engaged in this sector, making their digital exports less competitive.
The central point is that ICT drives employment and productivity growth throughout the
economy, not just in the ICT production and services sectors. For example, between 2006
and 2016, information technology-related jobs in non-ICT industries (occupations such as
web developers and computer programmers) increased by 35 percent, as compared to
economy-wide employment growth of 6 percent.9 Moreover, the U.S. International Trade
Commission credits digital trade with the creation of up to 2.4 million U.S. jobs.10
Furthermore, the benefits of ICT services largely go to other “non-ICT” sectors, such as
finance, agriculture, hospitality, and tourism that collectively generate up to 75 percent of
the value added by data flows over the Internet.11
In summary, ICT, through both production and consumption, represents a key source of
U.S. economic dynamism and economic growth as well as high-value-added production
and well-paying employment.
HOW TARIFFS ON ICT GOODS WOULD HARM ICT PRODUCERS AND CONSUMERS
ICT products underpin the digital economy.12 As such, increasing prices on ICT products
by applying tariffs on those goods harms both ICT producers and consumers.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
PAGE 3 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
To the extent that U.S.-located ICT-goods producers rely on components imported from
China, tariffs would increase the cost of finished goods they produce, placing them at a
competitive disadvantage versus foreign producers of final ICT goods.13 Moreover, it’s
unlikely that tariffs on Chinese ICT exports would induce ICT producers to move
considerable ICT production back to the United States. With an extensive install and
supplier base for ICT goods production in Asia, tariffs on Chinese ICT imports would
likely mean a shift in production to other similarly low-cost Asian nations, such as India,
Malaysia, or Vietnam, which U.S.-located ICT producers would then source from instead.
ICT tariffs would also harm other kinds of businesses in which ICT inputs account for a
key component of their final products. This would include industries such as aerospace,
appliances, automotive, locomotives, and scientific instruments that produce goods that
contain ICT components (e.g., semiconductors, sensors, and circuit boards). Applying
tariffs on such ICT inputs would raise costs for these industries, harming their
competitiveness. And the effect wouldn’t be marginal. As the World Trade Organization
(WTO) explains:
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated the import price level in 2015
for the category “computers, peripherals and semiconductors” to be around
66 per cent below the respective level of 1996, while the average import prices
for capital goods in total were only about 25 per cent below the level 1996.
Therefore, and as a result of significant price reductions and increased
performance, consumers and producers importing information technology
products as inputs to their industry have benefited from an unprecedented
reduction in the price paid for computational power.14
In other words, applying tariffs on ICT products would only harm the very U.S.
manufacturers that the administration is working so hard to assist.
Yet the biggest negative effect, as documented below, would be on the wide array of
businesses, non-profits, and government organizations that rely on ICT goods in their
production processes. As prices increase, these organizations would invest less in these ICT-
based capital goods, lowering their rate of productivity growth. The same dynamic would
also apply to American consumers who increasingly use a wide variety of digital goods in
their daily lives, from smartphones to smart appliances. In 2014, Americans spent $1,160
per capita on ICT goods and services, up 6 percent from the year prior.15 And for many of
these goods and services, consumers are using them as “prosumers,” helping to drive
efficiency and productivity. A case in point is when consumers use their smartphones for e-
banking or e-retailing.
ITIF shares the Trump administration’s goal of bolstering U.S. manufacturing, including
of high-value-added ICT products such as tablets and semiconductors. But the way to
achieve this is by focusing on ensuring that production and development, especially of
next-generation ICT products, occurs in the United States and that the value chains
supporting such are constituted domestically, which will require policies such as robust

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
PAGE 4 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
research and development funding and effective public-private partnerships like the
growing Manufacturing USA network of Institutes of Manufacturing Innovation.16
Put simply, tariffs aren’t going to deliver the ICT goods.
MODELING THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF TARIFFS ON CHINESE ICT IMPORTS
This report analyses the economic impact of tariff rates of 10 percent and 25 percent on
ICT imports from China. These include products like computers, servers, smartphones,
semiconductor manufacturing and testing equipment, software and scientific instruments,
as well as most of the parts and accessories of these.
Under a 10 percent tariff rate, economic growth would slow by 0.041 percent in the first
year after tariff implementation, and the economy would forego a cumulative $163 billion
in economic growth over the ensuing 10 years. Under a 25 percent tariff rate, economic
growth would decrease by 0.105 percent in the first year and the economy would forsake a
cumulative $332 billion in economic growth over 10 years.
This slower economic growth would translate into the average American household’s
income being $150 to $306 less in year 10 than it would have been if such tariffs were not
introduced. We do not model the direct effect of higher prices on consumers, because
tariffs represent a transfer payment—consumers pay tariffs and the government receives the
revenue. In contrast, the effect of higher prices on ICT products from tariffs is a direct cost
to the economy, limiting growth.
To summarize the relationship between tariffs on ICT imports and economic growth:
Tariffs raise the price of ICT products (for the same dollar value, consumers can purchase
less ICT), and since ICT products become more costly, businesses and consumers invest
less in ICT products, which results in the economy having a smaller stock of computers
and other such productivity-enhancing tools. As a consequence, productivity growth is
slower than it would be otherwise. Figure 1 summarizes this conceptual model, which
serves as the basis for the economic analysis that follows. (A detailed methodology can be
found in the Appendix.)
Figure 1: Conceptual Framework for Analyzing the Economic Impact of Tariffs

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
PAGE 5 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
This report first calculates the trade flows in ICT goods between the United States and the
world, and then between the United States and China, identifying the flow of final goods
(products for direct consumption and investment) and intermediate goods (inputs used for
further production). The analysis relies on conservative and well-documented price
elasticities for the consumption of ICT in response to price changes, whereby an increase in
prices of 1 percent decreases consumption by 1 percent.17 Next, we estimate the current
stock of ICT capital in the U.S. economy. Then we estimate the level of ICT investment
(controlling for how final and intermediate goods impact investment differently) under the
status quo and under tariff rates of 10 percent and 25 percent on China-produced ICT
imports. Given the expected change in ICT investment, we calculate the change in
economic growth using an estimate that a 1 percent decrease in a country’s ICT capital
stock decreases productivity by 0.06 percent.18
In 2016, U.S. businesses, consumers, and other entities invested $1.2 trillion in ICT—56
percent in software, 22 percent in telecommunications equipment, and 22 percent in IT
hardware. (U.S. ICT investment has been increasing by 4.2 percent per year since 2012.)
Of this, just under 40 percent ($450 billion) comes from ICT imports, with China
supplying $180 billion. To put that in context, China supplies just under 12 percent of
U.S. ICT investment. In contrast to overall ICT investment increasing, ICT imports have
been decreasing by 0.6 percent per year since 2012. This means that as U.S. investment in
ICT has increased, a greater proportion of these investments have stemmed from U.S.-
produced ICT goods and services.
ITIF estimates that in the first year after the United States ratifies a 10 percent tariff on
Chinese ICT imports, Chinese ICT imports would decrease by $20.6 billion. This would
mean a decrease in overall ICT investment by $21.9 billion, or 1.8 percent. This would in
turn reduce the growth of ICT capital stock by 0.69 percent. This decline in capital stock
growth would reduce productivity growth by 0.041 percent in the short run. A 25 percent
tariff would lead to a 0.105 percent decrease in productivity growth.
Against the baseline 3 percent annual GDP growth projected by the Office of Management
and Budget, in the forthcoming years a 10 percent tariff on Chinese ICT imports would
mean $8 billion lower U.S. GDP growth after the first year, $66 billion after the fifth, and
$163 billion after the tenth, on a cumulative basis. Under a 25 percent tariff regime, the
estimated economic losses would be $20 billion after the first year, $134 billion after the
fifth year, and $332 billion after the tenth (see figure 2). For an average American
household, a 10 percent tariff on Chinese ICT imports would mean that, after 10 years, its
annual household income would be $150 less than it would have been without the tariffs,
and under a 25 percent tariff, $306 less.
For an average
American household,
a 10 percent tariff on
Chinese ICT imports
would mean that after
10 years, its annual
household income
would be $150 less
than it would have
been without tariffs,
and under a 25
percent tariff,
$306 less.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
PAGE 6 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
Figure 2: Cumulative GDP Forgone if Tariffs Are Levied on Chinese ICT Imports (US $Billions)

THE RIGHT WAY TO CONFRONT CHINESE INNOVATION MERCANTILISM
As ITIF has documented in numerous reports, including “Enough Is Enough: Confronting
Chinese Innovation Mercantilism” (2012) and “Stopping China’s Mercantilism: A
Doctrine of Constructive, Alliance-Backed Confrontation” (2017), China represents the
world’s leading practitioner of “innovation mercantilist” practices, which constitute the
single greatest trade threat to both America’s economy and the global trading system.19
China’s mercantilist practices are rampant and include policies such as: forced intellectual
property (IP) or technology transfer as a condition of market access; data or production
localization requirements; production or export subsidies; unbalanced licensing and
investment regimes; manipulation of standards; and many others.
As such, the Trump administration is right to have undertaken a comprehensive review of
America’s trade relationship with China under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974. The
goal must be to ensure that America’s enterprises are able to trade, invest, and sell on free
and fair terms. But any steps to pressure China into better behavior should also be in
America’s economic interests. Blanket tariffs applied across entire categories of
productivity-boosting capital goods, especially on ICT, would reduce investment in these
technologies in the United States, thus decreasing U.S. productivity, competitiveness, and
economic growth.
To be sure, as ITIF noted in its response to the administration’s Request for Public
Comments as part of its “Section 301 Investigation into China’s Acts, Policies, and
Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation,” strong
action to confront Chinese mercantilism is necessary.20 Such actions must be initiated from
a perspective not of U.S. protectionism but of protecting a free and fair global trading
system that has produced tremendous value for the United States and for the global
economy when participants have played by the rules. The administration’s policies must
-$8
-$66
-$163
-$20
-$134
-$332-$350
-$300
-$250
-$200
-$150
-$100
-$50
$0
1 Year 5 Years 10 Years
10% Tariff 25% Tariff

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
PAGE 7 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
also be specifically designed to enroll like-minded allies in the cause of confronting Chinese
mercantilism; we cannot fight this battle alone—nor should we want to. Conducting such
a battle one-on-one would likely produce a tit-for-tat retaliation from China.
Rather, we need a targeted approach that also works to enlist our allies. As ITIF suggested
in its response to the administration’s call for public comment, more-targeted policy steps
are available to contest Chinese mercantilism. These include:
 Working with our allies to create and maintain a comprehensive “bill of
particulars” on Chinese innovation-mercantilist policies and practices, deciding
which elements can be brought to the WTO for action and which need new rules.

 Collaborating with like-minded countries to bring a WTO case against China for
its IP and technology transfer mandates and/or its extensive system of market-
distorting production subsidies.

 Ensuring reciprocity in IP and technology licensing agreements.

 Updating the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) to
reflect the realities of modern state-led capitalism and if necessary requiring
separate reviews for investment from state-directed economies.

 Placing a temporary ban on all technology transfers to any Chinese state-owned,
state-controlled, or substantially state-funded company if the technology is part of
a stated Chinese industrial policy goal or sector for which China’s government has
set explicit import-substitution targets.

 Requiring notification to the U.S. government on a confidential basis of
technology licenses to China and of transactions in China in which the Chinese
government or Chinese government-affiliated entities are involved.

 Denying use of the U.S. banking system to companies benefitting from stolen IP
and requiring Chinese-headquartered enterprises that wish to list on U.S.
stock exchanges to provide audited books according to Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles.

 Continuing not to recognize China as a market economy and amending U.S. trade
law to reflect that non-market economy status includes state planning and control
over IP and technology.

 Permitting the U.S. Trade Representative to hire outside counsel for WTO
disputes, as many countries (such as China) do, particularly for more technically
complex matters.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
PAGE 8 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
China’s innovation mercantilism represents a serious and systemic threat to America’s
economy and especially to the health, competitiveness, and viability of America’s advanced-
technology enterprises and industries. The threat demands a forceful, concerted, and
thoughtful response. But blanket tariffs on broad categories of ICT goods would do more
harm than good to the U.S. economy.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
PAGE 9 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
APPENDIX: DETAILED METHODOLOGY
Data for this analysis comes from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, the U.S. Census
Bureau, the UN Comtrade and Main Aggregate database, the World Bank, the World Input-
Output tables, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the World
Trade Organization, the Conference Board, and the White House Office of Management
and Budget. The analysis builds on a framework ITIF developed in its 2017 analysis “How
Joining the Information Technology Agreement Spurs Growth in Developing Nations.”21
Data for calculating trade in ICT goods comes from the United Nations Comtrade
Database.22 The database provides the value and weight of imports and exports between each
country and its trading partners, broken down by year and commodity type. The database
releases trade data according to three classification systems for traded goods. Of these three
systems, this analysis uses two. The first is the Harmonized Commodity Description and
Coding System (HS). This system is used most often to identify which products countries
enact tariffs on (or other forms of trade barriers). In this system, there are over 5,000 distinct
goods categories, with these categories revised every four to six years. Currently, the HS2012
is the most up-to-date classification system. The second is the Broad Economic Categories
(BEC) system. This system classifies goods into capital, intermediate, and consumption
goods. For purpose of this analysis, we collapsed the categories of capital and consumption
goods into a final goods category. Currently, this system is in its fourth revision, with the fifth
revision slated to come into effect by the end of 2018. To merge these two classification
systems, the United Nations provides mapping correlation tables to allow users of the trade
data to convert a product identified in one classification system into the other.
ITIF identified 269 ICT products by their HS codes. One minor limitation is that a handful
of ICT products do not have HS codes attached to them and thus cannot be properly
identified within the trade data. This arises because such products may be new or very
specialized, and as such do not have classification codes attached to them. These
“unidentified” products (which consist of more than just ICT goods) comprise approximately
2 percent of trade in ICT products.
ITIF used 2016 as the base year for our analysis, as 2017 trade data has yet to be fully
released. U.S. trade flows, both imports and exports, were calculated for total trade in these
269 ICT products (according to their HS codes). In addition, ITIF calculated the real change
in ICT trade flows from 2011 to 2016 using relevant GDP deflators available from the
World Bank. Next, import values for these 269 products were summed to get the total value
of ICT imports. Then ICT trade attributable to China and the rest of the world were
separated and mapped onto their BEC equivalents to identify the value of final and
intermediate goods imported from China.
To determine the change in ICT imports, we employ a price elasticity of import demand of -
1. This means that a 1 percent increase in price decreases the quantity demanded for ICT
products by 1 percent. This value is chosen as a proxy for developed countries and is based on
literature tracking the change in the price elasticity of demand for ICT.23

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
PAGE 10 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
Using this proxy value does not take into consideration the fact that the price elasticities of
import demand are sensitive toward change in exchange rates and other trade frictions.
Realistically, each ICT product has its own demand elasticity, but such estimates have yet to
be developed. Furthermore, ITIF uses the total value of imports as a proxy for physical
quantity demanded. This assumes that the value of imports captures the physical quantity
demanded, although the change in prices would in turn have increased physical quantity of
ICT goods imported (i.e., 10 CPUs cost $1,000, thus quantity demanded is 10, introducing
a 10 percent tariff would mean that a CPU costs only $110, but with that $1,000, one can
now only get 9 CPUs; but since the value of that is still $1,000, it does not accurately
represent the change in physical quantity). Note that this change is not the price elasticity of
import demand, it is the effect of using monetary value as a proxy for quantity demanded.
Another limitation is that the price elasticity of import demand only estimates changes at the
margins, rather than a change from no tariffs to a tariff levy. A study that analyzed global
effects from the ITA found that countries that completely eliminated their tariffs had a much
larger trade-creation impact than those countries that gradually reduced their tariffs to zero.24
(In other words, going from, say, a 6 percent tariff to no tariff had a greater trade effect than
going from an 8 percent tariff to a 2 percent tariff.) This is because reducing tariffs to zero
reduces border formalities considerably and demonstrates lock-in and a firm commitment,
easing the trade in goods and facilitating efficient global supply chains. Conversely, by
enacting tariffs, the United States would raise the transaction costs for trade and may see a
larger decrease in imports (i.e., a 10 percent tariff may induce a decrease in quantity
demanded for ICT by much more than 10 percent).
In summary, for this analysis, we assume that a 10 percent tariff placed on ICT imports from
China decreases the total import value of these goods by 10 percent (and a 25 percent tariff
an equivalent 25 percent decrease in value).
To estimate how the decrease in ICT imports from China impacts the U.S. economy, we first
estimate how the decrease in Chinese ICT imports leads to a decrease in U.S. ICT
investment. Then we estimate the economic impact using the elasticity of ICT capital (a 1
percent increase in ICT stock increases GDP by 0.06 percent) and compare that to the
baseline scenario of GDP growth under no change to ICT investment. There are a number of
studies that estimate the elasticity of ICT capital. For example, Cardona, Kretschmer, and
Strobel conducted a meta-analysis of 29 economic studies that examine the relationship
between ICT investments and economic growth, and suggest that the results from those
studies cluster at a value of 0.06.25 A more recent study released in early 2018 by Thomas
Niebel analyzes the impact of ICT capital on economic growth using data from 2000 to
2010 and clusters countries according to their economic development status. Depending on
his model specifications, he too finds an ICT capital elasticity of approximately 0.06.26
Data to estimate current ICT investment, composition of ICT investment, and capital stocks
come from The Conference Board. Basic economic data such as GDP and gross capital
formation (i.e., capital investments) comes from the United Nations Main Aggregates
Database (with the latest data for 2016). Data for the growth rate in ICT capital investment

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
PAGE 11 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
comes from the OECD productivity statistics series. Real growth rates for these indicators
were calculated from 2011 to the latest year data was available and averaged.
Using these indicators, ITIF estimates that approximately 32 percent of annual U.S.
investment goes into ICT. And the composition of these ICT investments are 22 percent
into IT hardware, 22 percent into telecommunications, and 56 percent into software. Each
year, these types of ICT investments depreciate by 30 percent for IT hardware, 12 percent for
telecommunications, and 46 percent for software. Using the net perpetual inventory method,
ITIF estimates the current stock of ICT capital and projects economic growth under the
baseline scenario of no trade shocks to the current growth rate of ICT investment. ICT
investment is split into two categories, domestically produced (73 percent) and imported (27
percent); domestically produced investments increase 4.2 percent per annum, and imported
investments decrease at 0.6 percent per annum. This baseline estimate allows us to formulate
a counterfactual estimate as to how much GDP will be lost under a reduction in ICT
investment from levying tariffs on Chinese ICT imports.
To estimate the decrease in ICT investment accrued due to reduced Chinese ICT imports,
ITIF estimated the value of final ICT goods imported from China and intermediate ICT
goods imported from China, and this is modelled in as a trade shock (i.e., a one-time static
decrease in trade flows). Final ICT import goods comprise 81 percent of ICT imports from
China and represents a direct decrease in ICT investment for the following year. Intermediate
ICT import goods make up 19 percent of ICT imports and has a partial impact on ICT
investment. This arises because only a portion of intermediate goods imported is invested in
the economy—U.S. producers use imported intermediate goods to produce final goods
consumed both in the United States or exported to other countries.
The World Input Output tables provide data on how the share of intermediate goods
produced by other countries that is contained in a unit of final output (for example, a
computer produced by the United States may contain $100 worth of components from
China, $250 worth of components from Japan, $175 worth of components from Mexico),
and the share of final output that is consumed by a country or exported. To that effect, we
assume that U.S. ICT production contains 5 percent of Chinese imports and that 33 percent
of U.S. ICT production is purchased and remains in the United States.
Given a reduction in intermediate and final goods imports from China under either tariff
scenario, a new value for annual ICT investment can be calculated. ITIF then calculates the
estimated change in ICT capital stocks, and its induced impact on economic growth in the
case of a 10 percent tariff and 25 percent tariff on ICT imports from China. We then
compare these two cases against the baseline projections to calculate GDP forgone.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
PAGE 12 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
ENDNOTES
1. Dale W. Jorgenson and Khuong M. Vu, “The ICT Revolution, World Economic Growth, and Policy
Issues,” Telecommunications Policy 40 (2016) 383-397.
2. Ibid.; Maya Eden and Paul Gaggl, “On the Welfare Implications of Automation,” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 7487, April 20, 2016,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2690016.
3. U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Gross-Domestic-Product-(GDP)-by-Industry Data (Value Added
1947-2016; accessed March 13, 2018), https://www.bea.gov/industry/gdpbyind_data.htm.
4. Stephen J. Ezell and John J. Wu, “How Joining the ITA Spurs Growth in Developing Nations,”
(Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, May 2017), 9,
https://itif.org/publications/2017/05/22/how-joining-information-technology-agreement-spurs-growth-
developing-nations.
5. Robert D. Atkinson and Andrew S. McKay, Digital Prosperity: Understanding the Economic Benefits of the
Information Technology Revolution (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, March 2007),
3, http://www.itif.org/files/digital_prosperity.pdf.
6. Centre for Economics and Business Research, “O2 Individual Productivity Index,” (Centre for
Economics and Business Research, October 2013), https://cebr.com/reports/o2-individual-productivity-
index/.
7. United States International Trade Commission (U.S. ITC), Digital Trade in the U.S. and Global
Economies, Part 2 Publication 4485, Investigation No. 332-540, (U.S. ITC, August 2014),
http://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4485.pdf.
8. Robert D. Atkinson and J. John Wu, “State New Economy Index 2017,” (Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation, November 2017), http://www2.itif.org/2017-state-new-economy-index.pdf.
9. Ibid.
10. United States International Trade Commission, Digital Trade in the U.S. and Global Economies, Part 2.
11. Matthieu Pélissié du Rausas et al., “Internet Matters: The Net’s Sweeping Impact on Growth, Jobs, and
Prosperity,” (McKinsey Global Institute, May 2011),
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/internet_matters.
12. Stephen J. Ezell and John J. Wu, “Assessing the Benefits of Full ITA Participation for Indonesia, Laos,
Sri Lanka, and Vietnam” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, September 2017), 6,
http://www2.itif.org/2017-benefits-full-ita.pdf.
13. Robert D. Atkinson, “Designing a Global Trading System to Maximize Innovation” Global Policy Vol 5.,
Issue 1 (March 2014), http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1758-5899.12120/pdf.
14. World Trade Organization, 20 Years of the Information Technology Agreement (Geneva, Switzerland,
World Trade Organization, June 2017), 25,
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/ita20years_2017_full_e.pdf.
15. Digital Content Next, “U.S. and Global Consumer Spending on Media Content and Technology
Continues to Rise,” March 11, 2016, https://digitalcontentnext.org/blog/2016/03/11/us-and-global-
consumer-spending-on-media-content-and-technology-continues-to-rise/.
16. Robert D. Atkinson and Stephen J. Ezell, “Ten Principles to Guide the Trump Administration's
Manufacturing Strategy” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, January 2017),
https://itif.org/publications/2017/01/31/ten-principles-guide-trump-administrations-manufacturing-
strategy.
17. Gilbert Cette and Jimmy Lopez, “ICT Demand Behavior: An International Comparison,” Economics of
Innovation and New Technology 12, (2012): 397–410. Cette and Lopez calculate the elasticity for ICT
demand for the United States over a 20-year period from 1980 to 2005, showing that the price-demand
for ICT changes over time. In the 1980s, price elasticity was at -2 and has increased than plateaued at -

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
PAGE 13 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018

0.9 since the early 2000s. (Note that the elasticity used here differs from the ones used in two previous
ITIF reports, where our models correlated a 1 percent drop in ICT prices to a 1.3 percent increase in
ICT consumption, as the elasticity is higher in developing countries. This study uses 1 as indicated by
more recent research on the effect for developed countries such as the United States.)
18. M. Cardona, T. Kretschmer, and T. Strobel, “ICT and Productivity: Conclusions From the Empirical
Literature,” Information Economics and Policy 25, (2013): 109–125; Thomas Niebel, “ICT and economic
growth—Comparing developing, emerging and developed countries,” World Development 104,
December 2, 2017, pp. 197-211.
19. Robert D. Atkinson, Nigel Cory, and Stephen J. Ezell, “Stopping China’s Mercantilism: A Doctrine of
Constructive, Alliance-Backed Confrontation” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation,
March 2017), http://www2.itif.org/2017-stopping-china-mercantilism.pdf; Stephen J. Ezell and Robert
D. Atkinson “False Promises: the Yawning Gap Between China’s WTO Commitments and Practices”
(Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, September 2015), http://www2.itif.org/2015-
false-promises-china.pdf; Robert D. Atkinson, “Enough is Enough: Confronting Chinese Innovation
Mercantilism,” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, February 2012),
http://www2.itif.org/2012-enough-enoughchinese-mercantilism.pdf.
20. Hearing and Request for Public Comments: China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology
Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation (October 25, 2017) (filing of Stephen J. Ezell, VP Global
Innovation Policy, Information Technology and Innovation Foundation), http://www2.itif.org/2017-
china-transfer-ip-innovation.pdf.
21. Ezell and Wu, “How Joining the ITA Spurs Growth in Developing Nations,” 9.
22. United Nations Comtrade database, http://comtrade.un.org/.
23. Cette and Lopez, “ICT Demand Behavior: an International Comparison.”
24. Christian Henn and Arevik Mkrtchyan, “The Layers of the Information Technology Agreement Impact,”
(World Trade Organization Working Paper No. ERSD-2015-01, February 2015),
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/reser_e/ersd201501_e.pdf.
25. Cardona, Kretschmer and, Strobel, “ICT and Productivity: Conclusions From the Empirical Literature.”

ERRATA
This report was updated on March 19, 2018. Estimates of the percentage change in
economic growth due to ICT tariffs were misstated in the second full paragraph on page 4
and have been corrected. Estimates of GDP growth projections over 10 years have been
clarified in the last paragraph on page 5. These changes have no bearing on the report’s
main findings regarding total economic growth projections over 10 years or on projected
changes to household income.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
PAGE 14 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2018
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Randolph Court, Nigel Cory, and Alex Key for
providing input to this report. Any errors or omissions are the authors’ alone.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Robert D. Atkinson is the founder and president of the Information Technology
and Innovation Foundation. He is also the co-a uthor of the books Big is
Beautiful: Debunking the Myth of Small Business (MIT, 2018) and Innovation
Economics: The Race for Global Advantage (Yale, 2012). Atkinson received his
Ph.D. in city and regional planning from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill in 1989.
Stephen J. Ezell is ITIF Vice President for Global Innovation Policy and focuses
on science, technology, and innovation policy as well as international
competitiveness and trade policy issues. He is the co-author of Innovating in a
Service Driven Economy: Insights Application, and Practice (Palgrave McMillan,
2015) and Innovation Economics: The Race for Global Advantage (Yale 2012).
J. John Wu is an economic analyst at ITIF. He holds a B.A. in economics and
sociology from The College of Wooster.
ABOUT ITIF
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) is a nonprofit,
nonpartisan research and educational institute focusing on the intersection of
technological innovation and public policy. Recognized as the wo rld’s leading
science and technology think tank, ITIF’s mission is to formulate and promote
policy solutions that accelerate innovation and boost productivity to spur
growth, opportunity, and progress.
FOR MORE INFORMATION, VISIT US AT WWW.ITIF.ORG
