
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021
Moore’s Law Under Attack:
The Impact of China’s Policies
on Global Semiconductor Innovation
STEPHEN EZELL | FEBRUARY 2021
China’s mercantilist strategy to grab market share in the global semiconductor industry is fueling
the rise of inferior innovators at the expense of superior firms in the United States and other
market-led economies. That siphons away resources that would otherwise be invested in the
virtuous cycle of cutting-edge R&D that has driven semiconductor innovation for decades.
KEY TAKEAWAYS

▪ No industry has an innovation dynamic quite like the semiconductor industry, where
“Moore’s Law” has held for decades: The number of transistors on a microchip doubles
about every two years, producing twice the processing power at half the cost.
▪ The pattern persists because the semiconductor industry vies with biopharmaceuticals to
be the world’s most R&D-intensive industry—a virtuous cycle that depends on one
generation of innovation to finance investment in the next.
▪ To continue heavy investment in R&D and CapEx, semiconductor firms need access to
large global markets where they can compete on fair terms to amortize and recoup their
costs. When they face excess, non-market-based competition, innovation suffers.
▪ China’s state-directed strategy to vault into a leadership position in the semiconductor
industry distorts the global market with massive subsidization, IP theft, state-financed
foreign firm acquisitions, and other mercantilist practices.
▪ Inferior innovators thus have a leg up—and the global semiconductor innovation curve is
bending downward. In fact, ITIF estimates there would be 5,100 more U.S. patents in
the industry annually if not for China’s innovation mercantilist policies.
▪ To address the challenge Chinese innovation mercantilism poses to the semiconductor
industry, the United States needs to work with like-minded nations while enhancing its
own innovation capacity in the sector.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 1
INTRODUCTION
Semiconductors represent perhaps the world’s most-important industry, as they are the
foundation of a wide array of products and services.1 Moreover, they play a key enabling role in
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), high-performance computing (HPC),
5G, the Internet of Things, and autonomous systems, among others.
Unlike industries in which China has already gained significant global market share—including
high-speed rail, solar panels, and telecom equipment—China’s global market share and
competitiveness in semiconductors, especially with regard to Chinese-headquartered firms, is
still quite modest, with the global leaders largely based in Europe, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan,
and the United States.
It is because of this that China has targeted the industry for global competitive advantage, as
detailed in a number of government plans, including “Made in China 2025.” China has taken a
wide range of steps to propel itself into becoming a major global semiconductor competitor.
However, while some of these policy actions are fair and legitimate, most are not and are
“innovation mercantilist” in nature, seeking to unfairly benefit Chinse firms at the expense of
more-innovative foreign firms.
Competition can drive innovation, but only if it is market-based. When Apple came out with the
iPhone and helped drive Blackberry from the market, this spurred innovation, because it was
based on consumer demand for a better product, with innovation driving the change. In contrast,
Chinese semiconductor firms lag significantly behind the global leaders, usually by two
generations of chip development, and Chinese firms patent less than the global leaders. As such,
Chinese chip sales largely depend on unfair support from the Chinese government; and each sale
reduces the pace of global semiconductor innovation by taking market share and revenue away
from more-innovative non-Chinese firms. In fact, this report estimates that without Chinese
innovation mercantilist policies in the semiconductor industry, there would be more than 5,000
additional U.S. patents in the industry annually than there are now.
This report provides an overview of the semiconductor industry and the innovation dynamics
driving it, including an explication of why innovation mercantilist policies harm innovation. It
then describes Chinese innovation mercantilism in the sector and examines the deleterious effect
of China’s policies on global innovation in the sector. Finally, it provides policy recommendations
for how policymakers can address these challenges.
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE GLOBAL SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
The term “semiconductor” refers to a solid substance—such as silicon or geranium—which has
electrical conductivity properties allowing it to be used either as a conductor or an insulator.
Semiconductors, also referred to as integrated circuits (ICs), constitute the brains powering
electronic equipment, providing the computational and storage capacity underpinning digital
computing. Semiconductors pack as many as 30 billion transistors onto a chip as small as the
size of a square centimeter, with circuits measured at the nanoscale (“nm,” a unit of length

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021 PAGE 2
equal to one-millionth of a meter) level, with the very-newest semiconductor fabrication facilities
producing semiconductors at 5 nm and 3 nm scales.2 Leading-edge semiconductors contain
transistors that are 10,000 times thinner than a human hair, operating at tolerances smaller
even than the size of the coronavirus. In 2019, the global semiconductor industry generated
$412 billion in revenues and shipped over 1 trillion semiconductors.3 Analysts expect the
industry to grow to $730 billion by 2026.4
In 2019, U.S.-headquartered semiconductor enterprises held a 47 percent market share of
global semiconductor industry sales (down about 5 percent from the 51.8 percent share they
held in 2012), followed by South Korean firms with 19 percent, Japanese and European firms
with 10 percent each, Taiwanese firms with 6 percent, and Chinese enterprises with 5 percent.
(See figure 1.)
However, production shares are different, as many U.S. semiconductors are produced in places
such as Taiwan and China. In fact, as of 2019, the United States possessed just 11 percent of
global semiconductor fabrication capacity, whereas South Korea held 28 percent, Taiwan 22
percent, Japan 16 percent, China 12 percent, and Europe 3 percent. (See figure 2.) China’s
share of global semiconductor fabrication capacity doubled from 2015 to 2019. As of year-end
2020, there were just 20 semiconductor fabrication facilities (“fabs”) operating in the
United States.5
Figure 1: 2019 Global semiconductor industry sales market share by nationally headquartered company6
United States,
47%
South Korea,
19%
Japan, 10%
Europe, 10%
Taiwan, 6%
China, 5% Other, 3%

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 3
Figure 2: Global semiconductor fabrication capacity by country7

The four main types of semiconductor are logic chips, memory (usually dynamic random-access
memory (DRAM) or NAND) chips, analog chips (those which generate a signal or transform signal
characteristics, and which are especially prevalent in automotive and audio applications), and
discrete chips (ones designed to perform specific electronic functions). In terms of market share
by location of company headquarters for each major segment of the global semiconductor
industry, in 2019, the United States led clearly in logic and analog, South Korea led in memory,
(followed by the United States), and European firms led in discrete semiconductors. Chinese-
headquartered companies registered but a 9 percent share of the logic market sector and a 5
percent share of the discrete sector. Moreover, as this report shows, if not for massive Chinese
government interventions to stand up a domestic industry, Chinese-headquartered companies
likely wouldn’t even have had these shares. (See figure 3.)
Figure 3: Semiconductor industry market share, by segment, by nationally headquartered company, 20198

0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
South Korea Taiwan Japan China United States Europe Other
2015 2019
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Logic
Analog
Memory
Discrete
61%
63%
23%
23%
6%
0%
65%
5%
6%
9%
9%
25%
9%
22%
0%
42%
9%
0%
9%
5%
United States South Korea Japan Europe Taiwan China Other Asia-Pacific

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 4
In 2019, the logic segment accounted for $107 billion in global sales, memory for $106 billion,
and analog for $54 billion.9 Intel is the world’s leader in logic chip market share. Texas
Instruments, Analog Devices, and Infineon account for the market leaders in the analog chip
market, with market shares of 19, 10, and 7 percent, respectively, as of Q1 2020.
10 Samsung
and SK Hynix (both headquartered in South Korea) followed by Micron (United States) lead the
world in DRAM production, accounting respectively for 44 percent, 29 percent, and 21 percent
of global market share as of Q1 2020.11 Intel, Samsung, TSMC, SK Hynix, and Micron led
competitors in final forecasted 2020 semiconductor sales. (See Table 1.) This table also shows
the strength of the U.S. fabless sector: U.S.-domiciled semiconductor design companies
accounted for 65 percent of fabless global sales in 2019, with leaders including Qualcomm.
Broadcom, NVIDIA, Apple, and AMD.12
Table 1: Top 15 2020 forecast semiconductor global sales leaders13
Company Headquarters 2020 Final Forecasted Semiconductor
Sales Revenues (millions)
Intel United States $73,894
Samsung South Korea $60,482
TSMC Taiwan $45,420
SK Hynix South Korea $26,470
Micron United States $21,659
Qualcomm United States $19,374
Broadcom Inc. United States $17,006
NVIDIA United States $15,884
Texas Instruments United States $13,088
Infineon Germany $11,069
MediaTek Taiwan $10,781
Kioxia Japan $10,720
Apple United States $10,040
ST Europe $9,952
AMD United States $9,519

As Table 1 illustrates, the industry is highly globalized, with a large number of countries fielding
enterprises competing across multiple facets of semiconductor production, from semiconductor
design, to manufacturing, to ATP (assembly, test, and packaging) activities. In fact, each
segment of the semiconductor value chain has, on average, firms from 25 countries involved in
the direct supply chain and firms from 23 countries involved in support functions. Over 12
countries have enterprises directly engaged in semiconductor chip design and 39 countries have
at least 1 semiconductor fabrication facility, while over 25 countries have enterprises engaging
in ATP activities.
14 (See figure 4.) A considerable amount of value gets created along each
segment of the semiconductor production process, with the U.S International Trade Commission
(U.S. ITC) estimating that 90 percent of the value of a semiconductor chip is split evenly

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 5
between the design and manufacturing phases, with the final 10 percent of value production
accounted for through ATP activities.15
Figure 4: Number of countries with enterprises participating in various phases of semiconductor production
activity16

The global breadth and scale of the value chains needed to produce some of the world’s most
sophisticated technological devices have given rise to a number of business/operating models in
the industry. (See figure 5.) Historically (dating back to the 1950s and 1960s), the
semiconductor industry consisted primarily of integrated device manufacturers (IDMs)—that is,
firms which conduct all key facets of semiconductor manufacturing, especially design and
fabrication, internally. Firms such as Infineon, Intel, Micron, Renesas, Samsung, SK Hynix, and
Texas Instruments remain leading IDM players to this day.
Figure 5: Operating models in the semiconductor industry17

In 1987, Morris Chang founded the Taiwanese firm TSMC (Taiwan Semiconductor
Manufacturing Company), which pioneered the foundry business model, concentrating on
contract manufacturing for other semiconductor companies, often ones focused on designing
semiconductors for application-specific purposes such as AI, wireless communications, or HPC
uses. This essentially represents outsourced manufacturing, or “manufacturing as a service”—
and it revolutionized the industry, giving rise to a host of new players beyond TSMC, including
America’s Global Foundries, China’s Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation
(SMIC), and Taiwan’s United Microelectronics Corporation (UMC).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 6
The advent of foundries in turn supported the rise of the fabless industry; that is, companies
which focus on semiconductor chip design, such as (now-fabless) Advanced Micro Devices
(AMD) (chips for AI, HPC, and graphics), NVIDIA (graphics chips), and Qualcomm (5G and other
wireless chips). Collectively, this is referred to as the “fabless-foundry” model.
Outsourced ATP (which may also be referred to as outsourced assembly and test, or OSAT) is
performed by a number of global players, including Amkor (United States), ASE Technology
(Malaysia), J-Devices (Japan), Power-Tech (China), and Siliconware Precision Industries
(Taiwan). On the front end of the process are companies and consortia that focus on
semiconductor research and development (R&D) activity, such as CEA-Leti (France), Imec
(Belgium), ITRI (Taiwan), SEMATECH (United States), and the Semiconductor Research
Corporation (United States).
Whereas almost 30 companies manufactured integrated circuits at the leading-edge of technology 20
years ago, only 5 do so today (Intel, Samsung, TSMC, Micron, and SK Hynix).
Also of high import are another set of companies—notably Applied Materials (United States),
ASML (the Netherlands), KLA Tencor (United States), and Lam Research (United States)—which
manufacture the machines and tooling equipment that run semiconductor fabs. The global
semiconductor manufacturing equipment industry generated $62 billion in revenues itself in
2020, with revenues expected to rise at a 9 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR) to
$96 billion by 2025.18 Finally, a number of enterprises, especially ones from Japan, South
Korea, and Taiwan, manufacture chemicals and components essential to the semiconductor
manufacturing process. For instance, fluorinated polyimides, a group of specialty polymers that
provide physical strength and heat resistance, are produced by Daikin Chemical (Japan), DuPont
(United States), Kaneka Asahi Kasei (Japan), and Taimide Technology (Taiwan).19
In other words, a key driver of the global semiconductor industry has been specialization, as
enterprises—and indeed entire industrial ecosystem clusters within nations—have elected to
concentrate their competitive energies on mastering key facets of the semiconductor production
process (for instance, Dutch strength in extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography, Japanese strength
in chemicals and production equipment, Korean strength in memory chips, Taiwanese strength
in foundries, or Malaysian and Vietnamese strength in ATP activities).
INNOVATION DYNAMICS IN THE GLOBAL SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
There’s been no industry with an innovation dynamic so clearly and effectively codified as the
semiconductor industry’s Moore’s Law. Coined by Intel co-founder Gordon Moore, the “law”
(which technologically speaking refers to “process-node scaling”) represents the notion that the
number of transistors on a microchip doubles about every two years, effectively meaning a
semiconductor’s capability in terms of speed and processing is doubled, even though its cost is
halved. Moore’s prediction has proven remarkably prescient—and up to the present day at least,
highly reliable. The innovation process captured by Moore’s Law has delivered tremendous
improvements in semiconductor performance and cost: The number of transistors per wafer has
increased by a factor of almost 10 million (since Moore articulated the law in 1975), yielding a
100,000-fold gain in processor speed and a cost reduction of more than 45 percent per year for
comparable performance.20 (See figure 6.) Moore’s Law has also offered somewhat of a guiding

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 7
innovation pathway for the industry, providing an orientation for the efforts of pre-competitive
research consortia and their development of long-term industry roadmaps. However, while some
have come to take Moore’s Law for granted, one study found that the number of researchers
required to achieve Moore’s Law today is more than 18 times larger than the number required in
the early 1970s.21
Figure 6: Increasing performance, decreasing relative costs of semiconductors over the past half-century22

This speaks to an essential point: Innovation in the global semiconductor industry does not arrive
like “manna from heaven,” but rather is the result of quite significant investment, starting with
the R&D process itself but also extending into the costs required to build, and to operate,
modern semiconductor fabs. Intel’s July 2020 announcement that it had fallen at least one year
behind schedule in developing its next major advance in chip-manufacturing technology, that is,
in moving from 10 nm to 7 nm technology (and that it might even have to rely on a competitor’s
manufacturing facilities for some production), served as a stark reminder that innovation in
semiconductors is not easy, inexpensive, or assured.23 Indeed, keeping Moore’s Law on track has
been no sure thing; rather, it’s been the result of hundreds of billions of dollars of investment by
industry players from many nations (complemented by government investment in basic and
applied research) over the preceding decades.
Industry R&D and CapEx Expenditures
In fact, the global semiconductor industry vies with biopharmaceuticals to be the world’s most
R&D-intensive industry. For instance, the top-13 semiconductor firms in the “2019 EU
Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard” invested 18.4 percent of sales in R&D, more than the
biopharma industry. (See figure 7.)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021 PAGE 8
Figure 7: Sector R&D intensity in the “2019 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard”24
Of the top 13 semiconductor companies in the 2019 “EU Industrial R&D Investment
Scoreboard,” six hail from the United States, and the top three most R&D-intensive companies
are Qualcomm, Taiwan’s MediaTek, and America’s AMD. (See Table 2.) In terms of actual
investment, Samsung led with €14.8 billion (approximately $17.6 billion), followed by Huawei
with €12.7 billion ($15 billion), followed by Intel with €11.8 billion ($13.7 billion), although it
should be noted that, of these three companies, Intel is the only one whose business is purely
semiconductor related.25 The 2020 version of the report contains less-extensive firm-level data,
but it finds that Huawei has become the world’s third-largest R&D investor—its level of R&D
having increased by 225 percent over the past five years alone (and by 31.2 percent over the
past year)—while Samsung ranks fourth and Intel eighth among the top 10 global
R&D investors.26
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Top-13
Semiconductor
Enterprises
Pharmaceuticals
& Biotechnology
Sofware and
Computer
Services
Technology
Hardware &
Equipment
Electronic and
Electrical
Equipment
Automobiles and
Parts
Aerospace &
Defense
Health Care
Equipment and
Services

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 9
Table 2: Leading semiconductor investors on the “2019 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard”27
Company Headquarters R&D Investment
(Billions) R&D Intensity (%)
Qualcomm United States €4.88 24.9
MediaTek Taiwan €1.64 24.2
AMD United States €1.25 22.1
NVIDIA United States €2.08 20.3
Intel United States €11.80 19.1
Analog Devices United States €1.02 18.8
Broadcom United States €3.29 18.1
NXP Semiconductors The Netherlands €1.48 18.1
Renesas Electronics Japan €1.01 16.9
Samsung South Korea €14.80 15.3
ST Microelectronics Switzerland €1.18 14.1
Huawei China €12.70 13.9
ASML The Netherlands €1.47 13.4
The industry is also highly capital intensive; with the U.S. semiconductor industry’s global gross
capital expenditures (CapEx) totaling $31.9 billion in 2019, making the industry’s capital
expenditures as a percentage of sales, at 12.5 percent, second only to America’s alternative-
energy sector (although that is likely because they counted installed end use customer
equipment).28 (See figure 8.)
Figure 8: U.S. industries’ capital expenditures as a percent of sales29

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 10
Figure 9: Countries’ headquartered-enterprise’s percent share of global semiconductor industry capital
expenditures, 201930

In terms of global capital investment, in 2019, Korean-headquartered enterprises invested 31
percent of global CapEx in the sector, followed by U.S. companies with 28 percent, Taiwanese
firms with 17 percent, Chinese firms with 10 percent, Japanese firms with 5 percent, and
European firms with 4 percent. (See figure 9.) Again there is concentration among leading
nations, and firms: For instance, in 2014, only three firms (Samsung, Intel, and TSMC)
accounted for 60 percent of all expenditures at global semiconductor factories.31
The global semiconductor industry must be so R&D- and capital-intensive because innovating in
the semiconductor industry requires increasingly complex chip designs at ever-smaller scales,
especially if the industry is to maintain Moore’s Law. And while some believed at the start of the
last decade that the 28 nm threshold would herald the limit of Moore’s Law, materials-
engineering breakthroughs over the past decade in EUV lithography, etching, and thin-film
deposition have brought the current industry frontier to 5 nm, with fairly clear visibility into the
processes needed to get to 3 nm, 2 nm, and even 1 nm-sized integrated circuits.32
The number of researchers required to achieve Moore’s Law (i.e., doubling of computer chip density)
today is more than 18 times larger than the number required in the early 1970s.
Yet the expertise, capital, and scale needed to develop a new semiconductor design—or to build
a new semiconductor fab—is extremely high, and ever-increasing. For instance, the cost of
advancing chip design from the 10 nm to the 7nm level increased by over $100 million, and the
cost of moving from the 7 nm to the 5 nm level will likely nearly double again, increasing from a
cost of $300 million to almost $550 million. (See figure 10.)
Korea, 31%
United States, 28%
Taiwan, 17%
China, 10%
All Others, 5%
Japan, 5%
Europe, 4%

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 11
Figure 10: Cost to advance to next level of chip development (US$, millions)33

And that’s just the cost to design the chip; actually building the fabs to manufacture these ever-
smaller chips only continues to increase as well. In 2019, TSMC announced it would build a
5 nm fab in Arizona at a cost of $12 billion; in 2017, it had announced it was making plans to
build a 3 nm fab in Taiwan at an anticipated cost of $20 billion.34 Overall, as of 2020, it’s
estimated that building a new 14–16 nm fab costs, on average, $13 billion; a 10 nm fab $15
billion; a 7 nm fab $18 billion; and a 5 nm fab $20 billion.35 (See figure 11.)
Figure 11: Average cost to build a new foundry/logic fab (US$, billions)36

Reflective of the increasing cost of competing in the sector, whereas almost 30 companies
manufactured integrated circuits at the leading edge of technology 20 years ago, only 5 do so

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 12
today (Intel, Samsung, TSMC, Micron, and SK Hynix).37 Beyond the cost of building the fabs, it’s
also worth noting the expense of maintaining their ongoing operations. The 10-year cost of a
state-of-the-art fab, including both initial investment and annual operating costs, can reach up to
$40 billion.38
Evidence of the need for companies in the global semiconductor industry to achieve scale to
effectively compete arrives almost daily. For example, in November 2019, AMD acquired Xilinx
in a $35 billion deal. Moreover, the three-largest mergers and acquisitions (M&A) deals of 2020
(involving U.S. companies) were also in semiconductors, including NVIDIA’s $40 billion
proposed acquisition of Arm Holdings (a British chip design firm that had been backed by
Japan’s SoftBank) and Analog Devices’ $20 billion deal to acquire Maxim Integrated Products.39
Factors Enabling Continued Innovation
The semiconductor industry is an innovation-based industry characterized by extremely high fixed
upfront costs of R&D, design, and production equipment, yet incremental costs of production
(i.e., an individual chip comes off the production line at marginal cost).40 Moreover, the industry
fundamentally depends on one generation of innovation to finance investment in the next, so
profits from the 10 nm fab beget the revenues to invest in the 7 nm fab, which make possible the
5 nm and 3 nm fabs of the future. In fact, there is a strong positive correlation (0.93) between
revenue and R&D spending the next year for major semiconductor firms.41 This means that if
more-innovative semiconductor enterprises lose sales to less-innovative Chinese firms, they will
on average reduce R&D spending. This dynamic matters greatly because each generation of
leading-edge semiconductor technology has a lifespan of only two to four years before it is
overtaken by newer technology.42
As such, the ability of the global industry to sustain itself depends on three critical factors: fair
access to global markets, market-based competition to reduce artificial overcapacity and
significant price declines, and minimal intellectual property (IP) theft. To the extent these
factors don’t exist—and as discussed subsequently, they do not because of Chinese government
action—global innovation will be hindered.
First, semiconductor companies need access to large global markets so they can amortize and
recoup their costs across a single large global marketplace. In other words, access to larger
markets better enables them to cover those fixed costs, so that unit costs can be lower (driving
more consumption) and revenues for reinvestment, especially in R&D, higher. This is why firms
in most innovation industries are global. If they can sell in 20 countries rather than 5, expanding
their sales by a factor of four, their costs increase by much less than a factor of four. The more
sales, the more can be plowed back into generating more innovations. This explains why a study
of European firms found that, for high-tech firms, “their capacity for increasing the level of
technological knowledge over time is dependent on their size: the larger the R&D investor, the
higher its rate of technical progress.”
43

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 13
A thriving global semiconductor industry depends upon three critical conditions: fair access to global
markets, market-based competition to reduce artificial overcapacity and significant price declines,
and minimal intellectual property theft.
And given the significant growth in fixed costs of R&D and capital equipment, the ability to
access global markets is more important than it has ever been for the semiconductor industry.
This means that policies to lower trade barriers are particularly important for semiconductor
innovation. Lack of integrated global markets may cause relatively little harm to more-
conventional industries with low fixed-to-marginal cost ratios, such as toys, shoes, and steel. But
market barriers cause serious harm to global innovation in such innovation-based industries as
semiconductors. Access to global markets is also essential to production at large scales, which
matters greatly when learning effects are so significant to the industry. For instance, one study
found an average “learning rate” of roughly 20 percent, meaning that per-unit semiconductor
production costs fell 20 percent every time cumulative output doubled.44
In this sense, Chinese actions regarding access to its market will play a key role in innovation in
the industry. According to one study, China now accounts for 60 percent of global semiconductor
consumption. According to International Business Strategies, in 2019, China accounted for
$212.2 billion of semiconductor industry sales, followed by North America with $59.5 billion,
rest of world with $48.8 billion, Europe with $41.8 billion, and Japan with $38.7 billion. (See
figure 12.)
Figure 12: Global semiconductor consumption, by region (billions), in 201945

Clearly, the Chinese market is quite significant, accounting for a considerable proportion of
revenues for many U.S. semiconductor companies. For instance, in the first four months of
2018, the Chinese market accounted for over 60 percent of Qualcomm’s revenues, over 50
percent of Micron’s, about 45 percent of Broadcom’s, and over 40 percent of Texas
$212.2
$59.5
$48.8
$41.8
$38.7
China North America Rest of World Europe Japan

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 14
Instruments’.46 (See figure 13.) In 2018, about 36 percent of U.S. semiconductor company
revenues, or $75 billion, resulted from sales to China.47 Having fair and non-discriminatory
access to the Chinese market provides the opportunity for firms to earn revenues that can then
be reinvested into future generations of innovation.
Figure 13: U.S. semiconductor companies' revenues from China (first four months 2018)48

Second, innovation is reduced when companies face excess, non-market-based competition. This
can occur when governments pump in hundreds of billions of dollars in subsidies, which unfairly
disadvantages enterprises that are attempting to compete on genuinely market-based terms. In
other words, if leading-edge companies cannot be assured that they can earn a reasonable, risk-
adjusted rate of return on their investments—which is put in doubt by some governments, such
as China investing massive amounts of money to create a domestic semiconductor industry—
then the leading companies will have to cut their R&D and capital expenditures. As James Lewis
of the Center for International and Strategic Studies (CSIS) wrote, it’s easy to see this dynamic in
the global semiconductor industry by considering the following hypothetical:
Let’s say there is a global demand for $1 billion semiconductors a year, and that 10
companies supply these, each with 10 percent of the market. China then uses
subsidies to create 2 more companies. Now there are 12 companies and the market
share of each falls to roughly 8 percent. This puts pressure on the existing
companies, and some will go out of business. Others will look to cut costs to survive
and one likely cut will be in research and development. This means that the overall
rate of spending on R&D will fall and innovation will slow, unless you assume that
the new Chinese companies will conduct R&D at the same level, which China does
not yet have the R&D capability to do.
49

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 15
Third, because the industry fundamentally depends on knowledge, technology, and know-how, an
international system with robust IP rights—including patents, trade secrets, and trademarks—is
critical to providing adequate incentives for investing significant amounts of R&D.50 There are
over 1,000 steps involved in making a DRAM chip, for example. If companies cannot retain and
protect that expensive IP, and it goes to competitors illegally and illicitly, their revenue will go
down, thereby reducing investment.
Finally, as noted, the industry relies on open and smoothly flowing global semiconductor value
chains, enabling contributions to semiconductor R&D, innovation, and production from a wide
variety of players around the world. However, because of this, as the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) noted in its report, “Measuring Distortions in International
Markets: The Semiconductor Value Chain,” this extensive internationalization of the industry
“implies that any trade distortion will be magnified and transmitted across many companies and
markets.”
51 In other words, innovation mercantilism is even worse in this industry than others
because the effects of one nation’s malevolent practices instantaneously propagate to negatively
affect other firms throughout the world.
CHINA’S INNOVATION MERCANTILISM IN SEMICONDUCTORS
China regards leadership in semiconductors as pivotal to the nation’s future economic growth
and national security prospects. As one report summarizes the importance China places on the
industry: “The Chinese government has prioritized the development of a domestically competitive
and commercially viable semiconductor industry for decades because it considers
semiconductors to be a strategic technology and finds that control over semiconductor
production confers both economic and national security benefits.”
52 Indeed, China “has publicly
exerted its desire to build a semiconductor industry that is far more advanced than today and
less reliant on the rest of the world.”
53 And as the U.S. Congressional Research Service noted,
“China’s state-led efforts to develop an indigenous, vertically integrated semiconductor industry
are unprecedented in scope and scale.”54
Chinese Semiconductor Industrial Policies
China has a history of developing strategic industrial plans for its semiconductor sector dating
back to 1956, when semiconductors were identified as a key strategic industry in the “Outline
for Science and Technology Development, 1956–1967.” This has carried through to the
country’s 2014 articulation of its “Guidelines to Promote [the] National Integrated Circuit
Industry,”—the so-called China “National IC Plan”—and to its “Made In China 2025” strategy,
announced in 2015.55 In fact, over the last decade alone, China has issued over 100 science,
technology, and sectoral development plans singling out domestic semiconductor industry
development as a central objective.
56
China has every right to compete intensely in the global semiconductor industry, but it should do so
through innovation, not innovation mercantilism.
The U.S. International Trade Commission’s John VerWey comprehensively described the
evolution of Chinese semiconductor industrial policy from 1956 to today in his report, “Chinese
Semiconductor Industrial Policy: Past and Present.” VerWey noted that the period from 1956 to
1990 was characterized by (mostly ineffectual) state-led planning that emphasized indigenous

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 16
innovation. From 1990 to 2002, China pivoted, “pursuing a hybrid model of industrial
development, endowing a few large firms with the majority of available funds so that they could
pursue partnerships with foreign companies in an effort to accelerate progress.” Project 908
(part of China’s Eighth Five-Year Plan from 1991 to 1995), sought to turn the firm Huajing into
a global-leading IDM by “endowing it with 2 billion RMB [$300 million at the time, about $0.5
billion in current dollars] and negotiating a [forced] joint-venture (JV) relationship with Lucent
Technologies to facilitate technology transfer.”57 But as Yin Li explained, it took “eight years to
take the idea from plan to reality, resulting in a JV that used old manufacturing equipment and
process technologies to produce chips that lagged behind the industry’s leaders by the time they
were brought to market.”
58
After the failure of Project 908, China’s Ninth Five-Year Plan (covering 1996 to 2000) launched
Project 909, which targeted the memory chip market and “called for the development of
domestic chips made by an internationally competitive firm using Chinese IP and engineers.”59 A
Chinese government-designated champion firm, Hua Hong, leveraged a JV with Japan’s NEC to
copy the design of a Japanese fab and replicate it in China with the Chinese facility staffed
primarily with Japanese engineers and some Chinese scientists. The effort was modestly
successful, until the global DRAM market cratered from oversupply in 2002, leading Hua Hong
to incur losses of over 700 million RMB in one year.60
The failure of Projects 908 and 909, along with China’s accession to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) in December 2001, ushered in a new approach, roughly from 2002 to 2014:
broadly an “attraction strategy” in the semiconductor industry that sought to make China an
attractive location for international firms. Taiwan’s TSMC launched a wholly foreign-owned
foundry in Shanghai and a Taiwanese citizen founded China’s Semiconductor Manufacturing
Company (SMIC). SMIC, which is among the world’s top five foundries, adopted a fast-follower
strategy that was tremendously abetted by extensive central and provincial Chinese government
support, including “a five-year tax holiday (and another five-year tax break at 50 percent of
standard rates), tariff exemptions, reduced VATs, and loans from state-owned banks.”
61 In 2005,
China’s National Medium- and Long-Term Science and Technology Development Plan Outline for
2006–2020 (the so-called “MLP”) highlighted semiconductors as a “core technology” enabling
future hardware advances and called for companies to adopt an “IDAR” strategy: Introducing,
Digesting, Absorbing, and Re-innovating IP and technologies as a means of industrial catch-up.
China did have relatively more success during this period, becoming more globally competitive in
the assembly and test segment of the semiconductor market.
China has a history of developing strategic industrial plans for its semiconductor sector dating back
to 1956.
While China had some success in this period attracting inbound semiconductor foreign direct
investment (FDI), firms investing in China were producing chips several generations behind the
global state of the art, and Chinese semiconductor firms themselves remained relative laggards
producing older generations of technology. As China became more of a global hub for electronics
manufacturing and final assembly over this period (i.e., the iPhone), it became the world’s
leading importer of semiconductors. Chinese imports of semiconductors grew from $41 billion in
2002 to $279 billion in 2014.
62 To be sure, as the Information Technology and Innovation

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 17
Foundation (ITIF) has noted, while the Chinese trade deficit in semiconductors did grow over this
period, the reality is that about half of those semiconductor imports were re-exported—with value
added during assembly and manufacturing—from China as part of global production networks for
cell phones, tablets, computers, and other electronic products.63 Nevertheless, with the
ascendence of the technology-focused Xi Jinping as Chinese president in 2013, these dynamics
set the stage for a re-evaluation of China’s semiconductor development strategies, laying the
groundwork for the introduction of the National IC Plan in 2014.
The National IC Plan and the Made In China 2025 Strategy
The National IC Plan became the centerpiece of China’s semiconductor strategy in 2014, with
China’s State Council setting a goal of China becoming a global leader in all segments of the
semiconductor industry by 2030.64 The Plan called for at least $150 billion in government
subsidies—from central, provincial, and municipal Chinese governments as well as a variety of
state-owned enterprises (SOEs, from the technology sector and beyond)—to enable China to
become self-sufficient in every facet of the industry.65 The Chinese government established the
China Integrated Circuit Investment Industry Fund (CICIIF, also known as the “National IC
Fund”) to channel that $150 billion in state funding in support of domestic industry, overseas
acquisitions, and the purchase of foreign semiconductor equipment.66 The Semiconductor
Industry Association (SIA) estimated that by 2017 China had raised $80 billion of its initial
$150 billion investment goal.67 In October 2019, China supplemented these investments by
announcing a new national semiconductor fund of 204.2 billion yuan ($28.9 billion) financed by
central- and local-government-supported enterprises including the State Tobacco Monopoly
Administration and the China Development Bank Corp.
68 In order to avoid charges of government
subsidization, China channeled funds through these types of state-owned businesses to make it
look like they were akin to private-sector investments. As part of the National IC Plan, China
called for 70 percent of the semiconductor chips used by companies operating in China to be
domestically produced by 2025 (and ideally 100 percent by 2030).69 Specifically, China’s
government announced plans to expand the domestic supply of semiconductors with the aim of
reaching targets by 2030 of $305 billion of domestic production of chips (from $65 billion in
2016), and 80 percent of domestic market served (from 33 percent in 2016).70
China’s National IC Plan calls for $150 billion of government subsidies to produce domestically at
least 70 percent of the semiconductors it consumes, and for China to become a global leader in all
segments of the semiconductor industry by 2030.
The tens of billions of dollars in funds made available as part of the National IC Fund have gone
to purposes including: standing up from whole cloth entirely new Chinese companies competing
in various facets of the semiconductor ecosystem, acquiring foreign semiconductor technology
companies, and subsidizing China’s existing companies. As VerWey elaborated:
Endowed with $150 billion in funds from the central and provincial governments, the
National IC Fund was tasked with acquiring companies throughout the
semiconductor supply chain. The Fund has engaged in a two-pronged strategy. On
the one hand, it funds outbound FDI to acquire foreign companies. On the other, it
provides funds to facilitate inbound FDI such as greenfield investment and joint

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 18
ventures with non-Chinese companies to help realize the vision of the National
IC Plan.71
Beyond the National IC Plan, in 2015, the Chinese government released its “Made in China
2025” strategy, a 10-year, $300 billion, comprehensive blueprint aimed at transforming China
into an advanced manufacturing leader, and which specifically targeted 10 strategic industries,
including semiconductors.72 Across these 10 industries, China has developed a series of national
and provincial funds to progress Chinese firms toward three key strategic goals: 1) “localize and
indigenize,” meaning “to indigenize R&D and control segments of global supply chains”; 2)
“substitute,” meaning to replace foreign suppliers with domestic sourcing wherever possible in
value chains toward the production of final products; and 3) “capture global market share,”
meaning to “go out into the world” and compete.73
While certainly there are some elements of the National IC Plan and the “Made in China 2025”
strategy that are well within the bounds of fair international competition—such as funding basic
scientific research; supporting research consortia; supporting science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education; providing tax incentives (so long as they are equally
available to enterprises from all nations); and supporting digital infrastructure deployment—a
great many of their elements, and related Chinese activities and policies, are steeped in the
tenets of innovation mercantilism. As the United States Trade Representative’s Office (USTR)
wrote, “Since 2014, when the government issued the [National IC] Guidelines, Chinese
companies and investors—often backed by state capital—have undertaken a series of
acquisitions to achieve technology breakthrough, shrink the technology gap between China and
advanced countries, cultivate domestic innovation clusters, and reduce China’s reliance on
IC imports.”74
As the following section shows, China’s innovation mercantilist practices in the semiconductor
sector have included excessive ownership and subsidization of state-owned or state-supported
enterprises; direct provision of equity or provision of financing at below-market terms; state-
directed or state-enabled acquisition (or attempted acquisition) of foreign semiconductor
companies; IP theft; forced or compelled technology transfer, especially through mandated joint
ventures; and manipulation of technology standards, alongside a variety of other market-access
restrictions or impediments that seek to advantage Chinese players in this sector to the detriment
of foreign competitors.
Chinese Government Ownership of Chinese Semiconductor Enterprises
Chinese innovation mercantilism in the semiconductor sector starts with the fact that the
Chinese government exercises a considerable degree of influence over domestic enterprises by
possessing a significant degree of ownership of them. As OECD wrote in its report, “Measuring
Distortions in International Markets: The Semiconductor Value Chain”:
Ownership or investment by the state in semiconductor firms is very largely a Chinese
phenomenon, with central and local authorities possessing stakes in nearly all
domestic value-chain participants, be they fabless, foundries, or OSAT firms.
Government stakes range from indirect participations below 20% to majority
direct ownership.75

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 19
In effect, the Chinese government has become a minority or majority shareholder in most
medium- and large-sized semiconductor enterprises in China. For example:
▪ Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation (SMIC): Total state participation in the
company increased from 15 percent in 2014 to 45 percent as of 2018, led by stakes held by
the National IC Fund (19 percent), state-owned Datang Telecom (19 percent), and Tsinghua
Unigroup (7 percent).
▪ China Electronics Corporation (CEC): A state-owned firm that presides over two of China’s large
semiconductor groups: Hua Hong Semiconductor and Huada Semiconductor. The National IC
Fund owns 10 percent of Hua Hong Semiconductor and 29 percent of Hua Hong Wuxi, a
semiconductor fab structured as a joint venture.
▪ Tsinghua Unigroup: Although it initially focused on chip design, the firm has made recent
forays into the foundry business, receiving support from local governments and the National
IC Fund to invest in the construction of new memory fabs in Chengdu (Sichuan), Chongqing,
Nanjing (Jiangsu), and Wuhan (Hubei). Once completed, those investments could eventually
reach approximately $100 billion.76
▪ Jiangsu Changjiang Electronics Technology (JCET): JCET originally started as a private firm that
specialized in outsourced package assembly and testing, and with its acquisition of
Singapore-based STATS-ChipPAC in 2015, it became the world’s largest OSAT firm. With
that acquisition partly funded by the National IC Plan, and considering follow-on
investments, the Chinese state now controls 25 to 30 percent of JCET.
▪ Yangtze Memory Technologies Co. (YMTC): YMTC is a Chinese state-controlled joint venture
launched by the National IC Industry Investment Fund, the state university-controlled fabless
semiconductor firm Tsinghua Unigroup, and the Hubei Science and Technology Investment
Group, supported by $24 billion in initial government funding allocated for its initial Wuhan
factory alone.77 In effect, YMTC is China’s state-owned national champion for memory chips,
especially those used in solid-state hard drives and USB flash drives.
▪ ChangXin Memory Technologies (CXMT): Launched in May 2016, CMXT is another Chinese-
government-created semiconductor manufacturer that also focuses on memory technologies.
ChangXin was established as a project co-led by the local state-owned Hefei Industrial
Investment Fund (HIIF) and GigaDevice Semiconductor Beijing (a Chinese designer of flash
memory chips), with HIIF kicking in $8 billion to launch the effort.78 CXMT was created as a
“pilot demonstration” of the “Made in China 2025” initiative and as such enjoys tremendous
support from a variety of Chinese government programs.79
An OECD study of 21 international semiconductor companies from 2014 to 2018 found that Chinese
companies received 86 percent of the below-market equity provided by their nations’ governments.
Overall, out of China’s top-10 semiconductor companies by revenue, China’s National IC Fund
and Chinese SOEs together hold more than 25 percent of at least 5 of those firms.80 (State
ownership increases further when state investments at the subsidiary level of these
semiconductor companies, or where local governments and provincial funds often partner with
other state actors, are included.) As the OECD’s report further elaborates, Chinese government
investment, through a multitude of investment vehicles, has “profoundly reshaped China’s

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 20
semiconductor industry, combining to give the state a stronger influence over domestic
companies.… Growing direct participation by the state in China’s semiconductor industry
proceeds from a broader policy push to turn the country into a leading producer of
semiconductors over the medium-term.”81 The OECD further noted that “the distinction between
SOEs and other companies in China is made harder” by the “blurring of boundaries between the
state and private interests” through “critical avenues of state influence.”82 Moreover, state
ownership is not passive; rather, the state provides direction to companies to achieve state
development goals.
Government Subsidies
Closely related to the issue of ownership is the issue of subsidization of Chinese semiconductor
firms by central, provincial, and local governments. As the U.S. ITC explained, “Essential to
China’s semiconductor industrial plans are subsidies, which can take the form of regional,
provincial, and national funds (such as the National IC Fund); investment vehicles; and policies
that incentivize industry investment, such as tax breaks.”
83 In fact, “out of the 11 funds the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce identified as targeting Made in China 2025 industries, the National IC
Fund is the second largest, behind only a more-general Special Constructive Fund.”84 It should
also be noted that the national fund has since been flanked by a series of sister funds at
provincial and city levels, such as the Beijing IC Industry Equity Investment Fund, and funds
from other local governments including Shanghai (Pudong), Shenzhen, and Wuxi. Indeed,
subsidizing the activities of domestic semiconductor firms, or subsidizing the ability of those
firms, or other investment vehicles, such as thinly veiled private equity or venture capital firms to
acquire foreign semiconductor players, has been a central feature of Chinese semiconductor
mercantilism.
As the OECD found, “Government support through below-market equity appears to be particularly
large in the semiconductor industry and concentrated in one jurisdiction.”
85 The OECD’s study of
21 international semiconductor firms over the years 2014 to 2018 found that government
support provided through “below-market equity” (i.e., effectively a subsidy) “amounted to $5-15
billion for just six semiconductor firms, four of which are from China” (these being Hua Hong,
JCET, SMIC, and Tsinghua Unigroup). The report continued to note that, for SMIC and Tsinghua
Unigroup, “total government support exceeded 30 percent of their annual consolidated
revenue.”
86 In total, the OECD found that Chinese firms together received 86 percent of below-
market equity injections identified in its study. The organization concluded that, “For the four
Chinese firms covered by this study, government funds have committed equity funding of about
$22 billion in total to date, with the largest share benefitting SMIC and Tsinghua Unigroup, and
their subsidiaries. These four firms received about $10 billion of the initial $23 billion tranche
of National IC Plan funding.”
87 With regard to SMIC, the OECD report found that state subsidies
accounted for slightly over 40 percent of the company’s revenues from 2014 to 2018.88 Of
particular import, the OECD study found that there “notably appears to be a direct connection
between equity injections by China’s government funds and the construction of new
semiconductor fabs in the country.”
89
When it comes to state subsidies at the firm level—that is, as a percentage of revenue for
semiconductor manufacturers (from 2014 to 2018)—Chinese enterprises clearly led their foreign
competitors, by an order of magnitude. (See figure 14.) As noted, state subsidies accounted for
slightly over 40 percent of SMIC’s revenues over this period, 30 percent for Tsinghua Unigroup,

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 21
and 22 percent for Hua Hong. In contrast, this figure was minimal for TSMC, Intel, and
Samsung, each, for whom revenues identifiable as state subsidies accounted for, at most, 3
percent or less of their revenues over this period.
Figure 14: State subsidies as a percentage of revenue for chip fabs, 2014–201890

Another example came in 2017, when a semiconductor investment vehicle that was set up using
funds from the National IC plan provided monetary support to Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi
to develop the company’s first smartphone processor.
91 While Xiaomi did not disclose how much
financial support the government provided in developing that chip—which in total was estimated
to be at least RMB 1 billion ($141 million)—it underscored that the Chinese government’s
“warmth,” in addition to funding, was important.92
Chinese government-directed ownership or subsidization of Chinese semiconductor enterprises
enables them to vastly expand production relative to the speed and extent possible if they were
primarily reliant on private capital markets. As such, just like Chinese-subsidized capacity in
many other industries, such as solar panels and steel, China is also artificially creating capacity
in semiconductors. These types of efforts are also critical to China’s efforts to develop a fully
indigenous “closed-loop” semiconductor manufacturing ecosystem by 2030. One other facet of
this is that the Chinese government provides insurance to Chinese companies to protect against
faulty equipment or materials from Chinese suppliers, in addition to making many of these
aforementioned manufacturing subsidies contingent on a commitment to use local suppliers.93
OECD researchers have identified a direct connection between equity injections by China’s government
semiconductor funds and the ensuing construction of new semiconductor fabs in the country.
The subsidies also enable Chinese firms to sustain below-market rates of return. Indeed, the
OECD report explains that “the four Chinese companies in the sample (Hua Hong, JCET, SMIC,
and Tsinghua Unigroup) all had sustained below-market equity returns continuously from 2014–
2018.” Losses at Yangtze Memory Technologies were reported to be $460 million in the first
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
SMIC (China) Tsinghua
Unigroup (China)
Hua Hong (China) TSMC (Taiwan) Intel (U.S.) Samsung (South
Korea)

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 22
half of 2018, yet the state-backed company continues to operate normally, has not defaulted on
its debts, and still receives large amounts of cash.94 While their global competitors have to earn
market-based rates of return to survive, let alone to realize funds that can be reinvested in future
generations of R&D and innovation, Chinese firms can endure long periods of below-market rates
of return, giving them a competitive leg up on more-innovative market-based firms.95 The OECD
observed that “the lower returns put these firms at competitive advantage by exempting them
from having to meet their full cost of capital, thus relaxing market discipline that otherwise
constrains their competitors.”96
For the year 2019, Peter Cowhey, Dean of the School of Global Policy and Strategy at the
University of California, San Diego, has estimated nations’ “total funding assistance” to their
semiconductor industries, with his definition of total funding assistance including “the addition
of known semiconductor programs, including provision of equity, grants/tax concessions, capital
investment, R&D grants, and workforce development activities.” Cowhey estimated China’s total
government funding for 2019 at $34.2 billion, Japan’s at $5.1 billion, America’s at $1.4 billion,
Taiwan’s at $1.3 billion, the European Union’s at $1 billion, and Korea’s at $700 million.97 (See
figure 15.)
For China, most of these amounts are industrial subsidies. In contrast, the amounts for the other
nations are mostly legitimate investments, such as in pre-competitive research. For instance, the
U.S. figure mostly reflects the amount of federal R&D research funding related to the sector.
However, the outsized Chinese government support for its semiconductor industry becomes even
more starkly apparent when comparing the value of total funding assistance as a percentage of
the nations’/regions’ value of global semiconductor sales. By this measure, China’s government
assistance to its semiconductor industry is equivalent to 137 percent of the Chinese
semiconductor industry’s global sales, compared with just 11 percent for Japan, 3.8 percent for
Taiwan, 2.3 percent for the European Union, and a miniscule 0.01 percent each for South Korea
and the United States. (See figure 16.)
Figure 15: Estimated value of total semiconductor sector funding assistance by nation/region (US$, billions)
in 201998

 $- $5 $10 $15 $20 $25 $30 $35
South Korea
European Union
Taiwan
United States
Japan
China

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 23
Figure 16: Estimated value of total semiconductor sector funding assistance as a percentage of global sales99

Below-Market Financing
In addition to below-market equity, Chinese firms have benefited considerably from below-market
borrowing. As the OECD observed, “The empirical record shows unambiguously that in countries
where the state plays a strong role in the economy, SOEs obtain on average more subsidies and
more loans at cheaper interest rates than their private counterparts.”100 And, indeed, the OECD
report also found that, “The overwhelming majority of all below-market borrowings … identified
over the period 2014-28 originate from the Chinese financial system.”101
This is consistent with China’s 2014 IC Guidelines, which instructed “domestic development
banks and commercial banks to continually provide financial support to the integrated circuit
industry.”102 Over the period from 2014 to 2018, the three-largest Chinese semiconductor
industry recipients of below-market financing were Tsinghua Unigroup ($3.4 billion), SMIC
($695 million), and JCET ($688 million), notably from loans they received from Chinese state
banks such as the Bank of China, the China Development Bank, and the China Construction
Bank.
103 Hua Hong obtained an estimated $71 million in below-market financing from Chinese
banks over this period. The provision of below-market financing is another way Chinese firms are
able to remain in competition despite earning below-market returns.
Separately, a broad range of Chinese manufacturers, including of semiconductors, have
benefited from the aggressive export credit initiatives of the China Export-Import (Ex-Im) Bank.
For instance, Huawei (which mainly produces phones and networking equipment, but which does
own HiSilicon, a Shenzhen-based fabless semiconductor company) benefits from a $100 billion
line of credit that Chinese state-owned banks have made available to Huawei customers.
104
Moreover, the U.S. Export-Import Bank has concluded that “most of the terms and conditions of
their [China Exim Bank’s] financing did not and do not fit within the OECD guidelines.”105
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 120% 140%
South Korea
United States
European Union
Taiwan
Japan
China

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 24
Government-Directed Acquisition of Foreign Firms
Chinese entities have used National IC Strategy and related funds to acquire or attempt to
acquire a variety of foreign enterprises operating along virtually every segment of the
semiconductor production process. As the OECD noted plainly, “Chinese authorities have
indicated that ‘they intend to use the national [semiconductor] funds selectively’ in order to
acquire foreign technology.”106 As it continued, “Cross-border acquisitions appear in particular to
have gathered pace following the creation in 2014 of China’s state-backed national
semiconductor fund and related sister funds at the local level.”107 From 2015 to 2017 alone,
Chinese investors and firms offered more than $30 billion in bids for U.S. and European
semiconductor companies.108 And over a five-year period starting in 2014, it’s estimated that
China’s Tsinghua Unigroup Ltd., (the technology investment arm of one of China’s top state-led
universities) alone tried to invest $47 billion to acquire Western companies.109 One consultancy
estimated that, by December 2020, Chinese-government-guided strategic technology investment
funds controlled more than RMB 4 trillion ($610 billion) in capital.110
Chinese entities have used National IC Strategy and related funds to acquire or attempt to acquire a
variety of foreign enterprises operating along virtually every segment of the semiconductor
production process.
Examples are manifold. In 2011, California-based microchip designer Atop Tech, which
commanded a $1 billion market share in electronic-design automation (specialized software) and
integrated circuits markets, was forced into bankruptcy and acquired by a Hong Kong-listed
company Avatar Integrated Systems, which had a sole director listed in its incorporation papers:
a Chinese steel magnate.111 In 2015, Hua Capital Management—a Beijing-based private-equity
fund co-founded by Tsinghua Unigroup and tasked with managing Beijing’s semiconductor
funds—acquired the U.S. semiconductor company OmniVision.112 In October 2015, Jiangsu
Changjiang Electronics Technology Co. used $300 million from the National IC Fund to help pay
for the $780 million acquisition of Singapore’s STATs ChipPac. That same year, Beijing E-Town
Capital, a CICIIF shareholder, acquired U.S.-headquartered Mattson Technology, gaining
specialized capabilities in etchers and rapid thermal processing equipment and strip tools used
in semiconductor production.113 Also in 2015, a CICIIF consortium acquired Integrated Silicon
Solutions, Inc., gaining specialized chip expertise.114 In 2016, the Chinese firm Navtech (Beijing
Navgnss Integration Co., Ltd.) acquired Swedish foundry Silex Microsystems after having
received funding from China’s National IC Fund and a Beijing sister semiconductor fund.
115 Also
in that year, China’s National Silicon Industry Group (NSIG)—an investment fund backed by
Sino IC Capital, the manager of the country’s national semiconductor fund—acquired Finnish
wafer producer Okmetic as well as a 14.5 percent stake of French wafer producer Soitec.116 One
particularly active entity has been Digital Horizon Capital, a Chinese technology fund used
extensively by the Chinese government to invest in strategic overseas targets. The fund has
invested in 113 U.S. companies which the Chinese Communist Party has identified as strategic
priorities.117 And it should also be noted that the National IC Fund has supported Chinese
purchases of foreign firms in other segments of the information and communications technology
(ICT) ecosystem. For instance, in 2014, Chinese firm Apex Microelectronics bought the U.S.
printer company Lexmark at a 17 percent premium over its listed stock price, in part because it

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 25
received funding from the Chinese National IC fund.118 Indeed, the company is now 5 percent
owned by the IC fund.119
And those are just examples of acquisitions that succeeded; many other attempts were launched.
In 2015, Tsinghua Unigroup launched a $23 billion bid to purchase America’s Micron.120
Spurned with that purchase blocked by the U.S. government, in 2016, the National IC Fund
backed a buyout firm seeking to buy U.S.-based Lattice Semiconductor Corp.121 Also in 2016,
the Fujian Grand Chip Investment Fund, with support from the National IC Fund, was behind a
$723 million gambit to acquire Germany’s Aixtron.122 That same year, Unisplendour, a Hong
Kong-based subsidiary of Tsinghua Unigroup, attempted to purchase a 15 percent stake in U.S.
data storage company Western Digital.123 As Western leaders began to wise up to the nature of
these transactions, with Chinese government-subsidized entities trying to acquire the crown
jewels of Western technology (Germany having regrettably allowed robotics manufacturer Kuka to
be acquired by the Chinese household appliance manufacturer Midea in 2016), such
transactions were increasingly blocked, and the United States enhanced its FDI screening
procedures with reforms to its Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS)
program in 2018.
It should be noted, however, that one other active avenue of Chinese efforts to acquire U.S.
semiconductor firms or their technologies has been, and remains, venture capital. For instance,
the proposed purchase of Lattice Semiconductor was actually made by Canyon Bridge Capital
Partners, a Chinese-backed JV/private equity fund operating out of Silicon Valley.124 As Alex
Capri of the Hinrich Foundation elaborated in his report “Semiconductors at the Heart of the
U.S.-China Trade War,” “China’s state-backed venture capital firms have been active in Silicon
Valley in targeting start-ups working on innovations that can be incorporated into semiconductor
niches along global value chains.”125 As Capri noted, two such examples include Westlake
Ventures, a Silicon Valley-based entity that receives funding from the Chinese City of Hangzhou,
and ZGC Capital Connection, which lists itself as a subsidiary of a state-owned enterprise funded
by the Chinese government.126
And though the introduction of America’s CFIUS legislation in 2018 has made it more difficult
for Chinese entities to outright acquire U.S. semiconductor firms, China continues to make
investments in many U.S. semiconductor-related enterprises. As recently as December 2020,
China’s government-guided funds made investments in the U.S. semiconductor firms Pixelworks,
Black Sesame Technologies, and LightIC Technologies.
127
Intellectual Property Theft
As CSIS’s Jim Lewis noted, the Chinese government has sponsored “long-running state
espionage programs targeting Western firms and research centers (and this) technological
espionage has carried over into cyberspace.”
128 Indeed, the acquisition of foreign semiconductor
technology through IP theft has been a key pillar of Chinese strategy. For instance, in November
2018, the U.S. Department of Justice charged China’s Fujian Jinhua Integrated Circuit Co. with
working to steal trade secrets from U.S. chipmaker Micron Technologies.
129 The incident spurred
the Justice Department to launch a new initiative to combat foreign economic espionage and
trade secret theft. That effort yielded results when, in June 2020, the U.S. Department of
Justice found Chinese national Hao Zhang guilty of economic espionage and theft of trade
secrets from both Avago, a California-based developer of semiconductor design and processing

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 26
for optoelectronics components and subsystems, and Skyworks, a Massachusetts-based innovator
of high-performance analog semiconductors.130 Taiwanese-based semiconductor manufacturers
TSMC and Nanya Technology Corporation have both experienced attempted or effected thefts of
trade secrets, including a 2016 incident in which TSMC engineer Hsu Chih-Pen stole TSMC
trade secrets he intended to sell to Chinese state-owned Shanghai Huali Microelectronics
Corp.
131 One assessment found that China’s SMIC alone has accounted for billions in
semiconductor IP theft from Taiwan.132 In fact, as early as 2003, TSMC had filed lawsuits in
U.S. courts alleging that SMIC had infringed upon its patents and stolen its trade secrets.133 The
acquisition of foreign semiconductor technology through IP theft has been an essential pillar of
Chinese strategy to develop its semiconductor industry.
Moreover, as Capri wrote, “Cybersecurity experts have noted that since imposition of export
restrictions on Chinese tech firms such as Huawei, Hikvision, SenseTime and others, there has
been an escalation of cyber security threats (attacks and attempted cyber-intrusions) at American
technology companies.”
134 Indeed, China has regularly amped up its cybertheft after it has
released new industrial development strategies, and cybersecurity firm Crowd Strike noted China
did so again in 2018–2019 amidst the intensified U.S.-China trade conflict.135 As Dan Lips
wrote in “Answering the China Chip Challenge,” the Department of Defense’s 2020 China
Military Power report found that Chinese hackers “repeatedly targeted tech groups developing
machine learning, autonomous vehicle, medical imaging, semiconductors, processors, and
enterprise cloud computing software.”
136 It cited a 2018 example in which a Chinese SOE “was
implicated in a conspiracy to commit economic espionage through the theft, conveyance, and
possession of stolen trade secrets from a U.S. semiconductor company,” [that] “specializes in
dynamic random-access memory.”137
A 2019 CNBC Global CFO Council report found that one in five North American corporations had
their IP stolen in China within the past year.138 The Commission on the Theft of American
Intellectual Property has estimated that China’s IP theft may cost the U.S. economy as much as
$600 billion annually.139
Forced Joint Ventures/Forced Technology Transfer
As the OECD observed, “[T]here is also unease in the [semiconductor] industry regarding
practices that may amount to forced technology transfers, whereby government interventions
create the conditions where foreign firms may be required to transfer technology to local partners
or to share information that can be accessed by competitors.”
140 Such unease should not be a
surprise. The reality is that pressured technology transfer concessions are part and parcel of
virtually every negotiation with the Chinese. A 2017 survey conducted within the semiconductor
industry by the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) found that
25 U.S. companies—which accounted for more than $25 billion in annual sales—had been
required to form JVs and transfer technology, or both, as a condition of market access.141
Chinse government-forced joint partnering or forced local production as a condition of market
access has been one reason explaining increased U.S. multinational enterprise (MNE)
semiconductor production in China over the past two decades. As a report from the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, “Trends in U.S. Multinational Enterprise (MNE)
Activity in China, 2000-2017,” finds, “U.S. MNE capital expenditure in China for the
production of semiconductors accounted for nearly one-third of all U.S. MNE global capital

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 27
expenditure on semiconductor manufacturing assets in 2017” with “the U.S. MNE affiliate value
added in China for semiconductors and other electronic components increasing over 250 percent
from 2009 to 2017, from $1.6 billion to $5.6 billion.”142 As that report notes, certainly some of
the factors driving increased U.S. MNE ICT and semiconductor production in China pertain to
being closer to local markets as well as to “relatively lower labor and overhead costs, flexible
production and benefits from economies of scale, decreased transportation costs, and proximity
to global supply chains.”
143 However, the report continues to note that another significant driving
factor has been that “[t]he Chinese government’s industrial policies and related trade restrictions
have also coerced foreign companies into expanding their manufacturing operations in China.”144
Chinse government-forced joint partnering or forced local production as a condition of market access
has been one reason explaining increased U.S. multinational enterprise (MNE) semiconductor
production in China over the past two decades.
Related has been China’s efforts to corner markets for rare earth metals. As the aforementioned
report notes, “[B]etween 2005 and 2010 Beijing steadily reduced export quotas on rare earth
elements, often used in the production of electronic components, making it necessary for many
ICT equipment manufacturers to locate production in China. As a result, U.S. MNE ICT
manufacturing assets in China grew 61.7 percent from $14.1 billion in 2005 to $22.8 billion
in 2010.”145
Technology Standards
The development of voluntary, transparent, consensus-based, industry-led technology standards
has played a catalytic role in fostering the development of interoperable and globalized supply
chains for semiconductors and other ICT goods.146 Developing and applying common global
standards instead of differential country- or region-specific standards makes it far more efficient
to integrate components across semiconductor and other ICT supply chains.147 While technology
standards work best when developed through a collaborative, voluntary, industry-led basis, China
has made the development of indigenous technology standards, particularly for ICT products, a
core component of its industrial development strategy. For instance, in 2018, China introduced a
new standardization law that will likely favor local firms’ goods and services.148 While, at this
point, China’s attempts to set advantageous standards pertain more to the downstream
applications or technologies that use semiconductors—such as 5G, AI, the Internet of Things,
and autonomous vehicles—rather than the actual semiconductors themselves, there’s little doubt
that “China Standards 2035,” a nationwide effort to develop industrial standards and eventually
internationalize them, is meant to place Chinese firms in a superior position to their American
and European competitors.149 There’s also evidence that China is attempting to influence
international standards development organizations (SDOs) to ensure their technology lies at the
heart of (i.e., are considered essential to) the international standard.150
Preferential Tax Policies
In August 2020, the Chinese government announced preferential tax breaks for the sector, but
made them only available to “homegrown semiconductor companies and software developers.”151
For instance, a manufacturer that has been in operation for more than 15 years and that makes

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 28
28 nm or more-advanced chips is exempt from corporate income tax for up to 10 years, with the
preferential treatment period starting from the company’s first profit-making year.152
China’s Integrated Circuit Market
Before moving on to assess the impact of China’s innovation mercantilism on the global
semiconductor industry, it’s worth providing a brief overview of the current state of the Chinese
integrated circuit marketplace. Semiconductor Digest estimated that the Chinese integrated
circuit market was worth $124.6 billion in 2019, with $19.5 billion worth of those ICs
manufactured in China, and with China-headquartered companies producing only $7.6 billion
(38.7 percent) of that production, and thus accounting for only 6.1 percent of the total Chinese
IC market (and 2.1 percent of the worldwide IC market).153 The growth of China’s semiconductor
market has outpaced that of the rest of the world for many years. For instance, from 2005
through 2015, China’s semiconductor industry grew at a 10-year compounded annual growth
rate of 18.7 percent while its semiconductor consumption grew at a rate of 14.3 percent and the
worldwide semiconductor market grew at a 4.0 percent CAGR.154
However, Chinese semiconductor strengths are growing rapidly, both from the chip design and
chip manufacturing perspectives. For instance, between 2010 and 2015 alone, the number of
Chinese IC design firms grew from 485 to 715, with the largest 20 percent of these firms
producing revenues of between $2.3 billion and $16 billion.155 About 20 percent of the world’s
fabless chip design firms are now located in China.156 As a Deloitte report notes, “In integrated
circuit design, China's capability has surged over the past 5 years, and started to catch up with
Taiwan's and South Korea's, joining them as the main players in Asia Pacific IC design.”157 Also,
a core focus of China’s strategy going forward will be trying to lead in the development of
semiconductor chips for application-specific purposes, most noticeably chips for AI. As the
MIT
Technology Review’s Will Knight noted, China is leveraging “its existing strength in AI and its
unparalleled access to the quantities of data required to train AI algorithms [which] could give it
an edge in designing chips optimized to run them.”158 Other noteworthy achievements of China’s
semiconductor industry include optical devices, low-power embedded processors, sensors, and
discrete devices.159

China has paid special attention to two specific market segments: foundries and memory chips.
China’s pure-play foundry market increased by 41 percent in 2018, which resulted in China
accounting for 19 percent of the global foundry market.160 China has also been particularly
targeting memory chips (even going back to Project 908), with the country continuing to make
large investments in its memory chip manufacturing infrastructure. As Ernst noted, China has
made a “massive push to develop from zero a domestic memory industry, with reported
investments of more than $40 billion in flash memory production, and another $10 - $15 billion
in DRAM memory production.”161 Indeed, from 2019 to 2021, Chinese-owned companies
ramped up the country’s indigenous memory capacity from basically 0 to 300,000 wafers per
month (wpm).162 And this all came at the expense of foreign market share. Over the course of
2020, China’s state-backed companies announced major production increases in both NAND
and DRAM—both critical memory technologies.163 For instance, Yangtze Memory Technologies
(owned by the state-backed Tsinghua Unigroup) announced it would triple production to 60,000
wpm, equivalent to 5 percent of global output, by year-end 2020 at its new, $24 billion plant in
Wuhan.164 Similarly, ChangXin Memory Technologies, also a state-funded company, announced
that in 2020 it would quadruple production of DRAM chips to 40,000 wpm (or 3 percent of
world DRAM output) at its $8 billion facility in Hefei.165

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021 PAGE 29
As Capri wrote about these investments (and to lead into this report’s following section):
As China’s memory chip production is based on government output targets and other
strategic, non-market driven goals, then the possibility of an over-supply of NAND
and DRAM chips would seem likely, at some point, which would drive down global
market prices. None of this bodes well for the world’s existing players in this
space.166
As James Mulvenon similarly warned in a recent SOS International report on YMTC:
YMTC is currently aggressively expanding its capacity and fabrication facilities,
raising serious concerns about its future plans in the global market. YMTC’s state-
backing means it does not have to worry about profits and can expand capacity
beyond supply demands. This will result in significant oversupply in the market.
Unless the other chip suppliers reduce their capacity, which will result in ceding
market share to YMTC, the industry will experience massive losses. The
semiconductor industry will be forced to consolidate, which could lead existing
companies—including U.S. and allied country companies—to exit the industry, as
happened with solar panels, flat panel displays, and LEDs.
167
In December 2020, China’s SMIC contended that it had achieved a major breakthrough in its
ability to manufacture 7 nm chips. It asserted that its N+1 7 nm node marks a significant
improvement over its current 14 nm production node, including a 20 percent increase in
performance, a power consumption reduction of 57 percent, a reduced logic area of 63 percent,
and SoC (System on a Chip) area reduction of 55 percent.168 This aligns with a recent Goldman
Sachs report predicting that China may be capable of producing 7 nm chips by 2023.169 Also
notable about this development is that the design architecture for the N+1 foundry node may
enable SMIC to break its reliance on EUV lithography machines provided by foreign vendors.
Reducing its dependence on foreign EUV-lithography-based semiconductor manufacturing
equipment has long been a key objective for China, with the Suzhou Institute of Nano-tech and
Nano-Bionics under the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Sinano), along with the National Center
for Nanoscience and Technology, recently announcing breakthroughs in development of a new
type of 5 nm laser lithography technology.170
China is also working to position itself for leadership in what are called third-generation, wide
band-gap semiconductors, which are chipsets made of materials such as silicon carbide and
gallium nitride. The main applications of the third generation of semiconductor materials are
semiconductor lighting, power electronics, lasers and detectors, and other fields, each with
different industry maturity.
171 U.S.-based CREE Inc. and Japan’s Sumitomo Electric Industries,
Ltd. currently lead in development of these next-generation chipsets, but with no single country
now dominating this fledgling technology, up-and-coming Chinese competitors such as San’an
Optoelectronics Co., Ltd. and state-owned China Electronics Technology Group Corp. may be
able to make a step change in the sector.172

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021 PAGE 30
IMPACTS OF CHINA’S INNOVATION MERCANTILISM ON SEMICONDUCTOR
INDUSTRY PRODUCTION AND COMPETITION
Enterprises from the United States (and other leading nations such as Germany, the Netherlands,
South Korea, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom) remain ahead of China in semiconductor
technology. Experts believe that China still “remains at least two generations behind in its ability
to produce microchips for consumer electronics.”173 However, as noted immediately above, China
has demonstrated the ability to rapidly close such gaps, as shown nowhere more clearly than in
solar photovoltaics, where the Chinese share of the global market was miniscule before 2005 but
had exceeded 60 percent by 2011, and has only grown further since then.174 A similar trajectory
in semiconductors is not unthinkable, especially should other nations not heed lessons from their
loss of global production and market share in other advanced-technology industries, especially in
the face of unbridled, unimpeded Chinese innovation mercantilism. As President Obama’s
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology warned, “Chinese policies are distorting
[semiconductor] markets in ways that undermine innovation, subtract from U.S. market share,
and put U.S. national security at risk.”175 These trends have only grown over the last three to
five years.
From 2001 to 2016, China’s share of global value added in the semiconductor industry grew almost
fourfold, from 8 to 31 percent, while the United States’ share fell from 28 to 22 percent, and Japan’s
share fell by over two-thirds, from 30 to 8 percent.
Share of Semiconductor Value Added, Exports, and Fabrication Capacity
Perhaps the most-significant evidence of the impact of Chinese innovation mercantilism in this
sector has been the dramatic growth of Chinese value added in the global semiconductor
industry since the year 2001. In 2016 (the most-recent year for which data is available), China
produced $120 billion in value added, compared with $83 billion for the United States, $55.6
billion for Taiwan, and $39 billion for South Korea. (See figure 17.) U.S. value added in the
sector peaked at $91.3 billion in 2011 (values in nominal dollars). China’s value added in the
global semiconductor sector increased threefold from 2007 to 2016. Note that these figures
account for production activity of both Chinese and non-Chinese firms operating in the country.
In terms of share of global value added in the global semiconductor industry, from 2001 to
2016, China’s grew almost fourfold, from 8 to 31 percent, while the United States’ share fell
from 28 to 22 percent, and Japan’s share fell by over two-thirds, from 30 to 8 percent. Taiwan
and South Korea both saw their shares double or almost so, with Taiwan’s share growing from 8
to 15 percent and South Korea’s growing from 5 to 10 percent. Germany and Malaysia
maintained shares of 2 percent each. (See figure 18.)

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 31
Figure 17: Value added (US$, billions) of semiconductor industry by economy, 2001–2016176

Figure 18: Country share of value added in global semiconductor industry, 2001 and 2016177

A similar trajectory is apparent when considering semiconductor exports. According to OECD
data, in 2018, China exported $138 billion in semiconductors, Taiwan $111 billion, South
Korea $92 billion, Singapore $87 billion, the United States $53 billion, the EU-27 and United
Kingdom combined each about $53 billion, and Japan $48 billion.
From 2005 to 2019 (or most-recent year available), China’s semiconductor exports increased
from $27.8 billion to $138 billion, Taiwan’s increased from $35.9 billion to $111 billion, South
Korea’s from $30.9 billion to $92.4 billion, and the EU 27 + United Kingdom’s from $69.4
billion to $81.6 billion. Meanwhile, U.S. exports were roughly unchanged—$53.1 billion in
2005 compared to $52.9 billion in 2019—while Japan’s exports decreased slightly from $47.9
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
$400
$450
All Others
Thailand
Germany
Singapore
Malaysia
Japan
South Korea
Taiwan
United States
China
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
2001 2016

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 32
billion to $46.9 billion. (See figure 19.) In other words, amazingly, the world’s leader in
innovating and developing semiconductors was unable to increase the net value of its
semiconductor exports over almost a 15-year period. Considering nations’ change in
semiconductor exports from 2005 to 2019, China realized a nearly 400 percent increase, from
$27 billion to $138 billion; while the United States experienced a slight decline of 0.04
percent, from $53.1 to $52.9 billion; and Japan experienced a decline of 2.2 percent, from
$47.9 billion to $46.9 billion. (See figure 20.)
Figure 19: Nations' semiconductor exports, 2005 and 2019 (US$, billions)178

Figure 20: Percent change in nations' semiconductor exports from 2005 to 2019179

China’s shares of global semiconductor value added and exports have grown so rapidly in large
part because the Chinese government provided the direction, coordination, and massive funding
 $-
 $20
 $40
 $60
 $80
 $100
 $120
 $140
 $160
China Taiwan South Korea EU27 + UK United States Japan
2005 Exports 2019 Exports
-50%
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
250%
300%
350%
400%
450%
China Taiwan South Korea EU27 + UK United States Japan

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 33
to increase its share of global semiconductor manufacturing capacity. China’s strategic ambitions
for the sector remain unchanged—if anything, they’ve doubled down—so this rapid growth is
only expected to continue in the future. In fact, whereas China held barely 1 percent of global
semiconductor manufacturing capacity in 2000, by 2010 this share had grown to 11 percent,
and to 15 percent by year-end 2020, with this share forecast to increase to 24 percent by 2030,
according to a report coauthored by the Boston Consulting Group and the Semiconductor
Industry Association.
180 (See figure 21.)
Figure 21: Global manufacturing capacity by location181

Figure 22: Change in semiconductor fab capacity by country/region, 2007–2021182

-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
15%
China South Korea Southeast
Asia
Taiwan Europe North America Japan

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 34
Another way to interpret this trend is by examining the change in semiconductor fabrication
capacity by country (or region) from 2007 to 2021. Over this time period, China’s share of
semiconductor fabrication capacity has risen by 13.4 percent, while South Korea and Taiwan’s
shares have increased by 2.5 and 0.7 percent, respectively, whereas Europe’s share fell by 2.2
percent, North America’s (predominantly the United States’) fell by 5.6 percent, and Japan’s fell
by 10.1 percent. (See figure 22.) This trend is also exemplified by Table 3, which shows that the
number of China’s fabs increased threefold from 2015 to 2019 alone. More semiconductor fabs
means more semiconductor production, and indeed China’s output of integrated circuits is
rapidly expanding, up over fivefold from 2012 to year-end 2020, from 75 billion to 225 billion
units. (See figure 23.)
Table 3: Worldwide 300 mm semiconductor fab count183
Country/Region 2015 2017 2019
Taiwan 29 34 36
China 8 12 24
United States 18 20 20
South Korea 13 17 19
Japan 10 11 13
Europe & Mideast 7 8 8
Southeast Asia 5 7 6
Total 90 109 126
Figure 23: China's output of integrated circuits, 12-month rolling sum184

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 35
Moving forward, China’s efforts to control more of this strategic sector will continue. China has
the most semiconductor fab projects underway in the world, with at least 30 new facilities or
lines in construction or on the drawing board (of which 13 are targeted at the foundry market).185
China has built 19 new semiconductor fabs since the start of 2017. And China’s fab
construction spending reached record highs in 2018, totaling $6.8 billion and accounting for
over 50 percent of worldwide construction spending.186 In fact, China is projected to add 40
percent of the world’s new semiconductor manufacturing capacity over the course of this
decade.187 (See figure 24.) By 2030, Asia is expected to command 83 percent of installed global
wafer capacity production, with China possessing the most-significant share. (See figure 25.) Of
course, the most-significant factor driving this development is the massive Chinese government-
sponsored or -enabled subsidization of the sector, which, as noted, has been directly connected
to the growth of new semiconductor manufacturing capacity in the country.
Figure 24: Share of net new chip manufacturing capacity by country/region, 1990–2030188

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 36
Figure 25: 2019–2030 global installed semiconductor wafer capacity projection189

In fact, whereas in 2012 China ranked fifth among seven regions worldwide in IC wafer capacity,
the country surpassed the Americas in 2018 and Japan in 2019 to now rank third. China’s IC
wafer capacity growth accelerated by 14 percent in 2019, by 21 percent in 2020, and is
expected to grow at least 17 percent in 2021. From 2019 through the end of 2021, China will
have increased its wafer capacity for memory by 95 percent, for foundry by 47 percent, and for
analog by 29 percent. In 2021, Chinese-headquartered companies will account for 57 percent of
the country’s IC installed wafer capacity, compared with foreign companies’ 43 percent share.190
(See figure 26.)
Figure 26: IC installed wafer capacity by top-five region (capacity in 200 mm eq wpm thousand)191

Returning to the trends shown in figure 21, which charts the change in the global landscape of
semiconductor manufacturing from 1990 to today and beyond to 2030, it’s important to
emphasize that other nations/regions have generally experienced substantial declines in their
share of global semiconductor manufacturing capacity over the past three decades. Europe’s
relative decline is most notable here, given its share of global semiconductor manufacturing
capacity fell from 44 percent in 1990, to 24 percent in 2000, to 13 percent in 2010, to 9

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 37
percent in 2020; in other words, Europe lost 80 percent of its market share over this three-
decade period. Similarly, the United States lost over 70 percent of its share of global
semiconductor manufacturing capacity. To be sure, about half the loss in Europe and the United
States predated China really amping up its semiconductor industrial policies starting in the prior
decade, although for both nations the loss extended over the past decade and is likely to proceed
through the current one, with Japan, South Korea, and other nations also losing market share as
China’s share grows.
China is projected to add 40 percent of the world’s new semiconductor manufacturing capacity over
the course of this decade.
The American and European loss, especially from 1990 to 2020, largely corresponds with two
forces: 1) a considerable increase in offshored manufacturing by U.S. and European companies;
and 2) the growth of Taiwan’s sector, a reflection of Morris Chang’s TSMC and the foundry
model. While certainly Taiwanese industrial planning, support from its Industrial Technology
Research Institute (ITRI), and the springing up of an indigenous semiconductor ecosystem over
the prior decades—initially with Taiwan as a key player in the market for ATP services—played a
part, much of Taiwan’s success here was driven by a breakthrough business model innovation:
the foundry model which TSMC so effectively pioneered. Of course, the American and European
loss also reflects a broader undercurrent of semiconductors and other manufacturing sectors
offshoring to lower-cost manufacturing locales, especially in the 1990s. While the factors that
drove industry dynamics from 1990 to 2020 have their own set of causes, the growth of China’s
slice, especially since 2010, has been driven in no small part by its aggressive innovation
mercantilism, as described in this report.
IMPACTS OF CHINA’S INNOVATION MERCANTILISM ON SEMICONDUCTOR
INDUSTRY INNOVATION
It should be clear that absent China’s unfair, mercantilist policies, Chinese semiconductor
enterprise growth would be significantly lower than it has been. Accordingly, a key question is,
What has been and what is likely to be the impact of China’s practices on innovation in the
overall industry globally? As noted, countries’ innovation mercantilist policies negatively impact
competitors by creating excess competition, thereby reducing the revenues needed to reinvest in
future generations of innovation. This section examines how Chinese innovation mercantilist
practices have impacted capital expenditures, profits, R&D, patents, and leading-edge
production in the global semiconductor industry.
Capital Expenditures
As noted previously, the semiconductor industry represents one of the world’s most capital-
intensive industries. However, semiconductor industry capital intensity has actually declined
considerably over the past several decades. In fact, globally it fell from 40.8 percent in the mid-
1980s and 33.7 percent in the mid-1990s to just 24.2 percent as of 2019. (See figure 27.)
This decrease in semiconductor enterprises’ investment in CapEx may reflect the increasing
advent of Chinese innovation mercantilist policies—not only taking market share away from the
leaders and reducing their ability to invest in new facilities, but also impeding innovators’ ability
to earn profits that can be reinvested in the future.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 38
Figure 27: Semiconductor industry capital expenditures, 1981–2019192

Industry Revenue and Profits
As of year-end 2019, and accounting for the revenues generated by the 136 largest leading
semiconductor companies in the world, which totaled $571.8 billion, Chinese-headquartered
companies accounted for $41.3 billion, over 7.2 percent of those revenues. Chinese firms
accounted for 21 percent of global OSAT revenues ($6 billion), 8 percent of foundry revenues
($4.5 billion), and 7 percent of global revenues from chip design and manufacturing activities
($29.6 billion).
193 In 2015, Chinese firms commanded a 4 percent share of global
semiconductor industry revenues. Thus, Chinese-headquartered firms have seen their market
share nearly double from 2015 to 2019 (albeit clearly from a small base.)
In terms of non-Chinese enterprises, Samsung, Intel, and TSMC account for the greatest shares
of revenue generated by the global semiconductor industry, followed by SK Hynix, Micron, and
Qualcomm, each with a roughly equivalent share. (See figure 28.)
Despite China’s growth, the net profit margins for China’s semiconductor companies are a
fraction of those of leading semiconductor companies, such as Intel, Samsung, TSMC, SK Hynix,
and Micron. (See figure 29.) On average, in 2019, net margins for the non-Chinese firms were
19.4 percent, while net margins for the Chinese-owned firms were 12.1 percent. This shows that
Chinese semiconductor firms are primarily not market driven and that it’s the aggressive Chinese
industrial subsidies that in large part keep these firms afloat and allow them to finance massive
expansionary investments, even with very low margins.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 39
Figure 28: Non-Chinese semiconductor firm revenue, % of global, 2010–2019194

Figure 29: Net profit margins for selected semiconductor companies, 2015–2019195

R&D
As of 2018, U.S.-headquartered enterprises invested 17.4 percent in R&D as a share of their
sales, compared with 13.9 percent for European firms, 9.9 percent for Taiwanese ones, 8.8
percent for Japanese ones, 8.4 percent for Chinese ones, and 7.3 percent for Korean ones. (See
figure 30.) The impact of Chinese innovation mercantilism in this sector on foreign competitors’
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Intel
Samsung
TSMC
SK Hynix
Sony
Qualcomm
Micron
Infineon
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
Chinese Non-Chinese
Gross or Net Profit as a Percentage of Revenue
Gross Profit Margin
Net Profit Margin

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 40
ability to reinvest profits in R&D is in part reflected in the fact that European semiconductor
industry R&D intensity has fallen from 16.5 percent in 2010 to 13.9 percent today. Conversely,
the mean R&D intensity for Chinese semiconductor firms rose from 6.3 percent in 2012 to 8.4
percent in 2018, an increase of 33 percent.196
However, it is important to note that it is difficult to get fully accurate figures. For example, the
figures on Korea include Samsung and are not broken out for its semiconductor industry, and
would likely be higher if it were. In contrast, Chinese firms have strong incentives to overstate
their R&D expenditures when reporting to the government, in large part because the central
government, in particular, looks at R&D spend as a key indicator of performance.
Even with this, Chinese semiconductor firms are about half as R&D-intensive as U.S.
semiconductor firms and about 40 percent as EU firms; the more market share Chinese
semiconductor firms capture over time will shift market power to less-innovative firms and thus
decrease the level of R&D invested.
In fact, there is a strong positive correlation (0.89) between semiconductor firm revenues in one
year and R&D expenditures in the next.
197 Thus, when Chinese semiconductor firms capture
sales and take market share away from more-innovative enterprises, this empowers less-
innovative firms and weakens the overall innovation ecosystem. For instance, with Yangtze
Memory Technologies capturing as much as 5 percent, and Changxin Memory Technologies as
much as 4 percent, of the global DRAM market in 2020, an ever-increasing amount of market
share is going to less-innovative Chinese companies.198 As such, if Chinese semiconductor
innovation mercantilist policies continue to enable Chinese firms to gain market share, then the
ability of more-innovative firms to invest in R&D will drop, potentially leading to a lessening of
the industry’s ability to maintain Moore’s Law.
Figure 30: Global spending by firms on semiconductor R&D as a share of sales in 2018, by country/region199

0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
United States European
Union
Taiwan Japan China Korea Other Nations

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 41
Patents
The United States’ Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) tracks data on semiconductor patents
granted by the agency. While the U.S. share of semiconductor patents decreased from 43
percent in 1998 to 29 percent in 2018, the United States still leads. (See figure 31.) Japan’s
share fell by about one-third, from 33 percent to 23 percent. Taiwan and South Korea are next,
followed by the EU. China stands at sixth, accounting for about 6 percent of global patents.
When patents per $1 billion in GDP are calculated, China’s lag is even more profound. For every
$1 billion in national GDP, there are 310 patents awarded to U.S. semiconductor firms, whereas
there are just 77 patents awarded per $1 billion in GDP to Chinese semiconductor firms.200
In 2019, Chinese innovation mercantilism led to approximately 5,100 fewer U.S. semiconductor
patents awarded than would otherwise be the case (out of a total of about 19,500 issued).
ITIF’s analysis finds that non-Chinse semiconductor firms had a patent intensity (patents as a
share of sales) four times greater than Chinese semiconductor firms. Factoring in these firms’
lower patent intensity and assuming that without unfair Chinese government policies these firms’
global market share would be one-third of what it is today, ITIF calculated that the cost of these
policies was a significant reduction in global patenting. We find that, in 2019, Chinese
innovation mercantilism led to approximately 5,100 fewer U.S. semiconductor patents awarded
than would otherwise be the case (out of a total of about 19,500 issued).
Figure 31: Share of USPTO semiconductor patents granted by country/region, 2018201

Leading-Edge Production
Another way to view the impact of Chinese policies in the sector is by recognizing that Chinese
firms remain quite far from the leading edge of technology, which suggests that were it not for
aggressive innovation mercantilism policies, then China would scarcely have a major
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
United States Japan Taiwan South Korea EU China Rest of World

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 42
semiconductor manufacturer at all. (It might still be competitive in the OSAT market, however.)
For instance, in terms of leadership in manufacturing the most-advanced chips in the logic
segment of the industry, South Korean and Taiwanese players Samsung and TSMC lead with
scale production at the 5 nm level (with a clear pathway to reaching production at 3 nm by
2022), followed by Intel, which is currently making the transition from 10 nm to 7 nm (7 nm is
listed here, as the firm is currently in pilot production at 7 nm and expects to reach scale by Q4
2021), followed by SK Hynix at 10 nm, America’s Global Foundries at 12 nm, and Taiwan’s
UMC and China’s SMIC each at 14 nm. (See figure 32.)
Likewise, in the memory (e.g., DRAM) market, Micron, SK Hynix, and Samsung stand at the
leading edge, producing DRAM chips at the 10 nm process level, while Changxin Memory
Technologies is currently at the 19 nm process level and Yangtze Memory Technologies is at 22
nm. (See figure 33.)
As such, to the extent Chinese competitors gain market share, especially because of government
support, they by definition take market share from firms that are technologically superior.
Figure 32: Leading logic semiconductor manufacturers (by most-advanced process node, with the smaller the
node, the more advanced the production)202

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Samsung TSMC Intel Global Foundries SMIC UMC

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 43
Figure 33: Leading memory semiconductor manufacturers (by most-advanced process node, with the smaller the
node, the more advanced the production)203

In summary, firms headquartered in Germany, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the United Kingdom,
and the United States remain global leaders in semiconductor innovation. However, it’s also clear
that Chinese policies that unfairly take market share from global leaders in order to support
Chinese laggards will only continue to reduce the relative position of leading firms, thereby
limiting their ability to earn the revenues—and thus the profits—needed to invest in the R&D
and capital expenditures that sustain future generations of innovation. China certainly has every
right to compete intensely in this sector, but it should do so through innovation, not innovation
mercantilism.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
To deal with the challenge posed by Chinese innovation mercantilism to the global
semiconductor industry, the United States both needs to work with like-minded nations and to
enhance its own innovation capacity in the sector. To summarize, some of the key international
policy recommendations include 1) subsidy disciplines at the WTO; 2) collaboration on export
controls; 3) coordinated FDI screening; 4) information sharing among like-minded nations to
combat Chinese IP theft and economic espionage; and 5) cooperation among like-minded
nations on semiconductor R&D and innovation. Key domestic policy recommendations include
fully funding Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) for America Act
legislation and increasing federal investment in semiconductor R&D.
International Responses
Expand Subsidies Disciplines at the WTO
China has become competitive in many advanced-technology sectors—from solar panels and
wind turbines to telecom equipment to semiconductors—in part due to Chinese government
subsidies, often provided to SOEs. For instance, 95 percent of Chinese firms in tech industries
received R&D subsidies in 2015, with those subsidies accounting for 22 percent of firms’ R&D
0
5
10
15
20
25
Micron Samsung SK Hynix Changxin Memory
Technologies
Yangtze Memory
Technologies

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 44
investments.204 China “spent or loaned $30–$40 billion to establish its current position as the
world’s leader in both solar and wind turbine technologies.”205 And, as noted, China’s National IC
and related provincial funds seek to invest at least $150 billion to establish a closed-loop
semiconductor ecosystem in China.
According to the WTO, there are three elements required for financial assistance to be identified
as a subsidy: 1) a financial contribution; 2) given by the government or a public body; that 3)
confers a benefit on the recipient of such contributions.206 Subsidies “should not distort trade
and investment”; but China’s clearly do. Accordingly, the United States should work with like-
minded nations (including through the trilateral framework with the European Union and Japan)
and at the WTO to update its rules to impose much stiffer conditions on, and penalties for,
aggressive industrial subsidization.207 This should start with clarifying the definition of a “public
body,” extending it to include state-influenced activities of entities such as SOEs and private
firms.208 Rules should obligate the subsidizing country to prove that a given subsidy does not
inflict harm on others. Like-minded nations should focus on achieving a significant increase in
global subsidies transparency, including insisting upon timely and complete notification of
subsidies and establishing a presumption of prejudice toward subsidies not timely notified.209
The countries should also designate an annual meeting between WTO members and the WTO
appellate body to discuss patterns and challenges pertaining to excessive use of subsidies.
Allied Nations Should Collaborate on Semiconductor Export Controls
As noted, China represents both an important market and an important location of production for
companies competing in the semiconductor industry (let alone all other advanced-technology
sectors). As part of receiving the benefits conferred on it by electing to join the WTO, China has
committed to make access to its market available to enterprises from other nations according to
the foundational principles of non-discrimination, national treatment, and non-transparency. As
noted above, China has also agreed not to distort trade and international markets through
excessive industrial subsidization. If it continues to compete along these trajectories, it poses an
existential threat to firms that are playing according to market-based rules. Recognition of this
dynamic led the Trump administration to impose, or threaten to impose, export controls on
Chinese firms, including the August 2020 decision by the Department of Commerce to require a
license for the sale to Huawei of any microchips that are designed or produced through the use
of U.S. equipment or software.210 At the end of September 2020, the administration expanded
these controls by requiring companies to obtain a license from the Department of Commerce
before a range of technologies or inputs could be sold to SMIC (the administration expanded its
logic for export controls in this instance by contending that SMIC is a major supplier of
semiconductors to the Chinese military, and so U.S. national security concerns were implicated
by the sale of U.S. technologies that could benefit the Chinese military).211
In the face of unbridled Chinese innovation mercantilism—not to mention the nation’s growing
geopolitical aspirations—export controls on the core technologies underpinning China’s economic
and military rise are certainly a tool which will be closely considered by policymakers. However,
as ITIF wrote in “An Allied Approach to Semiconductor Leadership,” it’s important that to the
greatest extent possible the United States collaborate with like-minded nations to coordinate in
introducing such export controls, “for export control regimes are most successful when they are
coordinated internationally.”212 As Section 4811(5) of the Export Control Reform Act notes,
“Export controls should be coordinated with the multilateral export control regimes. Export

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 45
controls that are multilateral are most effective, and should be tailored to focus on those core
technologies and other items that are capable of being used to pose a serious national security
threat to the United States and its allies.”213
Specifically, a new approach is needed that represents a middle ground between the United
States’ recent efforts to introduce unilateral export controls that increasingly seek to accomplish
economic or trade policy objectives and the traditional Wassenaar approach for both
semiconductors (including semiconductor manufacturing equipment) specifically and advanced
technologies more generally. As such, the United States should eschew the application of
unilateral export controls and seek to develop a more-ambitious and effective plurilateral
approach to promulgate export controls among like-minded nations that have indigenous
semiconductor production capacity, such as Germany, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the
Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.
214 These nations should work together to establish a
common understanding of both what threats are posed to the global semiconductor industry by
enterprises from non-market economies not fundamentally competing on market-based terms, as
well as the pace and evolution of semiconductor technology. Then, among themselves, these
nations should establish working groups, outside the Wassenaar structure, to develop
descriptions of both the semiconductor technologies and related items that warrant controls
(beyond what already exists), as well as establish common licensing policies.
Align Foreign Direct Investment Screening Procedures
 As noted, in August 2018, Congress updated America’s foreign investment screening practices
by passing the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA), updating the remit
of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS), which screens foreign
investment in the U.S. economy. Specifically, FIRRMA expands CFIUS’s jurisdiction to include
certain non-controlling investments in critical technology (including emerging technologies),
critical infrastructure companies, and companies with access to sensitive personal-identifier
information.
215
The United States should work with like-minded nations to align foreign investment screening
practices and to exchange information when it appears other nations are trying to use unfair
practices in making foreign investments, such as heavily state-subsidized SOEs attempting to
purchase foreign enterprises in advanced-technology industries. In total, since 2014, Chinese
businesses have made at least $56.8 billion in technology-related investments abroad, of which
$36.7 billion (65 percent) was invested outside the United States.216 The largest allied
destinations of Chinese tech-related FDI outside the United States have been the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, Germany, France, and Singapore.
217 In fact, FIRRMA instructs CFIUS
to “establish a formal process to share information with foreign allied governments and
coordinate and cooperate on investment security issues,” with the understanding that countries
adopting comprehensive foreign investment review processes may remain on CFIUS’s list of
“excepted foreign states.”218 The United States should continue to work with like-minded nations
to coordinate investment screening procedures and consider expanding its list of “excepted
foreign states” to include countries such as France, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Japan, and
South Korea (among others).

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 46
Enhance Information-Sharing Efforts to Combat Foreign Economic Espionage and
Intellectual Property, Technology, or Trade Secret Theft
The Five Eyes alliance represents a compact among Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United
Kingdom, and the United States to provide mutual access between members to intelligence
activities, including cybersecurity, and promote greater levels of military interoperability.
219 The
United States should lead a larger group of like-minded nations in developing a broader Five
Eyes-like alliance specifically focused on collaborating to combat state-sponsored economic
espionage in advanced-technology industries. One important activity such an entity could
undertake would be to develop a comprehensive list of enterprises and individuals who have
attempted or affected IP theft, and develop mechanisms to restrict such firms and individuals
from competing in like-minded nations’ markets.
Allied Nations Should Cooperate on Semiconductor Development Activities
The immensity and complexity of semiconductor innovation means there’s opportunity to enroll
participants from like-minded nations in long-term, high-potential R&D programs such as
“semiconductor moonshots” that could, for instance, develop affordable desktop semiconductor
fabrication capabilities that could take the place of a billion-dollar fabrication facility and allow
the production of small batches of structures.220 This is actually anticipated in the bipartisan
CHIPS for America Act, which calls for the creation of a $750 million multilateral security fund
envisioned to support development and adoption of secure microelectronics. Secure
microelectronics supply chains would be an excellent first step in this regard, and Congress
should be sure to appropriate funding for this provision as it reviews reauthorization of the
National Defense Authorization Act (into which that legislation has since been incorporated) this
fall.
221
Domestic Responses
As much as it’s important to contest Chinese semiconductor innovation mercantilism, the United
States must tend to the health of its own semiconductor innovation ecosystem, as the following
policy recommendations suggest.

Appropriate Sufficient Funding to Meet CHIPS Act Objectives
In 2019, two significant pieces of congressional legislation were introduced with the intent of
stimulating the innovative and competitive capacity of the U.S. semiconductor industry. First,
Senators John Cornyn (R-TX) and Mark Warner (D-VA) introduced the bipartisan CHIPS for
America Act, which was followed by Senators Tom Cotton (R-AR) and Chuck Schumer’s (D-NY)
introduction of the American Foundries Act of 2020. The two pieces of legislation were since
merged, and a consolidated version of the legislation was included in the 2020 National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA), which was passed into law at the end of 2020.222 The legislation
would expand federal investment in semiconductor research and technology development,
introduce incentives to locate semiconductor manufacturing facilities in the United States, and
provide expanded tax credits for investment in the sector. Among other elements, the legislation
would:
▪ Provide $10 billion in matching grants for WTO-consistent state/local incentives to attract
semiconductor manufacturing facilities, which would help level the playing field with
other nations’ incentives;

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 47
▪ Invest $7 billion over five years for semiconductor research at agencies such as the
National Science Foundation (NSF), Department of Energy, and the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA);
▪ Introduce a $750 million multilateral security fund to support development and adoption
of secure microelectronics and secure microelectronics supply chains;
▪ Create a Manufacturing USA Institute for Semiconductor Manufacturing as well as a
National Semiconductor Technology Center to research and prototype advanced
semiconductors;
▪ Introduce a 40 percent investment tax credit for semiconductor equipment and facilities
expenditures; and
▪ Launch initiatives to support the development and adoption of secure microelectronics
and secure microelectronics supply chains.
Each of these programmatic elements constitutes important measures to reinvigorate U.S.
semiconductor industry competitiveness (especially with regard to semiconductor manufacturing,
but also with regard to other phases such as semiconductor design). As such, the incoming
117th Congress should provide full appropriations for these initiatives.
Increase Federal Investment in Semiconductor R&D
Though it’s embodied in the legislation referenced in the prior recommendation, it’s worthwhile
to highlight specifically the need to bolster federal investment in semiconductor R&D. Forty years
ago, federal funding for semiconductor R&D was more than double the level of private-sector
funding. However, by 2019, U.S. private-sector investment of about $40 billion in
semiconductor R&D was 23 times greater than the federal government’s level of investment.223
In 2019, the U.S. federal government invested just $1.7 billion in core, semiconductor-specific
R&D (along with an additional $4.3 billion in research in semiconductor-related fields). The
federal government should at least triple its annual investment in federally funded
semiconductor R&D.
Chinese government policy undermines the dynamics that sustain the positive and reinforcing
innovation cycle in the industry, thereby slowing innovation for the world.
CONCLUSION
Semiconductors represent one of the world’s most-important industries. Semiconductors are an
innovation-based industry that depends on strong IP protection and sufficient profits to invest in
next-generation R&D and production. Chinese policies distort the global market through massive
subsidization, IP theft, forced technology transfers, and other innovation mercantilist practices.
As such, Chinese government policy undermines the dynamics that sustain the positive and
reinforcing innovation cycle in the industry, slowing innovation for the world. Policymakers from
like-minded nations need to come together to ensure the industry continues to evolve along
private-enterprise led, market-based, rules-governed dynamics. All nations have a right to
participate in this sector, but unless the contours of that competition are thoroughly consistent
with WTO-based rules and principles, innovation will suffer.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021 PAGE 48
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank Dr. Robert Atkinson and Kevin Gawora for providing input to this
report. Any errors or omissions are the author’s alone.
About the Author
Stephen J. Ezell is ITIF vice president for Global Innovation Policy and focuses on science,
technology, and innovation policy as well as international competitiveness and trade policy
issues. He is the coauthor of Innovating in a Service Driven Economy: Insights Application, and
Practice (Palgrave McMillan, 2015) and Innovation Economics: The Race for Global Advantage
(Yale 2012).
About ITIF
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) is an independent, nonprofit,
nonpartisan research and educational institute focusing on the intersection of technological
innovation and public policy. Recognized by its peers in the think tank community as the global
center of excellence for science and technology policy, ITIF’s mission is to formulate and
promote policy solutions that accelerate innovation and boost productivity to spur growth,
opportunity, and progress.
For more information, visit us at www.itif.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 49
ENDNOTES

1. Makada Henry-Nickie, Kwadwo Frimpong, and Hao Sun, “Trends in the Information Technology
Sector” (Brookings, March 2019), https://www.brookings.edu/research/trends-in-the-information-
technology-sector/.
2. Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), “Winning the Future: A Blueprint for Sustained U.S.
Leadership in Semiconductor Technology” (SIA, April 2019), 2, https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/04/FINAL-SIA-Blueprint-for-web.pdf.
3. SIA, “Worldwide Semiconductor Sales Decrease 12 Percent to $412 Billion in 2019,” news release,
February 3, 2020, https://www.semiconductors.org/worldwide-semiconductor-sales-decrease-12-
percent-to-412-billion-in-2019/; See also: WikiZero, “Transistor Count,”
https://www.wikizero.com/en/Transistor_count.
4. John Pitzer, Managing Director, Credit Suisse Bank, “Remarks at SIA Event: “Big Opportunities,
Looming Challenges: The State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry” (July 9, 2020),
https://www.semiconductors.org/events/big-opportunities-looming-challenges-the-state-of-the-u-s-
semiconductor-industry/.
5. Congressional Research Service (CRS), “Semiconductors: U.S. Industry, Global Competition, and
Federal Policy” (CRS, October 2020), i, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R46581.pdf.
6. SIA, “2020 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry” (SIA, 2020), 8,
https://www.semiconductors.org/2020-state-of-the-u-s-semiconductor-industry/.
7. CRS, “Semiconductors: U.S. Industry, Global Competition, and Federal Policy,” 22. Note: 300 nm
Equivalent Wafer Capacity by Country/Region, 2015 and 2019. CRS cites IC Insights, Global Wafer
Capacity, 2020–2024. CRS also makes this caveat: “While actual production outputs are proprietary
and generally confidential, production capacities are well known and used as the primary metric for
assessing where semiconductors are made.”
8. CRS, “Semiconductors: U.S. Industry, Global Competition, and Federal Policy,” 24. Citing: SIA,
“2020 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” 8.
9. SIA, “2020 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” 11.
10. Data courtesy of Semiconductor Industry Association, provided by IC Insights.
11. Thomas Alsop, “DRAM chip market share by manufacturer worldwide from 2011 to 2020,”
Statista,
June 19, 2020, https://www.statista.com/statistics/271726/global-market-share-held-by-dram-chip-
vendors-since-2010/.
12. Chad P. Brown, “How the United States marched the semiconductor industry into its trade war with
China” (Peterson Institute for International Economics, December 2020), 18,
https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/wp20-16.pdf.
13. “2020F Top 15 Semiconductor Sales Leaders Including Foundries,” AnySilicon, November 24,
2020, https://anysilicon.com/2020f-top-15-semiconductor-sales-leaders-including-foundries/.
14. Accenture and Global Semiconductor Alliance (GSA), “Globality and Complexity of the
Semiconductor Ecosystem” (Accenture and GSA, February 2020), 7,
https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/PDF-119/Accenture-Globality-Semiconductor-
Industry.pdf#zoom=50.
15. John VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors”
(U.S. International Trade Commission, March 2018),
https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/executive_briefings/ebot-semiconductor_gvc_final.pdf.
16. Accenture and GSA, “Globality and Complexity of the Semiconductor Ecosystem,” 6. Used with
permission.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 50

17. Nathan Associates, “Beyond Borders: The Global Semiconductor Value Chain” (Nathan Associates
and Semiconductor Industry Association, June 2016), 10, https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/06/SIA-Beyond-Borders-Report-FINAL-June-7.pdf.
18. Markets and Markets, “Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment Market,” accessed September 14,
2020, https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/semiconductor-manufacturing-
equipment-market-263678841.html.
19. Samuel M. Goodman, Dan Kim, and John VerWey, “The South Korea-Japan Trade Dispute in
Context: Semiconductor Manufacturing, Chemicals, and Concentrated Supply Chains” (U.S.
International Trade Commission, October 2019), Office of Industries Working Paper ID-062,
https://usitc.gov/publications/332/working_papers/the_south_korea-
japan_trade_dispute_in_context_semiconductor_manufacturing_chemicals_and_concentrated_supply
_chains.pdf.
20. Antonio Varas et al., “Government Incentives and U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor
Manufacturing” (SIA and Boston Consulting Group), 11, https://www.bcg.com/en-
us/publications/2020/incentives-and-competitiveness-in-semiconductor-manufacturing.
21. Nicholas Bloom, “Are Good Ideas Getting Harder to Find?”
American Economic Review Vol. 110,
Issue 4 (April 2020): 1104–1144, https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20180338.
22. Varas et al., “Government Incentives and U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing,”
12.
23. Aaron Pressman, “Intel has fallen behind again on its next big chip manufacturing improvement,”
Fortune, July 23, 2020, https://fortune.com/2020/07/23/intel-chip-manufacturing-delay-7-
nanometer/.
24. European Commission, “The 2019 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard” (European
Commission, 2020), 57, 61, https://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2020-
04/EU%20RD%20Scoreboard%202019%20FINAL%20online.pdf.
25. Huawei’s R&D investments include for subsidiary HiSilicon, but as the 2019 EU Industrial R&D
Investment Scoreboard didn’t break this investment out, Huawei is omitted from the top two here.
26. European Commission, “The 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard” (European
Commission, 2020), https://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2021-
01/SB2020_final_16Dec2020_online.pdf.
27. European Commission, “The 2019 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard,” 57, 61.
28. SIA, “2020 SIA Factbook,” 22.
29. Ibid.
30. SIA, “2020 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” 13.
31. Dieter Ernst, “From Catching Up to Forging Ahead: China’s Policies for Semiconductors” (East-West
Center, 2015), https://www.eastwestcenter.org/publications/catching-forging-ahead-chinas-policies-
semiconductors.
32. Peter Clarke and Dylan McGrath, “Foundries have 28-nm yield issues, say execs,”
EETimes,
November 2, 2011, https://www.eetimes.com/foundries-have-28-nm-yield-issues-say-execs/; Dan
Hutcheson, CEO and Chairman, VLSI Research, (Remarks at SIA Event: “Big Opportunities, Looming
Challenges: The State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” July 9, 2020),
https://www.semiconductors.org/events/big-opportunities-looming-challenges-the-state-of-the-u-s-
semiconductor-industry/.
33. Alex Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War” (The Hinrich Foundation,
January 2020), 17, https://www.hinrichfoundation.com/research/white-paper/trade-and-
technology/semiconductors-at-the-heart-of-the-us-china-tech-war/.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 51

34. Jess Macy Yu, “TSMC says latest chip plant will cost around $20 bln,” Reuters, December 7, 2017,
https://www.reuters.com/article/tsmc-investment/tsmc-says-latest-chip-plant-will-cost-around-20-bln-
idUSL3N1O737Z.
35. SIA, “2020 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” 13.
36. Ibid.
37. Hutcheson, “Remarks at SIA Event: Big Opportunities, Looming Challenges: The State of the U.S.
Semiconductor Industry.”
38. Varas et al., “Government Incentives and U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing,”
1.
39. Cara Lombardo and Dana Cimilluca, “Chip Company AMD Pursues Rival for $30 Billion Tie-Up,”
The Wall Street Journal, October 9, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/amd-is-in-advanced-talks-to-
buy-xilinx-11602205553?mod=hp_lead_pos4.
40. Robert D. Atkinson, “Designing a Global Trading System to Maximize Innovation,” Global Policy Vol.
5, Issue 1 (February 2014), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/1758-5899.12120.
41. Author’s calculations performed with data gathered from semiconductor firms’ annual reports.
Methodology involved calculating the correlation between the sum of revenue for four major
semiconductor firms and their R&D investment from 2010 to 2019. All data points are in millions of
USD. Specifically, the correlation was 0.91 with a one-year lag and 0.93 with no lag.
42. Justin Hodiak and Scott W. Harold, “Can China Become the World Leader in Semiconductors?”
The
Diplomat, September 25, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/09/can-china-become-the-world-
leader-in-semiconductors/.
43. Lorne Switzer, “The Determinants of Industrial R&D: A Funds Flow Simultaneous Equation
Approach,”
Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 66, No. 1 (1984):163- 168; Cited in George
Symeonidis, “Innovation, Firm Size and Market Structure: Schumpeterian Hypotheses and Some
New Themes,”
OECD Economic Department Working Papers No. 16 (1996): 15.
44. Douglas A. Irwin and Pete Keno, “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor Industry,”
Journal of Political Economy Vol. 102, No. 6 (1994): 1200–27,
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2138784.
45. Bruce Berman, “China Now Consumes More Than 60% of World’s Semiconductor Output; U.S.
Portion of Sales is Shrinking,”
IP Closeup, April 21, 2020,
https://ipcloseup.com/2020/04/21/china-now-consumes-more-than-60-of-worlds-semi-conductor-
output-u-s-portion-of-sales-is-shrinking/.
46. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 36; citing Ned Davis Research,
2018.
47. Asa Fitch and Bob Davis, “U.S. Chip Industry Fears Long-Term Damage From China Trade Fight,”
The Wall Street Journal, March 9, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/chip-industry-fears-damage-
china-trade-fight-11583693926.
48. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 36.
49. James A. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians” (Center for Strategic and
International Studies, January 2019), 17, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/publication/190115_Lewis_Semiconductor_v6.pdf.
50. Robert D. Atkinson, “Innovation Drag: China’s Economic Impact on Developed Nations” (ITIF,
January 2020), https://itif.org/publications/2020/01/06/innovation-drag-chinas-economic-impact-
developed-nations.
51. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), “Measuring distortions in
international markets: The semiconductor value chain” (OECD, November 2019), 98,
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/8fe4491d-en.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 52

52. VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 9.
53. Executive Office of the President, President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST), “Report to the President: Ensuring Long-Term U.S. Leadership in Semiconductors”
(PCAST, January 2017), 8,
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_ensuring_long-
term_us_leadership_in_semiconductors.pdf.
54. CRS, “Semiconductors: U.S. Industry, Global Competition, and Federal Policy,” i.
55. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians,” 2.
56. VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 9.
57. Ibid., 11.
58. Yin Li, “From Classic Failures to Global Competitors: Business Organization and Economic
Development in the Chinese Semiconductor Industry” (Master’s thesis; Fudan University, August
2011),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304581717_From_Classic_Failures_to_Global_Competitors
_Business_Organization_and_Economic_Development_in_the_Chinese_Semiconductor_Industry.
59. Douglas B. Fuller,
Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons: Firms and the Political Economy of China’s
Technological Development (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, July 2016).
60. VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 11.
61. Ibid., 12.
62. OECD.Stat, BTDIxE Bilateral Trade in Goods by Industry and End-use, ISIC Rev.4 (Total trade in
electronic components and boards), accessed July 20, 2020,
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=TIVA_2018_C1#.
63. Nigel Cory, “China’s Exaggerated Semiconductor Trade Deficit No Justification for Mercantilist
Policies,” The Innovation Files, October 28, 2015, https://www.innovationfiles.org/chinas-
exaggerated-semiconductor-trade-deficit-no-justification-for-mercantilist-policies/.
64. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians,” 2.
65. Robert D. Atkinson, Nigel Cory, and Stephen Ezell, “Stopping China’s Mercantilism: A Doctrine of
Constructive, Alliance-Backed Confrontation” (ITIF, March 2017), 15,
https://itif.org/publications/2017/03/16/stopping-chinas-mercantilism-doctrine-constructive-alliance-
backed.
66. Christopher A. Thomas, A New World Under Construction: China and Semiconductors (McKinsey &
Company, November 2015), http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/asia-pacific/a-new-world-
under-construction-china-and-semiconductors.
67. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 31.
68. Yoko Kubota, “China Sets Up New $29 Billion Semiconductor Fund,” The Wall Street Journal,
October 25, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-sets-up-new-29-billion-semiconductor-fund-
11572034480.
69. “Chips on Their Shoulders,” The Economist, January 23, 2016,
http://www.economist.com/news/business/21688871-china-wants-become-superpower-
semiconductors-and-plans-spend-colossal-sums.
70. McKinsey Global Institute, “China and the world” (McKinsey Global Institute, July 2019), 80,
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/featured%20insights/china/china%20and%20the%20
world%20inside%20the%20dynamics%20of%20a%20changing%20relationship/mgi-china-and-
the-world-full-report-june-2019-vf.ashx.
71. VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 13.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 53

72. U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “Made in China 2025: Global Ambitions Built on Local Protections”
(U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 2017), 3,
https://www.uschamber.com/sites/default/files/final_made_in_china_2025_report_full.pdf.
73. Ibid., 16.
74. United States Trade Representative’s Office (USTR), “2018 Special 301 Report” (USTR, 2018),
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/Press/Reports/2018%20Special%20301.pdf; VerWey, “Global
Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 15.
75. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 51.
76. Ibid., 58.
77. SOS International, “Blue Heron: Yangtze Memory Technologies Co. (YMTC)” (SOS International,
December 2020), 6.
78. He Shujing and Mo Yelin, “China creates new memory chip champ, but will customers come?”
Nikkei Asia, August 18, 2020, https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Caixin/China-creates-new-memory-
chip-champ-but-will-customers-come.
79. Roslyn Layton, “The Art of Balancing Economic and National Security: Policy Review of
Semiconductor Manufacturing Equipment Export Control” (China Tech Threat, September 2020),
11, https://chinatechthreat.com/semiconductors/.
80. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 54.
81. Ibid., 55–56.
82. Ibid., 53.
83. VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 15;
Cate Cadell, “China cuts tax rates for chipmakers amid trade tensions,”
 Reuters, March 30, 2018,
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-semiconductors-taxbreaks/china-cuts-tax-rates-for-
chipmakers-amid-trade-tensions-idUSKBN1H60JM.
84. VerWey, “Global Value Chains: Explaining U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficits in Semiconductors,” 15.
85. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 8.
86. Ibid.
87. Ibid., 77.
88. Dan Wang, “A Bumpier Road to Semiconductor Supremacy,” Gravel Dragonomics, July 14, 2020.
89. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 9.
90. Saif M. Khan and Carrick Flynn, “Maintaining China’s Dependence on Democracies for Advanced
Computer Chips” (Brookings Global China in Partnership With the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, April 2020), 7, https://www.brookings.edu/research/maintaining-chinas-dependence-on-
democracies-for-advanced-computer-chips/. Citing: OECD, “Measuring distortions in international
markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 84.
91. Eva Dou, “Xiaomi Launches Its Own Chip, With an Assist From Beijing,”
The Wall Street Journal,
February 28, 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/xiaomi-launches-its-own-chip-with-an-assist-from-
beijing-1488281629; U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “Made in China 2025,” 20.
92. U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “Made in China 2025,” 20.
93. Christopher A. Thomas, “Lagging but motivated: The state of China’s semiconductor industry”
(Brookings, January 7, 2021), https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/lagging-but-motivated-the-
state-of-chinas-semiconductor-industry/.
94. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 29.
95. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians,” 3.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 54

96. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 82.
97. Peter Cowhey, “Expanding the analysis of subsidies and semiconductors” (Power Point Presentation,
World Semiconductor Congress, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2019).
98. Ibid., 11.
99. Ibid.
100. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 50.
101. Ibid., 69.
102. Ibid., 75.
103. Ibid., 74.
104. Ellen Nakashima, “U.S. pushes hard for a ban on Huawei in Europe, but the firm’s 5G prices are
nearly irresistible,” The Washington Post, May 29, 2019,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/for-huawei-the-5g-play-is-in-europe--and-
the-us-is-pushing-hard-for-a-ban-there/2019/05/28/582a8ff6-78d4-11e9-b7ae-
390de4259661_story.html.
105. Michael O. McCarthy, “Background Material for U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission,” June 6, 2012, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/6.14.12McCarthy.pdf.
106. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 48.
107. Ibid., 7.
108. Bob Davis and Eva Dou, “China’s Next Target: U.S. Microchip Hegemony,” The Wall Street Journal,
July 27, 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-next-target-u-s-microchip-hegemony-
1501168303.
109. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians,” 16.
110. Mercedes Ruehl, James Kygne, and Kiran Stacey, “Chinese state-backed funds invest in the U.S.
despite Washington curbs,” The Financial Times, December 2, 2020,
https://www.ft.com/content/745abeca-561d-484d-acd9-ad1caedf9e9e.
111. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 38.
112. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 48.
113. CRS, “Semiconductors: U.S. Industry, Global Competition, and Federal Policy,” 30.
114. “GigaDevice to Merge with ISSI, Say Sources,” China Flash Market, November 22, 2016,
https://en.chinaflashmarket.com/news/view?id=10677.
115. ChinaGoAbroad, “Beijing Navgnss Integration to acquire a majority control of Sweden’s MEMS chip
maker for $115m,” June 4, 2016, http://www.chinagoabroad.com/en/recent_transaction/beijing-
navgnss-integration-to-acquire-a-majority-control-of-sweden-s-mems-chip-maker-for-115m.
116. Okmetic, “Okmetic Oyj applies for delisting of its shares from the official list of Nasdaq Helsinki,”
September 15, 2016, http://www.globenewswire.com/news-
release/2016/09/15/872002/0/en/Okmetic-Oyj-applies-for-delisting-of-its-shares-from-the-official-
list-of-Nasdaq-Helsinki.html; Ridha Loukil, “Pourquoi un fonds chinois entre au capital de Soitec,”
L’usine Digitale, February 10, 2016, https://www.usine-digitale.fr/article/pourquoi-un-fonds-chinois-
entre-au-capital-de-soitec.N378551.
117. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 37.
118. Tom Randall, “Tesla Flips the Switch on Gigafactory,” Bloomberg Technology, January 4, 2017,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-01-04/tesla-flips-the-switch-on-the-gigafactory.
119. Robert D. Atkinson, “Testimony Before U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission on
Chinese Foreign Direct Investment” (ITIF, January 26, 2017),

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 55

https://itif.org/publications/2017/01/26/testimony-us-china-economic-and-security-review-
commission-chinese-foreign.
120. “China’s Tsinghua Unigroup plans $23B bid for Micron Technology,” CNBC, July 13, 2015,
https://www.cnbc.com/2015/07/13/chinas-tsinghua-unigroup-makes-23b-bid-for-micron-
technology.html.
121. Liana B. Baker, “Lattice Semiconductor to be bought by China-backed Canyon Bridge,” Reuters,
November 4, 2016, http://www.reuters.com/article/us-lattice-us-m-a-canyon-bridge-
idUSKBN12Y1K5.
122. Georg Fahrion, “Aiztron-Chinas Staatsstreich,” Capital, October, 24, 2015,
http://www.capital.de/dasmagazin/aixtron-chinas-staatsstreich.html.
123. Lucas Mearian, “China's Unisplendour drops bid to buy WD stake,” ComputerWorld, February 24,
2016, https://www.computerworld.com/article/3037517/chinas-unisplendour-forced-to-drop-bid-to-
buy-wd-stake.html.
124. WikiCorporates, “Canyon Bridge Capital Partners.”
125. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 37.
126. Ibid.
127. Ruehl, Kygne, and Stacey, “Chinese state-backed funds invest in the U.S. despite Washington
curbs.”
128. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians,” 23.
129. Makena Kelly, “China state-owned company charged with stealing US tech trade secrets,” The
Verge, November 1, 2018, https://www.theverge.com/2018/11/1/18052784/china-chip-stolen-
trade-secrets-justice-department-semiconductor.
130. United States Department of Justice, “Chinese Citizen Convicted of Economic Espionage, Theft of
Trade Secrets, and Conspiracy,” news release, June 26, 2020,
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/chinese-citizen-convicted-economic-espionage-theft-trade-secrets-
and-conspiracy.
131. Chuin-Wei Yap, “Taiwan’s Technology Secrets Come Under Assault From China,” The Wall Street
Journal, July 1, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/taiwans-technology-secrets-come-under-assault-
from-china-1530468440.
132. Fuller, Paper Tigers, Hidden Dragons, 137.
133. Brown, “How the United States marched the semiconductor industry into its trade war with China,”
16.
134. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 55.
135. Dan Swinhoe, “Chinese hacking groups to ramp up cyber attacks on some industries, experts say,”
CSO, April 2, 2019, https://www.csoonline.com/article/3384927/chinese-hacking-groups-to-ramp-
up-cyber-attacks-on-some-industries-experts-say.html.
136. Dan Lips, “Answering the China Chip Challenge: Recommendations for U.S. Semiconductor
Industrial Policy in 2021” (Lincoln Network, December 2020), 11,
https://lincolnpolicy.org/2020/answering-the-china-semiconductor-challenge-recommendations-for-u-
s-semiconductor-industrial-policy/.
137. Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s
Republic of China: Annual Report to Congress” (OSD, 2020),
https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-
POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 56

138. Eric Rosenbaum, “1 in 5 corporations say China has stolen their IP within the last year: CNBC CFO
Survey,” CNBC, March 1, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/02/28/1-in-5-companies-say-china-
stole-their-ip-within-the-last-year-cnbc.html.
139. The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property, “Update to the IP Commission
Report: The Theft of American Intellectual Property: Reassessments of the Challenge and United
States Policy” (National Bureau of Asian Research, 2017), https://www.nbr.org/wp-
content/uploads/pdfs/publications/IP_Commission_Report_Update.pdf.
140. OECD, “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain,” 48.
141. United States Trade Representative’s Office, “Findings of the Investigation into China’s Acts,
Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation Under
Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974” (USTR, March 2018),
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Section%20301%20FINAL.PDF.
142. Kaj Malden and Ann Listerud, “Trends in U.S. Multinational Enterprise (MNE) Activity in China,
2000-2017” (U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, July 2020), 4,
https://www.uscc.gov/research/trends-us-multinational-enterprise-activity-china-2000-2017.
143. Ibid., 7; Alexander Hammer, “Why Have U.S. Firms Offshored to China” (U.S. International Trade
Commission Executive Briefings on Trade, June 2017), 1–2,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3370578#:~:text=As%20the%20U.S.%20eco
nomy%20has,to%20suppliers%20and%20a%20growing.
144. Malden and Listerud, “Trends in U.S. Multinational Enterprise (MNE) Activity in China,” 7.
145. Ibid., 7.
146. Stephen Ezell, “The Middle Kingdom Galapagos Island Syndrome: The Cul-De-Sac of Chinese
Technology Standards” (ITIF, December 2014), http://www2.itif.org/2014-galapagos-chinese-
ict.pdf.
147. Nathan Associates, “Beyond Borders,” 7.
148. Nigel Cory, “The Ten Worst Digital Protectionism and Innovation Mercantilist Policies of 2018”
(ITIF, January 2019), https://itif.org/publications/2019/01/28/ten-worst-digital-protectionism-and-
innovation-mercantilist-policies-2018.
149. Rebecca Arcesati, “Chinese tech standards put the screws on European companies,” MERICS,
January 9, 2019, https://merics.org/en/analysis/chinese-tech-standards-put-screws-european-
companies.
150. Nigel Cory and Robert D. Atkinson, “Why and How to Mount a Strong, Trilateral Response to China’s
Innovation Mercantilism” (ITIF, January 2020), 26, https://itif.org/publications/2020/01/13/why-
and-how-mount-strong-trilateral-response-chinas-innovation-mercantilism.
151. Arjun Kharpal, “China is ramping up its own chip industry amid a brewing tech war. That could hurt
US firms,”
CNBC, June 4, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/06/04/china-ramps-up-own-
semiconductor-industry-amid-the-trade-war.html.
152. Arjun Kharpal, “China unveils policies to boost chipmakers as tensions with U.S. rise,” CNBC,
August 10, 2020, https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/11/china-policies-to-boost-chipmakers-as-
tensions-with-us-rise.html.
153. Shannon Davis, “China to Fall Far Short of its “Made-in-China 2025” Goal for IC Devices,”
Semiconductor Digest, May 21, 2020, https://www.semiconductor-digest.com/2020/05/21/china-to-
fall-far-short-of-its-made-in-china-2025-goal-for-ic-devices/.
154. PwC, “China’s Impact on the Semiconductor Industry: 2016 Update” (PwC, January 2017), 4,
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/technology/chinas-impact-on-semiconductor-industry/assets/china-
impact-of-the-semiconductor-industry-2016-update.pdf.
155. Ibid., 20.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 57

156. Thomas, “Lagging but motivated: The state of China’s semiconductor industry.”
157. Deloitte, “Rise of the “Big 4”: The Semiconductor Industry in Asia Pacific” (Deloitte, 2020), 7,
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/technology-media-
telecommunications/cn-tmt-rise-of-the-big-4-en-082820.pdf.
158. Will Knight, “China has never had a real chip industry. Making AI chips could change that,” MIT
Technology Review, December 14, 2018,
https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/12/14/138260/china-has-never-had-a-real-chip-industry-
making-ai-chips-could-change-that/.
159. Doug Strub, “China’s Innovation Policy and the Quest for Semiconductor Autonomy: An Interview
with Dieter Ernst” (AmCham Shanghai, May 2019), https://www.amcham-
shanghai.org/en/article/semiconductor-dieter-ernst.
160. Seamus Grimes and Debin Du, “China’s emerging role in the global semiconductor value chain,”
Telecommunications Policy (2020),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340734119_China's_emerging_role_in_the_global_semico
nductor_value_chain.
161. Strub, “China’s Innovation Policy and the Quest for Semiconductor Autonomy.”
162. Christian G. Dieseldorff, “China Surges Past Americas and Japan in IC Capacity,”
Semi, January 25,
2021, https://blog.semi.org/business-markets/china-surges-past-the-americas-and-japan-in-ic-
capacity.
163. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 29.
164. Ibid.
165. David Manners, “China to run 4% of world’s memory wafers in 2020,” Electronics Weekly,
November 21, 2019, https://www.electronicsweekly.com/blogs/mannerisms/memory-
mannerisms/china-aiming-4-world-memory-market-2020-2019-11/.
166. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 21.
167. SOS International, “Blue Heron: Yangtze Memory Technologies Co. (YMTC),” 5.
168. Dave Makichuk, “China a step closer to microchip independence,” Asia Times, December 1, 2020,
https://asiatimes.com/2020/12/china-a-step-closer-to-independence-in-microchip-war/.
169. Kevin Fogarty, “Chinese chipmaker to chase more advanced technology with IPO proceeds,” S&P
Global Market Intelligence, July 7, 2020, https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-
insights/latest-news-headlines/chinese-chipmaker-to-chase-more-advanced-technology-with-ipo-
proceeds-59327563.
170. Makichuk, “China a step closer to microchip independence.”
171. Julissa Green, “Detailed Introduction to the Third Generation of Semiconductor Materials,” Stanford
Advanced Materials, January 17, 2020, https://www.sputtertargets.net/blog/introduction-to-the-
generations-of-semiconductors.html.
172. Sharon Chen, Yuan Gao, and Steven Yang, “China to Plan Sweeping Support for Chip Sector to
Counter Trump,”
Bloomberg, September 3, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-
09-03/china-is-said-to-plan-broad-chip-sector-support-to-counter-trump.
173. Capri, “Semiconductors at the Heart of the US-China Tech War,” 21.
174. David M. Hart, “The Impact of China's Production Surge on Innovation in the Global Solar
Photovoltaics Industry” (ITIF, October 2020), https://itif.org/sites/default/files/2020-china-solar-
industry.pdf; Robert D. Atkinson, “Who Lost Lucent? The Decline of America’s Telecom Equipment
Industry,” American Affairs Vol. IV, No. 3 (Fall 2020),
https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2020/08/who-lost-lucent-the-decline-of-americas-telecom-
equipment-industry/.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 58

175. PCAST, “Report to the President: Ensuring Long-Term U.S. Leadership in Semiconductors.”
176. National Science Foundation, “Science & Engineering Indicators 2018” (Appendix Table 6-14),
accessed July 14, 2020, https://nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/assets/1235/tables/at06-14.pdf.
177. Ibid.
178. OECD.Stat, BTDIxE Bilateral Trade in Goods by Industry and End-use, ISIC Rev.4 (Total trade in
electronic components and boards), accessed July 20, 2020,
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=TIVA_2018_C1#.
179. Ibid. Note: Data for the European Union + 27, United States, and South Korea are from 2019, while
the data for China, Japan, and Taiwan are from 2018.
180. Varas et al., “Government Incentives and U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing,”
7.
181. Ibid.
182. Khan and Flynn, “Maintaining China’s Dependence on Democracies for Advanced Computer Chips,”
7.
183. CRS, “Semiconductors: U.S. Industry, Global Competition, and Federal Policy,” 26–27.
184. Wang, “A Bumpier Road to Semiconductor Supremacy,” 1.
185. Mark Lapedus, “China’s Foundry Biz Takes Big Leap Forward,” Semiconductor Engineering, January
28, 2019, https://semiengineering.com/chinas-foundry-biz-takes-big-leap/.
186. Lewis, “Learning the Superior Techniques of the Barbarians,” 19.
187. Varas et al., “Government Incentives and U.S. Competitiveness in Semiconductor Manufacturing,”
1.
188. Ibid.
189. SIA, “2020 State of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” 14.
190. Dieseldorff, “China Surges Past Americas and Japan in IC Capacity.”
191. Ibid. Citing data from “SEMI’s Q4 2020 World Fab Forecast Report.” Capacity described in 2
million wafer per month (200 mm equivalents).
192. Goldman Sachs, “Which industries could do more onshoring in the US; Regionalization, Resiliency
of supply chains is on the rise” (Goldman Sachs, July 15, 2022), 19.
193. Bart van Hezewijk, “China’s position in the global semiconductor value chain,” May 22, 2020,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/chinas-position-global-semiconductor-value-chain-bart-van-hezewijk/.
194. Data gathered from semiconductor firms’ annual reports as well as WSTS Blue Book Data.
195. Author’s analysis based on earnings data provided in companies’ annual financial reports.
196. Xin Kong, Miao Zhang, and Santha Chenayah Ramu, “China’s Semiconductor Industry in Global
Value Chains,”
ERIA Discussion Paper Series (February 2015),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/269934826_China's_semiconductor_industry_in_global_va
lue_chains.
197. Analysis of Intel, Micron, SK Hynix, and TSMC, for years 2010 to 2019.
198. Phate Zhang, “Analyst expects Yangtze Memory market share to reach 5% by year-end,” CNTech
Post, June 22, 2020, https://cntechpost.com/2020/06/22/analyst-expects-yangtze-memory-market-
share-to-reach-5-by-year-end/; Shujing Yelin, “China creates new memory chip champ, but will
customers come?”
199. Peter Cowhey, “Expanding the analysis of subsidies and semiconductors.”
200. Author’s analysis. Counts available patent data for AMEC, Changxin Memory Technologies, Giga
Device, Huawei, Hua Hong, Montage, SMIC, Will Semiconductor, and Yangtze Memory Technologies

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 59

from China and for AMD, Intel, Micron, NVIDIA, and Qualcomm from the United States. GDP data
taken from the World Bank, GDP (current $US).
201. Carol Robbins, Derek Hill, and Mark Boroush, “Science and Engineering Indicators: Invention,
Knowledge Transfer, and Innovation” (National Science Board, January 15, 2020), Table S8-12;
“USPTO patents and patent families granted in semiconductors, by region, country, or economy:
1998–2018,” https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20204/data.
202. “Chipmaking is being redesigned: Effects will be far-reaching,” The Economist, January 23, 2021,
https://www.economist.com/business/2021/01/23/chipmaking-is-being-redesigned-effects-will-be-
far-reaching; “Advances in Logic IC Process Technology Move Forward,” IC Insights, February 21,
2019, https://www.icinsights.com/news/bulletins/Advances-In-Logic-IC-Process-Technology-Move-
Forward/. Note: While Intel is currently at 10 nm for scale production, given the transistor density of
its integrated circuits, Intel’s 10 nm chips functionally operate to the same level as TSMC’s 7 nm
chips. Intel reports it will reach 7 nm level production by Q4 2021, with those chips likely having
the functional equivalence of TSMC’s current 5 nm chips.
203. Author’s analysis from various published reports. Chris Miller, “Why DRAM is stuck in a 10nm trap,”
Blocks and Files, April 13, 2020, https://blocksandfiles.com/2020/04/13/dram-is-stuck-in-a-10nm-
process-trap/.
204. Lily Fang et al., “Corruption, Government Subsidies, and Innovation: Evidence from China,” NBER
Working Paper No. 25098 (September 2018), https://www.nber.org/papers/w25098.
205. John Fialka, “China used ‘chaos’ and lots of cash to dominate renewable energy competitors,”
Rhode Island Governor’s Wind and Solar Energy Consortium, September 23, 2017,
https://governorswindenergycoalition.org/china-used-chaos-and-lots-of-cash-to-dominate-renewable-
energy-competitors/.
206. Cowhey, “Expanding the analysis of subsidies and semiconductors.”
207. Cory and Atkinson, “Why and How to Mount a Strong, Trilateral Response to China’s Innovation
Mercantilism.”
208. Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Joint Statement on Trilateral Meeting of the
Trade Ministers of the United States, Japan, and the European Union,” news release, May 31,
2018, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2018/may/joint-statement-
trilateral-meeting.
209. Stephen Ezell, “Strengthening Subsidies Rules to Tackle Trade-Distortions: Perspectives From the
High-Tech Sector” (power point presentation at 2019 WTO Public Forum, “Trading Forward:
Adapting to a Changing World,” October 11, 2019).
210. U.S. Department of Commerce, “Commerce Department Further Restricts Huawei Access to U.S.
Technology and Adds Another 38 Affiliates to the Entity List,” news release, August 17, 2020,
https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2020/08/commerce-department-further-restricts-
huawei-access-us-technology-and.
211. Dan Strumpf, “U.S. Sets Export Controls on China’s Top Chip Maker,”
The Wall Street Journal,
September 28, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-sets-export-controls-on-chinas-top-chip-
maker-11601118353.
212. Stephen Ezell, “An Allied Approach to Semiconductor Leadership” (ITIF, September 2020), 32,
https://itif.org/publications/2020/09/17/allied-approach-semiconductor-leadership.
213. House.gov, “Chapter 58—Export Control Reform,”
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title50/chapter58&edition=prelim.
214. Proposal suggested by Kevin Wolf in phone call with Stephen Ezell, July 13, 2020.
215. Matthew S. Borman et al., “Addressing the Implications of CFIUS’s Expanded Jurisdiction Over
Critical Technology and the Interplay with Current Export Control Reform” (power point presentation,
American Conference Institute, July 15, 2020), 22,

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & INNOVATION FOUNDATION | FEBRUARY 2021

PAGE 60

https://www.americanconference.com/CFIUS/agenda/addressing-the-implications-of-cfiuss-expanded-
jurisdiction-over-critical-technology-and-the-interplay-with-current-export-control-reform/.
216. Andrew Imbrie and Ryan Fedasiuk, “Untangling the Web: Why the U.S. Needs Allies to Defend
Against Chinese Technology Transfer” (The Brookings Institution, April 2020), 11,
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/FP_20200427_chinese_technology_transfer_imbrie_fedasiuk.pdf;
American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation, “China Global Investment Tracker,”
https://www.aei.org/china-globalinvestment-tracker/. (Investments must be greater than $1 million;
tech industry coding completed by AEI.).
217. Imbrie and Fedasiuk, “Untangling the Web,” 3.
218. Ibid; Farhad Jalinous et al., “Foreign Investment Review Heats Up Following CFIUS Reform,” White
& Case LLP, October 28, 2019, https://www.whitecase.com/news/media/foreign-investment-review-
heats-following-cfius-reform.
219. David Howell, “Why Five Eyes should now become six,” The Japan Times, June 30, 2020,
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/opinion/2020/06/30/commentary/japan-commentary/five-eyes-now-
become-six/.
220. PCAST, “Report to the President: Ensuring Long-Term U.S. Leadership in Semiconductors,” 2–3.
221. Stephen Ezell, “New legislation required to secure US semiconductor leadership,” The Hill, June
30, 2020, https://thehill.com/opinion/technology/505054-new-legislation-required-to-secure-us-
semiconductor-leadership.
222. Lindsay Wise, “Senate Passes Defense-Policy Bill With Bipartisan Support,” The Wall Street Journal,
July 23, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/senate-passes-defense-policy-bill-with-bipartisan-
support-11595530292.
223. SIA, “Sparking Innovation: How Federal Investment in Semiconductor R&D Spurs U.S. Economic
Growth and Job Creation” (June 2020), 2, https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/SIA_Sparking-Innovation2020.pdf.
