
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
PAGE 1 INFORMATION TE CHNOLOGY & INNOVATIO N FOUNDATION | MARCH 2017

Stopping China’s Mercantilism:
A Doctrine of Constructive,
Alliance-Backed Confrontation

ROBERT D. ATKINSON, NIGEL CORY, AND STEP HEN J. EZELL | MAR CH 2017

There is a growing understanding that China is an outlier when it comes
to global norms and rules governing trade, investment, and economic
policy, and that the unremitting and even accelerating “innovation-
mercantilist” behavior on the part of the Chinese government represents a
threat not only to the U.S. economy, particularly its advanced industries,
but indeed to the entire global economic and trade system. The previous
three U.S. administrations sought engagement and dialogue with China’s
leaders, in the belief and hope that this would lead the Chinese
government to retreat from its mercantilist path. It should by now be clear
that this approach has failed. For, rather than reform, China has doubled
down on its innovation-mercantilist strategies, seeking global dominance
across a wide array of advanced industries that are key to U.S. economic
and national security interests. And despite the claims of some apologists
for Chinese behavior, it’s clear what the end game is: Chinese-owned
companies across a range of advanced industries gaining significant global
market share at the expense of American, European, Japanese, and Korean
competitors. A far more proactive, whole-of-government response, in tight
partnership with our allies, is needed to ensure that Chinese innovation
mercantilism is contained and then rolled back and a genuine market- and
rules-based global trading system restored.
Effectively managing
the U.S.-China trade
and economic
relationship will be
one of the most
significant
international
challenges the Trump
administration faces.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
PAGE 2 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Unless U.S. policymakers want to blithely accept Chinese innovation mercantilism and the
damage it inflicts on the U.S. economy and its advanced industries as beyond their control,
it’s time for a new approach that moves beyond the naïve push for further dialogue and
instead makes it clear to Chinese leaders that such unfair, harmful policies cannot be
practiced with impunity. But this fight cannot be about individual tactics, for the Chinese
government has shown itself to be quite adept at abandoning certain tactics when they
become discredited due to global pressure, only to adopt new and more effective ones in
service of its overall mercantilist strategy. The focus needs to be not just on tactical wins,
but on more broadly enlisting the global community to help roll back the entire Chinese
innovation-mercantilist enterprise and getting China to finally become a responsible player
in the global trading system. As such, the Trump administration has a unique opportunity
to work with our allies to press Chinese leaders for a fundamental economic policy reset
that will move the world economy back toward the rule of law and market-based policies.
However, to succeed, a new approach to U.S.-China economic and trade policy from the
U.S. government will need to be pursued with great care and sophistication. The Chinese
government is not without weapons, and it has demonstrated a strong willingness to use
them to fight back against legitimate efforts to try to get it to stop manipulating the global
trade system. And because of the lack of rule of law in China, the Chinese government
could very well use its powers to capriciously punish U.S. firms producing or selling there.
But doing nothing due to the fear of retaliation should not be an option.
As such, the Trump administration needs to make crystal clear that any such strategy is
based not on punishing China nor seeking to hold it down. Indeed, it is in America’s
interest to have China rapidly increase its citizens’ per-capita incomes. The administration
also needs to make clear that the strategy is not based on making America great again or
putting America first, but rather that it is based on saving the global trading system by
restoring it to a rules-based one. In essence, the Trump administration should make clear
that it is acting more “in sorrow, than in anger,” and that any punitive actions are
temporary, only in place until the Chinese government makes needed reforms.
Further, the time when unilateral U.S. action alone would suffice has gone. The last time
that was perhaps possible was in the first few years of the Obama administration when the
United States possessed enough leverage to press China on its own. But after at least two
decades of unrelenting mercantilism, China is no longer as dependent on the United States
economically, and thus our leverage acting alone is more limited. As such, any action
toward China needs to be articulated through a strong and unified coalition, particularly
with nations such as Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, South Korea, the United
Kingdom, and the European Union. All of these economies have been harmed by Chinese
mercantilism and are even more likely to be hurt going forward as China ramps up its
strategy of innovation mercantilism to obtain global technology leadership. And that means
the focus of Trump administration trade policy complaints should be focused first and
foremost on China, not on other nations such as Mexico, Germany, and others which may

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
PAGE 3 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

run trade surpluses with America, but are generally playing by the rules and should be our
natural allies in this confrontation with China, not antagonists.
Perhaps the single most important strategic factor to guide the Trump administration’s
policy toward China should be to differentiate between protectionism and prosecution. In
other words, enforcement should be used to contest Chinese protectionism that is affecting
the global trade system, not simply as a tool to make the United States more competitive or
to provide shelter to certain parties from the rigors and turmoil of global competition. This
may sound like a semantic difference, and indeed, most in the Washington trade
establishment refuse to accept the difference―seeing both as “protectionism”―but there is
in fact a difference, and it’s a critical one. In this sense, it’s hard to see how the relatively
modest Mexican trade surplus is the result of mercantilist Mexican policies and easy to
conclude that the threat of tariffs on Mexican imports represents nothing more than U.S.
protectionism. In contrast, the large trade deficit with China results from its mercantilist
policies that regularly violate the spirit, and in many cases the letter, of World Trade
Organization (WTO) rules. Since 2002, the United States has accumulated a goods trade
deficit with China of over $3.5 trillion, and trade with China alone accounted for about 50
percent of the U.S. trade deficit in goods in 2016.1 As such, tough action in return, even
so-called “protectionist” policies, are justified. But again, the goal here is not permanent
“protectionist” policies against China but rather an array of policies used as tools to
pressure China into significantly reducing, and ultimately eliminating entirely, its use of
mercantilist policies. Should China do that, the U.S. economy should remain open to
China’s enterprises and to robust trade and investment between the two nations. Indeed,
the United States should pursue a “selective” prosecution: China should be rewarded when
it plays by the rules and progress is visible, but be met with resolute action where it does
not play by the rules. Blanket, punitive trade taxes against China will not prove productive;
U.S. strategy in response to China’s mercantilism will have to be more nuanced.
A U.S.-China economic and trade relationship that evolves according to equitable, rules-
and market-based trade, with both nations competing by implementing constructive
innovation- and productivity-enhancing policies, will produce win-win-win results for the
United States, China, and the rest of the world. To be sure, it’s in the world’s interest for
China’s economy to grow and for Chinese citizens to enjoy a significantly higher standard
of living, but China should achieve this outcome within the boundaries of the rules set for
international economic competition by the WTO and by pursuing an across-the-board
productivity growth strategy (e.g., where it seeks to grow productivity in all industries, not
just export-based ones), not an innovation-mercantilist growth strategy. But if China
continues to compete substantially through the use of innovation-mercantilist policies, this
will inflict significant damage on the U.S. and the global economy, forestalling global
innovation progress in the process.2
As such we advocate that the Trump administration, supported by Congress, acknowledge
the following:
The focus needs to be
not just on tactical
wins, but on more
broadly rolling back
the entire Chinese
innovation-
mercantilist enterprise
and getting China to
finally become a
responsible player in
the global
trading system.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
PAGE 4 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

 Recognize that while the United States has trade disputes with many nations, the vast
majority of critical issues concern one and only one nation: China. China is so large
and its innovation-mercantilist practices so egregious and all-encompassing that it
should be the principal focus of U.S. trade enforcement policy. Moreover, prevailing
upon China to reduce its use of innovation-mercantilist practices will relieve pressure
on other nations, such as Indonesia, Malaysia, Vietnam, and even India, whose
policymakers believe they have no choice but to keep up with China and to emulate
its unfair trade practices.3 It will be of central importance not to get distracted by
disputes with other nations of significantly less strategic importance.

 Embrace a realistic, clear-eyed understanding of China’s economic strategy. As it
stands, that strategy is a fundamentally mercantilist one, which seeks to autarkically
serve domestic markets through local production―including increasingly by
developing China’s own high-tech, innovation-based industries even as it excludes
foreign competition in such sectors―all the while still maintaining unfettered access
to global markets for exports of Chinese products.

 Recognize that―as articulated initially in China’s “National Medium- and Long-
Term Program for Science and Technology Development (2006-2020),” and more
recently in the “Made in China 2025 Strategy” and the “13th Five-Year Plan for
Science and Technology”―China seeks leadership in over 400 advanced technologies,
from semiconductors, high-performance computers, and cloud computing to
aerospace and biotechnology. When China pursues innovation-mercantilist
policies―such as the acquisition of foreign technology enterprises leveraged by
nonmarket, government-backed funds; forced transfer of technology or intellectual
property (IP); IP theft; abuse of antitrust/antimonopoly policy; denial or restrictions
of foreign firms’ access to Chinese markets; development of China-only standards;
massive subsidies for Chinese firms; refusing to allow access to key resources (e.g., rare
earth elements) unless companies locate in China; or any number of other unfair trade
practices―such policies directly threaten the health and very viability of American
(and other foreign) enterprises and thus need to be contested in the most vigorous
manner possible by U.S. government agencies with enforcement power, whether
under U.S. law or pursuant to international agreements.

 Steadfastly hold China to the commitments it made when it joined the community of
trading nations in the World Trade Organization. This means not only adhering to
the technical rules of the WTO, but in all instances abiding by the fundamental free-
market tenets on which the WTO is based: those of national treatment,
nondiscrimination, reciprocity, and transparency.

 Adopt a policy of “constructive, alliance-backed confrontation” with China that
moves from legalistic or “meeting-by-meeting” engagements with China to a results-
oriented one.4 This should entail holding China to specific goals, such as significantly
reducing its global current account surplus and reducing its forced technology transfer
and IP theft, as well as procedural goals, such as securing results demonstrating a shift
from predominantly export-led growth to growth generated chiefly by raising

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
PAGE 5 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

productivity in the country’s non-traded (e.g., non-export) sectors. An approach that
systematically addresses the fundamental problems is needed instead of contesting
individual measures, because Chinese innovation mercantilism has proven hydra-
headed: For every one policy effectively countermanded, two more appear.

 Take a “whole-of-government” approach to confronting Chinese innovation
mercantilism. This means that the United States Trade Representative (USTR) plays
a key strategic and convening role, but that agencies across the federal government,
including the Department of Commerce, the State Department, the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (PTO), and others are empowered and enrolled with their
distinctive strengths and capabilities to play a greater role in countering the threat.

 Recognize that Chinese economic policy has tremendous implications for U.S.
national security beyond U.S. economic competitiveness through the vitality of the
U.S. industrial base, the security of components which pass through defense industrial
supply chains, and the ability of U.S. economic strength to finance a robust national
security and defense apparatus.

 Recognize that the United States must continue to take the leading role in shaping
the rules guiding a liberalized international trade system and that this means
completing even higher-standard trade, investment, and other multilateral
international agreements. If the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP), the
Trade in Services Agreement (TiSA), and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership Agreement (T-TIP) can be improved upon and completed, this would
serve U.S. interests. In contrast, a failure to complete and to implement next-
generation trade agreements that establish higher-standard rules, principles, and
norms for market-based global trade will only cede the terms and structure of global
trade to Chinese leadership. It’s imperative the United States seek alliances and build
next-generation trade deals with countries that are committed to the rule of law and
principles of rules- and market-based trade.

 Ensure much better access to China’s market on fair terms, so that U.S. enterprises
and industries (along with those of other foreign countries) have every opportunity to
be competitive global players in the sectors in which they compete.

 Seek ultimately a win-win economic and trade relationship with China grounded in
the framework of rules-based, market-determined, enterprise-led trade activity. This
needs to be achieved with the assistance of like-minded allies to make this outcome
a reality.

To realize this broad vision, however, the United States needs a new approach supported
by improved strategic positioning, organizational improvements within the federal
government, stronger processes, new policies, and new administrative and legislative
actions. This should include the following:

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
PAGE 6 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Improve S trategic Positioning
The Trump administration needs to adopt a new strategic direction for trade. It should:
 Lead a reinvigorated and reformed market- and rules-based global trading system,
working in close collaboration with like-minded countries. This should include not
only administration-to-administration cooperation, but also legislative-to-legislative
cooperation.

 Work with our allies to create and maintain a comprehensive “bill of particulars” on
Chinese innovation-mercantilist policies and practices, and decide which elements can
be brought to the WTO for action and which need new rules.

 Develop new and improved rules that fully address Chinese innovation mercantilism,
and agree to pursue implementation of them with like-minded countries. Reevaluate
the effectiveness of existing trade institutions in confronting Chinese innovation
mercantilism, building new trade agreements and institutions as needed.

 Make sure any agreements with China include these new rules, and complete
agreements with China, such as a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), only after China
complies with its existing trade commitments and is prepared to bind itself to new
rules that prohibit its mercantilist proclivities.

Improve Organizational Arrangements Within the Federal Government
Any new strategy will not be fully effective without organizational reforms within the U.S.
federal government. To achieve this, the Trump administration or Congress should:

 Establish an Industrial Intelligence Unit within the National Intelligence Council.
 Create a sub-directorate within the National Security Council responsible for raising to
the highest levels of U.S. government the need to develop and coordinate a whole-of-
government response to combatting foreign innovation mercantilism.

 Create an Office of Competitiveness within the United States Trade Representative’s
Office, whose job it would be to identify, in collaboration with the interagency trade
task force, foreign government policies and practices that do not necessarily violate the
WTO but that hurt U.S. commerce. Staff and resource this new office with economists
with sectoral industry expertise, lawyers, and other professionals who understand the
legal implications of China’s mercantilist practices, and make it a key task for a deputy
trade representative to closely supervise this work.

 Staff and resource USTR and other federal agencies playing an important role in
confronting Chinese innovation mercantilism to reflect the scale and importance of
their duties. Ensure adequate funding and staffing for the Interagency Center on Trade
Implementation, Monitoring, and Enforcement (ITEC) and those working under the
Assistant U.S. Trade Representative (AUSTR) for Monitoring and Enforcement.

The United States
needs to take a more
assertive lead in
defending, promoting,
and building upon the
open and rules-based
global trading system.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
PAGE 7 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

 Expand America’s network of intellectual property and digital trade attachés around
the world.

 Inculcate a more tech- and IP-focused foreign commercial service and Patent and
Trademark Office, in particular with staff that can help U.S. enterprises identify
opportunities to license greater amounts of IP or technology on legitimate, market-
based terms, in China.

Establish Stronger Processes to Contest Chinese Innovation Mercantilism
Organizational reforms will need to be accompanied by new approaches and processes
responding to China’s innovation-mercantilist policies. To do that, the Trump
administration or Congress should:

 Ensure that free trade agreements (FTAs), BITs, and other agreements have new and
improved rules that address Chinese innovation mercantilism. These would include
looking at stronger performance requirements for goods, services, and investment; rules
on competition/unfair government practices (e.g., against governments involved in
setting licensing fees for standards); more vigorous transparency requirements (for
China covering their “normative documents”); stronger national treatment
requirement for IP; etc.

 Elevate trade enforcement in the interagency process.

 Permit USTR to hire outside counsel for WTO disputes, as many countries (such as
China) do, particularly for more technically complex matters.

 Strengthen the rules of engagement in negotiations with Chinese trade negotiators.

 Bring more trade disputes before the WTO.

 Task USTR with considering development of a non-violation nullification and
impairment case, given that many Chinese policies undercut the benefits and rights the
United States thought it was getting when it allowed China to join the WTO.

 Improve monitoring and transparency regarding China’s WTO-contravening
industrial policies (such as subsidies), making up for Chinese failure to provide timely
notification to the WTO of such policies.

 Revise and use discretionary powers under the U.S. Trade Act to address unfair
trade practices.

 Enhance application of Section 337 of the U.S. Tariff Act and develop a strategy to
counter possible Chinese retaliation from increased use of this instrument.

 Permit the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) to issue Trade Enforcement
Advisory Opinions.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
PAGE 8 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

 Encourage the ITC to examine and make findings regarding the impact/threat of
unfair mercantilist practices on U.S. commerce, and exclude foreign products, services,
and technologies that benefit from such policies.

Rethink Key Policies Toward Contesting Chinese Innovation Mercantilism
A number of key policy areas, such as antitrust and foreign investment review, need to be
rethought as they apply to China. As such, the Trump administration or Congress should:

 Push back against China’s use of antitrust policies as a tool of industrial policy and take
into account competitiveness impacts in antitrust policy.

 Pass legislation that allows firms to ask the Department of Justice (DOJ) for an
exemption to coordinate actions regarding technology transfer and investment to
nations like China.

 Ensure reciprocity in intellectual property and technology licensing.

 Insist on reciprocally equivalent access and treatment regarding foreign
direct investment.

 Reform the Committee on Foreign Investment (CFIUS) to reflect the realities of
modern state-led capitalism and if necessary require separate investment reviews for
investment from state-directed economies.

 Protect and retain U.S. comparative advantage in advanced-technology industries by
passing legislation requiring notification to the U.S. government on a confidential basis
of technology licenses to China and of transactions in China in which the Chinese
government or Chinese government-affiliated entities are involved.

 Address Chinese currency manipulation.

Take Additional Administrative and Legislative Actions
Finally, there are a number of specific changes and actions the administration should push
for. As such, the Trump administration and Congress should:

 Increase number of fact-finding investigations initiated by the U.S. International Trade
Commission to include investigations related to issues such as licensing, antitrust, and
indigenous innovation.

 Task the Department of Commerce with issuing more reports on strategic economic
and trade issues.

 Deny use of the U.S. banking system to companies benefitting from stolen IP.

 More closely coordinate domestic IP actions with foreign actions, such as by targeting
companies or regions in China that engage in widespread IP theft for criminal
A broad government
strategy to addressing
U.S.-China trade
policy issues needs to
be translated into a
framework that aligns
strategy, agencies,
resources, and
actions.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
PAGE 9 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

enforcement actions and significantly increasing inspections of Chinese imports by
U.S. customs.

 Provide enhanced small-claims mechanisms for small- and medium-sized enterprises to
bring IP actions against importers and overseas manufacturers stealing their IP,
including under the Defend Trade Secrets Act.

 Provide technical assistance and support for companies retaliated against in China for
bringing trade complaints.

 Continue not to recognize China as a market economy and amend U.S. trade law to
reflect that nonmarket economy status includes state planning and control over
intellectual property and technology.

 Adjust, curtail, or cut off scientific and other cooperation in the absence of progress on
Chinese mercantilism and insist on reciprocity in treatment of technology transferred
so that the U.S. government can own improvements in any joint
technology agreement.

INTRODUCTION
Effectively managing U.S.-China economic and trade relations, particularly in the context
of geopolitical considerations, will be one of the most significant challenges faced by the
Trump administration. As Michael Schuman notes, writing for Bloomberg’s Business Week,
“China is an economic rival to the U.S., and Washington has to start acting like it.”5
Rolling back Chinese innovation mercantilism will be vital for the competitiveness of both
the U.S. economy and U.S. enterprises, particularly those in advanced industries.
Moreover, the United States is the leading representative for a community of nations that
have chosen market-led capitalism over state-led capitalism, and so it bears particular
responsibility for containing and rolling back Chinese mercantilism, thus encouraging
other nations to choose a more rules-based approach to trade and investment.
This report lays out strategic trade and economic policy prescriptions, articulating key
principles, conceptualizations, and policy responses that should guide the Trump
administration and Congress in dealing with China. The report continues by detailing the
evolution of modern Chinese economic strategy in “innovation-mercantilist” terms;
summarizing the deleterious impact these policies have inflicted on the U.S. economy and
U.S. workers, particularly in advanced industries; and then articulating how to reset the
U.S.-China bilateral trade and economic framework on fair, market-based, and mutually
beneficial terms. The report distinguishes between strategic and tactical approaches the
United States should adopt, grouping the tactical elements into organization changes,
process reforms, policy reforms, and administrative actions, many of which can be
undertaken in the first year of the Trump administration.
It’s imperative the
Trump administration
be guided by a clear-
eyed understanding of
the nature of China’s
economic and
competitive strategy
and the implications
this entails for the
U.S. economy and its
firms, industries, and
workers.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
PAGE 10 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE EVOLUTION OF CHINESE ECONOMIC STRATEGY
In 2015, Chinese President Xi Jinping unabashedly trumpeted a goal of making China the
“master of its own technologies,” by which he meant that Chinese firms, operating in
China, would produce virtually all technology goods and services for Chinese consumers.6
China’s arrival at such a point resulted from the evolution of Chinese economic policy over
the past two decades. Up until the mid-2000s, Chinese economic-development strategy
sought principally to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) and induce foreign
multinational corporations to shift production to China.7 That production was mostly in
more traditional manufacturing. China used an array of unfair tactics to achieve that goal,
including systemic currency manipulation, massive subsidies to firms, and limits on
imports (including requirements for forced local production for firms wishing to sell
products in China).
That strategy changed in 2006, as China shifted to a “China Inc.” development model of
indigenous innovation, which focused on helping Chinese firms, particularly those in
advanced, innovation-based industries, often at the expense of foreign firms. Marking the
shift was a seminal document called the “National Medium- and Long-Term Program for
Science and Technology Development (2006-2020),” the so-called “MLP,” which called
on China to master 402 core technologies, everything from intelligent automobiles to
semiconductors and high-performance computers.
The MLP essentially announced that modern Chinese economic strategy sought absolute
advantage across virtually all advanced industries. It fundamentally rejected the notion of
comparative advantage—which holds that nations should specialize in the production of
products or services at which they are the most efficient and trade for the rest. Instead,
China’s goal today is to dominate in production of both advanced-technology products
such as airplanes, semiconductors, computers, pharmaceuticals, and commodity
manufacturing. Ultimately, Chinese policymakers wish to autarkically supply Chinese
markets for advanced-technology goods and services with their own production while still
benefitting from unfettered access to global markets for their technology exports and
foreign investment, the latter designed to acquire and integrate into Chinese firms’ know-
how, often based on foreign technology. As the Mercator Institute for China Studies
(MERICS) in Germany writes in its report, “Made in China 2025: The Making of a High-
Tech Superpower and Consequences for Industrial Countries,” “Made in China 2025 in its
current form [means that] China’s leadership systematically intervenes in domestic markets
so as to benefit and facilitate the economic dominance of Chinese enterprises and to
disadvantage foreign competitors.”8
In recent years, President Xi has only doubled down on this approach through new
promulgations such as the “Made in China 2025 Strategy,” the “13th Five-Year Plan for
Science and Technology,” the “13th Five-Year Plan for National Informatization,” and
“The National Cybersecurity Strategy,” among other policies. The “Made in China 2025
Strategy,” for instance, calls for 70 percent local content in manufacturing components in
China, while policies enumerated in documents such as the “13th Five-Year Plan for

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
PAGE 11 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

National Informatization” and “The National Cybersecurity Strategy” effectively deny
access to U.S. enterprises seeking to compete in emerging information and
communications technology (ICT) industries, such as cloud computing, in China. China’s
National Cybersecurity Strategy further outlines a goal for China to become a strong
cyberpower by 2020, and that includes mastering core technologies, many of which the
United States is currently the international leader in, such as operating systems, integrated
circuits, big data, cloud computing, the Internet of Things, etc. Put simply, China is
increasingly pursuing a strategy of shutting out foreign competitors in these sectors in the
interest of advantaging domestic industries.
As the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) has documented across
a series of reports—including “False Promises: The Yawning Gap Between China’s WTO
Commitments and Practices,” Enough Is Enough: Confronting Chinese Innovation
Mercantilism, “The Worst Innovation Mercantilist Policies of 2016,” and most recently in
testimony before the congressionally chartered U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission on Chinese investment in the United States—China has deployed a vast
panoply of innovation-mercantilist practices that seek to unfairly advantage Chinese
producers over foreign competitors.
9 These practices have included forced IP and
technology transfer or forced local production as a condition of market access; theft of
foreign IP; curtailment and even outright denial of access to Chinese markets in certain
sectors; manipulation of technology standards; special benefits for state-owned enterprises
(SOEs); capricious cases designed to force foreign companies to license technology at a
discount; refusing to allow access to key resources (e.g., rare earth elements) unless
companies locate in China; and even government-subsidized acquisitions of foreign
technology firms.
To be sure, no country is completely free from mercantilist policies, not even the United
States. But what is different about China is not just the scope and depth of its policies, but
the fact that the extent of state involvement in all aspects of China’s economy, which is not
restrained by legal protections including balance of powers and independent courts,
effectively means there is no rule of law to constrain Chinese officials from implementing
arbitrary and capricious mercantilist policies. As such, China is in a class of its own when it
comes to the practice of mercantilism.
U.S. enterprises across virtually all manufacturing sectors and every advanced-technology
sector—from aerospace and biotechnology to ICT products, Internet, digital media, and
clean energy—have been harmed by China’s aggressive use of innovation-mercantilist
policies. Moreover, China’s policies have inflicted considerable harm upon the U.S.
economy, its exports, and employment. Consider U.S.-China trade balances, which are
heavily distorted due to China’s economic and trade strategy. From the beginning of 2002
through the end of November 2016, China accumulated an aggregate $3.5 trillion trade
surplus in goods with the United States, as Figure 1 shows.10 Moreover, the annual U.S.
trade deficit with China has steadily increased. The U.S. deficit in trade in goods with
Chinese policymakers
wish to autarkically
supply Chinese
markets for advanced-
technology products
with their own
production while still
benefitting from
unfettered access to
global markets for
their technology
exports and FDI.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
PAGE 12 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

China in 2001, the year China entered the WTO, stood at just $83 billion; but by 2015, it
had ballooned to $367 billion.
Figure 1: Annual U.S. Deficit in Goods Trade With China, 2001 to Nov. 2016 ($ billions)11

In fact, 60 percent of the global U.S. trade deficit in 2015 was with China, with U.S.
manufactured imports from China six times larger than U.S. exports to China that year.12
Moreover, in 2015, in the 10 largest high-technology sectors in U.S.-China trade, Chinese
exports were $1.12 trillion—50 percent larger than America’s $752 billion of exports.
Furthermore, overall Chinese trade in these same 10 high-tech sectors was in surplus by
$354 billion while the U.S. was in deficit by $357 billion. Worse, since 2009, the Chinese
surplus in these sectors has soared by 128 percent, while the U.S. deficit has grown by 166
percent.13 This shift has coincided with a cratering of the U.S. share of global exports of
manufactured products. Indeed, the U.S. share of global exports of manufactures plunged
from 18 percent in 2000 to 12 percent in 2015, while China’s share quadrupled from 6 to
24 percent over that time period.14 To put this in absolute terms, U.S. exports of
manufactures of $650 billion in 2000 were almost three times larger than Chinese exports
of $220 billion that year while, by 2014, Chinese exports of $2,202 billion were almost
double U.S. exports of $1,164 billion.15
To be sure, some have argued that such U.S.-China trade balance statistics do not reflect
trade in value-added, and note that Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) research into trade in value-added data finds that “China’s trade
surplus with the United States shrinks by a quarter when calculated according to which
countries provide the parts and services that go into its exports and imports.”
16 But even if
that is the case, a gross imbalance in U.S.-China goods trade over the past decade and a
half remains.
Moreover, the reality is that China’s stock of foreign currency reserves grew from $212
billion in 2001 to $3.5 trillion by August 2015, and that accumulation of foreign currency
reserves has come principally from Chinese trade surpluses with other nations, most
-$400
-$350
-$300
-$250
-$200
-$150
-$100
-$50
$0

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
PAGE 13 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

notably the United States.17 In fact, as of year-end 2014, China’s total reserves (including
gold) of $3.9 trillion were greater than those of Japan, the United States, Russia, Brazil,
Korea, India, Germany, France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada combined, as
Figure 2 shows.
Figure 2: Total Reserves (Including Gold), Select Countries, 2014 18

In fact, the disparity in growth of foreign currency reserves between the United States and
China since 2001, when China entered the WTO, is quite noticeable, as Figure 3 shows.
And while certainly many factors contribute to the depth of countries’ foreign currency
reserves, China’s trade surpluses, particularly with the United States, have been a key driver
in this differential.
Figure 3: Total Reserves (Including Gold), United States and China, 2001-2015 (trillions)19

$0
$500,000
$1,000,000
$1,500,000
$2,000,000
$2,500,000
$3,000,000
$3,500,000
$4,000,000
$4,500,000
$0.0
$0.5
$1.0
$1.5
$2.0
$2.5
$3.0
$3.5
$4.0
China United States

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
PAGE 14 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

But to focus only on the trade deficit or foreign currency reserves is to miss what is really at
stake. We could very well envision a world where U.S.-China trade is in balance, but where
the structure of both the trade and national economies has radically shifted, with China’s
exports and economy shifting to higher-value-added advanced industries, while America’s
exports and economy become more commodity- and natural-resource based, with increases
in food, fiber, and mineral exports (along with waste paper, our fastest growing export to
China, by volume). Indeed, the fastest-growing U.S. exports to China from 2005 to 2015
were vegetables, tobacco, cereals, food residue and waste, beverages, explosives, and mineral
fuels.20 At this rate, America can go back to being an economy made up of “hewers of
wood and drawers of water.”21
WHY CHINESE INNOVATION MERCANTILISM MATTERS
Many defenders of the status quo argue that there is no real need to confront China
because its polices have not materially harmed the U.S. economy and won’t in the future.
Status quo supporters further blame technology for destroying the lion’s share of the 5.5
million U.S. manufacturing jobs lost in the 2000s. But, in fact, this “nothing-to-see-here”
narrative is wrong.
The reality is that U.S.-China trade imbalances have exerted significant deleterious impact
on U.S. employment. As Bloomberg recently noted, “Studies examining the impact of
China’s entry to the WTO in late 2001 have made the case that between 1 million and
more than 2 million of the 5 million American factory jobs lost since 2000 are traceable to
low-cost imports.”
22 As MIT economists David Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson
write about the effect of China’s trade surpluses on U.S. labor markets, “Amplifying
China’s potential impact on the U.S. labor market are sizable current account imbalances
in the two countries. In the 2000s, China’s average current-account surplus was 5 percent
of GDP, a figure equal to the contemporaneous average U.S. current-account deficit.”23
The authors estimate that the United States lost 982,000 manufacturing jobs between
2000 and 2007 because of Chinese import competition.24 In particular, they find that the
U.S. regions most exposed to China tended not only to lose more manufacturing jobs, but
also to see overall employment decline.25 Further, they calculate that the cost to the
economy from increased government payments (e.g., unemployment compensation,
worker retraining, etc.) amounts to one- to two-thirds of the consumer-welfare gains from
trade with China.26
Similarly, ITIF has found that a growing trade deficit was responsible for almost two-thirds
of jobs lost in the 2000s (i.e., approximately 3.8 million jobs), with a significant share of
this the result of unbalanced trade with China.27 Elsewhere, Robert Scott of the Economic
Policy Institute has estimated that the growing U.S. trade deficit with China cost 3.4
million American workers their jobs between 2001 and 2015, with nearly three-fourths, or
2.6 million, of those jobs lost in the manufacturing sector.28
To be sure, not all U.S. job loss due to trade with China since 2001 has been the result of
mercantilist trade practices—some is reflective of low-cost, labor-intensive industries, such
The United States has
trade disputes with
most nations in the
world, but the vast
majority of the most
critical issues concern
one and only one
nation: China.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
PAGE 15 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

as commodity apparel, where the United States and its workers are no longer cost
competitive—and where that type of work sensibly has been performed in low-wage
nations such as China.29 But had China not been running an export-led, government-
directed economy, not only would some jobs not have been lost, but these kinds of
“natural” losses would have been made up with an equal or even greater increase in higher-
value-added exports to China. They were not because China refused to allow that to
happen. In short, the clear reality is that since China’s entry into the WTO in 2001,
whatever the perfectly exact number, far too many American jobs have been lost due to
China’s innovation-mercantilist trade practices.
Still, the last contest was about low- and mid-tech manufacturing, in which Chinese
policies hollowed out many sectors of traditional U.S. manufacturing; whereas the current
contest revolves around who is going to lead in advanced industries. Nevertheless, one
reason why so many in the Washington trade establishment have been and remain so
sanguine about China’s mercantilism is that they believe it simply accelerated a natural
global division of labor, with China specializing in commodity, labor-cost-based
production and the United States in advanced, knowledge-based production.
Of course, that view is misguided in part because it ignores how Chinese policy
significantly distorted market forces to hasten that outcome without generating an
accompanying significant increase in U.S. exports to China to match their increased
exports. But regardless, the new challenge will be over advanced industries, in which many
U.S. enterprises lead and where many believe their lead in global markets is dominant. As
Schuman reiterates, the U.S.-China contest now is nothing less than “a battle for the high-
tech industries of tomorrow.”30 One needs to look no further than China’s “2014 National
Guidelines for Development and Promotion of the IC Industry,” to see this battle for
leadership in advanced industries unfolding. China’s integrated circuit (IC) strategy
unabashedly calls for eliminating its trade deficit in integrated circuits by 2030 and making
China the world’s leader in IC manufacturing by then. This includes IC manufacturing,
design, packaging, testing, materials, and equipment.
31 As part of this plan, China wants 70
percent of the semiconductor chips used by companies operating in China to be
domestically produced by the year 2025.32 Between national and provincial government
funds, the industry is expected to be supported with at least $160 billion of government-
backed funds.
China’s government harbors similar goals for replacing foreign imports with domestic
production (while still expecting unfettered access to global markets for exports and direct
investment) in virtually all advanced sectors, from life sciences to high-speed rail to clean
energy. As the “2016 Report to the Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission” summarizes:
China’s renewed focus on indigenous innovation and creation of globally
competitive firms in key emerging industries, such as integrated circuits,
biomedicines, cloud computing, and e-commerce, targets sectors in which the

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
PAGE 16 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

United States is a global leader. Continued preferential government treatment
and financial support of state-owned enterprises and designated industries
have lowered these firms’ cost of capital and production, creating a
competitive advantage over U.S. and other private firms both within China
and abroad.33
Take, for example, commercial aviation, a natural oligopoly industry because of the massive
costs of developing and producing the next generation of commercial jet airplanes. There
are only two major producers, Airbus and Boeing, who are in intense, slug-it-out
competition. Because of the incredible technological complexity of jet-aircraft production,
there is simply no way that market forces would generate a third competitor, especially
from scratch. But that has not deterred the Chinese government from massively subsidizing
its state-owned champion, the Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC), and
making foreign airplane sales into China contingent on transferring technology to AVIC.
China’s goal is to become self-sufficient in aviation, while also exporting to the world.
Thus, it’s no exaggeration to suggest that, without aggressive action, the United States may
face a world within 15 years where U.S. jobs in industries as diverse as semiconductors,
computers, biopharmaceuticals, aerospace, Internet, digital media, and automobiles are
significantly reduced due to Chinese policies unabashedly targeting domestic and global
market share in those industries. This not only has potentially serious implications for
America’s future economic security, it has perhaps even more serious implications for
America’s national security and military superiority.
WHY STRONG ACTION HAS BEEN LACKING
Most conventional neoclassical economist hold that the same principles of economics apply
to all economies across all times and in all places. Indeed, it is this conceit more than any
other that explains the intellectual reluctance to confront Chinese innovation mercantilism.
For if one believes that there is nothing fundamentally different between the Chinese
economy and Western, market-based ones and that any deviation from the Western model
is suboptimal, then one will look at any problems from China as only limited and
temporary. As one congressional subcommittee chairman dismissively noted, “The Chinese
only hurt themselves with their mercantilist actions.”
This macroeconomic view makes it seem as if Chinese market distortions are creating some
ripples in an otherwise smooth market pond, ripples that hurt both them and us, but ones
that ideally resolve themselves as the two economies find a new equilibrium. But this view
misses what’s really at stake. For it’s not just that Chinese government policies are
distorting markets, it’s that they represent a coherent array of measures designed to attack
U.S. (and other foreign) companies with the goal of defeating them. As former Procter and
Gamble CEO Alan Lafley wrote in his business strategy book, Playing to Win: How Strategy
Really Works, “Winning is what matters—and it is the ultimate criterion of a successful
strategy.”34 Indeed, business strategy doesn’t concern itself with whether there’s market
distortion or not; rather, it focuses on the ultimate goal: gaining competitive advantage,
The last contest with
China was about low-
and mid-tech
manufacturing, but
the new challenge will
be over who leads in
advanced industries.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
PAGE 17 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

ideally by defeating one’s competitors. But in the United States most policymakers and
experts worry about distorted markets while Chinese officials worry about attacking and
defeating their business opponents, so their businesses can win and even dominate. The
type of strategy with which China competes is reflected in a Harvard Business Review article
titled “Hardball: Five Killer Strategies for Trouncing the Competition.”35 The authors use
terms like “relentless,” “uncompromising,” “ruthless,” and “playing rough.” In describing
companies that don’t play by these rules, they write:
Softball players, by contrast, may look good—they may report decent
earnings and even get favorable ink in the business press—but they
aren’t intensely serious about winning. They don’t accept that you sometimes
must hurt your rivals, and risk being hurt yourself, to get what you want.
Instead of running smart and hard, they seem almost to be standing around
and watching. They play to play. And though they may not end up out-and-
out losers, they certainly don’t win.36
In contrast, hardball players play to win. The authors write:
In sports, after all, playing hardball means brushing back an aggressive batter
with a 100-mile-an-hour pitch. It means bare-knuckle boxing, John L.
Sullivan–style. It means giving someone a head fake in a pickup basketball
game on a city court littered with broken glass—and leaving him sitting on
his rear.37
When it comes to the economic competition between China and the United States, the
United States is playing recreational softball to China’s major league hardball.
In fact, if U.S. policymakers are to effectively respond to Chinese mercantilism, they will
need to understand that China is not like us, as most economists would contend, but rather
that the country is unique in the history of the world economy. There are at least seven
factors that together make China fundamentally different from U.S. and other
Western economies.
1) China’s growth strategy is predicated on mercantilism: seeking to grow by cranking up
exports and limiting imports. To be clear, this is not unique to China; many Asian
nations have relied on this strategy. But when combined with the other factors, China
does become unique.

2) Chinese strategy is not just about mercantilism (limiting imports and boosting
exports), it’s about autarky: becoming self-sufficient. The Chinse government has
proven that it seeks autarky in many traditional industries, such as steel and
shipbuilding, and now wants it in emerging industries such as aerospace, computers,
and semiconductors, placing itself counter to the fundamental tenet of comparative
advantage that underlies liberalized trade in the global economy.

When it comes to the
economic competition
between China and
the United States, the
United States is
playing recreational
softball to China’s
major league hardball.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
PAGE 18 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

3) China seeks to achieve its mercantilist goals by moving far up the value chain to more
complex, higher-value-added industries. Again, other nations, particularly the Asian
tigers (e.g., Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan) have pursued such policies. But the big
difference is that they did so when they were much closer to the leaders, especially in
terms of per-capita income. For a nation with a per-capita GDP about one-quarter of
the global leaders to seek to produce the same type of products as the leaders is
unprecedented and can only be achieved by policies that seriously distort markets and
harm U.S. enterprises, such as IP theft, forced technology transfer, government fixed
prices for key inputs, investment incentives that cajole firms to take carrots or be less
cost-competitive than rivals, subsidies that can’t be traced and therefore can’t be
disciplined through the WTO, etc.

4) It’s not just that China’s focus is to transform its industrial structure to higher-value-
added industries; it’s also that this goal is to be achieved principally by Chinese firms.
In contrast to some nations that sought to do this and relied at least in part on foreign
firms, such as Singapore and Ireland, China has made clear through its indigenous
innovation strategy that foreign firms in China serve a means—transferring technology
to Chinese firms—and are not an end in themselves.

5) Unlike market-oriented democracies, China lacks separation between the state and the
market. Not only are SOEs a major component of China’s economy, but many private
firms are not fully autonomous, subject to influence by the Chinese state.
38

6) While China is not the only nation lacking a rule of law, the lack thereof makes
enforcing actions against China in venues such as the WTO difficult to say the least.
For example, while the Chinese government is correct when it states that it does not
have official rules mandating technology transfer in exchange for market access by
foreign firms, the fact that these requirements are systematically enforced in informal
ways makes them just as effective, but almost impossible to prosecute.
7) China’s size: as the second-largest economy by gross domestic product and largest in
terms of population, China is unique. Its size plays out in two ways. First, because its
market is so large, no multinational firm can easily walk away from the Chinese
market. As such, Chinese officials know that they have foreign firms over a barrel:
either comply with their discriminatory policies or lose market access. Second, the
country’s large size means that China’s policies have an outsized effect on many
nations. If a smaller nation such as Thailand did everything China does, it would be an
irritant, but only that. When China uses these types of polices, it represents a
fundamental threat to the very fabric of the global trading system.
But won’t confronting Chinese innovation mercantilism cause a trade war? In Davos,
Chinese President Xi argued that “pursuing protectionism is like locking oneself in a dark
room” in the hope of avoiding danger but, in doing so, cutting off all “light and air.”39 He
Those who would
protest that more
aggressive action
against China’s
innovation
mercantilism would
trigger a trade war miss
that the United States
is already in one.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
PAGE 19 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

added that, “No one will emerge as a winner in a trade war.” This is wonderful spin,
worthy of the best New York public relations firm, but it overlooks that it is China that has
started and continues the trade war through its actions. What President Xi means by a
trade war is another nation challenging unbridled Chinese economic aggression. Indeed,
Chinese officials threaten that any efforts to hold them to global trade norms will be met
with overwhelming force in response. Mei Xinyu, a researcher with the Commerce
Ministry, “warned that if the United States played ‘low,’ China could play ‘lower,’”
neglecting to mention that it is China that has been and continues to “play low.”40 We can
expect more such threats as a way to cow the United States into submission, particularly if
members of the Washington trade establishment weakly persist in calling action against
foreign mercantilism “protectionism.”
ADOPTING THE PROPER FRAMEWORK TO CONTEST CHINESE MERCANTILISM
As this section explains, the United States has five strategic options it can choose from in
confronting Chinese innovation mercantilism: 1) be patient/wait for conversion to the
Washington consensus; 2) harangue and implore; 3) resigned defeat; 4) global isolation;
and 5) constructive, alliance-based confrontation. It should choose the last one:
constructive, alliance-based confrontation.
In 1989, economist John Williamson coined the term “Washington Consensus” to
describe the dominant logic of the prevailing global neoclassical economic and trade
framework. His Washington Consensus consisted of 10 staple policy recommendations,
such as fiscal discipline, openness to trade, liberalization of inward FDI, privatization of
SOEs, deregulation, legal protection for property rights, and redirection of public spending
from subsidies to investment, among others.41 Many persist in believing that the
Washington Consensus represents the only logical and rational prescription for a country
to pursue as it seeks economic growth, despite the fact that while components of the
Consensus are useful, it places too many limitations on legitimate government roles to spur
innovation and competitiveness.42 Nevertheless, many persist in viewing the Washington
Consensus as the high religion of economics―the only right and true path―and believe
that it is only time before the heretics and unbelievers, especially China, will be forced to
confront the error of their ways and repent. The job of the faithful, then, is to patiently
encourage the unbelievers to find the true faith.
One manifestation of this view is the argument made by some that China is just learning
how to be a market economy and needs more time. They contend that China is still a
developing country on a learning curve, trying to make things better. As one Chinese
official stated to us, “There are still some loopholes in IP laws, but it’s not due to lack of
trying. We are still learning.”43 But it is not really a question of learning. There are a
multitude of institutions, including the World Bank and the U.S. government, that have
spent considerable time and effort (and in the case of the World Bank, considerable
expense) helping Chinese officials learn the Washington Consensus approach to
development.
44 While it is true that many nations do learn and improve their economic
development policies as they develop, China has actually become more mercantilist in

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
PAGE 20 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

recent years, not less, and shows no signs of improvement. As China scholar Dieter Ernst
argues, “China’s evolving standards system provides little evidence that convergence to the
American system is likely to materialize.”45 Chinese economists and other scholars study
Western economics, policy journals, and development policies. Chinese officials know how
to make China a market-oriented, rather than mercantilist, economy; they just do not want
China to become one. Instead, China stands at the center of an increasingly widespread
“Beijing Consensus,” an economic approach that combines elements of state capitalism and
innovation mercantilism, both undergirded by a government unconstrained by the courts
and the rule of law, and which represents a direct challenge to the traditional Western
model of capitalism supported by global organizations such as the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and WTO. The path of “be patient, China will
become like us” shows no signs of coming to fruition, at least as long as China remains a
one-party state.
To be sure, there have been some modest improvements, including partial liberalization in
financial markets (e.g., interest rates), deregulation of various prices, and some
liberalization in China’s investment regime (e.g., expanded free trade zones and negative
lists). And there are some economic reformers in China that U.S. policy should seek to
support and empower. But even the minor liberalizing reforms mentioned above are at best
cosmetic in nature and moreover at odds with the vast panoply of innovation-mercantilist
policies China continues to introduce and employ.
If the “be patient and wait for them to convert to the true religion” approach represents a
false path, what else can we do? The other prevailing view can be described as the
“harangue and implore” strategy. As it becomes clear that the “patience” strategy is a dead
end, haranguing and imploring now appears to be the default strategy, to the extent the
United States has had any coherent “strategy” regarding Chinese economic policy. In other
words, through a combination of “technical assistance,” informal exchanges between
policymakers, and formal institutional cooperation such as the Strategic and Economic
Dialogue and Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT), U.S. policymakers
express their concerns to Chinese policymakers and hope that they will respond.
Sometimes they do if the pressure is strong enough and the cost to China not very high, as
was the case when Chinese officials promised to modify their Indigenous Innovation
Product Catalogue scheme after U.S. and European governments and businesses put their
feet down. But most of the time the best that can be achieved is a slight delay in
mercantilist policies as China’s policymakers simply wait until the heat and publicity have
died down. In addition, commitments on paper can mean very little in the real world, as
the 2016 JCCT outcomes factsheet demonstrates:
In 2011, after global expressions of concern and intensive U.S. engagement,
China ordered subnational governments to abolish government procurement
preferences for innovative products developed indigenously. While that
action represented a key recognition by China, compliance with the measure
What President Xi
means by a trade war
is another nation
challenging unbridled
Chinese economic
aggression.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
PAGE 21 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

proved to be incomplete, and new inconsistent measures continue to come
into force.46
So even here, China’s government promised to reverse its indigenous innovation policies,
but subsequently found new ways to get around the promises, including by moving much
of the indigenous innovation product catalogue activities to regional or provincial
governments and by introducing new policies having substantially the same effect. This
doesn’t engender confidence that China respects its commitments.
With it becoming increasingly clear that the harangue and implore strategy plays into
China’s hands and produces few real results, many appear to be defaulting to a third
strategy of “resigned defeat.” According to this view, it is inevitable that China will become
the largest economy in the world and as part of that rise will inevitably dominate advanced-
industry global value chains. Accordingly, the view goes, America and Europe should
accept “defeat” and focus on what they can still do economically and what China will let us
do (e.g., exports of agricultural goods and other commodities). But capitulating to this
approach is to accept the cognitive dissonance that accompanies the fact that China is a
part of the WTO, which implies a rules-based restraint on innovation mercantilism but
which in reality accepts it in most of its forms.
A variant of this view largely argues that we shouldn’t worry because the Chinese economy
will collapse under its own weight, brought down by its deviations from the Washington
Consensus (e.g., too many SOEs, too much corruption). It is a common view in
Washington that the Chinese Communist party is hanging on by its fingernails as China’s
economy continues to falter. In other words, we can avoid taking tough action because
China is unlikely to succeed. But this ignores the fact that in many advanced industries
Chinese government-supported companies are already succeeding in gaining global market
share, inflicting real harm upon U.S. and other foreign advanced enterprises and industries
as well as innovation more broadly.
The first two strategies will not prevent China from taking significant global market share
in advanced industries from Europe and the United States, not to mention Pacific allies
such as Japan and South Korea. The third strategy, resigned defeat, would be an abdication
of responsibility for the economic well-being of future generations of Americans. That then
leaves only two other strategies.
Of these, the first is “global isolation” and an “economic nationalist agenda,” attempting to
restore the kind of economic and trade regime that was prevalent before World War II,
when groups like the American Protective Tariff League argued for tariffs so that “the
American people should not, and will not, submit to the low standard of wages prevailing
in other countries.”
47 According to this view, globalization itself is suspect, and America
should just turn inward and reduce trade and investment ties with lower-wage nations,
including China. And if U.S. firms are foolish enough to invest in nations such as China
and be taken to the cleaners, so to speak, that’s their problem. But it’s a quite misguided
view to believe that what U.S. companies do in China is simply “their own business” and

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
PAGE 22 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

thus not a concern for the U.S. government and that the U.S. government shouldn’t have
to confront mercantilist trade practices on behalf of U.S. companies.
For the reality is that the well-paying U.S. jobs in U.S. multinationals are dependent on
global markets, and if we cede both the Chinese and the rest of world market to China, we
will be consigning millions of American workers with good, middle-class jobs to the
unemployment line. U.S. companies have a reasonable expectation that they should be able
to sell to China without having to enter into China and to be able to enter China and play
by a clear set of fair rules. It’s the job of the U.S. government to back them up on this. For
if America leaves the global playing field (or is just patient, or just harangues and implores),
U.S. multinational jobs in the United States will shrink. Moreover, China will be assured
of being the new global economic hegemon, and our allies will have no choice but to cut
their own certainly flawed deals with China to get the best deal they can on their own.
As a result, the only real choice is “constructive, alliance-based confrontation.” It is
confrontation because that is the only tactic that the Chinese respond to. It is alliance-
based because only a strong, united front by free-trading nations, led by the United States,
will have the force required to persuade China to roll back its mercantilist policies. It is
constructive because, at the end of the day, the Chinese government demands respect, even
when facing opposition. The following section lays out the contours of a constructive
confrontation approach to addressing Chinese innovation mercantilism.
CONFRONTING CHINA’S INNOVATION MERCANTILISM
To effectively confront the challenge posed by China’s innovation mercantilism, the U.S.
government needs to adopt a whole-of-government approach that pursues a results-
oriented trade strategy, and coordinate this with like-minded countries. To productively
rebalance the U.S.-China trade and economic relationship, both strategic and tactical
changes will be needed, as this section details. Addressing Chinese mercantilism needs to be
translated into a framework that aligns an overarching strategy executed through agencies,
resources, and actions, and then extended internationally through coordination with like-
minded countries.
Improve Strategic Positioning
The Trump administration needs to adopt a new strategic direction for trade. This should
involve a number of steps.
Lead the Collective Defense of the Market- and Rules-Based Trading System
The United States needs to take a more assertive lead in defending, promoting, and
building on the open and rules-based global trading system. It must lead determined efforts
to contain and roll back Chinese mercantilism and enroll like-minded countries in that
task. Our allies may follow, but they will not act without U.S. leadership.
Successive U.S. administrations have trusted that heavily scripted and structured dialogue is
the best way to address trade issues with China, yet experience consistently shows that this
trust is misplaced. Year after year the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and
To capitulate to
resigned defeat is to
accept the cognitive
dissonance that
accompanies the fact
that China is a part of
a WTO, which implies
a rules-based restraint
on innovation
mercantilism, but
which in reality
accepts it in most of
its forms.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
PAGE 23 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Trade—the main high-level forum addressing specific U.S.-China trade issues—has sought
to raise and address a range of technology, IP, and market-access issues.48 Yet year after year
this focus on individual measures proves ineffective—where one is addressed, others
appear, or worse, China commits to rectify problems with no intention of really doing so.
A Government Accountability Office (GAO) report into JCCT commitments from 2004
to 2012 shows that the largest share of China’s commitments were related to intellectual
property (62 commitments, or 34 percent of total commitments), along with many others
in the ICT and other high-tech sectors.49 Yet, in each year’s JCCT, new issues are added to
the JCCT agenda in these same areas, although China consistently breaks even these
commitments. For example, in November 2015, the 26th U.S.-China JCCT included
commitments by China not to discriminate against foreign ICT products, including
through new cybersecurity measures.50 Yet, by May 2016, President Xi pledged more
support for Chinese technology firms, and in October 2016 Xi publicly stated that China
is pursuing a foreign technology substitution policy (i.e., steal it or absorb it through
technology transfer, and then replace it with Chinese-only owned technology firms).
Indeed, the extensive range of localization measures in China’s “Made in China 2025” plan
for key technology sectors (released in May 2015) shows the futility in focusing on
individual measures without forcing China to change its overarching economic and
trade strategy.51
China’s unique economic system is at the heart of the challenge facing the United States
and the international community’s efforts to painstakingly set up (and defend) a market-
and rules-based trading system. As noted above, China is unique due to the interaction of
several factors, but especially the Communist Party’s central role in governing the
economy, including many parts of the private sector, as well as the lack of transparency and
rule of law.52 China’s unique approach was neither fully appreciated nor accounted for by
negotiators at the time of China’s WTO accession.53 Since accession, China has not
converged (as negotiators hoped) toward an economic model of the type which the WTO
was built to accommodate. This mismatch is much clearer now that China has grown into
a major player in the global economy yet still unabashedly uses its unique system to
manipulate loopholes in the system. It is becoming even clearer now that a special time-
limited “nonmarket economy” WTO accession provision, which was supposed to provide
time for an economic transition, has run out without China’s transition to a market
economy occurring. This clash of systems requires the United States and other major
economies to confront head on—and beyond mere WTO litigation—the challenge that
China’s actions pose to their individual trading relationships and to the trading system
as a whole.
China has shown how the WTO, and its dispute-settlement system, has real limits when it
comes to dealing with the anomaly that is China. As Robert Lighthizer noted in Senate
confirmation hearings held on March 14, 2017 to become the United States Trade
Representative for the Trump administration, the World Trade Organization is ill-
equipped to deal with Beijing’s industrial policy and this will call for creative new U.S.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
PAGE 24 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

approaches outside the WTO.54 As Lighthizer said, “I don’t believe that the WTO was set
up to deal effectively for a country like China and their industrial policy.”55 Dialogue
doesn’t work with a nation that already knows what it wants and will do whatever it can to
get it. Dispute resolution often does not work because the entire current WTO process is
premised on adjudicating laws, rules, and regulations, not opaque “administrative
guidance.” Although China’s basic law, the Law on Legislation, does not recognize
“normative” or “regulatory” documents (China’s terms for administrative guidance),
Chinese agencies adopt and enforce these normative/regulatory documents, frequently
without publishing them in draft or final form, even though publication of all final trade-
related measures is required by the WTO. America’s FTAs and BITs sidestep this issue by
requiring the publication of regulations, because regulations are binding in the United
States, but do not require trading partners to publish all of their binding administrative
measures. A further difference in China’s system, as compared with the U.S. system, is that
in China parties cannot challenge widely binding measures. The bottom line is that neither
U.S. domestic law, or our FTAs and BITs as currently configured, nor multilateral WTO
approaches are working; China will not systematically ameliorate its mercantilist strategies
and policies unless it is proactively compelled to do so by outside pressure that goes beyond
the narrow, legalistic limits of the WTO.
That means this contest will be won, first and foremost, not in the tribunals of Geneva, but
in the court of global opinion. Accordingly, the Trump administration’s first step should
be to build an ironclad prosecutor’s case that lays out the “bill of particulars”—in other
words, enumerating the vast extent of Chinese innovation-mercantilist policies—in great
detail. This is not about recycling the China chapter from the annual USTR National
Trade Estimate report. It is about comprehensively detailing the array of unfair,
mercantilist practices China engages in and concretely demonstrating how those practices
harm the United States and the entire world economy, rich and poor nations alike.
Second, once the Administration has established an ironclad case, President Trump should
assign Vice President Pence, Secretary Tillerson, Secretary Ross, and other top officials to
travel the world lining up allies at the highest levels in an effort to develop a coordinated
response to Chinese mercantilism, including countries in Europe (and the European
Commission itself), the Commonwealth nations, and Japan and South Korea. This could
even include orchestrating a G19 meeting that excludes China—for the meeting’s express
purpose would be to discuss how the 18 nations (and the European Union) should respond
to Chinese innovation mercantilism. Only the United States can do this, for it is uniquely
placed to provide the political leadership necessary to save the global trading system, given
its economic size, historical role, and enduring commitment to the underlying principles of
global trade liberalization. Moreover, there is some precedent for this, as President Reagan
showed when he orchestrated the Plaza Accord agreement in 1985. At the same time, the
U.S. Congress should step up efforts to coordinate with members of the European
Parliament and the legislatures of major trading partners, including France, Germany,
This contest will be
won, first and
foremost, not in the
tribunals of Geneva,
but in the court of
global opinion.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
PAGE 25 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Japan, and the United Kingdom, to discuss common concerns and legislative solutions that
could help to roll back Chinese mercantilism.
Such an assertive response is further needed, because, too often, Chinese bad behavior is
rewarded with bland statements, that, at best, result in minor revisions or rollbacks of the
egregious policies. Also, broad bilateral engagement too easily bloats the structure such that
it loses its central focus and ability to achieve outcomes on core interests.
Once these two key steps are done—documenting the case and mobilizing our allies—the
next step is to begin negotiations, with a list of very specific, performance-based demands.
If after a reasonable but short period of time results are lacking, the United States and our
partners should begin to ratchet up consequences, using the kinds of tools described below.
Should results be forthcoming, measures can be reduced; should they still be lacking,
measures can be ratcheted up.
Throughout this three-step process, it’s also important to note that the United States must
lead the defense of the global trading system, because other countries lack the ability to
push back against China on their own for the (very real) fear of retaliation. China has
repeatedly shown that it treats its trade relationships in an “all business” fashion and that it
is happy to dole out retribution where necessary, especially for nations that dare to
challenge Chinese interests. In isolation, few countries have the ability or will to respond,
but, if provided the leadership, countries can find strength, given the collective concerns—
over the system and specific rules—that are at stake. The Trump administration needs to
provide the leadership to build this cooperation as a way to defend the system, to recommit
key trading partners to the rules and principles that underpin the system, to obtain
commitments to collective action against Chinese mercantilist practices, and to build new
rules that not only add additional layers of protection but also address emergent trade and
investment issues.
It’s important that U.S. allies understand that while their core industries may not be
directly in China’s sights now (or only coming into China’s sights), many of their
industries, especially nonconsumer-facing ones, such as machine tools and dyes, production
equipment, robotics, and others are directly in the sights of Chinese policy. China clearly
seeks leadership across virtually all advanced industries, whether the enterprises affected are
American, European, Japanese, or Korean. Accordingly, the United States should do more
industrial intelligence-sharing on China’s innovation-mercantilist policies with allies. This
could include helping them understand which Chinese entities (often government-backed)
are truly behind Chinese FDI-acquisition activity, coordinating on bringing potential cases
before the WTO, and collectively pushing back against Chinese unfair trade practices.
Such coordination efforts have borne fruit before, as when U.S. and European stakeholders
exerted joint pressure to push back on China’s indigenous innovation product catalogues.
This also matters because the more the United States and its allies are able to hold firm and
push back with a coordinated response, the more this diminishes China’s ability to employ
its divide and conquer game of playing companies off one another to get them to make the

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
PAGE 26 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

best offer (e.g., coerced transfers of technology or IP) to be granted access to Chinese
markets that should already be open anyway. As Hout and Ghemawat write in “China vs.
The World: Whose Technology Is It?,” that story has played out in sector after sector from
high-speed rail to automotive to aerospace, and a better-coordinated response from like-
minded, rule-of-law nations could do a much better job of putting a stop to it.
To be sure, China will respond. One of China’s responses will be to portray itself as the
victim and suggest that it is the United States that is being mercantilist, as President Xi did
recently at Davos. Another response will be to claim that China is only doing what nations
at its level of development need to do. Already China makes every effort to portray its
mercantilist policies as enlightened and fair, even going so far as to produce a cartoon video
with a happy song about the development of the 13th Five-Year Plan.56 It will be
incumbent on the Trump administration to forcefully, but respectfully, counter every
disingenuous claim. And it will be incumbent for the Washington trade community not to
side with China out of the fear that prosecution will turn into protectionism.
Reevaluate the Effectiveness of Existing Trade Institutions in Confronting Chinese
Mercantilism, Building New Trade Agreements and Institutions Accordingly
China has exposed significant gaps in the international trading system—in rules, decision-
making, and enforcement—that the Trump Administration should address in future
agreements. Sixteen years after China joined the WTO, it’s clear the country has not used
its WTO accession to pursue the reforms that would have made it compatible with the
WTO-, rules-based trading system.
Statements at China’s accession, when compared with the situation outlined in this report,
betray a stark contrast. For instance, Mike Moore, the WTO’s director-general in 2001,
gushed that “China’s decision to join the WTO is momentous. Committing itself to WTO
rules will entrench market-based reform and strengthen the rule of law. … China’s opaque
and arbitrary trade and investment rules will become transparent, stable, and more
predictable.”
57 Moore assuaged those concerned China might not live up to its
commitments, intoning that, “A more open China brings benefits for everybody. … China
knows it has to stick to its WTO commitments. If it doesn’t, the U.S. or any other WTO
member government can use the organization’s dispute-settlement procedures to ensure it
does.”
58 For its part, the WTO itself stated:
China has agreed to undertake a series of important commitments to open
and liberalize its regime in order to better integrate into the world economy
and offer a more predictable environment for trade and foreign investment in
accordance with WTO rules.59
With this history as background, the Trump administration should take a realistic,
pragmatic view of the extent to which it can contest Chinese actions through the WTO
framework, and the extent to which unilateral or alternative measures will be needed. In
some instances, the Trump administration should use the WTO’s dispute-settlement body
more aggressively to adjudicate emergent issues that fall within WTO rules, such as those
Left unchanged,
China’s rise,
accompanied by its
unremitting use of
innovation-
mercantilist practices,
may accelerate the
WTO’s undoing.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
PAGE 27 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

around subsides and “public bodies.”60 However, the WTO’s usefulness is clearly limited in
its current state. Its consensus-based approach to negotiations has become untenable. The
WTO’s notification, surveillance, and review of existing and proposed trade-related
regulations is weak and ineffectual—a critical lapse as use of nontariff barriers become the
protectionist tool of choice.61 The WTO’s inability to get countries to update the rules to
account for modern trade issues—such as investment, competition policy, data flows, e-
commerce, intellectual property in the digital era, and currency manipulation—means the
Trump administration may need to initially work outside the WTO to make progress.
The fact that modern trade policy is not dependent on the WTO, but based on the variable
geometry of bilateral, regional, and plurilateral deals, reflects the lamentable state of affairs
at the WTO. It also reflects the fact that the United States and many free-trading countries
are already moving on from the WTO. There is no secret sauce to this; it’s going to require
new trade agreements and potentially new institutions. This will create some overlap with
the WTO and cause some fragmentation in the global trading system, but given the
prospect for changes at the WTO, this is the next-best option forward. The reality may
alarm some, but needs to be considered: that, left unchanged, China’s rise, accompanied by
its unremitting use of innovation-mercantilist practices, may accelerate the WTO’s
undoing.62 One outcome should be new rules, transparency procedures, and enforcement
mechanisms that make up for the WTO’s failings, and that ultimately could lead to the
creation of an alternative to the WTO. If the WTO cannot be reformed to effectively
address the challenges China poses to the global trading system, it may be time to craft
alternative instruments and organizations that, should China (and other mercantilist
nations) want to join, would have the mechanisms to effectively discipline mercantilist
behavior (similar to the scenario whereby China might eventually join a high-standard TPP
agreement). To be clear, this should not be about exclusion. (Any nation would be
welcome to join, providing it generally obeys the rules. If it doesn’t, it would be required to
leave.) Rather this is about reestablishing a faithful and trustworthy commitment, backed
up by better transparency and enforcement, to trade rules that have supported decades of
growing prosperity.
As an interim to that step, the Trump administration should use new and existing tools to
form new global rules and norms with as many like-minded economies—those that have a
vested interest in defending the rules- and market-based trading system—as possible.
Renewed efforts to finalize agreements with the European Union about specific issues or as
part of a broader trade deal will be critical to setting new norms. Moreover, updating
existing bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) will keep U.S. trade agreements relevant.
Existing U.S. FTAs, or new ones the Trump administration has proposed, such as with
Japan or the United Kingdom, would benefit from including new rules established in the
TPP, such as on the treatment of state-owned enterprises, intellectual property, e-
commerce, and services. Wherever possible, these new agreements should reinforce existing
core principles that China has undermined—those of an open, transparent, enforceable,
rules- and market-based trade and economic system.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
PAGE 28 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Don’t Pursue a BIT Until China Comes Into Compliance With Existing Trade
Commitments
In this regard, there has been considerable effort by the United States to complete a U.S.-
China Bilateral Investment Treaty, believing it could be a powerful vehicle to get China to
address outstanding trade issues. However, while a BIT may have some merit, any clear-
eyed view of it must recognize that it represents a two-edged sword. A strong investment
treaty could make things better, especially if it included meaningful market-access
commitments, a nondiscriminatory and participatory standards-making process that
includes outside stakeholders, provisions that prohibit China from giving its state-owned
and -influenced enterprises and private companies an unfair advantage over foreign firms,
and obligations to improve regulatory transparency.63 A review of the 2012 Model BIT,
whose changes to the 2004 Model BIT were patently insufficient, is needed before
proceeding. This review needs to be conducted specifically for the China BIT, based on the
“bill of particulars” mentioned earlier fully detailing the Chinese practices the Trump
Administration would like to see addressed, adequate time for public input, and full
consultation with cleared advisors (e.g., perhaps a special set of cleared advisors with
expertise in issues such as standards, state ownership/influence, subsidized investment,
transparency, and competition).
Also, very importantly, China would need to pre-agree prior to a U.S. willingness to move
ahead with the BIT that it will limit its CFIUS-like instruments to true national security
concerns, and not use them for economic, trade, or competition purposes. The United
States follows this standard, and so should China. There are numerous Chinese measures,
including in the cybersecurity space (e.g., the 2016 Cybersecurity Law and related
measures) where China is mixing commercial protectionism with the need to protect its
national security. (For instance, Chinese President Xi noted on March 12, 2017 that the
Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee had decided to establish a
framework for the integration of military and civilian industries. As Xi stated to the CPC,
“Civil technologies should better serve military purposes.”)
64 China should be required
prior to any re-start of BIT talks to re-set its appetite for using national security as a catch
all for plain old protectionism.
Moreover, the actual starting point for BIT negotiations should be China showing
meaningful, verifiable progress toward fulfilling its existing commitments at the WTO.
New commitments will not count for much if China is not held to account for its disregard
for current commitments, as ITIF argues in “False Promises: The Yawning Gap Between
China’s WTO Commitments and Practices.”
65 China is already obliged under existing
WTO commitments to address many issues that a potential BIT would contemplate, such
as those that prohibit forced technology transfers as a condition of market access, yet China
has made extensive use of such policies in a variety of sectors. China needs to
fundamentally recommit to the rules of the international trading system and abide by the
letter and the spirit of the rules, lest the United States again allow China to benefit from
international trade rules without having to abide by them.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
PAGE 29 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

The bottom line is that the United States needs to be very clear-eyed here, as Germany,
France, and Italy are proving. That’s reflected by a recent letter those nations sent to the
EU Commission requesting authority to establish investment reviews at the national level
that would prevent or address foreign mercantilist investment practices.66 The reality is that
it will be very hard for the United States to get a strong BIT treaty with China, there is a
high risk that it wouldn’t be enforced well, and it risks legitimizing China’s practices that
are not included in the BIT and setting a ceiling (e.g., a seal of approval). The United
States should be careful not to repeat the WTO experience, with China side-stepping the
letter and spirit of a treaty intended to open its relatively closed investment markets when
our investment markets are much more open. This is one area where coordination with
like-minded trading partners will be very important.
Strengthen Organizational Capabilities Within the Federal Government
The Trump administration should confront Chinese mercantilism through a federal
government organizational structure that reflects the significant nature of the challenge.
The organizational capacity of trade-focused agencies and bodies in the federal government
will need to be expanded and strengthened.
Establish a National Industrial Intelligence Unit with the National Intelligence Council
The United States largely continues to consider specific instances of Chinese innovation
mercantilism—such as the challenge of Chinese acquisition of U.S. technology
enterprises—on an ad hoc, case-by-case basis. There is no entity in government charged
with considering the challenge from a holistic, strategic perspective across agencies to
analyze, understand, anticipate, and respond. In particular, no entity analyzes China’s
capacity to absorb knowledge, to understand its determination to do something with it, or
to understand the sources of its technology. A glaring example of this is that it took the
U.S. government four years to recognize that China had articulated, and then to get
translated into English, its “National Medium- and Long-Term Program for Science and
Technology Development,” and begin to understand what its implications might be for
U.S. industry.67 And it has been nearly two years since China announced its Manufacturing
2025 plan and we’ve not seen concrete steps by the United States to effectively counter
this development.
To remedy this deficiency, the president should establish and staff a new National
Industrial Intelligence Unit (which could be housed within the existing National
Intelligence Council) charged with developing a better process and structure to understand
the specifics and long-term implications of other nations’ economic development strategies,
particularly China’s, so that the United States can respond more effectively.
68 In particular,
this group would develop a better process and structure to understand the long-term
implications of China’s economic development strategy on U.S. competitiveness. It would
also develop approaches to better leverage intelligence assets to boost the competitiveness of
U.S. companies. This would not constitute industrial espionage, but rather sharing
knowledge in the public domain (such as the MLP) about the competitiveness strategies of
Chinese enterprises and industries as well as developing better intelligence on the true
China will not
systematically
ameliorate its
mercantilist strategies
and policies unless it
is proactively
compelled to do so by
outside pressure.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
PAGE 30 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

source of Chinese government involvement in and financing of Chinese companies and the
front organizations they set up in the United States, as was the case in the attempted
Canyon Bridge acquisition of Lattice Semiconductor.69 And as part of the Council’s
mission, it should be charged with sharing commercial intelligence on China with our
allies, particularly those in Europe, as they have much less developed capabilities
vis-à-vis China.
The National Industrial Intelligence Unit should also prepare a report examining the
extent to which Chinese innovation-mercantilist policies—such as forced joint ventures,
forced tech and IP transfer, and completed or attempted Chinese acquisitions of U.S.
advanced-technology enterprises—have contributed to the outsourcing of manufacturing
and other activities to China and is leading to the hollowing out of the U.S. defense
industrial base. As suggested in the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission’s 2016 Report to Congress, such a report “should detail the national security
implications of a diminished domestic industrial base (including assessing any impact on
U.S. military readiness), compromised U.S. military supply chains, and reduced capability
to manufacture state-of-the-art military systems and equipment.”70
Create a Sub-directorate at NSC Responsible for Combatting Innovation Mercantilism
There are very few special assistants to the president (SAPs) or senior directors in the
International Economics Directorate of the National Security Council (NSC), and none
who are clearly charged with the development of strategy or execution of tactics related to
combatting foreign countries’ innovation-mercantilist practices. Competitiveness issues
have historically tended to fall through the cracks at the NSC; indeed, competitiveness has
almost always been a second-order priority in U.S. policy compared with diplomacy and
national security considerations.71 Yet America’s national security increasingly depends on
its technological leadership. To address this, President Trump should create within the
NSC a sub-directorate consisting of a senior director or SAP, supported by two to three
directors, which can be the liaison to the highest levels of the executive branch in
conceiving and executing a whole-of-government approach to combatting foreign
innovation mercantilism. Congress should authorize and appropriate funds to adequately
staff both the sub-directorate and industrial intelligence council unit.
Create an Office of Competitiveness at USTR, Responsible for, Among Other Things,
Creating a Global Mercantilist Index
USTR is an agency staffed with hardworking experts, many of whom are lawyers and who
can effectively work on negotiations and trade prosecution. But it is weaker when it comes
to the ability to analyze strategic-level competitiveness issues. To remedy this, the Trump
administration should establish within USTR a new “Office of Competitiveness” that
would be charged with thinking systemically about the design of U.S. trade policy in the
context of globalization and U.S. competitiveness. Too often, USTR isn’t staffed to be able
to do these analytics before marching into the next trade negotiation on the basis of the last
agreed text, or is fighting—even if sometimes understandably—the trade wars of the past.
It is not set up, either institutionally or philosophically, to fight the war that the country is

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
PAGE 31 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

engaged in today against rampant innovation mercantilism designed to capture U.S.
advanced industry leadership. Similar to the State Department’s Office of Policy Planning,
this new USTR office would be charged with focusing on U.S. trade policy in the context
of globalization and competitiveness. Toward that end, one of its roles would be to ensure
strong interagency collaboration so that all relevant agencies and departments of
government share a common understanding of both the threats posed by state-led
capitalism and the innovation mercantilism it often entails and how the United States
should respond. Another task would be to work with offices, especially regional offices,
within USTR and in other agencies across the federal government to ensure that there is
constant coordination with like-minded trading partners with respect to China. To date
this type of coordination has been catch as catch can, but it is vital part of the
successful development and execution of a strategy that can successfully counter
Chinese mercantilism.
One of the assignments for this new Office of Competitiveness at USTR would be to
develop an annual comprehensive ranking of nations’ mercantilist policies; in other words,
to create a “Global Mercantilist Index,” as ITIF suggests in “The Global Mercantilist
Index: A New Approach to Ranking Nations’ Trade Policies.”
72 Such an index would both
provide a comprehensive catalog of countries’ trade barriers affecting the rights of U.S.
intellectual-property holders—as the “National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade
Barriers” (“NTE”) and “Special 301” reports currently do, respectively—but join this with
a ranking system that comprehensively ranks and identifies the most egregious offenders.
Such a Global Mercantilist Index should also be designed to pay particular attention to
trade barriers that impact advanced-industry sectors, recognizing that a foreign mercantilist
policy targeting an industry that is less important to the U.S. economy (e.g., chicken
processing) is less problematic than a policy targeting an industry that is more important
(e.g., semiconductors). In essence, such a report would marry the comprehensiveness of the
“NTE” report with the “naming and shaming” function the “Special 301” report provides
by unabashedly designating counties as Watch List or Priority Watch List countries.73
A Global Mercantilist Index would thus identify, assess, and rank those countries making
the most extensive and damaging use of innovation-mercantilist policies. As ITIF found in
constructing a similar index in its “The Global Mercantilist Index” report, China would
likely be found the most significant purveyor of innovation-mercantilist practices.74 For
countries that perpetually appear on such a Global Mercantilist Index report, the United
States Trade Representative’s Office should require that the country develop an action plan
for remediation. This would require a country to coordinate with U.S. embassy trade
personnel in-country to develop an action plan for submission to USTR. The action plans
would theoretically include proposed ideas and policies that indicate a commitment to a
non-mercantilist strategy. Finally, not only should USTR begin to produce such a report,
but USTR’s proposed Office of Competitiveness should also push the WTO to issue a
similar version of the report in order to provide an international lens on the issue.
A “Global Mercantilist
Index” report would
marry the
comprehensiveness of
the “NTE” report with
the “naming and
shaming” function of
the “Special 301”
report.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
PAGE 32 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Increase Resources and Staffing at USTR and Other Relevant Agencies to Reflect the
Scale and Importance of the Task
USTR needs more resources if it’s to effectively meet the growing challenge of innovation
mercantilism, even as it works to develop new trade agreements and expand market access
for U.S. enterprises. USTR has fewer than 250 professionals to negotiate new agreements
and enforce existing ones. For 2017, USTR requested a budget for $59 million and 248
staff.75 Yet this is not that different from USTR’s 2008 budget request for $44 million and
225 staff.76 USTR’s budget is mainly for people and travel. In both regards, USTR needs
more funding to put people in Washington, China, and Geneva, in part to coordinate with
and travel to like-minded trading partners to develop policies and actions to resolve China
issues; to fund people to focus on trade enforcement (both in Washington and Geneva);
and to fund more frequent travel for D.C.-based staff to China and Geneva and to
coordinate with like-minded trading partners to help address trade issues and build and
execute enforcement cases involving China. As a comparison, USTR’s budget is
significantly less than the $86 million (2016) budget of the Department of Labor’s
International Labor Services program to protect workers outside the United States.77 Put
simply, USTR’s budget is hardly commensurate with its role in shaping an issue of
enormous consequence to the U.S. economy.
Further, USTR’s presence in China should be expanded, including new positions in
secondary cities, such as Shanghai and Guangzhou. Beijing is one of the very few overseas
postings maintained by USTR (the others being Brussels and Geneva), but the extent of
U.S.-China trade issues suggests this presence needs to be substantially upgraded. The
current USTR office at the U.S. embassy in Beijing only has two USTR officials (a
minister counsellor and a deputy trade attaché) and two support staff. This is little changed
from when USTR posted its first officer to Beijing—nearly a decade ago—in 2007.
78
USTR’s budget for its office in Beijing has grown—from $400,000 in 2008 to $1.2
million in 2017—but this is miniscule in comparison with the trade issues being handled,
the range and complexity of the issues, and the fact that these issues won’t be resolved
anytime soon. USTR should also expand its presence in Europe to be able to coordinate
better with European capitals in Berlin, Paris, Rome, London, etc. The one official in
Brussels should be fully subscribed dealing with EU matters, including on building what is
already a good, but still basic, coordination pattern on China issues.
USTR makes the case for extra resources clear in its latest budget:
The development of disputes with respect to the trade policies of China,
however, requires a very significant commitment of time and resources to
conduct Chinese-language research, translate uncovered legal measures, and
analyze the WTO consistency of such measures. The nontransparent nature
of China’s trade regime makes these enforcement initiatives especially
difficult, time-consuming, and resource-intensive.
79
Accordingly, Congress should boost USTR’s budget to at least $75 million, including
providing resources to create an Office of Competitiveness within USTR. However, it’s
USTR should play a
greater convening and
coordinating role
across the broad
swath of federal
agencies, including
the PTO and
Departments of
Commerce, Treasury,
and Justice, among
others, that play
important roles in
contesting Chinese
mercantilism.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
PAGE 33 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

important to reiterate that increasing USTR’s budget, while necessary, is not sufficient:
USTR needs to better coordinate and leverage the capabilities of other key government
agencies which play important roles in contesting Chinese innovation mercantilism and
avoid what sometimes appears to be a “not developed here” policy that sometimes may not
give as much attention to policy initiatives not originated from USTR.
Upgrade Trade Enforcement Capabilities and Strategy at USTR
The Trump administration should expand USTR’s trade enforcement capacity. For
instance, the ITEC team should be expanded, as its staff (of 22 trade analysts) would be
stretched too thin to cover the full spectrum of current cases as well as a potentially bigger
range of future cases.80 Further, the White House should publish a national trade-
enforcement strategy that reviews the adequacy of U.S. trade-enforcement mechanisms,
with the goal of developing additional enforcement tools, focusing not just on China but
also on the other worst-offender countries (notably Brazil, India, Indonesia, Russia, and
Vietnam). The first part of this trade-enforcement strategy should be a concerted
reemphasis on trade enforcement at USTR, including to assess and seek to bring cases that
are perhaps riskier, or where U.S. industry isn’t requesting a case but a case is in the interest
of the United States overall. Unfortunately, USTR has let the balance shift away from
enforcement for a number of reasons. One reason why is that it is simply easier to work on
policy matters in cooperation with trade officials from other nations, especially to develop
new trade agreements. Taking aggressive action against mercantilist policies is much
harder. It’s a natural inclination to want to play the “good cop” instead of the “bad cop”
who is complaining, confronting, and pressing for change. Another is that creative and
risky cases are hard to develop: it’s easier when industry brings in all the facts and
supporting information. This is why USTR needs to bolster the personnel and resources
committed to enforcement.
The U.S. Interagency Trade Enforcement Center (ITEC) mobilizes resources and expertise
across the federal government to develop and pursue trade-enforcement actions addressing
unfair foreign trade practices.
81 Yet ITEC’s budget of $9 million in 2015 was a pittance,
and frankly, a bargain, compared with the value it produced for the American taxpayer.82
ITEC’s annual funding should be increased to at least $15 million per year. Congress
should also direct increased funding to the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) for much stronger border enforcement,
particularly against illegal Chinese imports. The goal should be zero tolerance for Chinese
imports to the United States that are counterfeit or otherwise illegal. The Chinese should
know that if they take the time and effort to produce counterfeit or otherwise illegal
products for export to the United States that they will not sell any in America.
Expand the Network of Intellectual Property and Digital Trade Attachés
To further support USTR, the Trump administration should ensure that the Department
of Commerce deploys more staff overseas. The Department of Commerce should expand
and upgrade its network of digital economy and intellectual property attaché positions in
China and in other U.S. embassies around the world.
83 Given the number of ongoing

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
PAGE 34 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

concerns regarding both intellectual property and digital trade in China, both programs
should have a substantive team of staff to help USTR and U.S. companies at the embassy
and in consulates in secondary cities. Here, more attention is needed to what is happening
in the Beijing district itself, because current Beijing staff are mostly focused on federal-level
policy issues, but this can mean activity at the Beijing district level is neglected, which
matters because more than half of the foreign IP litigation occurs in Beijing municipal
courts. It’s important that the these new attachés have the necessary skills and experiences,
including the appropriate in-country language skills as well as a deep understanding of the
IP, trade, and legal policies and issues (including US and Chinese IP laws) at play.
Furthermore, these staff need to be posted at suitably senior levels to ensure they have the
status to access senior officials in a position to address relevant trade issues. For example,
the highest rank an intellectual property attaché can go is “first secretary,” which limits
individuals’ ability to participate in their own high-level routine meetings and while
accompanying an ambassador or visiting senior officials. This may seem mundane, but
when there are limited numbers of U.S. officials working on such trade issues, it is essential
they are in the best position possible to assist U.S. businesses and assist in
policy development.
Inculcate a More Tech- and IP-Focused Foreign Commercial Service and PTO
U.S. export promotion efforts do not fully account for a critical basis of U.S. competitive
advantage—U.S. technology and intellectual property. China’s market conditions have
changed considerably since its WTO accession, and it is highly capable of paying for
foreign technology and IP (as opposed to stealing it). The Foreign Commercial Service
should play a greater role in helping U.S. companies find and meet this demand (that is, to
sell or license U.S. enterprises’ technology or IP on fair, market-based terms).
The Trump administration should task the Department of Commerce with recruiting,
training, and deploying U.S. Commercial Service officers (who are deployed to embassies
around the world to help U.S. companies do business overseas) who are specialized in
technology and IP issues, as this is an area where U.S. firms excel and where there is a large
and growing demand for such goods and services, especially in China. The Foreign
Commercial Service already has a good network of offices across China—in Beijing,
Chengdu, Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Shanghai, Shenyang, and Wuhan—but would benefit
from more resources focused on high-value-added technology and intellectual property.
Similarly, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office should add a deputy director for
international affairs. PTO currently has only one deputy director responsible for all
purposes. It should add another deputy director to focus on international innovation and
intellectual-property issues, similar to other offices that have an international affairs
deputy director.
Develop Stronger Processes to Contest Chinese Innovation Mercantilism
Enhanced processes, particularly with regard to the trade-enforcement activities of the
federal government, will be needed to complement the suggested organizational changes.
USTR should compile
a comprehensive “bill
of particulars” listing
all of the mercantilist
actions China is
taking, including all
the ways in which it is
not complying with
the letter or spirit of
WTO laws.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
PAGE 35 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Elevate Trade Enforcement in the Interagency Process
U.S. trade agencies are often unable to respond to cases where China has broken trade rules
because other government agencies—many with their own engagement with Chinese
counterparts and agency-specific interests—veto stronger action. The growing range of
issues discussed in bilateral engagement and the intersection of trade with many of these
interests means that there are many agencies involved in the bilateral relationship. Each
agency has its own specific interests in China, which are often either ignorant of China’s
economic strategy or have a desire not to rock the boat. Those agencies devoted to
engaging with foreign nations on diplomatic, security, and financial concerns (such as the
Departments of State, Judiciary, and Treasury) should be relegated to an advisory capacity
in the interagency trade process. Enforcement should be left to those agencies that are
equipped to do it best and have the largest stake in a strong and globally competitive U.S.
economy, in particular, the Department of Commerce, USTR, and the new White House
Trade Council.
84 For too long, trade enforcement has taken a back seat to other concerns.
At the same time, the White House should make clear to cabinet secretaries in agencies
such as Judiciary and Treasury that they should be spending more time and effort pushing
back against Chinese mercantilism. A case in point is the DOJ antitrust division’s singular
lack of interest in speaking out and pressing China on abuse of the country’s
antimonopoly law.
Strengthen the Rules of Engagement in Negotiations With Chinese Negotiators
The increasingly diverse set of bilateral issues the United States has with China means that
many agencies and officials have been drawn into the framework over time, making it
difficult to have a single and consistent message and approach on key issues. If the bilateral
framework for managing the relationship is not focused on getting outcomes on core issues,
China will continue to rely on the disorganization of the U.S. government to use the
complexity of the bilateral relationship to obfuscate and make minor trade-offs, all the
while failing to focus on or respond to core U.S. interests.
The Trump administration should therefore prioritize issues, attention, and resources and
weigh the value of each engagement based on progress toward outcomes. The ever-growing
range of issues involved in the bilateral relationship is diluting and diverting attention from
achieving outcomes on the most significant trade and economic issues at stake. The current
bilateral framework for trade and economic issues—the U.S.-China Joint Commission on
Commerce and Trade and the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue, as well as the
high-level cybersecurity dialogue—needs streamlining and strict management to ensure
only core issues get addressed in the short periods in which senior officials are directly
involved. Moreover, China all too often uses these forums as way to play a rope-a-dope,
delaying strategy that would make University of North Carolina coach Dean Smith’s fabled
four-corners slowdown strategy look downright frenetic. Either there is real tangible
progress from the Chinese government from these dialogues or the Trump administration
should put them on hold until there is. And all agencies involved—from Agriculture to
Treasury—should receive strict marching orders from the White House on strategy and

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
PAGE 36 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

tactics, so they are all working toward common goals, just as is the case with Chinese
government agencies when they are involved in these dialogues.
Furthermore, the prevailing focus on presidential summits—though useful—threatens the
ability to efficiently deal with the broad array of issues in the relationship. Too often, issues
are passed up to respective leaders to resolve, as lower-level discussions prove unproductive.
Such emphasis benefits the opaque Chinese system and China’s strategy to delay and defer
action, as the upward referral of issues is intended principally to stall and prevent progress.
For the relationship to function, these lower-level dialogues should be expected to achieve
results at a speed that reflects the maturity and capabilities of each side and which reflects
the need for efficiency in addressing trade and economic issues that can have a significant
impact during long, drawn-out processes that depend on the principals. Finally, U.S.
officials must insist on meetings with Chinese interlocutors of equal rank and seniority;
U.S. trade teams should walk out the door when Chinese negotiators of equal rank fail to
appear, or when meeting requests are not answered in a timely fashion.
Bring More Trade Disputes at the WTO
The Trump administration should build on the previous administration’s growing use of
the WTO dispute-settlement mechanism to bring more trade cases. In his two terms,
President Obama initiated 16 cases against China. To be sure, China is increasingly the
focus of U.S. trade enforcement—since 2009, 11 of the 20 WTO complaints initiated by
USTR were against China.85 Despite this, more can be done.
As noted, many of China’s policies violate the spirit, if not always the letter, of trade rules
the country agreed to uphold in joining the WTO. In response, America often pushes back
bilaterally rather than by initiating a trade dispute at the WTO. A contributing factor to
the lack of more cases is that U.S. companies face the real threat of retaliation from the
Chinese government if they provide evidence against it in a trade case. Nevertheless, USTR
should bring more cases, whether industry supports them or not (assuming the facts can be
adequately developed). In particular, USTR should be more aggressive in initiating trade
disputes, or using the threat of disputes, to change China’s behavior. USTR could also
work to develop non-violation nullification and impairment cases, given that many
Chinese policies undercut the benefits and rights the United States thought it was getting
when it allowed China to join the WTO. The administration could also launch more cases
related to notifications and transparency. For example, China fails to adequately and timely
notify its subsidies, and China also regularly fails to publish measures in English, French, or
Spanish before it implements them. In addition, more thought needs to be given as to
whether and how to bring riskier cases. For example, in the standards area, China
frequently adopts design requirements that violate principles of technology neutrality
embodied in the WTO’s Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement.
Another potential WTO case could concern China’s continuing coerced technology-
transfer requirements. The prospects for such a case would be greatly improved if U.S. law
required notification to the U.S. government on a confidential basis of technology licenses
USTR should be more
aggressive in initiating
trade disputes, or
using the threat of
disputes, to change
China’s behavior, even
in cases where it must
launch disputes of its
own volition, without
industry initiating the
request.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
PAGE 37 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

to China and of transactions in China in which the Chinese government or Chinese
government-affiliated entities are involved. When China joined the WTO in 2001, it
agreed that foreign firms would not be pressured by government entities to transfer
technology to a Chinese partner as part of the cost of doing business in China. China
denies such practices by pointing out that they are not in writing. But government action
in China can and does occur by informal “administrative guidance” and this is very much
the case with coerced technology transfer. Not only does this continue to happen, it’s
actually getting worse, with Chinese officials insisting on transfers of more valuable
technology. For instance, global auto brands are only allowed to manufacture cars
domestically in China through joint ventures with local partners.
86 For example, China
made General Motors’ access to subsidies for electric-vehicle purchases contingent on the
company handing over the IP behind its electric hybrid car, the Volt. Ford was forced to
do the same.87 In November 2016, Volkswagen was compelled to enter a joint venture (JV)
if it was to be permitted to sell battery-electric and plug-in hybrid cars in China.88 This is
despite the fact that China promised to remove these types of measures at the JCCT in
2011.89 Yet, USTR annual reports to Congress on China’s WTO compliance continue to
highlight its use of such discriminatory practices. Unfortunately, this shouldn’t be a
surprise, as China has explicitly outlined aims for domestic production in this sector,
including through forced JVs and tech-transfer provisions, as part of its “Made in China
2025” strategic plan.90
Improve Monitoring and Transparency, Making Up for the WTO China Failure
Despite agreeing to do so when China joined the WTO, the Chinese government has
consistently failed to provide the WTO and its trading partners with required information,
translated into English (or another official WTO language), regarding policies related to
trade in goods, services, intellectual property, subsidies, and foreign investment. Such
transparency requirements may appear mundane and bureaucratic, but they are critically
important to judging whether a country is abiding by its WTO commitments and whether
grounds exist for a trade dispute. As noted above, USTR should bring a WTO case
regarding this enduring lack of transparency.
Moreover, the lack of transparency is part of the reason why USTR needs more people on
the ground: to better monitor Chinese government actions. The lack of transparency is
part of the reason why USTR needs more people on the ground— to better monitor
Chinese government actions. China’s governance system is notoriously opaque, complex,
and multi-layered with overlapping and often inconsistent national, provincial, and
municipal government policies. While such an approach is unnecessary for most trade
partners, there is as noted an ongoing need for more USTR officials in China, as USTR has
repeatedly reported that many aspects of Chinese policy are hidden away in unpublished
measures (including legally unrecognized normative or regulatory documents), oral
directives, and Communist Party secret red letter documents. These transparency concerns
extend to the provincial and municipal governments which also regularly fail to publish
their measures.
91 Furthermore, China regularly fails to provide at least a 30-day period for
public comment on drafts of trade- and economic-related regulations and rules as it agreed

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
PAGE 38 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

to at the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue in 2008 and 2011. And Chinese
agencies frequently adopt measures that take effect immediately when China’s WTO
obligations require it to allow comments by other agencies and then to translate the
measures into a WTO official language and officially publish them before implementation,
except in certain cases (such as emergency). Multiple USTR reports show that China’s
repeated failures to be transparent are part of a consistent pattern to avoid scrutiny for
discriminatory and trade-distorting regulations rules and other measures involving
subsidies, preferences, anti-competitive government practices, etc.92
A specific example is China’s extensive use of subsidies and its blatant disregard for WTO-
required transparency regarding such measures, as well as its failure to release detailed
information in the government’s budget, the state capital operating budget (SCOB).
Despite WTO commitments to submit regular notifications on what subsidies it provides,
China did not file its first notification after WTO accession (in 2001) until 2006. Five
years later, in 2011, it submitted a second notification for subsidies provided during the
period 2005 to 2008. In 2015, it provided a third notification for the period 2009 to 2014.
Beyond the delay, all three notifications were significantly incomplete and excluded
numerous subsidies that the United States knows the Chinese central government provides,
and none of these notifications included any of the extensive subsidies provided by
provincial or local governments.93 Since 2011, the United States has made formal requests
(e.g., counter-notifications) for information from China regarding over 350 unreported
Chinese subsidy measures. China has failed to provide a complete and comprehensive
response. Furthermore, China fails to provide a period for public comment for new trade-
related laws and regulations—as it agreed to as part of its WTO accession and (again) at
the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue in 2011. Multiple USTR reports show
that this is part of a consistent pattern by China to avoid scrutiny for discriminatory and
trade-distorting rules, regulations, and subsidies.94
This speaks to the need for a strengthened and emboldened USTR that can quickly
respond to China’s failure to abide by WTO transparency obligations and bilateral
commitments. A revamped and properly resourced USTR, supported by strong interagency
and U.S. embassy and consulate teams, should have the capability to identify, analyze, and
publicly respond each and every single time China fails to play by the rules it has agreed to
uphold. USTR can play a role in increasing transparency regarding China’s innovation
mercantilism, which the country purposely tries to obscure through the use of
unaccountable federal or provincial government bodies issuing administrative orders or
policies, sometimes informally, to foreign companies on a whole host of issues. This
transparency focus should form part of a broader effort to build support among like-
minded countries for a tougher response. The objective should be to not just rely on
naming-and-shaming, but on identifying actionable cases. Literally, USTR should put out
a statement each and every time China fails to deliver proper notification. And as noted
above, USTR should go even further, by compiling a comprehensive “bill of particulars”
listing all of the mercantilist actions China takes, including all the ways in which it is not
China has consistently
failed to provide the
WTO and its trading
partners with required
notifications,
translated into
English, regarding its
subsidy programs and
other trade-relevant
policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
PAGE 39 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

complying with the letter or spirit of its WTO obligations, and then working to make U.S.
allies, the media, and world aware of just how out of line Chinese policies are.
To complement larger USTR and Department of Commerce teams in China, the U.S.
government should increase funding specifically for English-language translations of
relevant documents, including key Chinese industrial-strategy publications. The language
barrier adds another level of opacity around Chinese trade and economic policy. WTO
reports on China’s trade-policy regime have repeatedly stated that it was not possible to
explain a Chinese policy or to confirm a statement made by the Chinese authorities because
the underlying documents were only available in the Chinese language.95 Yet China has an
obligation to publish in a WTO language, and such a translation undertaking is not
unique: the European Union translates all of its official documents, including those related
to trade, into 24 languages, and other countries also have similar translation burdens (e.g.,
Canada, Belgium, and Switzerland).96
Enhance Application of Section 337 of the U.S. Tariff Act
U.S. companies not only face the challenge of protecting their technology and intellectual
property from Chinese theft and forced transfer, but also from Chinese firms using this
same technology and IP against them both in third-country (e.g., international) markets
and even in their U.S. home market. The U.S. International Trade Commission applies
Section 337 of the U.S. Tariff Act to fight these and other forms of unfair competition.
Section 337 does not offer the ability to obtain monetary damages, but the ITC can issue
exclusion orders that block a foreign product from entering the United States and a cease-
and-desist order if the respondent continues to import the product in violation of the
ITC’s exclusion order.
Section 337 has become an important tool for U.S. companies to impede the importation
of goods that use stolen intellectual property, including of patents, copyrights, registered
trademarks, or even mask work.
97 Section 337 is a broad trade remedy, and while it does
not specifically mention intellectual property, it has become an important tool for U.S.
companies to impede the importation of goods that use stolen intellectual property. This
flexibility is an asset in ensuring that ITC operations adapt to address ever-evolving unfair
trade practices, (such as IP cybertheft). The need for this tool is evident from the ITC’s
caseload—in 2000, there were 25 active investigations; by 2005 this had risen to 57, and
then increased again to 88 in 2015. In 2016 there were at least 117 active investigations.98
This reflects the fact that the United States imports more and more technology-intensive
products that rely on intellectual property.99
Section 337 has generally worked well, but could benefit from several enhancements in its
application. First, the Trump administration and Congress should work to ensure that the
ITC has the direction, resources, technical competence, and confidence to handle a broader
range of IP-related cases, especially regarding trade secrets. As one complainant recently
argued, Section 337 “never contemplated the technological advancements over the past 50
years.”100 Second, the Department of Commerce needs to broaden engagement with U.S.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
PAGE 40 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) and start-ups to ensure that a broader cross-
section of companies is aware of Section 337. This matters because Chinese IP theft focuses
on wherever the technology is based, whether in small or large companies. In line with this,
the Department of Commerce should consider how the Section 337 process could be made
easier for smaller firms to leverage.
Finally, as suggested by the Commission on the Theft of American IP, the current 337
process could be made even faster to prevent goods containing or benefitting from stolen
IP from entering the United States. A speedier process, managed by a strong interagency
group led by the Secretary of Commerce, could both prevent counterfeit goods from
entering the United States and serve as a deterrent to future offenders. The speedier process
would impound imports suspected of containing or benefitting from IP theft based on
probable cause. A subsequent investigation would allow the importing company to prove
that the goods did not contain or benefit from stolen IP.
101 As the Commission on the
Theft of American Intellectual Property notes, “In an era in which the profitable life cycles
of some goods and processes can be measured in days and weeks, the existing Section 337
process is in desperate need of overhaul.”102
Create ITC Trade Enforcement Advisory Opinions
Congress should empower the U.S. International Trade Commission to investigate and
issue reports on allegations of trade violations that U.S. companies claim are happening
with trading partners, such as China.
103 Such ITC reports, in the form of a “Trade
Advisory Opinion,” would provide a valuable middle option along the spectrum—with
bilateral talks at one end and WTO dispute cases at the other, thus shedding light on
whether U.S. trade partners are violating trade rules and whether such a case is credible and
worthy of a potential case at the WTO (e.g., for China) or under bilateral free trade
agreements (for trading partners).
Congress could establish this process by expanding Section 332 of the Tariff Act of 1930,
which allows Congress to ask the ITC to conduct general fact-finding investigations with
respect to U.S. trade and competitiveness issues. The ITC has this responsibility, as it is an
independent agency with a reputation for authoritative and objective assessments. Through
this process, a U.S. company could file a detailed petition with the Senate Finance
Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee requesting the ITC investigate
whether a country is violating trade rules in a specific way and assess whether such violation
generates a material economic effect (in terms of jobs, investment, and exports, etc.) on a
company. If the committee leaders agreed, the ITC could review the claim, including by
inviting the foreign government and other stakeholders (e.g., other companies in the
sector) to comment. ITC would issue a determination within 120 days. The process would
be transparent. The final report would only be an advisory opinion, and therefore would
not obligate the administration to initiate a trade dispute case.
A Trade Advisory Opinion would prove a useful tool for several reasons. First, while USTR
has consistently pressed other countries over alleged trade violations, and brought a number
USTR needs to issue a
statement every single
time China fails to
provide required
notifications regarding
subsidies it provides or
measures pertaining to
policies or regulations
affecting trade in goods
and services before they
are implemented.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
PAGE 41 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

of cases before the WTO, the sheer number of trade agreements and alleged trade
violations makes it too overwhelming for USTR to respond to each allegation. ITC has the
expertise to manage such investigations, and its reports could help USTR determine which
allegations to pursue at the WTO or elsewhere. Second, it would provide U.S. companies
with an avenue to obtain a timely and thorough assessment of their claim. This may be
particularly valuable when there is internal disagreement within a sector about whether a
country is violating trade rules—those in favor would not be held back by others and could
see whether they have a credible case. Third, USTR is in the awkward position of being
responsible for both deciding whether a company’s claim of a trade violation is credible and
then prosecuting the claim. Fourth, it would provide Congress with an enhanced, but
appropriately limited, role in trade enforcement. The ITC is an independent agency that
would conduct its investigation in a transparent manner, thus testing whether the U.S.
company was right in asking for an investigation.
Finally, an ITC review that found that there was a “reasonable basis” for a trade violation
would clear a potential threshold for credibility, thus pressuring USTR to take action. Even
if the ITC found that there was no reasonable basis, it would still be useful, as it would
help USTR identify what information gaps it would need to fill if it did wish to initiate a
case in the future. Either way, the information discovery, debate, and transparency process
would be useful to politicians and policymakers in assessing whether China and others are
living up to their trade commitments.
Revise and Use Discretionary Powers Under the U.S. Trade Act to Address Unfair Trade
Another approach the Trump administration could take involves using Section 301(b) of
the Trade Act of 1974 (as amended) as leverage to either negotiate solutions to Chinese
unfair practices that don’t violate the WTO or to retaliate against China with WTO-
consistent remedies, including for example to prohibit Chinese services investment in the
United States not covered by U.S. WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)
commitments until China restores balance to the trade relationship. U.S. citizens can
petition USTR to initiate an investigation (as United Steelworkers did in 2010 with regard
to policies affecting trade and investment in green technologies in China) or it can start one
itself.
104 If USTR determines that “an act, policy, or practice of a foreign country is
unreasonable or discriminatory and burdens or restricts United States commerce,” under
301(b) USTR can respond.105 Subject to presidential direction and approval, the act allows
USTR to “suspend, withdraw, or prevent the application of, benefits of trade agreement
concessions,” and “impose duties or other import restrictions on the goods of, and,
notwithstanding any other provision of law, fees or restrictions on the services of, such
foreign country for such time as the Trade Representative determines appropriate.”
106
As noted, many of China’s actions clearly fall under the Act’s consideration of what is
“unreasonable.” A policy is unreasonable if the act is not necessarily in violation or
inconsistent with international law, but is otherwise unfair and inequitable.107
Unreasonable acts include those which deny fair and equitable opportunities to set up an
enterprise, fail to provide adequate and effective protection of intellectual property,

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
PAGE 42 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

systematically tolerate parties engaging in anticompetitive practices, or unfairly hampers
trade in goods and services and cross-border data flows.108
The Act has a mandatory reciprocity provision whose aim is to achieve an overall balance in
competitive opportunities in both markets. It does not demand strict equality in market
access. As a Senate report on the Act noted: “The requirement for achieving equivalence of
competitive opportunities within sectors does not require equal tariff and non-tariff barriers
for each narrowly defined product within a sector, but overall equal competitive
opportunities within a sector.”
109 To achieve this, the Act allows USTR to enter into
binding agreements with the offending country to eliminate or phase out such unfair and
restrictive trade policies. If negotiations with the offending party fail to achieve an
acceptable outcome, USTR may determine whether action is appropriate and if so, what
action to take.110
Measures used under Section 301(b) need to be carefully designed to minimize the
possibility of a “tit-for-tat” response from China. It is U.S. practice (under the U.S.
Statement of Administration Action for the Uruguay Round Agreements Act) to take any
potential cases to the WTO if the policy or practice is covered by WTO rules.111 However,
the United States is free to act against policies or practices that are not covered by WTO
agreements. One possible area for retaliatory measures is for services investment
restrictions. But to help determine what actions would be possible (given U.S. WTO
commitments), the Trump administration should require the “bill of particulars” to lay out
which Chinese practices can be the subject of WTO disputes and which can be the subject
of Section 301(b) actions. In the latter case, USTR, supported by the interagency process,
needs to develop retaliatory actions that are WTO consistent. Many of these would lie
within the purview and knowledge of other agencies, and their cooperation would be
needed to develop ideas and assess them interagency.
Rethinking Key Policies Toward Contesting Chinese Innovation Mercantilism
From reconceptualizing antitrust policy to rethinking policy toward Chinese investment in
the United States, several key policy reforms will be needed to better contest Chinese
innovation mercantilism.
Rethink Antitrust Policy and Push Back Against China’s Use of Antitrust Policies as a
Tool of Industrial Policy
The United States will need a sophisticated rethink of its own antitrust policies as well as a
deeper understanding of how China has abused its antitrust policies to advantage its own
enterprises if America and its advanced industry enterprises are going to compete
successfully with Chinese players. This is especially important given that China is creating
large national champions in mostly export-based industries, meaning that competing with
the Chinese in advanced industries will require even greater scale on the part of
U.S. enterprises.112
Further, antitrust authorities will need to be careful to ensure that their actions do not
inadvertently provide opportunities for Chinese firms to acquire divisions of U.S.
U.S. antitrust policy
has long been more
active at defending
the interests of
consumers against
predation by
enterprises than it has
been at defending
U.S. companies and
their workers from
antitrust abuses
instigated by other
nations that harm the
interests of those
enterprises.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
PAGE 43 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

companies. We saw this with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission’s recent requirement
that semiconductor maker NXP divest its RF power business as a condition of its $11.8
billion acquisition of U.S.-based Freescale Semiconductor Ltd. This opened up the
business for acquisition by the Chinese Jianguang Asset Management Co. Ltd., and just
like that, U.S. technology capabilities went to China, courtesy directly of an action
undertaken by the U.S. government. This was anything but pro-competition, and reflected
a lack of understanding of the new nature of global competition in the technology
industry.113 Likewise, it is ironic and troubling that U.S. chipmaker AMD created a joint
venture with China’s Nantong Fujitsu Microelectronics when AMD owes its very existence
to the requirement by U.S. antitrust officials for Intel to license its core technology to a
U.S. competitor.114
These kinds of competition policy mistakes harken back to the 1950s and 1960s when
U.S. antitrust authorities forced U.S. technology firms to compulsorily license between
40,000 and 50,000 patents.115 Many of these patents ended up going to Japanese firms that
were at the time significantly lagging behind their U.S. competitors, but with this
technology gift from the U.S. government, they rapidly caught up to and then exceeded
U.S. firms, costing the U.S. economy hundreds of thousands of middle- and high-wage
jobs. We saw this again with AT&T, where transistor technology was licensed to Sony.
The forced licensing of RCA’s color TV patents was the single most important factor in the
Japanese taking the color TV market away from its inventor, the United States.116
Similarly, Xerox was forced to license its technologies, again handing Japanese copier
companies the crown technology jewels. This aggressive competition policy enforcement
blithely ignored the threat of global competition to the U.S. economy. With global
competition even more intense today, and U.S. leadership much weaker, we cannot afford
to copy the mistakes of the 1950s and 1960s.
Moreover, in antitrust circles, while there has long been “more agreement with regard to
applying national rules to extra-territorial conduct that harms consumers within national
markets, there is no such consensus concerning the application of national antitrust rules to
extra-territorial conduct that harms the access of exporters to foreign markets.”117 Along
these lines, in 1988, the Department of Justice issued guidelines indicating that it would
not apply U.S. antitrust rules to overseas conduct that restrains U.S. exports, unless the
conduct also harmed U.S. consumers. In other words, U.S. antitrust policy has long been
more active at defending the interests of consumers against predation by enterprises than it
has been at defending U.S. companies and their workers from antitrust abuses instigated by
other nations that harm the interests of those enterprises. The Trump Department of
Justice should take a more active interest in the latter and change these guidelines.
This is made all the worse because China’s use of antitrust law as an industrial policy
weapon poses a significant threat to many U.S. firms operating in China, as it provides the
Chinese government with a large and flexible tool to target foreign firms for almost any
reason. Indeed, China’s 2007 antimonopoly law was designed to treat legitimately acquired
intellectual property rights as a monopolistic abuse, with Article 55 stating, “This Law is
The United States
needs a sophisticated
rethink of its own
antitrust policies as
well as a deeper
understanding of how
China has abused its
antitrust policies to
advantage its own
enterprises.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
PAGE 44 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

not applicable to undertakings’ conduct in exercise of intellectual property rights pursuant
to provisions of laws and administrative regulations relating to intellectual property rights;
but this Law is applicable to undertakings’ conduct that eliminates or restricts competition
by abusing their intellectual property rights.”118 And for the Chinese government, abuse
means charging market-based IP licensing fees to Chinese companies. This provision has
been used to take legal action against companies whose only “crime” is to be innovative and
hold patents. Indeed, the Chinese law allows compulsory licensing of IP by a “dominant”
company that refuses to license its IP if access to it is “essential for others to effectively
compete and innovate.”119 And with Chinese courts largely rubber-stamping Communist
Party dictates, foreign companies have little choice but to comply. And, all too often,
complying means changing their terms of business so that they sell to the Chinese for less
and/or transfer even more IP and technology to Chinese-owned companies.
Another challenge has been that China has abused the doctrine of foreign sovereign
compulsion, along with principles of international comity, to justify anti-competitive
behavior that has harmed U.S. interests, yet which U.S. courts have still upheld. For
instance, in 2005, U.S. purchasers of vitamin C brought a case against Chinese
manufacturers, alleging that the defendants conspired to fix prices and limit supplies of
vitamin C sold on international markets from 2001 to 2005, allegedly resulting in tens of
millions of dollars in damages to U.S. consumers. The Chinese manufacturers did not deny
the allegations, but claimed the suits should be dropped because the Chinese government
compelled their market-distorting conduct, citing the foreign sovereign compulsion
defense: essentially the notion that U.S. courts have to acknowledge the laws of other
nations. Although the vitamin C manufacturers were located in China and sold vitamin C
on international markets, they were subject to liability under U.S. antitrust laws pursuant
to the Foreign Trade Antitrust Improvements Act of 1982, which permits the application
of U.S. antitrust laws to conduct involving foreign trade and commerce where “such
conduct has a direct, substantial, and reasonably foreseeable effect” on U.S. domestic or
import commerce.
120 A 2013 jury trial found the companies liable for price fixing and
awarded $147 million in damages, marking the first time a Chinese manufacturer had been
found liable under U.S. antitrust laws.
However, the case was appealed to the Second Court of Federal Appeals, and, as it had at
the district court level, the Chinese government (specifically, the Chinese Ministry of
Commerce) made an amicus curiaie submission, contending that the manufacturers were
simply following Chinese government-mandated price fixing and that Chinese regulations
required that they coordinate prices and limit supply. In September 2016, the Second
Circuit threw out the jury’s verdict, ruling that the Chinese vitamin C manufacturers
weren’t liable in U.S. courts for their anti-competitive behavior because they were acting
under the direction of Chinese authorities. According to the Second Circuit,
the companies:
Were required by Chinese law to set prices and reduce quantities of vitamin
C sold abroad and doing so posed a true conflict between China’s regulatory

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
PAGE 45 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

scheme and U.S. antitrust laws such that this conflict in defendants’ legal
obligations, balanced with other factors, mandates dismissal of plaintiffs’ suit
on international comity grounds.121
In essence, the ruling concluded that foreign enterprises can’t be found liable for their
unfair trade practices if they are undertaken at the instruction of sovereign governments.
Clearly there are a number of problems with this. First, the ruling potentially provides a
free pass for foreign companies to violate U.S. antitrust laws, as long as they can claim their
conduct is lawful in their home territory and was directed by the company’s government.122
Had the Justice Department pursued the case to begin with, or at least made an amicus
filing in support of the U.S. plaintiffs, it is possible that they may have prevailed, because
U.S. courts accord great deference to the United States. The facts were not clear that the
Chinese government really mandated the price-fixing behavior (this was a key dispute in
the proceedings), in which case the Chinese companies had some freedom to make their
own decisions about their U.S. prices. The second is that the courts “considered and
declined to credit the position expressed by the U.S. Trade Representative, which had
complained to the World Trade Organization (WTO) that China has been fixing vitamin
C export volumes and prices—the very position taken by the Chinese government in its
submission and by the Chinese defendants.”123 The U.S. Second Court of Appeals gave
more deference to a foreign government committed to mercantilism than to an agency of
the American government. The courts should have given more deference to the executive
branch of the U.S. government, which has traditionally administered foreign policy.
A third problem is the Second Circuit Appeals Court’s contention that “Not extending
deference in these circumstances disregards and unravels the tradition of according respect
to a foreign government’s explication of its own laws, the same respect and treatment that
we would expect our government to receive in comparable matters before a foreign
court.”124 But this doctrine seems to presume that other nations’ laws derive from
democratically elected governments that follow open and transparent procedures for
adopting the rules governments require companies to follow (akin to the U.S.
Administrative Procedures Act), and so it would be useful for Congress to consider whether
it’s time to legislatively cabin in the ability of foreign governments to argue that ambiguous
acts and policies are mandates under local law when they may well not have been at the
time. Another possibility would be for the Justice Department’s Antitrust Division in the
Trump administration to pursue cases against Chinese defendants in which it argues that
policies encouraging price fixing that affect U.S. commerce are not the same thing as
requirements. Furthermore, if the vitamin C case is appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court
(as appears likely), the Trump Administration may be asked for its views, and would then
have first opportunity to draw the lines where they need to be, and in so doing correct this
miscarriage of justice. It should also be pointed out that, while the legal principle of
international comity is legitimate in so far as it goes, certainly U.S. courts should not be
giving deference to anticompetitive Chinese laws if and when those very laws are in
violation of the country’s WTO commitments, which indeed are effectively legal
China’s 2007
antimonopoly law was
designed to treat
legitimately acquired
intellectual property
rights as a
monopolistic abuse.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
PAGE 46 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

commitments the government of China has made to the United States. The fourth and
final problem is that American courts (like many neoclassical economists) may have a
limited overall appreciation for the systemic threat of Chinese innovation mercantilism and
recognize that China just might be intentionally abusing antitrust policies to serve
mercantilist ends. But their job is to interpret the law, so again the burden lies with
Congress and the Administration.
Another important Chinese government subsidies-related antitrust case is already on the
Supreme Court’s docket. On January 5, 2017, the trustee for a U.S. solar panel maker,
now bankrupt, requested a writ of certiorari asking the Supreme Court to review the
findings of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals upholding the U.S. district court which
threw out the case.125 The U.S. plaintiff, an innovative but now bankrupt solar panel
manufacturer, alleged that a predatory pricing cartel operating in the United States by
Chinese solar panel companies made possible by massive Chinese government subsidies was
not properly considered by the court because they didn’t allege “recoupment,” meaning
that the Chinese companies would recover their losses after driving the U.S. plaintiff out of
the market. Normally cartels are per se illegal. And in this case the Chinese defendants are
alleged to have been massively bank-rolled by the Chinese government, so that they could
sell at a loss in the United States without ever needing to worry about recovering their
losses. But the district court found, without conducting a hearing or discovery, (and the
Sixth Circuit upheld), that a cartel that drops prices without intending to raise them
subsequently does not cause harm that the antitrust laws were intended to address.
This case lies at the heart of how the Chinese government is able to insert itself into U.S.
commerce in questionable ways. There is international agreement that government
subsidies, especially those explicitly promoting exports, are especially harmful. Yet in
China, due to a lack of transparency as to where government money flows, it is near
impossible to trace the monies to the Chinese companies and bring subsidy cases at the
WTO or countervailing duty cases before the Commerce Department and the ITC. It is
possible that the Supreme Court will ask the solicitor general for the Trump
administration’s views about this case. If this occurs, antitrust, trade, and diplomatic
agencies should provide their views to the solicitor general. In addition, the Trump
administration should establish an interagency coordination process that includes all the
relevant agencies in developing the administration’s decisions on filing amicus curiae and in
providing input to the solicitor general in court cases relating to trade and commerce.
These matters are far too important—whether it comes to cases involving China or other
countries—for there ought to be thorough reflection about what the interests of the United
States are under existing law. Experts should also give consideration to domestic legislative
changes that may be needed to address issues that fall in the gap between what U.S. law
covers and what WTO disciplines address. Similarly, consideration is needed for how to
ensure that America’s FTAs and BITs, as well as WTO rules, have provisions that leave as
few gaps as possible between trade, competition, investment coverage. Very recently, the

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
PAGE 47 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

International Competition Policy Expert Group made useful recommendations along
these lines.126
Several other actions are needed with regard to U.S. antitrust policy vis-à-vis China. First,
the Trump administration’s Antitrust Division should abandon its view that foreign
antitrust actions deserve little scrutiny from the United States. As such, DOJ should
become much more active at pushing back against Chinese antitrust policies that are used
to unfairly target U.S. import and export commerce and which harm U.S. enterprises, and
in bringing antitrust cases under U.S. law against Chinese defendants, including in cases in
which the Chinese government may have had a role, or might appear in court. The Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) should do the same. And the FTC should also leverage Section
5 of the FTC Act against Chinese defendants, including its use of unfair methods of
competition and unfair practices mechanisms. In addition, DOJ and FTC should revise
their merger notification rules to ensure that foreign government entities, like Chinese
state-owned enterprises, must notify their acquisitions.127
Finally, Congress should pass legislation that allows firms to ask the Department of Justice
for an exemption to coordinate actions regarding technology transfer and investment to
other nations
. This would be similar to the 1984 Cooperative R&D Act, which allowed
firms to apply to form pre-competitive R&D consortia. One of the key levers China has is
that it’s a monopsonist: It is so large it can essentially compel foreign companies to hand
over technology in order to sell their products in China. But if companies in a similar
industry can agree that none of them will transfer technology to China in order to gain
market access, then the Chinese government will have much less leverage over them. The
same would be true if companies agreed that they would not invest in China until China
improved its IP protections.
Ensure Reciprocity in Technology and Intellectual Property Licensing
Likewise, the United States needs a new regime to contest China’s strict technology-
licensing laws. Under Chinese contract law and technology import-export regulations (or
TIER), a foreign licensor into China is obligated to offer an indemnity against third-party
infringement to the Chinese licensee.128 In other words, a foreign licensor licensing into
China has to provide an insurance that practicing the licensed technology does not infringe
any IP held by a third party. But, under TIER, this legal obligation only attaches to
“technology import contracts.” That is, this obligation only attaches to a foreigner licensing
technologies into China; the Chinese licensor has no such obligation. This discriminates
against foreign licensors. The foreign licensor is legally bound to offer something that the
Chinese licensee is not, making it difficult for small companies, companies which may
experience high litigation risks in China’s litigious environment, and companies engaged in
collaborative research and development (such as cross-licensing, open-source licensing, and
charitable activities) to arrive at mutually beneficial licensing agreements. TIER makes it
almost impossible for small companies, such as start-ups, to license their breakthrough
technologies in China, because no start-ups (due to their limited resources) would be able
to conduct the complex analysis required by China’s high-litigation environment and
U.S. FDI into China
faces significantly
different conditions
than Chinese FDI
faces in the
United States.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
PAGE 48 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

industrial policies that limit the value of foreign IP in order to offer insurance against third-
party infringement disputes. While large multinational companies could avoid this issue by
licensing technology (e.g., through their China-based subsidiaries), start-up companies
cannot do so because they typically do not have subsidiaries in China. Consequently, the
impact of the mandatory indemnification requirement on small- and medium-sized
companies, and especially start-ups, is particularly acute.
Another provision in TIER mandates that in technology-import contracts, improvements
belong to the party making the improvements, which typically is the Chinese licensee.
Thus, foreign licensors, including U.S. firms, cannot negotiate to own any improvements
or share the improvements with Chinese licensees, even if both licensing parties desire for
the improvements to be shared or owned by the foreign licensors. Moreover, TIER
prohibits any technology-import contracts to “unreasonably restrict the export channels” of
the Chinese licensee, thereby impeding the ability of the two licensing parties to allocate
markets as they see mutually beneficial. Put simply, U.S. companies are obligated under
TIER to let Chinese firms own the improvements and cannot freely negotiate market
allocation with Chinese companies.
Overall, the relative disparity between China’s production and exports of high-tech goods
as well as its low level of utilization of foreign IP suggests that China is a severely under-
licensed economy; addressing the inequalities of TIER could help improve this by ensuring
that China deregulates contracts regarding the acquisition of U.S. technology. Conversely,
the United States is the largest technology exporter in the world. This could help increase
the value of these exports to China, which has substantially underperformed in its potential
as a technology export market.
To address this discrimination, Congress should enact a regime whereby if Chinese entities
seek licenses in the United States, then the Chinese enterprise must license on the same
terms by which foreigners are required to license into China. Such legislation would
specifically require the Chinese licensor to offer an indemnity against infringement by the
U.S. licensee and to stipulate that the U.S. licensees are entitled to own the improvements
they make and receive a reasonable market allocation under the licenses. Another possible
approach would be for Congress to pass legislation requiring that the U.S. company whose
original technology was improved by the Chinese entity receives an automatic exclusive
license to use that improved technology [in the United States], such that the full potential
of the original technology owned by the U.S. companies is not encumbered by
improvements owned by the Chinese entity. Although technology-licensing law is usually a
matter of state contract law, the legislation would be enacted pursuant to Congress’s power
to legislate international commerce. In addition, the provision should be drafted to be
consistent with Article 40 of the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS)
Agreement, as an effort to control abusive Chinese practices in licensing.
Finally, another way to protect and retain U.S. comparative advantage in advanced-
technology industries would entail passing legislation requiring notification to the U.S.
government on a confidential basis of technology licenses to China and of transactions in
The United States
needs a new regime to
contest China’s strict
technology licensing
laws, one that insists
on reciprocity in the
terms of technology
and intellectual
property licensing.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
PAGE 49 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

China in which the Chinese government or Chinese government-affiliated entities
are involved.

Reform FDI Review and Update CFIUS to Reflect the Nature of Chinese Government
Influence
A core component of liberalized trade is liberalized foreign direct investment, yet it is clear
that U.S. FDI into China faces significantly different conditions than Chinese FDI faces in
the United States. As noted, in many cases, U.S. firms seeking market access in China,
particularly ones with sophisticated technology, must engage in a joint venture with a
Chinese firm. As one industry article advising U.S. companies wrote, “To participate in
China’s industry ecosystem, it is essential to establish connections with the stakeholders in
China, such as government, customers, suppliers, and even competitors, and to seek
opportunities in cooperation and development through mutual understanding and
engagement.”129 With regard to the life-sciences market in China, an industry analyst
writes that, “To enter the Chinese market, you may come in by licensing an asset, which
we have done, or you can create a joint venture, which we have also done. But you cannot
go in by yourself.”130 And as the U.S. Congressional Research Service reports, “The
OECD’s 2014 FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index, which measures statutory restrictions
on foreign direct investment in 57 countries (including all OECD and G20 countries, and
covering 22 sectors), ranked China’s FDI regime as the most restrictive, based on foreign
equity limitations, screening or approval mechanisms, restrictions on the employment of
foreigners as key personnel, and operational restrictions (such as restrictions on branching,
capital repatriation, and land ownership).”131
Chinese investment in the United States faces vastly fewer restrictions. Because of this steep
divergence, Congress and the Trump administration should insist on a level playing field,
and mutual access should be a core principle. As a report on Chinese acquisitions of
German firms noted, the “EU should emphasize … the need for mutuality: if Chinese
firms are given free access to more and more ‘crown 7 jewels’ of German industry, China
… would have to further open up their FDI regime and the possibilities for M&A in their
territories.”
132 In other words, as long as China restricts U.S. investment in China, largely
to take technology, the federal government should feel few constraints to use stricter
investment review as a tool to insist upon better behavior from the Chinese government.
Meanwhile, Chinese efforts to intentionally target U.S. advanced-industry enterprises
across a range of high-value-added sectors only continues to intensify, meaning that the
procedures of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) need to
be strengthened to ensure that Chinese entities, particularly those guided or backed by
Chinese-government influence or funding, are not able to acquire U.S. companies or
technology that could damage America’s economic or national security. According to the
Foreign Investment and National Security Act (FINSA) of 2007 (P.L. 110-149), CFIUS
may conduct an investigation on the effect of an investment transaction on national
security if the covered transaction is a foreign government-controlled transaction (in
addition to if the transaction threatens to impair national security, or results in the control
CFIUS should be used
as a tool to identify
and block
noncommercially
based foreign
investments that on a
case-by-case, and at
an aggregate level, are
acquiring control of
key technologies that
affect U.S. national
security, including
economic security.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
PAGE 50 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

of a critical piece of U.S. infrastructure by a foreign person). CFIUS has worked fairly
effectively in some technology areas, especially semiconductors, as attempted acquisitions
of Fairchild, Micron, GCS, Lumileds, Western Digital, and Aixtron have been stopped
either formally or informally.133 However, it has not prevented all acquisitions. For
example, a Chinese investor group bought Silicon Valley semiconductor firm ISSI in
2015.134 Moreover, Chinese firms are getting more sophisticated about attempted
acquisitions, including hiring the best U.S. legal, financial, and public relations talent to
advocate for their U.S. technology acquisitions, and obscuring their involvement in U.S.
shell companies, as they did with the attempted acquisition of Lattice Semiconductor.
135
As such, there is a need for CFIUS reform. Congress should, at a minimum, update the
charter of CFIUS to address the realities of modern-age state capitalism.
136 Other nations,
and particularly China, have put in place coordinated strategies to systemically target key
defense and industrial technologies resident in U.S. enterprises and attempt to acquire
them by having state-owned or -financed enterprises purchase the U.S. entity, using the
veneer that these are “market-based” transactions. Because the threat to both the U.S.
defense industrial base and the U.S. industrial base is systemic, the charter of CFIUS needs
to be updated to allow reviewers to move beyond case-by-case examinations to assess and
gauge systemic threats and examine covered transactions in a broader context. They have
arguably done this with semiconductors, but they should expand that scope. CFIUS also
needs greater capacity to review attempted acquisitions by Chinese firms of small and
young U.S. technology firms that might reflect promising future technology capabilities for
the nation.
Moreover, CFIUS reviewers often do not have adequate time to complete a serious
analysis, having only 30 calendar days to approve transactions or move them to a second-
stage investigation (although there is an ability to extend an investigation for 45 days on
top of the original 30). Therefore, Congress should increase the time period permitted for
the initial CFIUS review and also better equip CFIUS with additional personnel and
financial resources to support more thorough reviews. Congress should also require
mandatory notification for deals involving state-owned or state-financed entities by
countries of concern such as China and Russia. Attempted acquisitions made by Chinese
state-owned enterprises should be blocked outright, as recommended by the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission.
137 It’s also important that as CFIUS
committees consider whether the entity in question will come under “foreign control” that
they consider “nontraditional” forms of control, such as joint ventures or novel licensing
transactions that seek to achieve the same effect as the outright acquisition of a U.S.
company. For instance, Chinese acquirers may be exploiting a loophole in CFIUS by
designing licensing transactions that, when combined with the associated follow-on
agreements that utilize U.S.–based assets to operationalize the licensed intellectual
property, are substantively the same outcome as if the Chinese company had simply
purchased the U.S. business that holds the intellectual property. CFIUS reform should
make clear that these types of deals are “covered transactions” that could be investigated.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
PAGE 51 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Finally, the CFIUS chair should be transferred from the Treasury Department to another
department, perhaps the Department of Commerce. Treasury has an important role in
tracking investment and other financial flows, but Treasury largely hews closely to the lines
of the Washington trade consensus, seeing all or most inward FDI as an unalloyed good.
Commerce is better suited to focus on the implications of a given foreign investment on
the industrial economy and America’s innovation system.
But while CFIUS reform is a minimum, Congress should move beyond the relatively
narrow CFIUS process to create a more comprehensive foreign investment review process,
as many other nations, including Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom, have
instituted. Indeed, a number of other nations have taken much more proactive measures to
prevent the hollowing out of their key industries. For example, both South Korea and
Taiwan have essentially banned Chinese acquisition of their domestic semiconductor firms.
Under current law, CFIUS can only restrict investments that could adversely affect the
United States’ national security. As the civilian industrial base has become an ever-more
central part of the defense industrial base, however, the current limitations on CFIUS need
to be reexamined and a broader national-interest standard established. To be clear, the goal
of any foreign investment review scheme should not be to give in to domestic protectionist
interests, but to effectively differentiate between foreign direct investment that operates
according to market-driven principles and that which operates according to state-directed,
mercantilist principles. In other words, when a Chinese company, backed and directed by
the Chinese government, attempts to buy an American technology company with the main
goal of expropriating its intellectual property and moving it (or the company’s operations)
to China, that is clearly not in the interest of the United States. It would be important for
any such expanded regime not to apply to investments from allies who are designated by
the U.S. government as operating largely according to market principles (e.g., nations such
as Canada, Germany, Mexico, etc.). Those would continue to operate under the current
criteria of effect on national security. Rather, the more stringent review regime would be
for nations that operate according to mercantilist principles.
To govern such a differentiated regime, USTR could leverage a Global Mercantilist Index
report (as suggested above) along the lines of ITIF’s template report, which identified a
number of variables (e.g., tariffs, IP protection, foreign equity restrictions) and ranked
nations accordingly.
138 Not surprisingly China was one of two nations, out of 55, that
ranked in the “high” category. In these cases, all inward FDI would at least be reviewed and
potentially rejected if deemed harmful to U.S. innovation and competitiveness. If such a
regime had been in place, for example, CFIUS would not have approved the Apex
acquisition of the U.S. printer company Lexmark, given that Apex was accused of IP theft
by U.S. printer companies and was backed by Chinese government money. Some will
argue that instituting such a regime would just be emulating the Chinese and thereby
closing our economy. On the contrary, it’s doing exactly the opposite. It is about working
to ensure that China rolls back its mercantilist policies. Indeed, if implemented properly, it
would be a measure to improve the integrity of the global trade and investment climate.
A number of other
nations have
implemented a more
comprehensive foreign
investment review
process to prevent the
hollowing out of their
key industries.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
PAGE 52 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Others might object that this will lead to overreach, perhaps blocking acquisitions of assets
such as hotels because of false concerns about knowledge transfer. But clearly the current
CFIUS review process has proven itself highly sophisticated and mostly capable of
effectively analyzing knowledge-transfer risks. There is no reason to assume that a more
encompassing review process would not also be of equal sophistication. But even if it were
not, it would be better to make a few Type I errors (rejecting a hotel deal) than to make a
large number of type II errors (not rejecting acquisition deals that take U.S. technology
to China).
Address Chinese Currency Manipulation
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) commits member countries to “avoid
manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to prevent
effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive advantage over
other members.”
139 Particularly notable are Articles VIII and IV of the IMF, which address
members’ exchange-rate obligations. Article VIII states that members shall not “impose
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for account transactions” nor engage
in “any discriminatory currency arrangements or multiple currency practices.” Article IV
prohibits currency manipulation, which, since the 1970s, has been defined as protracted,
large-scale official purchases of foreign exchange to gain an unfair competitive advantage
in trade.140
But as the MAPI Foundation’s Ernest Preeg notes, China has “heavily engaged in such
prohibited manipulation” on a continued basis, making “more than $3 trillion of official
purchases over the past dozen years, which is protracted and large scale by any conceivable
definition of the term.”141 As Preeg notes, China “has been in gross violation of both
Article VIII—through a tightly managed, undervalued peg to the dollar—and Article IV—
currency manipulation through protracted large-scale official purchases of foreign
exchange.”142 Similarly, The Peterson Institute for International Economics named China
one of the world’s 20 most egregious currency manipulators from 2001 to 2012.143 This
extent of currency manipulation can have a significant impact in bolstering a nation’s
exports, by helping to effectively lower their price on international markets (while making
the exports of partner trade nations more expensive). It’s why the IMF estimates that a 10
percent real depreciation in a country’s currency is associated with a rise in real net exports
of 1.5 percent of GDP.
144 There’s little doubt that Chinese currency manipulation on a
sustained and long-term basis has played a significant role in driving U.S.-China
trade imbalances.
While China appears to have stopped keeping its currency artificially low since 2012, if
China were to return to using such practices in the future the United States should
consider linking full compliance with IMF Article VIII exchange-rate and Article IV
currency-manipulation obligations to Chinese access U.S. markets. In such a case, the
United States should be prepared to call for a WTO dispute panel under GATT Article
XV, which obliges members not to use exchange-rate policy in a way that diminishes
reciprocal access to markets for trade, in the process explaining how violations of IMF

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
PAGE 53 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

exchange-rate obligations simultaneously constitute an unfair import barrier and export
subsidy.145 Further, if and when the Trump administration takes up the TPP, it should
ensure the agreement includes strong and enforceable prohibitions against
currency manipulation.
Additional Actions to Confront Chinese Innovation Mercantilism
There are a number of additional actions various agencies of the federal government could
take to better contest Chinese innovation mercantilism, including the following:
ITC Should Conduct More General Fact-Finding Investigations
The Trump administration should ask the United States International Trade Commission
(under section 332 of U.S. trade law) to provide new and updated reports on major trade
and economic issues that pertain to China, such as the effects of IP infringement and
indigenous innovation policies, data localization, and restrictive services and investment
requirements on the U.S. economy. The ITC should consider using its subpoena power as
necessary to compel production of information due to fears that U.S. companies may have
of retaliation if they cooperate with the ITC.
The Department of Commerce Should Publish Reports on Strategic Economic and Trade
Issues Regarding China
The Trump administration should task the U.S. Department of Commerce with
undertaking a comprehensive review of and preparing a report on China’s “Made in China
2025” and Internet Plus initiatives, including their forced localization of R&D and
manufacturing requirements, to determine their potential impact on domestic U.S.
production and market access for U.S. firms.
Deny Use of the U.S. Banking System to Companies Benefitting From Stolen IP
As recommended by the Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property, the
Secretary of the Treasury, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Commerce,
should deny use of the American banking system to foreign companies that repeatedly use
or benefit from the theft of U.S. intellectual property.146 Access to the American market is a
principal interest of firms desiring to become global industrial leaders. Protecting American
IP should be a precondition for operating in the American market. Failure to do so ought
to result in sanctions on firms’ ability to access U.S. financial markets.
Do Not Recognize China as a Market-Based Economy
Whether or not the United States recognizes China as a market-based economy or a
nonmarket-based economy has significant implications, including in making key economic
calculations of prices and costs estimated in antidumping and countervailing duty cases.
The United States should continue to recognize China as a nonmarket economy.
Moreover, Congress should enact legislation requiring its approval before China (either the
country as a whole or individual sectors or entities) is granted status as a market economy
by the United States, as recommended by the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission.
147 China’s continuing use of production and export subsidies, provision of
below-market-cost inputs such as financing and access to land, continuing prevalence of
It has become too
often the case that
when Chinese officials
speak of international
cooperation to spur
innovation, it is code
for the transfer of U.S.
scientific and
engineering know-how
to China at free or
subsidized rates.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
PAGE 54 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

state-owned or state-directed enterprises, and state-influenced procurement decision-
making of SOEs and “private sector” firms alike (among other factors), as well as state
planning around technology and intellectual property means the United States should
continue to recognize China as a nonmarket economy.
The issue pertains to Article 15 of China’s Protocol of Accession to the WTO, which
allowed WTO members to “disregard Chinese prices and costs in antidumping cases and
instead base the calculation of dumping margins using external benchmarks.”148
Specifically, Article 15(a)(ii) states, “The importing WTO member may use a methodology
that is not based on a strict comparison with domestic prices or costs in China if the
producers under investigation cannot clearly show that market conditions prevail.”149
Chinese officials have argued that this practice should no longer be permitted after
December 2016, pursuant to Article 15(d) of the Protocol, which states, “In any event, the
provisions of subparagraph (a)(ii) shall expire 15 years after the date of accession.”150 But,
as Hufbauer and Cimino-Isaacs point out, Article 15(a) (which informs article 15(d)) only
really disappears “once China has established, under the national law of the importing
WTO Member, that it is a market economy.”151 (They also argue that there need not only
be a binary choice between “market” and “nonmarket” economy.) Regardless, as this report
has documented, China continues not to behave like a market-based economy, and should
not be recognized as such.
Cut Off Scientific and Other Cooperation
The United States should cease scientific and other cooperation with China until its use of
innovation-mercantilist practices dramatically declines. The U.S. government engages in
extensive cooperation with China to help share valuable technology in areas such as energy,
health, and agriculture. If the United States is serious about pressuring China to roll back
its innovation mercantilism, these kinds of cooperative efforts send exactly the wrong
message: You can engage in mercantilist practices with impunity, and we will still cooperate
with you scientifically. At a minimum, the standard U.S. Science and Technology
Agreement with China should address the problem that China’s technology-import
regulations mandate that the Chinese party owns improvements to the technology and that
these provisions are nonnegotiable.152 For instance, the U.S.-China Clean Energy Research
Center’s (CERC) Technology Management Plans state that participants shall negotiate in
good faith to provide nonexclusive licenses for IP developed on joint projects with
participants in the other country, as well as with third parties who are not participants. Yet,
“according to agency officials, this has not been the case in previous science and technology
agreements between the United States and other countries.”153
It has become too often the case that when Chinese officials speak of international
cooperation to spur innovation, it is code for the transfer of U.S. scientific and engineering
know-how to China at free or subsidized rates.154 Yet the expectation from the Chinese side
is that this should happen regardless of China’s ongoing innovation mercantilism and
discriminatory approach to foreign technology and trade.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
PAGE 55 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

CONCLUSION
China’s aggressive and unrelenting innovation-mercantilist policies pose a serious and
growing threat to both the U.S. and global economy as well as to advanced-technology
enterprises from the United States and other nations competing on rules- and market-based
terms. Even if China fails to achieve its robust ambitions for significantly greater global
share in advanced-technology sectors, to the extent it seeks to reach that goal through
mercantilist practices, those policies inflict significant harm on the global innovation
system and advanced-technology enterprises. So it’s not even a question of whether China
succeeds or not (although too many pundits too readily dismiss China’s likelihood of doing
so), it’s a question of whether China is playing by the rules it has agreed to. China’s
continued use of these discriminatory and restrictive policies will only recede in the face of
a concerted response led by America, but including its allies, insisting that this behavior is
not consonant with the international commitments China made in joining the WTO and
IMF. These countries should let China know it risks serious consequences by persisting
down this path.
Defenders of the status quo or apologists for China will raise a host of objections to any
policy regime that means getting tougher with China. One objection will be China may no
longer work with us on climate change. But why should America sacrifice its economic
prospects to get China to do what it should do and is also in its own interests: fighting
climate change. Likewise, some will say that we don’t want to start a trade war; after all,
U.S. companies could be hurt. But it’s clear what inaction means in the current one-sided
trade war: U.S. companies and their U.S. workers will be hurt, not just now, but in a
decade or more as Chinese firms dominate global markets and put U.S. companies out of
business, as they did with U.S. solar-panel companies over the last decade. Moreover, as we
stress, the goal should be constructive, alliance-based confrontation, not vitriolic
punishment sure to produce a similar reaction from China.
A corollary to this fear is that we shouldn’t fight back if it entails a risk that consumers
might no longer get cheap goods from China. But this is essentially saying that there
should be no near-term sacrifice by Americans to help preserve the global trading system.
Yet when John F. Kennedy promised that Americans would “pay any price, bear any
burden” to “assure the survival and the success of liberty,” pundits didn’t complain that
this would mean higher taxes and less consumer spending. Today, as the United States
pushes for more market-based trade from China, it’s no different. Besides, if the United
States does not act now, consumers will pay a price, just not now, but in a couple of
decades when the U.S. dollar will have to fall dramatically in order to have any chance at
being competitive with the dominant Chinese economy. A variant is that if we engage in
constructive confrontation our exporters will be hurt and that U.S. firms need the Chinese
export market.
155 But the reality is that we would be exporting hundreds of billions of
dollars more of goods and services to China if the country rolled back its
mercantilist policies.
China’s continued use
of these
discriminatory and
restrictive policies
will only recede in the
face of a concerted
response led by
America, but
including its allies,
insisting that this
behavior is not
consonant with the
international
commitments China
made in joining
the WTO.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
PAGE 56 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

In summary, this report has laid out a number of policy responses the Trump
administration would be well advised to consider and implement. However, we recognize
our recommendations are a contribution and not the last word. Accordingly, this report’s
most important recommendation is that the Trump administration recognize the vital
importance of U.S.-China trade and economic issues and focus on the full use of existing
tools and on the need to identify and develop new tools where needed. This will be
necessary to ensure that U.S.-China trade is conducted on a level (and market-based)
playing field that embodies core principles of national treatment, transparency,
and reciprocity.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
PAGE 57 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

ENDNOTES
1. United States Census Bureau, Trade in Goods with China (business and industry, foreign trade; accessed
January 7, 2017), https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#2000.; United States
Census Bureau, Trade in Goods with World, Seasonally Adjusted (accessed March 8, 2017),
https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c0004.html.
2. Stephen J. Ezell and Robert D. Atkinson, The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly (and the Self-Destructive) of
Innovation Policy: A Policymaker’s Guide to Crafting Effective Innovation Policy (Information Technology
and Innovation Foundation, October 2010), http://www.itif.org/files/2010-good-bad-ugly.pdf.
3. Nigel Cory, “The Worst Innovation Mercantilist Policies of 2016” (Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation, January 2017), http://www2.itif.org/2017-worst-innovation-mercantilist-
policies.pdf?_ga=1.198183215.1806060799.1471894729.
4. Stephen J. Ezell and Robert D. Atkinson, “False Promises: The Yawning Gap Between China’s WTO
Commitments and Practices” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, September 2015),
http://www2.itif.org/2015-false-promises-china.pdf.
5. Michael Schuman, “How to Win a Trade War With China,” Bloomberg, February 16, 2017,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-02-16/how-to-win-a-trade-war-with-china.
6. Robert D. Atkinson, “China’s Strategy for Global Technology Dominance by Any Means Necessary,”
Forbes, November 12, 2015, http://www.forbes.com/sites/realspin/2015/11/12/chinas-strategy-for-
global-technology-dominance-by-any-means-necessary/#11b91b207242.
7. Robert D. Atkinson, Enough Is Enough: Confronting Chinese Innovation Mercantilism (Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, February 2012), http://www2.itif.org/2012-enough-enough-
chinese-mercantilism.pdf.
8. Jost Wübbeke et al., “Made in China 2025: The Making of a High-Tech Superpower and Consequences
for Industrial Countries” (Mercator Institute for China Studies, December 2016),
https://www.merics.org/fileadmin/user_upload/downloads/MPOC/MPOC_Made_in_China_2025/MP
OC_No.2_MadeinChina_2025.pdf.
9. Ezell and Atkinson “False Promises”; Atkinson, Enough Is Enough; Cory, “The Worst Innovation
Mercantilist Policies of 2016”; Hearing on Chinese Investment in the United States: Impacts and Issues for
Policymakers, Before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 115th Cong. (January 26,
2017) (testimony of Robert D. Atkinson, President Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation), http://www2.itif.org/2017-us-china-
testimony.pdf?_ga=1.127221901.1806060799.1471894729.
10. United States Census Bureau, Trade in Goods with China.
11. Ibid. Note that data for 2016 is only through November 2016.
12. Ernest H. Preeg, “Time to Restore a Balanced, Rules-Based Multilateral Trading System With
Technology-Intensive Manufacturers at Center Stage” (MAPI Foundation, March 2016), 3,
https://www.mapi.net/system/files/attachments/files/PA-167.pdf.
13. Ibid., 11.
14. Ibid., 3.
15. Ibid., 4.
16. Alan Wheatley, “OECD/WTO Trade Study Slims China’s Surplus With U.S.,” Reuters, January 16,
2013, http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/01/16/oecd-trade-idUSL6N0AL1F420130116.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
PAGE 58 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

17. Chinability, China’s Foreign Exchange Reserves, 1977–2014 (accessed September 10, 2015),
http://www.chinability.com/Reserves.htm. (For current data see:
http://www.tradingeconomics.com/china/foreign-exchange-reserves).
18. The World Bank, Total Reserves (Includes Gold, Current US$) (International Monetary Fund,
International Financial Statistics and data files; accessed September 10, 2015),
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FI.RES.TOTL.CD.
19. Ibid.
20. United Nations Comtrade Database, Data Extract (U.S. exports to China by 2-digit HS classification,
2005, 2010, 2015; accessed February 24, 2017).
21. William Tyndale coined this phrase. See: Peter Linebaugh and Marcus Rediker, The Many-Headed
Hydra: Sailors, Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic (Boston, MA:
Beacon Press, 2013).
22. Peter Gosselin and Mike Dorning, “After Doubts, Economists Find China Kills U.S. Factory Jobs,”
Bloomberg, June 18, 2015, http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2015-06-18/after-doubting-
economists-find-china-killing-u-s-factory-jobs.
23. David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review 103, no. 6 (October
2013): 2121–2168, http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.6.2121.
24. Gosselin and Dorning, “Economists Find China Kills U.S. Factory Jobs.”
25. Justin Lahart, “Tallying the Toll of U.S.-China Trade,” The Wall Street Journal, September 27, 2011,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970204010604576595002230403020.
26. Ibid.
27. Adams Nager, “Calling Out China’s Mercantilism,” The International Economy, Spring 2016,
http://www.international-economy.com/TIE_Sp16_Nager.pdf.
28. Robert E. Scott, “Growth in U.S.–China Trade Deficit Between 2001 and 2015 Cost 3.4 Million Jobs”
(Economic Policy Institute, January 2017), http://www.epi.org/files/pdf/114752.pdf.
29. Robert D. Atkinson and Stephen J. Ezell, “Ten Principles to Guide the Trump Administration’s
Manufacturing Strategy” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, January 2017),
http://www2.itif.org/2017-manufacturing-principles.pdf?_ga=1.197649711.1806060799.1471894729.
30. Schuman, “How to Win a Trade War with China.”
31. Dr. Adam He, “Will New Policy in China Trigger Big Changes?” Solid State Technology,
http://electroiq.com/blog/2015/01/will-new-policy-in-china-trigger-big-changes/.
32. The Economist, “Chips on Their Shoulders,” January 23, 2016,
http://www.economist.com/news/business/21688871-china-wants-become-superpower-semiconductors-
and-plans-spend-colossal-sums.
33. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2016 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission” (Washington, DC: U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission, November 2016), 9,
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/annual_reports/Executive%20Summary%202016.pdf.
34. A. G. Lafley, Roger L. Martin, and L.J. Ganser, Playing to Win: How Strategy Really Works (Boston, MA:
Harvard Business Review Press, 2013).
35. George Stalk, Jr. and Rob Lachenauer, “Hardball: Five Killer Strategies for Trouncing the Competition,”
The Harvard Business Review, April 2004, https://hbr.org/2004/04/hardball-five-killer-strategies-for-
trouncing-the-competition.
36. Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
PAGE 59 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

37. Ibid.
38. Curtis J. Milhaupt and Wentong Zheng, “Beyond Ownership: State Capitalism and the Chinese Firm”
Geo. L.J. 103, 665 (2015),
http://scholarship.law.ufl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1693&context=facultypub.
39. Simon Denyer, “No Longer Welcome? American Companies Fear China’s Turning Its Back on Them,”
The Washington Post, January 17, 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/no-longer-
welcome-american-companies-fear-china-is-turning-its-back-on-them/2017/01/17/bd0e16e6-dcc7-11e6-
b2cf-b67fe3285cbc_story.html?utm_term=.43f52162ed14.
40. Ibid.
41. John Williamson, “What Washington Means by Policy Reform,” in Latin American Adjustment: How
Much Has Happened?, ed. John Williamson (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics,
1990).
42. Atkinson, Enough Is Enough, 6.
43. Ibid., 61.
44. Howard Schneider, “World Bank Support for China Solar and Wind Power May Have Cost U.S. Jobs,”
The Washington Post, October 14, 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/world-
bank-support-for-china-solar-and-wind-power-may-have-cost-us-jobs/2013/10/14/1e551948-27b5-
11e3-b3e9-d97fb087acd6_story.html.
45. Dieter Ernst, Indigenous Innovation and Globalization: The Challenge for China’s Standardization Strategy
(Honolulu: UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation and the East-West Center, June 2011), 2,
http://www.eastwestcenter.org/sites/default/files/private/ernstindigenousinnovation.pdf.
46. U.S. Department of Commerce, “U.S. Fact Sheet: 26th U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce
and Trade,” news release, November 23, 2015, https://www.commerce.gov/news/fact-sheets/2015/11/us-
fact-sheet-26th-us-china-joint-commission-commerce-and-trade.
47. C.D. Todd, “Home Production” (essay for the American Protective Tariff League, 1888).
48. The JCCT was established in 1983 as a dialogue between the U.S. and Chinese Commerce departments,
initially led by the heads of those departments. Starting in 2004, the JCCT became the forum to address
specific trade and business issues following China’s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001.
The JCCT has multiple working groups focusing on specific issue areas, operates year-round, and
culminates in an annual plenary meeting that alternates between the United States and China.
49. United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), “United States Has Secured Commitments in
Key Bilateral Dialogues, but U.S. Agency Reporting on Status Should Be Improved” (Washington, DC:
GAO, February 2014), http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/660824.pdf.
50. U.S. Department of Commerce, “U.S. Fact Sheet: 26th U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce
and Trade.”
51. The U.S.-China Business Council (USCBC), “Unofficial USCBC Chart of Localization Targets by
Sector Set in the MIIT Made in China 2025 Key Technology Roadmap,” accessed February 15, 2017,
https://www.uschina.org/sites/default/files/2-2-
16%20Sector%20and%20Localization%20Targets%20for%20Made%20in%20China%202025.pdf.
52. Mark Wu, “The ‘China, Inc.’ Challenge to Global Trade Governance,” Harvard International Law
Journal 57 (2016): 1001–1063, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers2.cfm?abstract_id=2779781. Wu
outlines how China’s “state capitalism,” or “China Inc.” as he prefers to call it, is not found anywhere else
in the world and would not be easily replicated by other societies. The Chinese economy significantly
differs from the economic models that influenced the Uruguay Round agreements. Wu outlines six
elements that make China Inc. unique, some of which on their own resemble elements found elsewhere,
but the interactions of these six elements cause the Chinese economy to be exceptional. This gives rise to
an economy where the Party-state remains all powerful, but significant economic activity is driven by

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
PAGE 60 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

private enterprises. Furthermore, it is difficult to apply typical differentiating labels in China, such as
market vs. non-market and private-led vs. state-led. The six elements are: the state (SASAC) as a
corporate holding entity; state control of financial institutions; state control over planning and inputs
(NDRC); Chinese-style corporate groups and affiliated networks; Communist Party involvement and
control; and the intertwined nature of private enterprises and the party-state. Although China has
become more transparent and market-oriented than it was prior to WTO accession, it has not converged
along the lines of either a market economy or one of the alternative structures seen elsewhere in the
world, such as a command economy, a “transition” economy from command to market-based, or the
conglomerate-led structure of East Asia. Hence, the China Inc. model remains a distinct form of its own.
53. To the extent they could, negotiators set specific provisions in China’s WTO protocol to address them.
But this raises the question as to why there are not more WTO rules dealing with issues specific to
China’s economic model. The belief that China would converge along the lines of other economies, such
as toward a market-based economy, have proven false. While negotiators may have disagreed as to where
China’s economic model would end up, they shared a common (now mistaken) belief that China would
converge toward an economic model already considered by the WTO framework. This has not
happened.
54. Shawn Donnan, “Lighthizer Vows to Crack Down on Unfair China Practices,” The Financial Times,
March 15, 2017, https://www.ft.com/content/5300b8f2-08f6-11e7-97d1-5e720a26771b.
55. Ibid.
56. People’s Daily, China, “China’s 13th Five-Year Plan in One Song,” YouTube video, 3:03, posted
October 17, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZTiBgHIWKik.
57. Mike Moore, “The WTO and the World Economy” (speech, National Foreign Trade Council World
Trade Dinner, New York, May 22, 2000), World Trade Organization (WTO),
https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/spmm_e/spmm31_e.htm.

58. Ibid.
59. World Trade Organization (WTO), “WTO Successfully Concludes Negotiations on China’s Entry,”
news release, September 17, 2001, https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres01_e/pr243_e.htm.
60. Wu, “The ‘China, Inc.’ Challenge.”
61. Bernard Hoekman, “Proposals for WTO Reform: A Synthesis and Assessment” (policy research working
paper 5525, The World Bank Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network, January 2011),
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/190031468167966416/pdf/WPS5525.pdf.
62. Wu, “The ‘China, Inc.’ Challenge.”
63. Stephen J. Ezell and Robert D. Atkinson, “The Middle Kingdom Galapagos Island Syndrome: The Cul-
De-Sac of Chinese Technology Standards” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation,
December 2014), 1, http://www2.itif.org/2014-galapagos-chinese-
ict.pdf?_ga=1.46708324.211397598.1440087131.
64. “China’s Xi Stresses Further Military Advancement,’ PressTV, March 12, 2017,
http://www.presstv.ir/Detail/2017/03/13/514156/China-Xi-military-militarycivilian-integration.
65. Ibid.
66. Guy Chazan, “EU Capitals Seek Stronger Right of Veto on Chinese Takeovers,” The Financial Times,
February 14, 2017, https://www.ft.com/content/8c4a2f70-f2d1-11e6-95ee-f14e55513608.
67. One Hand Tied Behind Our Backs: Why America Must Do Much More to Curb China’s Dangerous
Innovation Mercantilism (statement of James Mulvenon, vice president of the intelligence division at
Defense Group, Inc., expert panel hosted by Information Technology and Innovation Foundation,
September 17, 2015).
68. Information Technology and Innovation Foundation Staff, “Transition Memo to President-Elect
Trump: How to Spur Innovation, Productivity, and Competitiveness” (Information Technology and

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
PAGE 61 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

Innovation Foundation, November 2016), http://www2.itif.org/2016-white-house-transition-
memo.pdf?_ga=1.193783853.1806060799.1471894729.
69. Reuters, “Chinese Government Money Helped Canyon Bridge Acquire U.S. Chip Maker,” Fortune,
November 28, 2016, http://fortune.com/2016/11/28/chinese-government-canyon-bridge-chip-maker/.
70. The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2016 Report to Congress,” 26.
71. Ibid.
72. Michelle A. Wein, Stephen J. Ezell, and Robert D. Atkinson, “The Global Mercantilist Index: A New
Approach to Ranking Nations’ Trade Policies” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation,
October 2014), http://www2.itif.org/2014-general-mercantilist-index.pdf.
73. USTR can also designate a country as a Notorious Market and, therefore, conduct out-of-cycle reviews.
74. Wein, Ezell, and Atkinson, “The Global Mercantilist Index,” 3.
75. Executive Office of the President, Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Fiscal Year 2017
Budget” (Washington, DC: Office of the United States Trade Representative, February 2016),
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/notices/FY2017%20USTR%20Congressional%20Budget%20
Submission.pdf.
76. Executive Office of the President, Office of the United States Trade Representative, “President’s Budget,
Fiscal Year 2010” (Washington, DC: Office of the United States Trade Representative, June 2009),
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/gsp/speeches/reports/IP/ACTA/about%20us
/reading%20room/foia/ERR/FY2010%20CONGRESSIONAL%20BUDGET%20SUBMISSION%20
FINAL%206-10-09.pdf.
77. U.S. Department of Labor (U.S. DoL), “FY 2017 Congressional Budget Justification” (Washington,
DC: U.S. DoL, 2017), https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/documents/general/budget/CBJ-2017-V3-
02.pdf.
78. Office of the United States Trade Representative, “President’s Budget, Fiscal Year 2010.”
79. Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Fiscal Year 2017 Budget,” 14.
80. Mark Froman, “The Obama Administration’s Record on Trade Enforcement: More Resources and Real
Results,” Tradewinds, June 2014, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-
office/blog/2014/June/The-Obama-Administrations-Record-on-Trade-Enforcement-More-Resources-
and-Real-Results.
81. “Interagency Trade Enforcement Center,” U.S. International Trade Administration, accessed March 2,
2017, http://trade.gov/enforcement/itec/index.asp.
82. Stephen J. Ezell, David M. Hart, and Robert D. Atkinson, “Bad Blueprint: Why Trump Should Ignore
the Heritage Plan to Gut Federal Investment” (Information Technology and Innovation Foundation,
February 2017), https://itif.org/publications/2017/02/27/bad-blueprint-why-trump-should-ignore-
heritage-plan-gut-federal-investment.
83. U.S. Department of Commerce, “U.S. Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker Launches Digital Attache
Program to Address Trade Barriers,” news release, March 11, 2016,
https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2016/03/us-secretary-commerce-penny-pritzker-
launches-digital-attache-program; “Intellectual Property (IP) Attaché Program,” United States Patent and
Trademark Office, accessed March 2, 2017, https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/ip-
policy/intellectual-property-rights-ipr-attach-program/intellectual; “Commercial Service,” Embassy of the
United States in Beijing, China, accessed March 2, 2017, http://beijing.usembassy-
china.org.cn/commercial.html.
84. Hearing on Foreign Investment Climate in China Before the U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission (January 28, 2015) (written testimony of Dr. Robert D. Atkinson, Ph.D.,
President, Information Technology and Innovation Foundation), 3, http://www2.itif.org/2015-uscc-
investment-climate.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
PAGE 62 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

85. Office of the United States Trade Representative, “Fiscal Year 2017 Budget.”
86. Jake Spring, “VW Plans Big Push for Low-CO2 Cars in China,” Reuters, printed in Automotive News
Europe, November 17, 2016, http://europe.autonews.com/article/20161117/ANE/161119865/vw-plans-
big-push-for-low-co2-cars-in-china.
87. The Impact of International Technology Transfer on American Research and Development, Hearing Before the
House Science Committee, Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, H.R., 112th Cong. (December 5,
2012) (statement of Robert D. Atkinson, Ph.D., President, Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation), http://www2.itif.org/2012-international-tech-transfer-testimony.pdf.
88. Spring, “VW Plans Big Push for Low-CO2 Cars in China.”
89. U.S. Department of Commerce, “22nd U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade Fact
Sheet,” news release, November 21, 2011, http://2010-2014.commerce.gov/news/fact-
sheets/2011/11/21/22nd-us-china-joint-commission-commerce-and-trade-fact-sheet.html.
90. The U.S.-China Business Council, “Unofficial USCBC Chart of Localization Targets.”
91. Office of the United States Trade Representative, “United States Statement at the World Trade
Organization Trade Policy Review of the People's Republic of China,” news release, July 1, 2014;
https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/speeches/transcripts/2014/July/US-Statement-WTO-
Trade-Policy-Review-Peoples-Republic-of-China; Office of the United States Trade Representative
(USTR), 2016 Report to Congress On China’s WTO Compliance, (Washington, D.C.: USTR, January
2017), https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/2016-China-Report-to-Congress.pdf.
92. Ibid.
93. The Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) and the United States Department of
Commerce (DOC), “Subsidies Enforcement Annual Report to the Congress” (Washington, DC: USTR
and DOC, February 2016), http://enforcement.trade.gov/esel/reports/seo2016/seo-annual-report-
2016.pdf.
94. Ibid.
95. Deputy Chief of Mission Chris Wilson, Office of the U.S. Trade Representative in Geneva, Switzerland,
“USTR Official at WTO Trade Policy Review of China,” news release, July 1, 2014,
http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/english/texttrans/2014/07/20140701303099.html#ixzz4NTIP8EwN.
96. It’s also worth mentioning that there are new tools within the federal government to facilitate foreign
language document translation, including opensource.gov. Technical translations might also be done by
the PTO or other agencies.
97. “Understanding Investigations of Intellectual Property Infringement and Other Unfair Practices in
Import Trade (Section 337),” United States International Trade Commission, accessed January 12, 2017
https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/us337.htm.
98.
 “Section 337 Statistics: Number of New, Completed, and Active Investigations by Fiscal Year (Updated
Quarterly),” United States International Trade Commission, accessed January 13, 2017,
https://www.usitc.gov/intellectual_property/337_statistics_number_new_completed_and_active.htm.
99. Shara L. Aranoff, “The U.S. International Trade Commission, Section 337, and Patents—Looking Back
and Looking Forward” (comments as prepared for delivery, The ITC Comes to Silicon Valley, University
of California, Berkeley Law, Berkeley, CA, May 18, 2010), https://www.law.berkeley.edu/files/Aranoff-
ITC-Comments.pdf.
100. “US Company Withdraws Complaint Accusing Chinese Companies of Stealing Trade Secrets,” People’s
Daily Online, February 17, 2017, http://en.people.cn/n3/2017/0217/c90000-9179472.html.
101. The Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property, The IP Commission Report (The
National Bureau of Asian Research, May 2013), 4,
http://www.ipcommission.org/report/ip_commission_report_052213.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
PAGE 63 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

102. Ibid., 65.
103. This idea was first proposed by John Veroneau in a Politico article. See: John Veroneau and Shara
Aranoff, “How to Stop Our Partners’ Unfair Trade Practices,” Politico, April 6, 2016,
http://www.politico.com/agenda/story/2016/04/how-to-stop-our-partners-unfair-trade-practices-000084.
104. In this case, USTR was able to achieve the elimination of Chinese domestic content subsidies for wind
power equipment manufacturers through WTO consultations. See The United States Trade
Representative’s Office (USTR), The President’s Trade Agenda: 2016 (Washington, DC: USTR, 2016),
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Chapter%20V.%20Trade%20Enforcement%20Activities.pdf.
105. U.S. Trade Act of 1974, 19 U.S. Code § 2411 (Enforcement of United States’ Rights Under Trade
Agreements and Reponses to Certain Foreign Trade Practice),
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/19/2411.
106. Ibid.
107. Ibid.
108. Ibid.
109. Trade Reform Act of 1974, United States Senate Committee on Finance, H.R. 10710, 93rd Congress
(1974), https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/trade10.pdf.
110. USTR, The President’s Trade Agenda: 2016.
111. “Possible Unilateral Actions Under US Law,” White & Case LLP, January 13, 2017,
http://www.whitecase.com/publications/article/possible-unilateral-actions-under-us-law; “United
States—Sections 301–310 of the Trade Act 1974,” World Trade Organization, accessed February 22,
2017, https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds152_e.htm.
112. Hearing on Chinese Investment in the United States (Atkinson), 8.
113. Federal Trade Commission, “FTC Requires NXP Semiconductors N.V. to Divest RF Power Amplifier
Assets as a Condition of Acquiring Freescale Semiconductor Ltd.,” news release, November 25, 2015,
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2015/11/ftc-requires-nxp-semiconductors-nv-divest-rf-
power-amplifier.
114. Junko Yoshida, “Lurking Behind Every M&A Is China,” EE Times, December 13, 2016,
http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1330969.
115. Barry C. Lynn, “Estates of Mind,” Washington Monthly, July/August 2013,
http://washingtonmonthly.com/magazine/julyaugust-2013/estates-of-mind/.
116. Robert Sobel, RCA (New York: Stein and Day, 1986), 212.
117. Patricia Isela Hansen, “Antitrust in the Global Market: Rethinking Reasonable Expectations,” Southern
California Law Review 72 (1999): 1601-1649, http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~usclrev/pdf/072602.pdf.
118. “Anti-Monopoly Law of the People’s Republic of China,” China.Org.Cn, (accessed January 28, 2015),
http://www.china.org.cn/government/laws/2009-02/10/content_17254169.htm.
119. James McGregor, “China’s Drive for ‘Indigenous Innovation’: A Web of Industrial Policies” (U.S.
Chamber of Commerce Global Intellectual Property Center and APCO Worldwide, July 2010),
https://www.uschamber.com/sites/default/files/documents/files/100728chinareport_0_0.pdf.
120. Quinn, Emanuel, Urquhart, & Sullivan LLP (Quinn Emanuel LLP), “Second Circuit: International
Comity Precludes Antitrust Liability of Chinese Manufacturers for Conduct Mandated by Chinese Law”
(Quinn Emanuel Trial Lawyers, November 2016), http://www.quinnemanuel.com/the-firm/news-
events/article-november-2016-second-circuit-international-comity-precludes-antitrust-liability-of-
chinese-manufacturers-for-conduct-mandated-by-chinese-law/.
121. Brent Kendall, “U.S. Court Throws Out Price-Fixing Judgement Against Chinese Vitamin C Makers,”
The Wall Street Journal, updated September 20, 2016, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-court-throws-
out-price-fixing-judgment-against-chinese-vitamin-c-manufacturers-1474391092.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
PAGE 64 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

122. Quinn Emanuel LLP, “International Comity Precludes Antitrust Liability.”
123. Christopher B. Hockett et al., “Foreign Sovereign Compulsion: A Widening Split on Chinese Exports”
(Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP, 2016),
https://www.davispolk.com/sites/default/files/Foreign%20Soverign%20Compulsion-
%20A%20Widening%20Split%20on%20Chinese%20Exports_0.PDF.
124. Kendall, “U.S. Court Throws Out Price-Fixing Judgement.”
125. Energy Conversion Devices Liquidation Trust vs. Trina Solar Limited, “Petition for a Writ of
Certiorari,” (No. 16-850, Supreme Court of the United States, January 5, 2017).
126. U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “International Competition Policy Review,” accessed March 13, 2017,
https://www.uschamber.com/international-competition-policy-review.
127. Legal Information Institute, “16 CFR 802.52 - Acquisitions by or from foreign governmental entities,”
accessed March 10, 2017, https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/16/802.52.
128. Article 40 of the TRIPS Agreement (as an effort to control abusive licensing practices) holds that
Members agree that some licensing practices or conditions pertaining to intellectual property rights
which restrain competition may have adverse effects on trade and may impede the transfer and
dissemination of technology.
129. He, “Will New Policy in China Trigger Big Changes?”
130. Richard Daverman, “China Puts Priority on Biotech,” China Bio Today, April 14, 2016,
http://www.chinabiotoday.com/articles/20160414.
131. Wayne M. Morrison, “China-U.S. Trade Issues” (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service,
February 9, 2017), 25, https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RL33536.pdf.
132. Gert Bruche and Bernhard Wallner, “Dragons and Tigers Hunting in Germany: Chinese and Indian
Acquisitions of German Firms 2002–2012” (working paper, BGM Associates, 2013), 15,
http://www.bgmassociates.net/uploads/6/8/9/2/68925041/bgm_associates__-
_dragons_and_tigers_hunting_in_germany.pdf.
133. Michael Gershberg and Justin Schenck, “CFIUS Takeaways from Blocked Aixtron Deal,” Law 360,
December 16, 2016, https://www.law360.com/articles/873348/cfius-takeaways-from-blocked-aixtron-
deal.
134. Yoshida, “Lurking Behind Every M&A Is China.”
135. Liana B. Baker, “Lattice Semiconductor to be Bought by China-Backed Canyon Bridge,” Reuters,
November 4, 2016, http://www.reuters.com/article/us-lattice-us-m-a-canyon-bridge-idUSKBN12Y1K5;
Yoshida, “Lurking Behind Every M&A Is China.”
136. Stephen J. Ezell and Robert D. Atkinson, “Fifty Ways to Leave Your Competitiveness Woes Behind: A
National Traded Sector Competitiveness Strategy” (Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation, September 2012), http://www2.itif.org/2012-fifty-ways-competitiveness-woes-behind.pdf.
137. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2016 Report to Congress, 26.
138. Wein, Ezell, and Atkinson, “The Global Mercantilist Index.”
139. C. Fred Bergsten, “Beijing Is Key to Creating More US Jobs,” Foreign Policy, April 14, 2010,
http://www.iie.com/publications/opeds/oped.cfm?ResearchID=1545. Additionally, the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which is now an integral part of the WTO, indicates that
“contracting parties shall not, by exchange action, frustrate the intent of the provisions of this
Agreement.”
140. Preeg, “Time to Restore Multilateral Trading System,” 16–17.
141. Ibid., 17.
142. Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
PAGE 65 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

143. C. Fred Bergsten, “Addressing Currency Manipulation Through Trade Agreements” (Peterson Institute
for International Economics, January 2014), https://piie.com/publications/pb/pb14-2.pdf; Joseph E.
Gagnon, “Combating Widespread Currency Manipulation” (Peterson Institute for International
Economics, July 2012), https://piie.com/publications/pb/pb12-19.pdf.
144. The figures around this average response vary widely across economies (from 0.5 percent to 3.1 percent).
This IMF study analyzes export and import price and volume equations for 60 individual economies—23
advanced and 37 emerging market and developing economies for the past three decades. International
Monetary Fund (IMF), World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices (Washington, DC:
IMF, October 2015), http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2015/02/pdf/text.pdf.
145. Preeg, “Time to Restore Multilateral Trading System,” 20.
146. Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property, The IP Commission Report.
147. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2016 Report to Congress, 26.
148. Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs, “Is China a Market Economy?” East Asia Forum, July
28, 2015, http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2015/07/28/is-china-a-market-economy/.
149. Ibid.
150. Ibid.
151. Ibid.
152. United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), “U.S.-China Cooperation: Bilateral Clean
Energy Programs Show Some Results but Should Enhance Their Performance Monitoring”
(Washington, DC: GAO, July 2016), 33-34, http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/678321.pdf.
153. Ibid.
154. Scott Kennedy, “Thoughts from the Chairman: The Ambiguous Benefit of Meetings in China” (Center
for Strategic & International Studies, October 14, 2016), https://www.csis.org/analysis/thoughts-
chairman-ambiguous-benefit-meetings-china.
155. U.S.-China Business Council, “U.S.-China Business Council State Export Report August 2016”, (U.S.-
China Business Council, 2016), https://www.uschina.org/reports/us-exports/national.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
PAGE 66 INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY & INNOVATION FOUN DATION | MARCH 2017

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Randolph Court for providing input to this
report. Any errors or omissions are the authors’ alone.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Robert D. Atkinson is the founder and president of ITIF. Atkinson’s books
include Innovation Economics: The Race for Global Advantage (Yale,
2012), Supply-Side Follies: Why Conservative Economics Fails, Liberal
Economics Falters, and Innovation Economics is the Answer (Rowman &
Littlefield, 2006), and The Past And Future Of America’s Economy: Long
Waves Of Innovation That Power Cycles Of Growth (Edward Elgar, 2005).
Atkinson holds a Ph.D. in city and regional planning from the University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and a master’s degree in urban and regional
planning from the University of Oregon.

Nigel Cory is a trade policy analyst at ITIF. He previously worked as a researcher
at the Sumitro Chair for Southeast Asia Studies at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies. Prior to that, he worked for eight years in Australia’s
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and also had diplomatic postings to
Malaysia and Afghanistan. Cory holds a master’s degree in public policy from
Georgetown University and a bachelor’s degree in international business and
commerce from Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia.

Stephen J. Ezell is vice president, global innovation policy, at ITIF. He focuses
on innovation policy as well as international competitiveness and trade policy
issues. He is coauthor of
Innovating in a Service-Driven Economy: Insights,
Application, and Practice (Palgrave MacMillan, 2015) and Innovation
Economics: The Race for Global Advantage (Yale, 2012). Ezell holds a B.S.
from the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.

ABOUT ITIF
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) is a nonprofit,
nonpartisan research and educational institute focusing on the intersection of
technological innovation and public policy. Recognized as one of the world’s
leading science and technology think tanks, ITIF’s mission is to formulate and
promote policy solutions that accelerate innovation and boost productivity to
spur growth, opportunity, and progress.

FOR MORE INFORMATION , VISIT US AT WWW.IT IF.ORG.
