
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
MERICS REPORT
Investigating state support for
China’s medical technology
companies

ALEXANDER BROWN, GREGOR SEBASTIAN, FRANCOIS CHIMITS ,
JEROEN GROENEWEGEN -LAU, JACOB GUNTER

November 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 2
Research for this study was supported by MedTech Europe.
MedTech Europe is the European trade association for the medical technology industry
including diagnostics, medical devices and digital health. Its members are national,
European and multinational companies as well as a network of national medical
technology associations who research, develop, manufacture, distribute and supply
health-related technologies, services and solutions.

MERICS is a research institute committed to the highest standards of organizational,
intellectual and personal integrity and independence. MERICS does not accept funding or
rewards of any kind that seek to control the direction, content, or findings of its research
and projects. MERICS retains sole editorial control over its ideas and products. All views,
positions, and conclusions expressed in our publications should be understood to be
solely those of the authors.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 3

CONTENTS
Executive Summary .......................................................................................................................... 5
Distortions in the medical technology sector flourish due to growing policy
support .......................................................................................................................................................... 5
Financial support measures give China’s MedTech firms a significant boost.................. 6
Chinese firms are increasing their presence in third markets ............................................... 6

1. Industrial policy in the MedTech sector ............................................................................... 8
1.1 The growing scope and impact of China’s industrial policy............................................. 8
1.2 China’s industrial policy toolset in the MedTech sector .................................................... 9
1.3 China’s approach to localization harms foreign companies .......................................... 15

2. Measuring the volume of state support ............................................................................. 24
2.1 Quantifying state support in China’s MedTech sector ...................................................... 24
2.2 State support through direct subsidies and tax concessions ........................................ 26
2.3 Below-market financing delivers additional support ....................................................... 30
2.4 Cultivation of MedTech Little Giant companies .................................................................. 32
2.5 National S&T funding directed toward MedTech firms ................................................... 33

3. The position of Chinese firms in third markets .............................................................. 36
3.1 Reviewing China’s position in the international MedTech trade ................................. 36
3.2 The outlook for MedTech competition in third markets ................................................. 45

Annex .................................................................................................................................................. 49

Endnotes ............................................................................................................................................ 54

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 4
List of acronyms
BME: Below-market equity
COO: Country of origin
EUCCC: European Chamber of Commerce in China
HNTE: High and new technology enterprise
HSR: High-speed rail
IVD: In vitro diagnostics
MIIT: Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
NKP: National Key R&D Program
NMED: National Innovation Center for Advanced Medical Devices
NMPA: National Medical Products Administration
NSFC: Natural Science Foundation of China
OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
SEI: Strategic emerging industries
SOE: State-owned enterprise
SME: Small- and medium-sized enterprise
S&T: Science and technology
VBP: Volume-based procurement

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
For over a decade, China has viewed the medical technology sector (MedTech) as a core
priority in its industrial policy strategy. The sector is central to Beijing’s plans to move up
the value chain and embodies its ambitions to promote innovation, industrial
modernization and digitalization. Its strategic value has increased further in tandem with
rising living standards and the greater healthcare demands of China’s aging population.
Policy support is actively facilitating the rise of domestic players and p oses a growing
challenge for foreign MedTech firms.
Distortions in the medical technology sector flourish due to growing policy
support
The government is committed to advancing local industrial capabilities in this prominent,
high-tech sector, which remains dominated by foreign suppliers. Consequently, high-end
medical devices featured among the Made in China 2025 key industries released in 2015.
Dedicated development plans for the medical device sector have been released in every
five-year period since 2012.
The implementation of such plans has led to the rise of increasingly competitive Chinese
firms, while also creating distortions within China’s home market and, by extension, in
global markets too. Key facets of the sophisticated support system established in the
MedTech sector include:
 Policy guidance: The government calls on officials to cultivate Chinese brands, set global
standards and leverage the huge domestic MedTech market (worth EUR 135 billion in
2022) to attract foreign firms.1
 Financial measures: Companies benefit from s ubsidies, assistance with R&D funding,
tax concessions, additional equity provided through state guidance, etc.
 Innovation focus: Public research labs, national manufacturing innovation centers and
subsidized platforms are deployed to develop advanced medical technologies.
Officially, these measures benefit the whole sector without discriminating against foreign
firms active in China. But i n practice, Chinese firms tend to benefit the most, due to an
overall political climate focused on self -reliance and import replacement. The following
measures, for example, are indicative of discrimination against foreign companies:
 Biased procurement: Local content requirements and the shift toward volume -based
procurement (i.e., purchasing a high volume of products at lower prices) increase the
hurdles for foreign manufacturers in China’s market.
 Localization of value chains: Foreign firms are pressured to locate their production and
R&D activities within China, or risk exclusion.
 Regulatory barriers: For instance, China’s rules mandating approval in the ‘country of
origin’ significantly delay regulatory clearance for imported products as they must first
gain approval either in the country where the market authorization holder is based or
in the country of manufacture.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 6
Financial support measures give China’s MedTech firms a significant boost
China is developing a new blend of state capitalism to guide financial markets toward
national technological priorities. The government has increased tax incentives for R&D
investment and guided financial markets to allocate capital to innovative companies. The
results are apparent in the MedTech sector.
Based on the financial data of 122 Chinese MedTech firms listed on the Shanghai,
Shenzhen and Beijing stock exchanges, it is possible to calculate the value of direct
subsidies, tax benefits, below -market borrowing and, more roughly, below -market
equity.
2 The results show that:
 Between 2017 and 2022, the 122 firms have seen their access to government support
increase about five times, from EUR 655 million to EUR 2.8 – 3.8 billion (from CNY 5
billion to CNY 20 – 27 billion).
 Over the same period, measured state support was equivalent to about 6 percent of firm
revenue, plus or minus 0.8 percentage points based on the estimate for below -market
equity. Put another way, state support directed to China’s MedTech companies was
worth approximately 28 percent of company net profit, or 77 percent of R&D expenses.
These results indicate that China provides significantly more state support than other
advanced economies. According to the OECD, between 2005 and 2019, the same forms of
support amounted to approximately 4.45 percent of revenue for firms in China on average
in 13 sectors, compared to just 0.69 percent of revenue for firms in OECD countries.
In addition, about 10 percent of government R&D spending, or EUR 5.6 billion (CNY 40
billion) was spent on medical technology in 2022. This figure was calculated based on the
relative importance of medical technology in China’s S&T Megaprojects, the National Key
R&D Program and projects funded through the Natural Science Foundation of China.
These measurements do not cover all forms of state support afforded to MedTech firms in
China. Some distortions within China’s MedTech market are particularly difficult to track,
such as the industrial policy guidance and regulatory hurdles described above. However,
this data is already enough to show that China's state support distorts MedTech markets.
Chinese firms are increasing their presence in third markets
China’s growing role in the international MedTech trade reflects a trend toward increased
competition in third markets. In 2000, China made up less than 3 percent of global trade
in MedTech products by value. By 2021, China accounted for 12.4 percent of exports and
8 percent of imports. Key insights from the trade data include:
 China increased its share of global exports in a broad range of product categories, such
as medical consumables, patient aids and dental products, where it accounted for about
20 percent of global exports in 2021. It also made advances in diagnostic imag ing (11
percent of global exports) and became the top exporter of medical syringes in 2021.
 China’s rise in global MedTech exports seems to have impacted US exports most. China’s
share of global exports rose from 2.3 percent in 2000 to 12.4 percent in 2021, while the
US share fell from 36.5 percent to 22.5 percent. Meanwhile, the share enjoyed by the EU

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 7
(up from 25.4 percent to 26.9 percent) and other important exporters grew slightly
over this period.3
The reasons why US exports have been more impacted than EU ones may stem from more
product overlap, a stronger tendency toward offshoring by US-based firms in recent years,
or EU firms’ greater resilience, thanks to brand reputation and standards. In any case, EU
firms are likely to face greater competition as Chinese firms move into more high -end
MedTech products and improve quality standards.
Indeed, China is striving to develop local firms to cover all segments of the MedTech
industry and supply chain. Local firms will probably acquire more domestic market share
before setting their sights on internationalization. Firms such as Mindray (a manufacturer
of patient monitoring, in vitro diagnostic, and imaging equipment) and United Imaging (a
producer of imaging equipment) are already global players.
China’s MedTech SMEs, particularly Little Giant firms that enjoy special government
backing, will pose a growing challenge for foreign firms. The lines between private and
state ownership are becoming blurrier under China’s current economic model, which tries
to blend market forces with state intervention. Little Giant companies – of which there are
approximately 320 in the MedTech sector, including Endovastec, Sinomed and iRay
Technology – are developing local alternatives to imported products and looking to
expand overseas as well.
The plentiful state aid and protectionism outlined in this report are likely to provide
ongoing boosters to the competitiveness of China’s MedTech players in third markets. The
home market advantage afforded to these firms can be projected overseas. Chinese firms
can more readily lower margins abroad to secure market share. Such price competition
also risks reducing rivals’ profitability and their ability to fund further R&D. The high
degree of state support within China poses an increasing challenge for all non -Chinese
firms around the globe and one that could hinder advances in innovation.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 8
1. INDUSTRIAL POLICY IN THE MEDTECH SECTOR
1.1 The growing scope and impact of China’s industrial policy
Since the mid -2000s, China has pursued an increasingly ambitious and distorting
industrial policy. Initially, Beijing aimed to ascend global value chains in high-tech sectors,
promoting innovation and developing new growth drivers. But planners have since put
greater focus on promoting economic security and technological self -reliance. The
industrial policy toolbox has been adjusted. While Beijing still intervenes in markets using
direct subsidies and state -owned enterprises ( SOEs), it is increasingly keen on certain
market mechanisms to advance its goals, including financial market and private sector
guidance. This makes it more difficult to pinpoint state support.
Exhibit 1: Key Chinese industrial policy plans
PLAN MAIN INDUSTRIAL POLICY GOALS
2006: Mid - to long -term Plan
for Science and Technology
(2006-2020) and 16
Megaprojects (2006 -2015)
 Promote innovation as new growth driver and
catch-up with leading economies
2010: 20 Strategic Emerging
Industries (2010 -2020)
 Promote innovation as new growth driver and
catch-up with leading economies
 Develop future industries
2016: Innovation -Driven
Development Strategy
 Promote innovation as new growth driver and
catch-up with leading economies
 Develop future industries
2016: Made in China 2025  Promote innovation as new growth driver and
catch-up with leading economies
 Develop future industries
 Replace foreign producers
2021: 14 th Five-Year Plan
(2021-2025)
 Promote innovation as new growth driver and
catch-up with leading economies
 Develop future industries
 Replace foreign producers
 Foster technological self-reliance

The widening scope of China’s industrial policy is linked partly to external developments.
Beijing has had a long-standing focus on improving China’s self-reliance, but US sanctions
against Huawei and ZTE, followed by export controls on semiconductors, dialed up
economic security concerns so they now eclipse economic development as the main driver

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 9
of industrial policy. China’s government is doubling down on protecting its economy from
external disruptions and geopolitical challenges by reducing its dependence on foreign
suppliers.
Crucially for Europe, the impact of China's industrial policy extends beyond its domestic
economy. China's economic size means its policy slant is reshaping the role and
competitiveness of foreign firms, both within China and in global markets where they
compete with Chinese counterparts. The combined impact of direct or indirect policy
support, market protection, and party guidance molds the competitiveness and market
access of foreign companies.

1.2 China’s industrial policy toolset in the MedTech sector
1.2.1 Top-level guidance outlines MedTech priorities
The MedTech sector is closely aligned with Beijing’s ambition to move up the value chain
and secure China’s position as a global manufacturing superpower. MedTech is a high -
tech industry characterized by innovation, modernization, digitalization and AI
applications. All these factors, combined with China’s import dependencies, have made it
a magnet for state support over the last twenty years. It receives equal or more attention
than other prominent high-tech sectors like electric vehicles or robotics (see exhibit 2).
Beijing’s urgency toward domestic capabilities in the sector is strengthened by the
country’s aging population – and the associated need to improve public health as outlined
in the 2016 Healthy China 2030 strategy – coupled, more recently, with geopolitical
tensions that have red uced access to foreign technologies. A strong domestic medical
device industry is a matter of pride for Beijing, regardless of any national security and
economic concerns. Advanced MedTech firms symbolize China’s modernization and
global prowess and so are treated with the same importance as developing China’s own
passenger aircraft, the C919.
Central government support goes back to at least 2006, with the 16 Science and
Technology (S&T) Megaprojects initiative; two megaprojects were focused on medical
devices. Under the S&T Megaprojects umbrella, universities, research institutes and
companies competed for government research funding and support. In 2010, medical
devices were listed in the 20 Strategic Emerging Industries policy, garnering a plethora of
policy support at central, provincial and local levels. In 2015, the Made in China 2025
strategy set two high-level MedTech targets for 2025: Chinese manufacturers should hold
a 70 percent market share for medium - and high -end medical devices in county -level
hospitals, and achieve a minimum 85 percent localization rate for core components.
Government support has become ever more detailed. In 2010 the government started to
dedicate a sector -specific five -year plan to medical devices. Policy priorities have
remained relatively constant, with the main focus on achieving breakthroughs in
technological bottlenecks and cultivating a small set of globally competitive enterprises.
What’s noticeable is the shift away from highly quantitative targets such as the number of
patents or technologies toward a greater focus on high-quality company development.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 10
Exhibit 2

For the medical device sector, Beijing is following a similar industrial policy blueprint to
other strategic sectors like robotics or pharmaceuticals. The government is:
 Leveraging its state- driven investment in digital infrastructure like 5G by
encouraging firms to digitalize their manufacturing processes and develop new
smart MedTech devices and services like telemedicine
 Guiding the financial system to provide capital to highly innovative Chinese
MedTech firms by instructing state -owned banks to increase lending, and by
highlighting the MedTech sector, as well as specific Chinese MedTech companies, as
“supportable”, thus inducing private investors to channel capital toward them
 Boosting China’s medical equipment technological self-reliance by channeling
public and private research into institutes and companies developing replacements
for technologies that need to be imported
 Promoting growth by creating demand for high-end medical equipment, such
as through cheap loans for medical institutions
 Cultivating Chinese brands by creating a favorable market and innovation
environment for them and discriminating against foreign firms
 Setting global standards by leveraging China’s state-orchestrated standardization
system
 Leveraging its huge domestic MedTech market, which is the largest after the US
market and was estimated at EUR 13 5 billion (CNY 958 billion) in 2022, to
incentivize foreign producers to localize production, sourcing and development
4
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Medical devices Electric vehicles Robotics Biomedicine
Medical devices rank high on Beijing's technology agenda
Number of central and provincial level policy documents mentioning technologies
Source: MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 11
Exhibit 3: China’s top-level plans for the development of the MedTech sector
FIVE -YEAR PLAN COMMON TARGETS SPECIFIC GOALS
12th Five-Year
Special Plan
for the
Medical
Device Science
and
Technology
Industry
(2011-2015)
Achieve breakthroughs in
technological bottlenecks
including in:
 Established high-tech medical
devices such as CT, MRI, PET
 New medical devices such as
POCT, medical robots and
molecular biological analysis
instruments
 High-precision components
such as pump valves, micro-
sensors, micro-optical lenses
 Medical materials and
consumables such as
interventional stents and
artificial joints
Replace imports with domestic
production
Promote innovation instead of
imitation by strengthening
basic research
Develop and integrate digital
technologies into the medical
device sector
Accelerate the global expansion
of Chinese-made and Chinese-
innovated products
Breakthroughs in 20 -30 key
technologies and core components
Patent 200 core technologies
Support 10 -15 large medical device
enterprises
Establish 8 -10 medical device
industrial bases
Focus on developing 64-row spiral CT
13th Five-Year
Special Plan
for Scientific
and
Technological
Innovation of
Medical
Devices
(2016-2020)
Breakthroughs in 1 -3 original
innovative technologies and 10 -20
leading -edge technologies
Patent more than 300 technologies
Cultivate 8 -10 large medical device
enterprises
Establish 8 -10 medical device tech
clusters
Focus on developing 256-row spiral CT
14th Five-Year
Plan for the
Development
of the Medical
Equipment
Industry
(2021-2025)
Cultivate 6 -8 companies that rank
among the top 50 global medical
device firms
Focus on developing new health care
services such as tele -, smart, mobile
and high precision medicine
Develop several highly specialized
manufacturing champions and Little
Giant enterprises

However, there are some important differences between the medical devices sector and
other targeted areas. Its R&D intensity and varied technologies, most with a high degree
of specialization, create roadblocks. To overcome these, the government is betting on
high-tech SMEs and funneling capital into basic research. A major advantage for the
government is that it has direct control over most end consumers: hospitals and other
medical institutes. State procurement therefore plays an outsized role as an indus trial
policy lever in the MedTech sector.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 12
1.2.2 Beijing leverages its innovation ecosystem to deliver breakthroughs
Innovation is a key part of China’s efforts to move up value chains and improve resilience
in the MedTech sector. Beijing has started to intervene more strongly in China’s
innovation landscape to align it more closely with national strategic goals, which depend
upon fostering the innovation capacity of Chinese firms. Reforms announced in 2016 were
meant to improve the transparency and efficiency of public research funding and
institutes. After 2018, these reforms gained urgency and a stronger emphasis on reducing
foreign tech reliance, following US restrictions on China’s access to key technologies.
Beijing has since sought – in President Xi Jinping’s words – “to make the most of the
socialist system’s unique capability to concentrate resources.”
Chinese MedTech companies have benefited from this general trend. Medicine and
medical technology are consistently included in official and semi -official lists of
strategically important technologies and sectors.
Exhibit 4: Medical research features prominently in China’s top-level S&T plans
MAJOR S&T PLANS MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY FOCUS
2006: S&T
Megaprojects
 State Council listed 16 top research priorities toward 2020,
two of which relate to healthcare.
2015: Made in
China 2025
 “Biological medicine and high-end medical devices” is one of
ten key sectors. Semi-official documents set a goal of 50
percent self-reliance in high-performance medical devices by
2020 and 70 percent by 2025.
2016: S&T
Megaprojects
toward 2030
 State Council listed 16 top research priorities up to 2030, two
of which relate to healthcare.
2017: Foreign
Technology
Strangleholds
 “Cross-Linking and Immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) technology”
and “Components for medical imaging equipment” appeared
on a semi-official list of 35 “foreign technology strangleholds”
that China faces, highlighting dependencies on foreign CT and
MRI scanners.
5
2020: Strategic
Emerging
Industries (SEI)
 The biotech industry is one of eight priority sectors in this
central government catalog which directs local support policies.
Medical equipment is also supported through “the high-end
equipment manufacturing sector”. Health, medicine and elderly
care are target areas in another SEI, on digital services.
2021: 14th Five-
Year Plan
(2021-2025)
 “Genetics and biotechnology” and “Clinical medicine and
health” are two of the seven prioritized “cutting-edge S&T
fields”. Medical equipment is highlighted in the preceding
paragraph. “Biomedical imaging facilities” are part of the
planned major research infrastructure. Chapter 44 addresses
healthcare system reform, including speeding up approval for
medical devices that have been marketed overseas.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 13
The reforms to the science and technology system that Beijing launched in 2016 are part
of a larger trend toward more central control and coordination.
In line with this, reorganizations of the central government put ministries in charge of
specific tasks. The Ministry of Science and Technology was tasked with leading China’s
S&T strategy at the March 2023 National People’s Congress. Meanwhile, healthcare policy
falls under the National Healthcare Commission. The approval of pharmaceuticals and
medical devices is the purview of the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA),
a subsidiary of the State Administration of Market Reform. Medical data is subject to data
regulations, which the Cyber Administration of China enforces. The Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology (MIIT) spurs the medical technology sector with industry -
led innovation platforms, pilot and demonstration projects, zones and clusters.
For public research labs, a stronger hierarchy means:
 20 National Labs are China’s top institutes. Two of these focus on medical research: the
National Lab on Major Disease Research (hosted by the Peking Union Medical College)
and the National Lab for Protein Science (hosted by the Institute of Biophysics).
 500 National key labs support these, 65 of which focus on medical research (excluding
traditional Chinese medicine), hosted by universities, hospitals and companies
 Other types of research institutes and engineering centers exist further down the
hierarchy. Notably, the NMPA announced a program for medical research labs in 2018,
approving 117 in two batches. 30 of these labs focus on medical technology.
Beijing also seeks to improve synergies in the innovation ecology with subsidized
platforms. As part of Made in China 2025, 19 National manufacturing innovation centers
have been set up since 2016, three of which are relevant to medical technology: a robotics
center in Shenyang launched in 2018; a sensors center in Shanghai, founded in 2018; and
one on advanced medical devices (NMED), set up in Shenzhen in 2020.
6 Additionally,
NMPA approved 14 Regulatory Science Research Bases in 2021 that focus on co -
innovation in medical technology.
The NMED is housed at the Yesun Science and Technology Park, which is part of the
Guangzhou-Shenzhen-Hong Kong Greater Bay Area’s plan to integrate innovation
resources. Starting points for mapping zones more generally, as well as tracing related
subsidies, include:
 The yearly top 100 of biopharma zones ranked by the China Center for Information
Industry Development, a think tank under the MIIT.
 The national list of 45 advanced manufacturing clusters by MIIT. Five of these are in
medical technology, centering on Shenzhen, Shanghai, Suzhou, Wuxi and Beijing.
 Local industrial and innovation policy, especially in large city clusters around Beijing,
Shanghai, Guangzhou (the Greater Bay Area) and Chongqing-Chengdu

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 14
1.2.3 Policymakers channel capital to Chinese MedTech firms
Beijing is developing a new blend of state capitalism. Alongside its traditional ways to
finance national champions, such as subsidies and below -market credit, the government
has started to guide financial markets toward national technological priorities such as the
medical device sector. Policymakers regard government steerage as complementary to
market forces, which the government wants to harness for its political goals.
On the financial side, China’s industrial policy toolbox includes:
 Tying subsidies to winning volume-based procurement (VBP) tenders or
license approvals: Certain local governments, for instance, Wuhan city
government, gives one-time awards of up to EUR 1.4 million (CNY 10 million) to
companies that have successfully registered for Class II and III medical devices.
Likewise, Wuhan offers EUR 280,000 (CNY 2 million) to firm that earn ratifications
from the US Food and Drug Administration, the European Medicines Agency, or the
World Health Organization. Local governments in provinces like Hainan or cities
like Shenzhen also offer subsidies for local companies that win national volume -
based procurement (VBP) tenders.
7
 Helping fund R&D expenditure: Beijing funds companies’ research projects into
medical devices and components (most national and provincial level research
projects are open to firms registered in China), thereby helping them outsource
R&D costs. The government goes a step further for sp ecific projects. For instance,
the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology and the food and drug
watchdog, the National Medical Products Association (NMPA), are supporting
companies that research biomedical materials ((polymer, metal and inorganic non-
metallic materials) with preferential policy support and resources, plus promising
to procure successfully commercialized products, akin to a pre -commercial
procurement agreement.8
 Tweaking the tax system to promote innovation: The government has long tried
to support corporate R&D through tax incentives. In 2021, the government
expanded the super tax deduction for R&D expenses granted to manufacturing
firms from 75 to 100 percent to encourage greater spending on innovation-related
activities.9 For high -end manufacturing sectors, the government will also refund
incremental retained value- added tax credit on a monthly basis to encourage
equipment upgrades and technology investments.
 Bankrolling Chinese MedTech companies’ preferential loans: Providing
domestic companies with access to cheap, below -market financing – so that loan
terms are more favorable than is generally available – is one of Beijing’s most tried
and tested financial instruments in the industrial policy sphere. China’s state-owned
banking system is suited to this type of financial support. Research by the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) h as shown that
below-market credit contributes to the buildup of excess capacity which can lead to
loss of market share for foreign producers. 10 Recently, below -market loans have

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 15
been extended to a wider range of firms, such as the Little Giants, a government list
of high-tech SMEs (see chapter 1.3.3).
 China as an investor state: Over the last decade, Beijing has increased the supply
of equity capital available to firms in strategic sectors through government guidance
funds. They have become one of the main tools to channel capital directly into
industrial policy objectives. Essent ially, China’s central or, more often, provincial
and local governments set up venture capital type funds to invest in Chinese firms.
These tend to be in specific industries like the MedTech sector. G overnment
guidance funds are also meant to steer private investment, though this target has
often fallen flat.
 Channeling private investment into “certified sectors and companies”: One of
the most powerful tools at Beijing’s disposal is to guide private financial markets
toward strategic goals. Incentives for investors to heed government signaling have
grown exponentially in recent years, especially after Beijing’s technology
rectification campaign, which damaged the valuation of internet companies, and its
decision to wipe out the tutoring industry. Chinese investment bank reports now
often showcase how their highlighted companies align with Beijing’s technological
priorities. As we will show, government -certified companies, like the Little Giants,
benefit from additional equity infusions by capital markets. Companies in strategic
sectors receive subsidies and government support toward their market listings.
 Sometimes providing below-market energy: According to the OECD China does
not provide widespread below -market energy for industrial uses. However, in
specific provinces, government officials might use cheap or even below -market
energy to attract producers. China has also benefited from purchasin g
comparatively cheap Russian energy resources.
These support measures are unique and give Chinese firms an advantage on the global
stage. In Europe, for instance, firms do not receive similar levels of government support,
though the European exceptions include certain types of member -state level suppor t
programs to promote R&D in MedTech.

1.3 China’s approach to localization harms foreign companies
There is no intrinsic reason why China’s strategic support for the MedTech sector might
not benefit foreign companies there, for instance by supporting local investment in R&D,
and this has sometimes happened. However, Beijing has also created multiple policy
measures designed to support Chinese companies at the cost of foreign firms.

1.3.1 China strives to minimize imports of MedTech products
Although policymakers have long wanted China to climb global value chains in high-value-
added sectors like medical devices, the country remains reliant on imports of medical
devices and components, especially in high-end segments. Supply shortages experienced

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 16
during the 2020 Covid -19 outbreak added to policymakers’ worries about the safety of
the industrial supply chain and amplified the localization drive. President Xi Jinping
remarked in March 2020 that “it is necessary to speed up filling the shortcomings of
China’s high-end medical equipment industry […] and realize the independent control of
high-end medical equipment”.
Hence it comes as no surprise that localization is a core tenet of China’s current medical
equipment blueprint, the sector’s 14th Five-Year Plan. It states that by 2025 China needs
to establish safe and reliable industrial chains and achieve control of core technologies
(including extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [ECMO] and ultrahigh field magnetic
resonance imaging) as well as basic materials and components.
Since then, Beijing has released a raft of measures to strengthen domestic firms and
induce foreign firms to localize production and development. They include:
 Boosting foreign investment in high-tech medical devices: The 2020 edition of
China’s Encouraged Foreign Investment Catalog added several types of medical
equipment including AI -driven medical equipment, ventilators and ECMO
machines.
11 In 2022, dental and hearing aid -related technologies were added.
Investments linked to these products benefit from tariff exemptions on imported
equipment, preferential land prices and lower corporate taxes.
 Creating demand for locally produced medical equipment: The People’s Bank
of China – the country’s central bank – issued an interest discount policy in 2022 for
equipment renewal loans. EUR 28.3 billion (CNY 200 billion) was allocated for
medical equipment, enabling medical institutions to apply for subsidized loans. The
original policy document did not state any preference about where such medical
devices originate, but media reports have indicated the PBOC will prioritize support
for purchases of Chinese brands or equipment listed in the “Guidance Catalog for
the Promotion and Application of First Set of Major Technical Equipment”.
1213 As
will be shown, government directives favor domestically produced equipment
renewals and limit imports of medical devices.
 Restricting cross -border data transfer: Chinese data and cybersecurity
regulations have upped the pressure on foreign companies to invest yet more in
China to process data locally and continue serving the market. Often this means
more R&D must also be undertaken in China. In some areas, compani es are even
finding themselves forced to build self-sufficient digital systems. In AI, for example,
China is establishing its own standards and ethical principles.
 Praising the localization of foreign firms: State media applauds the localization
efforts of foreign companies, which hope in turn that their investments will help
them gain favor with regulators and cadres.
14 Siemens Healthineers’ Greater China
President Jerry Wang remarked that the NMPA’s acceptance of his company’s 7T
MRI MAGNETOM Terra is linked to localized R&D.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 17
Exhibit 5

1.3.2 Procurement plays primary role in promoting domestic players
The most important policy lever Beijing holds in the sector is state procurement. More
than any other sector, foreign healthcare equipment firms suffer from market access
difficulties and discriminatory state procurement in China , according to the European
Chamber of Commerce in China (EUCCC).
15 The government can use procurement as a
tool to develop domestic players because 85 percent of medical care is provided by public
hospitals.
16

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
DR (Digital Radiography)
Monitoring equipment
Radiation therapy equipment
Ultrasound equipment
CT (Copmuted Tomography)
Respiratory equipment
DSA
Coronary stents
Orthpedic trauma consumables
Orthopedic spine consumables
Baloon catheter
Surgical stapler
Orthopedic joint consumables
Prosthetic implants
Hemodialysis machine
Cardiac pacemaker
POCT (Point-of-Care Testing)
Microbial testing
Molecular diagnostics
Immunodiagnostics
Biochemical diagnostics
Infusion set
Wound care materials
Medical devices High-value consumables
In vitro
diagnostics
(IVD)
Low-
value
consu
mable
s
China is reliant on imports for high -value medical devices
China’s medical device import dependencies (2020) (share of local production, values below 50 percent in red)
Source: IResearch
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 18
Medical devices face the worst market access conditions in China
A survey of European companies in China conducted by the EUCCC in 2023 revealed
that 94 percent of medical device sector companies (N=18) feel they have missed
business opportunities because of market access restrictions.17 This compared to 62
percent (N=447) for all sectors and was the highest of any sector. Medical device
companies also felt most strongly that recent regulatory changes had negatively
impacted their business environment. While 64 percent of all companies (N=570)
said business has become more difficult, 79 percent of medical device firms did
(N=24), which was once again the highest of all sectors. Looking ahead, 54 percent of
medical device manufacturers surveyed do not expect any meaningful opening up or
leveling of the playing field to occur.

The legal basis for favoring domestic goods over imports is provided by China’s
government procurement law. The 2022 revision draft of the law contains language that
could be interpreted as meaning products with a high degree of domestic content should
be preferred for procurement purposes. 18 Indeed, MIIT issued non -public procurement
guidelines (Document 551) in 2021 that require 25, 50, 75 or 100 percent local content in
315 items including X -ray machines, MRI and surgical equipment. The MedTech sector
accounts for 57 percent of all items in the catalog.
19 Such practices harm foreign exporters
to China. They must either localize or risk losing the Chinese market. Similar internal
guidelines listing recommended suppliers and products were previously issued for other
sectors like information technology. Such localization measures contravene the World
Trade Organization’s (WTO) Agreement on Global Procurement, enforced in the EU but
not signed by China.
To break through technological bottlenecks at the heart of China’s import dependence in
high-tech medical devices, policymakers also dangle the carrot of preferential state
procurement contracts for China -based producers (including localized foreign ones). A
trial program established by the MIIT and National Health Commission invites consortia
of medical institutes and China-based medical equipment producers to showcase clinical
uses of innovative equipment, which can then be granted priority procurement.
20
Apart from the central level, there has also been a flurry of provincial and local level
policies on medical device procurement. Provinces including Anhui, Hubei and Shanxi
issued notices to local hospitals that increase the obstacles to importing medical
equipment, as it now requires explicit government approval. In Anhui, for instance,
approval is granted only if the product is unavailable in China or unreasonably expensive.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 19
Exhibit 6: Local public procurement measures restricting MedTech imports
PROVINCE POLICY DEVELOPMENT
Anhui
(April 2022)
Public hospitals are prohibited from purchasing imported
medical equipment without approval (requiring an audit)
Hubei
(June 2022)
Preference is given to domestic products as outlined in the
national “Administrative Measures for Government
Procurement of Imported Products”
Shaanxi
(June 2021)
For imports at least one criteria must be met: 1) Item cannot be
obtained in China 2) or not on reasonable economic terms 3)
the technical specifications of local products do not match
imported equipment
Guangdong
(June 2021)
2021 List of Products Imported by Provincial Health Institutes
dropped from 132 in 2019 to 46 in 2021
Sichuan
(April 2021)
Only 59 types of medical equipment can be directly imported
Zhejiang
(February 2021)
List of 195 items that can be imported

The government is also rolling out volume -based procurement (VBP), a practice first
introduced in the pharma sector in 2018.21 The primary purpose of VBP is to slash prices
and make health care more affordable. Price cuts have indeed been steep, with pacemaker
prices down 47 percent and coronary stents costing 93 percent less. 22 But the practice
also aims to increase the localization of medical equipment production and drive out
foreign producers, given that imports are often not sufficiently price competitive to win
VBP tenders. Centralized state procurement lends itself to the pursuit of industrial policy
goals. The price cuts associated with VBP could seriously impact medical device
manufacturers. Producers of consumables – which come with fewer services attached and
can be mass-produced more easily – are likely to be the initial and primary target of VBP.
China’s state intervention in procurement processes is starting to negatively impact
foreign medical device producers. The absolute number of contracts won by foreign
companies has gone up in most critical product categories like CT scanners or MRI
machines, but their relative market share has declined. For now, China’s growing market
masks this trend. But once Chinese firms begin to match their foreign rivals in production
capacity and technological level, then foreign firms can expect to see their market share
shrink further and absolute sales trend downwards too. The CT scanner market
demonstrates this: The market share of Siemens, Philips and GE (three foreign producers
from our company sample) dropped from 87 to 63 percent between 2015 and 2022.
23
However, the absolute number of CT scanner contracts awarded rose by 730 percent,
masking the decline in market share.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 20
Exhibit 7
Foreign companies’ market share in high-tech medical devices shrinks

Foreign market share in f our high-tech medical device products, based on share of procurement
contracts won

Note: The market share is based on an analysis of nine companies including three foreign ones (GE, Philips and Siemens).
Source: MERICS based on procurement data provided by ChinaFile

Exhibit 8
The market share decline is masked by an overall growing market

Number of CT scanner procurement contracts won

Note: The market share is based on an analysis of 9 companies including 3 foreign ones (GE, Philips and Siemens).

Source: MERICS based on procurement data provided by ChinaFile

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
CT MRI DSA Mobile DR
0
500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022Siemens GE Philips Neusoft United Imaging Wandong Medical Anke Med Mindray Browiner
Foreign market
share: 63%
Foreign market
share: 87%
© MERICS
 © MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 21
1.3.3 Regulatory hurdles disadvantage foreign MedTech producers
Regulatory barriers are one of the primary forms of distortion in China’s MedTech sector.
Foreign firms report experiencing discriminatory treatment, despite some reform efforts
to bring regulations in line with international best practices, such as the re vised
Regulation on the Supervision and Administration of Medical Devices (Order No. 739). 24
The European Chamber’s 2022 -2023 position paper noted the healthcare equipment
sector faces industry barriers related to requirements for inspections and administrative
permits. 25 It amplified the findings of the chamber’s business confidence survey that
market access and regulatory barriers in China are highest in the MedTech sector.26
Requirements regarding approval in the ‘c ountry of origin (COO) ’ for imported medical
devices are of particular concern. According to COO rules outlined in regulations dating
back to 2002, no imported medical devices can be approved in China until they are first
approved in either the country of manufacture or the one where the market authorization
holder is based.27
The delay caused by COO certification is further compounded by the fact that China
requires clinical trials to be conducted in China for high -risk category medical devices –
but COO approval is required before clinical trials can begin. In practice, the CO O rule
results in delaying the entry of foreign products by between one and three years
compared to European or US markets. Chinese firms therefore gain time to develop their
own products.
The NMPA has made some changes to the COO rules, exempting certain innovative
products that qualify for the "Green Channel" review. The Green Channel expedites the
approval process for innovative products with Chinese patents, including imported ones.
Yet this does little for foreign firms that conduct R&D outside of China and may even
disadvantage them.
Moreover, the COO rule may be in violation GATT Article III's national treatment
obligations, as identical products with the same characteristics and risks receive more
favorable regulatory treatment if they are manufactured in China. These regulations place
strong pressure on foreign firms to localize all parts of the design, manufacturing and
testing of products in China to qualify for the same regulatory approval pathways
available to local firms.

1.3.4 Beijing turns to high- tech SMEs to fill technological bottlenecks
High-tech SMEs have emerged as new recipients of Beijing’s industrial policy support.
Policymakers have realized the potential of high -tech SMEs to innovate and specialize in
niche markets, helping to develop Chinese alternatives to foreign inputs. Beijing has
therefore created a comprehensive support system to improve high-tech SME integration
in China’s innovation ecosystem. The government essentially acts as an “accelerator state”
that fast-tracks the development of SMEs in priority sectors.28
However, the government has instilled market forces in this support program. High -
performing high-tech SMEs can get a government awarded title that signals their status.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 22
They are then pitted against each other as they must renew the title every three years by
outperforming peers to retain preferential policy support.
The system is based on a competitive multi -tier selection process at the provincial and
central levels. The lowest -ranked tier consists of “I nnovative SMEs ” focused on
manufacturing, identified at the provincial level. Provincial governments select more
advanced “Specialized SMEs ” from this group, which get access to various support
mechanisms. The top performers are promoted to national “Little Giant” status and, on
reaching a certain size, are recognized as industry leaders in subsectors known as
“Manufacturing Champions. ” The Little Giants and Manufacturing Champions serve as
model firms in China's innovation-driven development. China has established targets for
the number of firms wanted in each category by 2025 (see exhibit 9).
Exhibit 9

The cultivation system attempts to cover all the high-tech SME’s potential needs, of which
the most pressing is finance. The Little Giant or Manufacturing Champion title both
guarantees direct state funding and signals official certification to private investors – who
are paying close attention to government signals after recent crackdowns on tutoring and
internet companies. The government is facilitating listings for high -tech SMEs with such
measures as the opening of a new SME-dedicated stock exchange in Beijing. China’s state-
dominated banking system is also ramping up lending to high-tech SMEs. These steps have
been hugely successful: Little Giants made up 40 percent of initial public offerings (IPOs)
in 2022 on the Shanghai, Shenzhen and Beijing stock e xchanges. Of these, 17 were firms
in the healthcare sector (some 10 percent of all Little Giant listings in 2022).
29

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 23
The government is also guiding SOEs and state-owned research institutes and universities
to support certified high -tech SMEs as key customers or R&D partners. Beijing has also
started to tweak intellectual property rights regulations to support Chinese hig h-tech
SMEs.
Medical equipment is a key sector for Little Giants, which are mainly active in
manufacturing sectors highlighted in the 14th Five-Year Plan or the Made in China 2025
strategy. The 14th Five-Year Plan for the Medical Equipment Sector emphasizes the push
for Little Giants and Manufacturing Champions with global leadership in specific fields by
2025.30 Out of 9,279 Little Giant enterprises announced in the first four batches, 230 or
roughly 2.5 percent are MedTech enterprises (i.e., either in the field of medical devices, in
vitro diagnostics or medical consumables). 31 If this ratio held true for the fifth batch of
Little Giant enterprises announced in July 2023, then the current number of Little Giant
MedTech enterprises would be about 320 firms.
It is too early to judge the success of the program. However, it is clear that the lines
between private and state ownership are becoming more blurred in China’s current
economic model, as it aims to blend market forces into state intervention. If the high-tech
SME promotion push proves successful, it could pose a serious challenge for international
MedTech firms, both in China and in third markets.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 24
2. MEASURING THE VOLUME OF STATE SUPPORT
2.1 Quantifying state support in China’s MedTech sector
This report strives to estimate the volume of state support directed toward the MedTech
sector in China. It is a challenging endeavor due to the opacity of policy mechanisms in
operation and the use of regulatory measures that may put foreign firms at a
disadvantage. The central government is pushing to increase self -reliance and favor
indigenous firms over foreign ones through non -public direc tives on procurement.
Regulatory requirements such as country of origin and clinical trial requirements also put
foreign companies at a disadvantage.
Policies to support local firms are crafted so that China can claim plausible deniability
toward discriminatory measures. Government distortion of capital markets also occurs
indirectly through top-level guidance and state programs. For instance, the Little Giants
initiative encourages the flow of financial and other resources from public as well as
private actors to specific firms. The lack of data on procurement and localization measures
prevents us from producing a comprehensive estimate of the level of state support.
32

2.1.1 Compiling a sample of listed MedTech firms in China
What is possible is to refer to publicly available firm -based data on the financial
performance of listed companies in China. These sources give insights into some of the
policy mechanisms supporting MedTech Chinese firms, such as subsidies, tax incentives ,
and below -market financing, even if not the full picture. Added together, they give a
conservative estimate for state support, though the full extent is likely to be significantly
higher for many firms.
This report analyses the financial data of 122 Chinese MedTech firms listed on the
Shanghai, Shenzhen or Beijing stock exchanges. Each firm has been allocated to one of
three segments, depending on their main revenue source. The segments are:
 medical devices (55 firms)
 in vitro diagnostics (IVD) (50 firms)
 medical consumables (17 firms)
33
Additional subsets track the data for:
 sample companies granted “Little Giant” status (39 firms)
 sample companies that qualify as SMEs (between 53 and 73 firms in any given year)34

2.1.2 Headline figures for state support
We found the 122 MedTech firms in our sample saw their access to government support
grow from EUR 655 million in 2017, to EUR 2.8-3.8 billion in 2022 (from CNY 5 billion to
CNY 20-27 billion); these figures were obtained by aggregating their state support from

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 25
direct subsidies, tax benefits, below-market borrowing and below-market equity. On top
of the uneven playing field created by non-financial or non-measurable industrial policies
in the Chinese market, this financial support exacerbates the lack of fair com petition
between Chinese and foreign firms.
Beyond the subsidies data, taken directly from company financial reports, we have
estimated other forms of state support. Tax benefits include tax deductions for R&D
activities and preferential tax rates for high-tech firms. These estimates include two forms
of below-market financing, as identified by the OECD. Below-market borrowing refers to
loans provided with discounted interest rates. Below -market equity involves additional
equity contributions made to firms through state actors or government guidance. Given
the opaque nature of this form of state support, we have provided upper and lower
estimates to show its potential extent.
Exhibit 10

These figures show how measurable forms of state support impact the bottom line for
China’s MedTech firms. Over the 2017 to 2022 period, measured state support was
equivalent to 5.3 percent or 6.8 percent of company revenue on average, depending on
whether one takes the lower or upper estimate of below-market equity into account. Put
another way, state support amounted to 25 percent / 31 percent of company net profit, or
69 percent / 86 percent of company expenditure on R&D, based on the lower / upper
estimate of below-market equity respectively.
OECD analysis of government grants, tax concessions and below -market financing for
firms in China over the 2005 to 2019 period indicates state support accounted for
approximately 4.45 percent of revenue, in a survey of 13 sectors. This compared with 0.69
percent of revenue for firms in OECD countries.
35 The results of this study into the
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Below-market equity upper
estimate
Below-market equity lower
estimate
Below-market borrowing
Tax benefits
Subsdies
State support for MedTech firms in China is growing
State support estimates for 122 listed MedTech firms (CNY billion)
Sources: Company financial data, MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 26
MedTech sector in China are therefore in line with expectations. The OECD data
underscores the gulf between China and OECD countries in the volume of direct and
indirect subsidies granted to firms.
Exhibit 11

2.2 State support through direct subsidies and tax concessions
2.2.1 MedTech is a magnet for subsidies in China
The volume of subsidies granted to MedTech firms has steadily increased in recent years.
In 2022, EUR 462 million (CNY 3.27 billion) in subsidies went to the 122 firms, equivalent
to an average of EUR 3.8 million (CNY 26.8 million) for each company. The medical device
segment’s firms got the most subsidies on average, equal to EUR 4.0 million (CNY 28.1
million) each in 2022.

0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Below-market equity upper estimate
Below-market equity lower estimate
Below-market borrowing
Tax benefits
Subsidies
State support benchmark for China
State support benchmark for OECD
countries
China's MedTech firms got far more support than firms in
OECD countries
State support as a share of revenue for listed MedTech firms (percent)
Note: The state support benchmark for China and OECD countries covers the same forms of support calculated
for China's MedTech firms, namely subsidies, tax benefits, below-market borrowing and below-market equity
Sources: Company financial data, OECD, MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 27
Exhibit 12

Exhibit 13

0
500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
3.500
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Overall
Medical devices
IVD
Medical consumables
MedTech Little Giant
firms
MedTech SMEs
Subsidies received by Chinese MedTech firms have
doubled since 2018
Total subsidies received by sample set of Chinese MedTech firms (CNY millions)
Source: Wind
© MERICS
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Overall
Medical devices
IVD
Medical consumables
MedTech Little Giant
firms
MedTech SMEs
Listed companies (all
sectors)
MedTech firms receive more subsidies relative to their
size than other sectors
Subsidies as a share of revenue (based on aggregate values)
Source: Wind
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 28
Since 2017, the ratio of subsidies to revenue for MedTech firms fell slightly from 1.3
percent to 0.9 percent. Yet it was still more than twice the average for all listed firms on
the Shanghai, Shenzhen and Beijing stock exchanges. MedTech companies therefore
receive more subsidies relative to their revenue than firms in other sectors: The ratio is
highest for MedTech Little Giant companies and MedTech SME enterprises.

2.2.2 Tax benefits are a key form of financial support
Several kinds of tax benefits are available to high -tech manufacturing firms in China,
including MedTech ones. 36 Firms can qualify for a reduced 15 percent income tax rate,
down from 25 percent, based on their status as high and new technology enterprises
(HNTE). In 2021 the central government introduced monthly value- added tax credit
refunds for advanced manufactur ing firms to encourage equipment upgrades and
investment in technology.37 It has also implemented regulations to incentivize investment
in R&D, by allowing eligible industries to accelerate the depreciation of fixed assets and
deduct part of their expenses on overseas R&D activities from their taxable income.
38
China’s Enterprise Income Tax Law allows companies to deduct 100 percent of their R&D
expenses from their taxable income.
39 The percentage has grown since 2008 when new
rules introduced an additional “Super Deduction” of 50 percent on R&D expenses.40 It was
raised to 75 percent for manufacturing enterprises in 2018 and again to 100 percent in
2021.41 As a result, the total level of tax -deductible R&D expenses for manufacturing
enterprises reached 200 percent in 2021.
This study uses the data available in company financial statements to track the tax
concessions received based on their HNTE status and R&D expenses. This approach does
not cover all tax incentives, but rather provides a conservative estimate.
42 The results
show:
 Tax benefits for the 122 MedTech companies have grown from EUR 222 million
(CNY 1.7 billion) in 2017 to EUR 1.61 billion (CNY 11.4 billion) in 2022, a six -fold
increase.
 Average tax concessions for each firm have risen from EUR 1.9 million (CNY 14.3
million) in 2017 to EUR 13.3 million (CNY 93.8 million) in 2022.
 For Chinese MedTech firms, tax deductions have been worth about 2.6 percent of
revenue in recent years and are trending upwards. For MedTech SMEs and MedTech
Little Giant firms, this ratio has been above 3.7 percent since 2020.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 29
Exhibit 14

Exhibit 15

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Overall
Medical devices
IVD
Medical consumables
MedTech Little Giant
firms
MedTech SMEs
Medtech company tax benefits pass CNY 10 billion in 2022
Estimated value of tax benefits (CNY billion)
Sources: Wind, company annual reports, MERICS
© MERICS
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
4,5%
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Overall
Medical devices
IVD
Medical consumables
MedTech Little Giant firms
MedTech SMEs
Tax benefits are particularly important for Little Giants
and SMEs
R&D tax dedutions as a share of revenue, average
Sources: Wind, company annual reports, MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 30
2.3 Below-market financing delivers additional support
China’s state-controlled financial system grants it the ability to supply cheap equity and
debt to enterprises in strategic sectors, including the MedTech sector.

2.3.1 Below-market equity boosts capital injections
Below-market equity (BME) refers to the government provision of equity finance on terms
that are better than the market, for example by itself providing additional equity on non-
market terms. 43 Government signalling also sways private actors to invest in certain
sectors and government -endorsed companies, thus providing additional capital beyond
what could be expected without government intervention. Directives to guide
investments toward priority sectors, including biotechnology and medical devices, are
found in the Made in China 2025 strategy and the 14th Five-Year Plan.44
Due to the opaque nature of below -market equity, we derive two estimates for its value
based on the comparison of price-earnings (PE) ratios .45 For the lower estimate, we use
the average PE ratio of foreign firms plus one standard deviation as a benchmark for
capital allocation according to free market principles.
46 Any PE ratios of Chinese firms
above that are counted as indicating below-market equity (BME). If any additional capital
contributions were made to the firm that year, a proportional amount is counted as BME,
based on how much higher the firm’s PE ratio i s above the benchmark. For the upper
estimate, we set the average PE ratio of foreign firms as the benchmark and count any PE
ratios of Chinese firms above that as indicative of BME.47
The estimates produced indicate that:
 At the lower estimate, between 2017-2022, the 122 Chinese listed MedTech companies
benefited from EUR 236 million (CNY 1.8 billion) in below-market equity each year on
average, equivalent to 1.3 percent of revenue on average.
 At the upper estimate, the same firms benefited from EUR 551 million (CNY 4.2 billion)
in below-market equity each year on average between 2017-2022, equal to 2.8 percent
of revenue on average.
 Below-market equity peaked in 2022, at a range of EUR 0.8 -1.8 billion (CNY 5.4 -12.8
billion).

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 31
Exhibit 16

2.3.2 Below-market borrowing a minor factor for MedTech firms
State-run banks can offer companies preferential interest rates, i.e., below -market
borrowing (BMB). This study emulates an OECD methodology to assess the extent of this
form of state support. Corporate interest rates are calculated based on their financial
records. The average interest rate for all firms is then compared to an estimated
benchmark interest rate (based on an AA - credit rating for SMEs and an AA credit rating
for large firms).48
The results show that between 2017 and 2022, listed SMEs in the MedTech sector paid
interest rates that were 2.6 percent lower on average than the benchmark AA - rate.
Meanwhile, large listed firms paid interest rates that were 0.7 percent lower on average
than the benchmark AA rate. 49 These reduced interest payments translate to below -
market borrowing worth an average of EUR 45.9 million (CNY 350 million) each year for
the 122 MedTech firms, which is equivalent to 0.22 percent of revenue.
These figures for below-market borrowing are much smaller than those produced by the
OECD, which found below-market loans equaled roughly 2.3 percent of revenue for firms
in China. 50 Yet these values are likely to vary considerably depending on the industry.
Among the 122 MedTech firms in our sample, interest -bearing liabilities accounted for
only about 30 percent of revenue in any given year. As these firms have a relatively low
debt burden, a small variation in the interest rate granted them does not generate a
significant financial boost.

0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
4,5%
5,0%
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Lower estimate (CNY
billion, lhs)
Upper estimate (CNY
billion, lhs)
Lower estimate as a
share of revenue (rhs)
Upper estimate as a
share of revenue (rhs)
Chinese MedTech firms benefit from state guided equity flows
Below-market equity estimates in real value terms and as a share of revenue
Sources: Refinitiv, MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 32
Exhibit 17

2.4 Cultivation of MedTech Little Giant companies
China’s efforts to spur on the growth of high- tech SMEs are delivering significant
resources to smaller firms in the MedTech sector. As seen in the analysis on direct
subsidies and R&D tax deductions, such policies are of great importance to early -stage
high-tech SMEs, providing additional capital as they scale up. State support has a bigger
impact because of their smaller size. These firms are playing a key role in advancing the
industry’s localization and have clear ambitions to compete in the global market.
Examples of Little Giant firms in the MedTech sector include:
 Endovastec, a producer of stent grafts. It developed China’s first indigenous -made
abdominal aortic stent graft, and its aortic products have 28 percent of the domestic
market. Its aortic stent graft and delivery system ("Castor branched stent") was listed
in the sixth batch of “Manufacturing Champion Products" in 2021.
51 Endovastec spent
EUR 70 million (CNY 533 million) on R&D operations between 2017 and 2022.
 Sinomed is another Little Giant firm active in the coronary stent market. It produces
balloon catheters, coronary stents, and other related products. Sinomed had one of the
highest levels of R&D expenditure among Little Giant firms in our sample, spending EUR
128 million (CNY 977 million) between 2017-2022. Sinomed has subsidiaries in Beijing,
Suzhou, Hong Kong, the United States, Japan, the Netherlands and France. It has set out
its global ambitions, saying it is committed to enhancing the influence of Made in China
in the international arena.
-0,5%
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
2,0%
2,5%
3,0%
3,5%
4,0%
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
BMB estimate for large
firms (CNY million, lhs)
BMB estimate for SME
firms (CNY million, lhs)
Difference between real
and benchmark interest
rates for SMEs (rhs)
Difference between real
and benchmark interest
rates for large firms (rhs)
Preferential interest rates generate only marginal cost
savings for MedTech firms in China
Below-market borrowing (BMB) estimates for MedTech firms, split between SMEs and large firms
Sources: Wind, CEIC, MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 33
 Cofoe Medical Technology produces medical equipment for pregnant women,
newborns, and home medical equipment. Its key products include blood glucose meters
and blood pressure monitors. Cofoe’s annual reports mention the drive toward import
substitution as a catalyst for the industry. 52 Cofoe already exports to more than 46
countries.
 iRay Technology produces digital X -ray detectors with applications in fields like
medical, dental and radiotherapy. It is also one of the leading R&D investors among the
39 Little Giants in this study’s sample, spending EUR 90 million (CNY 685 million)
between 2017-2022. iRay has production facilities in Taicang and Haining, China, and
in Seoul, South Korea. Its detectors are used in over 80 countries, including the United
States and several European countries.

2.5 National S&T funding directed toward MedTech firms
This section attempts to estimate the value of China’s research funding in the MedTech
field. According to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), China invested EUR 437 billion
(CNY 3.09 trillion) on R&D in 2022 across all areas. That was a year -on-year increase of
10 percent and 19 percent more than Europe spent on R&D in 2021. China has not yet
published the breakdown for 2022, but in 2021 companies spent 76.9 percent,
government 13.3 percent and higher education institutes 7.8 percent. Due to a lack of
transparency, only a portion of the roughly EUR 56 billion (CNY 400 billion) that the
government spent in 2022 can be traced to specific sectors and technologies.
We estimate that about 10 percent of government R&D spending, or EUR 5.6 billion was
spent on medical technology, based on the relative importance of medical technology
across China’s main types of project-based research funding (see below). Estimates based
on OECD data indicate that government spending on R&D in the field of medical and health
sciences in 2021 was equivalent to EUR 5.7 billion in the United States, EUR 1.7 billion in
Germany and EUR 1.2 billion in Japan.
53
We were not able to discern how much of this funding went to companies. When
beneficiaries are mentioned at all, only principal investigators are named, many of them
affiliated with universities, laboratories or hospitals (see exhibit 18). However, companies
are often part of joint funding applications so they are, at the very least, among the main
indirect beneficiaries.
Project-based research funding is organized into three pillars: the S&T Megaprojects, the
National Key R&D Program (NKP) and the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC).
The national S&T Megaprojects are China’s flagship research projects. Medical
technologies are included in two out of the 16 projects, or 12.5 percent, although these
primarily focus on pharmaceuticals. For the 2020-2035 period, 15 megaprojects were set
in 2016, and “next-generation artificial intelligence” was added in 2017. The list includes
a megaproject on “healthcare” that seems primarily to support the Healthy China 2030
agenda, as it targets precision medicine, non-communicable diseases, reproductive health
and birth defects, among other things. Unfortunately, China has not published how much

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 34
funding is involved, nor who gets it. Researchers at Wuhan University of Science and
Technology reported winning a EUR 2.1 million (CNY 15 million) grant in 2022 under the
“brain and brain-inspired science” megaproject, for research on Alzheimer’s disease.
54 In
the 2006 -2020 period, a megaproject on “major new drugs” was estimated to have
received EUR 6.4 billion (CNY 55 billion) over the entire funding period. Because the S&T
Megaprojects typically tackle major socioeconomic challenges, they often involve central
SOEs and national champions, such as China Mobile and Huawei which took part in the
“Next-generation mobile internet” megaproject that ended in 2020.
Exhibit 18: China’s leading medical technology research groups, according to public
research funding records
TOP 10 NKP WINNERS BY PROJECT COUNT TOP 10 NSFC WINNERS BY PROJECT COUNT
INSTITUTION PROJECTS
WON
INSTITUTION PROJECTS
WON
Zhejiang University 17 Shanghai Jiaotong
University
511
People’s Liberation Army
General Hospital
16 Peking University 289
Shanghai Jiaotong University 15 Sichuan University 276
Sun Yat -sen University 13 Zhejiang University 275
Peking University Third
Hospital
13 Huazhong University of
Science and Technology
267
Beijing Tiantan Hospital of
Capital Medical University
12 Fudan University 254
University of Science and
Technology of China
11 Capital Medical University 246
Peking University 11 Sun Yat -sen University 244
Fu Wai Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences
11 Xi‘an Jiaotong University 171
People’s Liberation Army
Third Military Medical
University
10 Central South University 142

The National Key R&D Program (NKP) focuses on research that is close to marketization.
About 10 percent of the 5,261 projects awarded this type of funding had terminology in
their project titles that we have linked to medical technology.55 The dataset is based on an
online portal from China’s Ministry of Science and Technology and covers the 2016-2021
period. The portal mentions the funding granted in the first three years (2016-2019). We

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 35
were thereby able to trace the funding for 460 out of the 546 projects that met the criteria.
They averaged about EUR 2.1 million (CNY 15.8 million) per project, and EUR 942 million
(CNY 7.19 billion) in total. Extrapolating this to the entire set gives a total of EUR 1.12
billion (CNY 8.61 billion) over a five-year period, or EUR 224 million a year on average.
The NSFC supports basic and early -stage research. About 21 percent of the 518,354
projects that the foundation funded met the same criteria for medical technology that we
used for the NKP. The dataset is based on official announcements and covers a much
longer period, from 1994 to 2023, though its data for the last three years is less complete.
The dataset is also a hundred times larger than that of the NKPs because it covers regional
branches. Nevertheless, the total funding for the 108,369 projects that m et the criteria
was only EUR 700 million (CNY 5.93 billion), or EUR 63,800 (CNY 542,000) per project on
average. Funding increased dramatically in 2011 and hovered around EUR 65-91 million
(CNY 500-700 million) per year between 2012 and 2020.
Combining these datasets enabled us to extrapolate and estimate how much the Chinese
state invests in medical technology R&D. If we take the lower limit of 10 percent of
projects dedicated to medical technology (it is 12.5 percent for healthcare megaprojec ts,
10 percent for MedTech NKP and 21 percent for MedTech NSFC) and then assume that
this 10 percent of projects also represents 10 percent of government R&D expenditure,
that translates to EUR 5.6 billion of the total EUR 56 billion that was spent in 2022. A major
caveat is that this approach assumes a stable relation between projects and funding,
though we know that funding amounts vary substantively. The estimation can be
improved through a more granular data analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 36
3. THE POSITION OF CHIN ESE FIRMS IN THIRD MARKETS
The estimates for state support presented in Chapter 2 demonstrate that China’s MedTech
firms benefit from substantial financial assistance, more than in other advanced
economies. On top of this, non-financial measures such as the discriminatory application
of regulations and procurement programs provide key advantages. These strengthen the
position of China’s MedTech firms in their home market and enable them to compete more
effectively abroad.
While China’s domestic market presents the strongest growth potential in the short term,
third markets are likely to emerge as the main arena of competition between Chinese and
foreign medical technology firms in the future, as is currently taking place in the battery
and EV sectors. This chapter investigates recent trends in the international MedTech
products trade. It then explores the outlook for MedTech products made in China and in
the global market.
56

3.1 Reviewing China’s position in the international MedTech trade
3.1.1 China has become a key player alongside the EU and the United States
China’s role in international trade in MedTech products has grown tremendously over the
past two decades. Around 2000, China partook in less than 3 percent of global trade in
MedTech products in terms of value. By 2021, China accounted for 12.4 percent of exports
and 8 percent of imports. This amounts to almost EUR 34 billion in exports annually (USD
40 billion), and EUR 21 billion in imports (USD 25 billion). In 20 percent of the customs
lines covering MedTech products, China supplies more than 30 percent of global exports.
For two catego ries – Mechano-therapy apparatus and non -mechanically propelled
wheelchairs – China’s share is more than two-thirds.
Since 2000, China’s rise in global MedTech exports appears to have come primarily at the
expense of US exports (possible explanations for this trend are given in section 3.2.2). The
United States has seen its share of global exports steadily decline. In subcategories where
China’s share has increased significantly, the drop in US export share has been prominent.
While the EU’s share of global exports has been impacted in selected product categories,
its overall share of global MedTech exports has remained steady (see exhibit 19).
The same can be said of other significant players. The combined share of world exports
for Japan, South Korea, Japan, Malaysia, and Mexico has stayed broadly stable over the last
decade. Altogether, those countries make up about 17 percent of global MedTech exports.
Apart from Japan in diagnostic imaging and Mexico in other medical devices, none act as
a production base for exports on the same level as the EU, United States or China. Only
syringes, needles and catheters display a slight correlation between an uptick in Chinese-
made exports and a break in the trend for one of these countries, namely Mexico.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 37
Exhibit 19

Exhibit 20

0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU 27 USA Other important exporters*
The EU has maintained its share of global MedTech
exports despite the China's growing share
Share of global MedTech exports for the main exporting economies
* Other important exporters are: Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore and South Korea
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
China EU27 USA
China has become an important MedTech products
destination but not on the level of the US and EU
Share of global MedTech imports among the main importing economies
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 38
A review of MedTech exports by product category shows China’s share has already or is
on track to surpass the United States and is approaching the EU’s share in many areas, like
medical consumables, patient aids and dental products. China now accounts for about 20
percent of global exports in each of these product categories (see exhibits 21, 22 and 23).
On a more granular level, there seems to have been a crowding -out effect on EU export
growth in some products due to the rise of Chinese-made products, such as catheters and
syringes (see exhibits 24 and 25). In other areas, the growth in Chinese exports has been
rather moderate, as with diagnostic imaging (up from 1 percent of world exports in 2000
to 11 percent in 2021) and orthopedics and prosthetics (up from 1 to 4 percent). These
are segments where the United States and EU still account for more than h alf of global
exports.

Exhibit 21

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU 27 USA
China's rise has dented US leadership in consumables
Share of world MedTech exports by broad categories (simple average): Consumables
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 39
Exhibit 22

Exhibit 23

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU 27 USA
China has become a co -leader in patient aids exports
Share of world MedTech exports by broad categories (simple average): Patient Aids
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU 27 USA
PRC dental products sales on track to challenge the EU's lead
Share of world MedTech exports by broad categories (simple average): Dental Products
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 40
Exhibit 24

Exhibit 25

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU 27 USA Mexico Other large exporters*
© MERICS
* Japan, Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
The EU has retained its lead in catheters
Total trade in 901832 by China, the EU and the US, in million USD
0
200
400
600
800
1.000
1.200
1.400
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU 27 USA Mexico Other large exporters*
© MERICS
* Japan, Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
Chinese-made syringes recently overtook other leaders
Total exports in HS901831 by China, the EU and the US, in million USD

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 41
Broadly speaking, the main products that make up China’s MedTech trade have changed
little over the past two decades. There remains a clear difference in the kinds of products
traded by China on the one hand, and the EU and the United States on the other. China’s
exports are more concentrated on lower-end products; therapeutic appliances, bandages
and dressing products still make up 30 percent of all Chinese MedTech exports. The EU
and the US exports are more diversified, with a greater weight on high-end products, such
as laboratory reagents, catheters, or artificial joints.
That is not to say that nothing has changed. In China’s export mix, the diminishing
importance of bandages and dressing products, from 19 percent in 2000 to 6 percent in
2021, and the slightly increased diversification toward more complex products – such as
electrodiagnostic apparatus – is noteworthy. This is unsurprising as it tracks the overall
path of China’s economy, which has grown in complexity and capacity since the beginning
of the century.
China’s import figures suggest that domestic demand for more high -end MedTech
products has grown, as have local production capacities in other products. This is reflected
in growing imports of more advanced surgical instruments (which made up 27 percent of
China’s MedTech imports in 2021) and a drop in imports of portable aids. Meanwhile, the
share of imaging machinery and radiation apparatus decreased from 34 percent to 15
percent of Chinese MedTech imports from 2000 to 2021, like ly because of increased
domestic production capacities (partly driven by foreign firms localizing their
production).
57

3.1.2 China’s export advances are most evident in emerging economies
All countries around the globe have witnessed significant growth in the inflow of Chinese
MedTech products. Yet the uptick has been most prominent in low -income countries,
whose imports from China are mostly in basic products (i.e., more price -sensitive and
high-volume products).58 For instance, between 2017-2021, China’s exports of bandages
and dressings to low and lower-middle income countries were more than double those of
the EU and the United States combined.
China has also increased its exports to middle - and high -income countries, but the
importance of the EU and the United States as suppliers of MedTech products is greater.
In middle -income countries, China is not visibly challenging EU or US exports as yet,
except for imaging parts and accessories.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 42
Exhibit 26

Exhibit 27

0
10.000
20.000
30.000
40.000
50.000
60.000
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU27 USA
Chinese MedTech products now have a decent share
of the market in high -income economies
Exports of MedTech goods to high-income markets (USD million)
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS
0
5.000
10.000
15.000
20.000
25.000
30.000
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021China EU27 USA
Growth in middle-income markets has been strong
for all major players
Exports of MedTech goods to middle-income markets (USD million)
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 43
Exhibit 28

Looking at the geographic distribution of export competition, China is well positioned in
Africa, where Chinese MedTech exports are one third of EU exports and twice the level of
US exports. Two decades ago, China’s exports to Africa were only about 10 percent that of
the EU or the United States. Turning to south and southeast Asia, China’s MedTech exports
are nearing the level of EU exports in India and have overtaken those of the EU and United
States in Indonesia and the Philippines.
There is no specific pattern of increases in Chinese exports to Belt and Road Initiative
(BRI) partner countries, despite advances in some emerging markets. Even looking at
subgroups of BRI countries, be it by region (Africa, Asia, etc.) or by income level (low-
/middle-/high- income countries), there is no clear trend of stronger Chinese exports
above the level visible elsewhere.

3.1.3 Bilateral EU –China trade in MedTech products
Trade in MedTech products between the EU and China delivered a substantial surplus for
the EU, up till the beginning of the Covid -19 pandemic in 2020. Bilateral trade relations
started off balanced in the 2000s, then evolved into a surplus for the EU during the 2010s.
From 2015 to 2019, the bilateral surplus for the EU averaged EUR 1.3 billion (USD 1.5
billion) a year.

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021
China EU27 USA
China is catching up fastest in low -income markets
Exports of MedTech goods to low-income markets (USD million)
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 44
Exhibit 29

A recent surge in Chinese MedTech exports to the EU has reversed the trade balance,
yielding a deficit of EUR 600 billion (USD 725 billion) in 2021. Almost all that rise was due
to an increase in exports of oxygen products (for 2020 only), reagents and mec hano-
therapy appliances. During the Covid -19 pandemic, EU MedTech imports from China
almost doubled. The rapid shift was a stark departure from pre-pandemic trends.
In contrast, the expansion of EU MedTech exports to China began in 2017/18 and
embraces numerous product types (see exhibit 29). This could imply that EU export
growth will remain high beyond the pandemic period. The share of EU MedTech exports
going to China has grown progressively, reaching 10 percent or EUR 7 billion (USD 8
billion) in 2021, up from about EUR 2.5 billion in 20 11 (USD 3 billion), thanks mostly to
surgical instruments.
China has been a strong growth market for EU exports, with an average annual increase
of close to 19 percent over the past two decades. Some standouts include X-ray materials
(tubes and films) and ophthalmic instruments. China now accounts for over 20 percent of
the EU’s exports of these products, compared to almost nothing two decades ago.

-10.000
-8.000
-6.000
-4.000
-2.000
0
2.000
4.000
6.000
8.000
10.000
Consumables Dental Products Diagnostic Imaging
Orthopaedics & Prosthetics Other Medical Devices Patient Aids
Covid tilted Sino-EU MedTech trade into a surplus for China
EU-China bilateral trade in MedTech goods in million USD, with Chinese imports in negative values
Note: Chinese exports listed as positive values, EU exports listed as negative values
Sources: CEPII (Baci) and MERICS computation on a perimeter of MedTech by MedTech Europe
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 45
3.2 The outlook for MedTech competition in third markets
China’s growing competitiveness in the MedTech sector is felt most sharply within its own
domestic market. However, the same factors making that competition difficult – from the
legitimate strength and innovativeness of China’s scientists, engineers and entrepreneurs,
to extensive state aid and the distortions it can bring – are and will be projected into third
market competition.

3.2.1 China’s playbook for internationalization
The move from domestic domination to global competitiveness is a well -worn road for
China’s national champions. The combination of joint venture (JV) requirements for
foreign investors, the suite of state aid directed to indigenous firms, and especially
procurement and market access issues (first as a means of support, then as a means of
protection) have helped China’s companies transform themselves into world leaders in
the rail, shipping, and 5G sectors.59

Protectionism, procurement, and state aid help China’s rail champions go global
China’s domestic rail industry has been dominated by SOEs for freight and non-high-
speed passenger trains. These firms have long enjoyed a protected home market and
extensive state aid. Having mastered traditional rail technologies and built an
economy of scale to become globally competitive, Ch ina’s rail industry set its sights
on high-speed rail (HSR).60
China opened up to foreign investment in local production of HSR suppliers.
Investors were required to enter into JVs with local firms. However, given the
abundance of competitive players in the market, foreign firms such as Bombardier,
Siemens, Kawasaki and Alstom accepted local partners in order to secure contracts
supplying Beijing’s ambition for a massive national HSR grid.
Over time, the JV tech transfers helped local partners catch up technologically until
indigenous suppliers had developed ‘good enough’ HSR technology.
61 Once that level
was reached, procurement greatly favored indigenous suppliers and the extensive
state aid provided to those (mostly state -run) firms in a protected home market
generated massive economies of scale.
Now, China’s HSR industry is a global one. With additional state support from the
Belt and Road Initiative creating additional demand for both HSR and traditional rail,
China’s rail footprint overseas has displaced many competitors and taken significant
market share.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 46
3.2.2 Can China’s MedTech players displace foreign firms in third markets?
The plentiful state aid and protection outlined in this report are all likely to boost the
competitiveness of China’s MedTech players in third markets moving forward.

How are they doing so far?
As outlined in section 3.1.1, China’s MedTech exports have not yet meaningfully displaced
EU exports at the aggregate level. By contrast, US MedTech companies seem to have lost
significant ground to Chinese competitors. A thorough evaluation of the reasons behind
this trend goes beyond the scope of this report, but possible explanations for the greater
impact on US exports could include:
 First, there may be more direct competition between US and Chinese firms because of
higher levels of product overlap. They may be more likely to sell similar products, or to
sell a given product within the same value category, so China’s entrance into that
segment could have displaced US exports.
 Second, it may be that US MedTech firms have offshored more production to China,
including for exports, so the outcome is higher Chinese exports and lower US ones.
 Third, US firms may have offshored more than EU firms into third markets, meaning
their sales in those countries are not reflected in US trade data.
 Fourth, EU strengths like brand reputation as well as standards (like CE) may have
helped EU MedTech firms to increase sales in third markets in ways that US and Chinese
manufacturers are unable to replicate.
However, while EU exports have remained resilient overall, certain segments have seen
higher than average displacement by exports from China. In 2021, China’s exports of
catheters overtook the US level and were approaching the EU’s level, while China’s exports
of syringes overtook both the EU and the United States. China is challenging the leadership
of both major rivals in X-ray technology exports to middle-income markets. More broadly,
it is closing the gap with the EU on exports to Africa, South Asia and Southeast Asia.
Such trends could be driven partly by traditional competitive advantage, but the abundant
state aid received by Chinese firms in their home market ought not be overlooked.
 The
multitude of preferential policy measures, including procurement and financial support,
enables Chinese firms to develop economies of scale that can be projected into third
markets.62 This has resulted in a growing capacity to compete with European firms in the
budget and mid-value ranges for certain MedTech equipment. European competitors are
likely to feel increased pressure in high -end markets too as China’s MedTech producers
continue to climb the value chain, in line with the aims embodied in its national industrial
policy.

How might they do in the future?
Although China’s MedTech sector enjoys similar advantages to its rail, shipping, and 5G
industries, there are also some distinct differences. The MedTech sector is considerably

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 47
more fragmented, with multiple players in firms of all sizes, than the far more
concentrated industries where China Inc has gone global in the past. Larger Chinese
MedTech firms such as Mindray and United Imaging are already pushing competition in
overseas markets and will continue to do so. Meanwhile, SMEs that are still building up
capacity within China may have less assertive internationalization plans – though some of
the most advanced and fast growing under schemes like the Little Giants initiative are
going abroad earlier.
Just how effective the Little Giants initiative is in promoting MedTech firms will be an
important factor in the internationalization of China’s home -grown firms. In the past,
China’s industrial policy has prioritized more consolidated industries. The stru ggles of
advanced SMEs in China have been noted for many years, but this has begun to change. To
the degree that the Little Giants succeed, European MedTech companies can expect
greater direct competition in many fields where Europe’s own hidden champions have
long reigned. Firms such as Endovastec, Sinomed and iRay Technology are developing
local alternatives to imported products and looking to expand overseas (see Chapter 2 for
details).
More broadly, how Beijing manages different priorities in the healthcare sector, and to
what degree it seeks to stimulate or constrain domestic competition, will have a
considerable impact on how China’s MedTech firms do overseas. When Chinese firms that
already enjoy a protected home market project themselves overseas, they can benefit not
only from state aid, but also from cannibalizing their home market to gain market share
overseas – i.e., if dominant in a given technology in a market devoid of competit ion, they
can raise domestic margins to lower overseas ones and thereby offer lower prices abroad
to secure market share.
However, the opposite scenario is also possible. China’s government finances could face
considerable strains from debt and economic growth issues combined with the rising
burden of society’s healthcare costs. If so, Beijing may then decide that securing lo wer
prices for a given MedTech product domestically is more important to strategic goals than
gaining global market share. The potential for such a scenario is more acute in MedTech
than many other sectors due to the growing use of volume -based procurement, which
hands single suppliers a huge share of the domestic market if they win bids, but at the cost
of a massive cut to margins.
63
That could put pressure on affected firms to raise margins overseas to compensate for lost
margins at home, which in turn would limit their ability to undercut pricing when facing
off with foreign competitors. Similar pressure is already pushing some of Ch ina’s
consumer internet and e-commerce players to look overseas for markets and margins to
compensate for weaker opportunities at home after a series of crackdowns on their sector
between 2020 -2022. 64 As a result, if Chinese M edTech firms are pushed to find
profitability overseas, that may be a catalyst for them to enter third markets and compete
with European players there. However, because those Chinese firms would be looking
abroad to replace lost margins in China, they would be less able to slash margins overseas,
which would make competition with them fairer.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 48
As such, speculating on future third market competition remains a mixed bag in a highly
segmented and very diverse industry. There will likely be a wide range of archetypes of
Chinese competitors in third markets. Some will cannibalize their protected home market
and leverage state aid to the fullest when they go abroad and apply cutthroat tactics to
compete for market share, while others will struggle to expand globally as their
shareholders demand high margins overseas to compensate for Beijing’s strangli ng of
margins, and with many other options in between.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 49
ANNEX
Annex 1: Products covered by each segment in the state support analysis
SEGMENT PRODUCTS
Medical
devices
Dental cements, Medical X -ray film (flat), Medical X -ray film (rolled),
Medical, surgical sterilizers , Wheelchairs, not mechanically propelled,
Wheelchairs, mechanically propelled, Electrocardiographs, Ultrasound,
MRI, Scintigraphic apparatus, Other electrodiagnostic apparatus, Ultra -
violet or infra -red ray apparatus, Dental drills, Dental instruments,
Ophthalmic instruments, Blood pressure monitors, Endoscopy apparatus,
Dialysis apparatus, Transfusion apparatus, Anesthetic apparatus &
instruments, Mechano -therapy apparatus, Therapeutic respiration
apparatus, Fixation Devices, Artificial teeth, Other dental fittings, Artificial
joints, Other artificial body parts, Hearing aids, Pacemakers, Other
portable aids, CT scanners, Dental X -ray, Other medical X- ray apparatus, A,
B, C ray apparatus, X -ray tubes, Other imaging parts & accessories, Dental
chairs, Hospital furniture, Contact lenses, Artificial joints, Orthopedic or
fracture appliances, Other artificial body parts, Compound optical
microscopes other than stereoscopic or those for microphotography,
microcinematography or microprojection, Mineralized collagen artificial
bone repair products used in orthopedics, oral or plastic surgery, and
neurosurgery, Aortic balloon dilation catheters, Aortic stent grafts,
Biological hard brain (ridge) membrane patch, Artificial crystal, Titanium
skull fixing / repair products, Spinal implant, Artificial dural (spinal)
membrane patch, Biofilm, oral repair membrane, Blood glucose meter
IVD Blood-grouping reagents, Prepared culture media for development or
maintenance of micro -organisms (including viruses and the like) or of
plant, human or animal cells, Diagnostic or laboratory reagents on a
backing and prepared diagnostic or laboratory reagents, whether or not
on a backing, other than those of heading 3002 or 3006, Life science
plastic equipment (cell culture plates, cell culture bottles, vacuum and
needle filters, disposable serum pipettes, centrifuge tubes), Biological
diagnosis Reagent, Urine tests, Reproductive health detection reagent,
enterovirus detection reagent, blood infectious diseases diagnostics
reagent, Coagulation tests systems, Gene sequencing technology for
clinical applications
Medical
consumables
Medical dressings (adhesive), Medical dressings (non -adhesive), Suturing
Materials, First -aid boxes & kits, Ostomy products, Surgical gloves,
Syringes (with/without needles), Tubular metal needles/needles for
sutures, Other needles, catheters, cannulae, et c

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 50

Annex 2: HS codes included in the trade data analysis
AREAS
(CATEGORY 1)
CATEGORY
(CATEGORY 2)
SUBCATEGORY HS6 CODE
(CATEGORY 3)
Consumables Bandages &
Dressings
Medical dressings (adhesive) 300510
Consumables Bandages &
Dressings
Medical dressings (non -adhesive) 300590
Consumables Suturing
Materials
Suturing Materials 300610
Consumables Other
Consumables
Blood-grouping reagents 300620
Consumables Other
Consumables
First-aid boxes & kits 300650
Consumables Other
Consumables
Ostomy products 300691
Consumables Other
Consumables
Surgical gloves 401511
Consumables Syringes,
Needles &
Catheters
Syringes (with/without needles) 901831
Consumables Syringes,
Needles &
Catheters
Tubular metal needles/needles for
sutures
901832
Consumables Syringes,
Needles &
Catheters
Other needles, catheters, cannulae,
etc
901839
Consumables Other
Consumables
Prepared culture media for
development or maintenance of
micro-organisms (including viruses
and the like) or of plant, human or
animal cells
382100
Consumables Other
Consumables
Diagnostic or laboratory reagents
on a backing and prepared
diagnostic or laboratory reagents,
whether or not on a backing, other
than those of heading 3002 or 3006
382200
Dental
Products
Instruments &
Supplies
Dental cements 300640

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 51
Dental
Products
Capital
Equipment
Dental drills 901841
Dental
Products
Instruments &
Supplies
Dental instruments 901849
Dental
Products
Instruments &
Supplies
Artificial teeth 902121
Dental
Products
Instruments &
Supplies
Other dental fittings 902129
Dental
Products
Capital
Equipment
Dental X -ray 902213
Dental
Products
Capital
Equipment
Dental chairs 940210
Diagnostic
Imaging
Imaging Parts &
Accessories
Contrast media 300630
Diagnostic
Imaging
Imaging Parts &
Accessories
Medical X -ray film (flat) 370110
Diagnostic
Imaging
Imaging Parts &
Accessories
Medical X -ray film (rolled) 370210
Diagnostic
Imaging
Electrodiagnostic
Apparatus
Electrocardiographs 901811
Diagnostic
Imaging
Electrodiagnostic
Apparatus
Ultrasound 901812
Diagnostic
Imaging
Electrodiagnostic
Apparatus
MRI 901813
Diagnostic
Imaging
Electrodiagnostic
Apparatus
Scintigraphic apparatus 901814
Diagnostic
Imaging
Electrodiagnostic
Apparatus
Other electrodiagnostic apparatus 901819
Diagnostic
Imaging
Radiation
Apparatus
CT scanners 902212
Diagnostic
Imaging
Radiation
Apparatus
Other medical X -ray apparatus 902214
Diagnostic
Imaging
Radiation
Apparatus
A, B, C ray apparatus 902221
Diagnostic
Imaging
Imaging Parts &
Accessories
X-ray tubes 902230
Diagnostic
Imaging
Imaging Parts &
Accessories
Other imaging parts & accessories 902290

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 52
Orthopedics
& Prosthetics
Fixation Devices Fixation Devices 902110
Orthopedics
& Prosthetics
Artificial Joints Artificial joints 902131
Orthopedics
& Prosthetics
Other Artificial
Body Parts
Other artificial body parts 902139
Orthopedics
& Prosthetics
Artificial Joints Artificial joints 902111
Orthopedics
& Prosthetics
Artificial Joints Orthopedic or fracture appliances 902119
Orthopedics
& Prosthetics
Artificial Joints Other artificial body parts 902130
Other
Medical
Devices
Medical, Surgical
Sterilizers
Medical, surgical sterilizers 841920
Other
Medical
Devices
Wheelchairs Wheelchairs, not mechanically
propelled
871310
Other
Medical
Devices
Wheelchairs Wheelchairs, mechanically
propelled
871390
Other
Medical
Devices
Ultra-Violet Or
Infra-Red Ray
Apparatus
Ultra-violet or infra -red ray
apparatus
901820
Other
Medical
Devices
Ophthalmic
Instruments
Ophthalmic instruments 901850
Other
Medical
Devices
Other
Instruments &
Appliances
Blood pressure monitors, endoscopy
apparatus, dialysis apparatus,
transfusion apparatus, anesthetic
apparatus & instruments
901890
Other
Medical
Devices
Hospital
Furniture
Hospital furniture 940290
Other
Medical
Devices
Ophthalmic
Instruments
Contact lenses 900130
Other
Medical
Devices
Ophthalmic
Instruments
Compound optical microscopes
other than stereoscopic or those for
microphotography,
microcinematography or
microprojection
901180
Patient Aids Therapeutic
Appliances
Mechano- therapy apparatus 901910

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 53

Patient Aids Therapeutic
Appliances
Therapeutic respiration apparatus 901920
Patient Aids Portable Aids Hearing aids 902140
Patient Aids Portable Aids Pacemakers 902150
Patient Aids Portable Aids Other portable aids 902190

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 54
ENDNOTES

1 Witmed, “China’s Medical Device Market Is the Second Largest in the World at 958.2 Billion! 中国医械市场全球第二，规模
9582 亿！,” May 4, 2023, http://www.cn-witmed.com/list/13/6215.html.
2 Tax benefits include tax deductions for R&D activities and preferential tax rates for high-tech firms. Below-market
borrowing refers to loans provided with discounted interest rates. Below-market equity refers to additional equity
contributions made to firms through state actors or government guidance. Due to the opaque nature of this form of state
support, we provide a lower (more conservative) and upper (more realistic) estimate of its potential extent.
3 The other important exporters are Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore and South Korea.
4 Witmed, “China’s Medical Device Market Is the Second Largest in the World at 958.2 Billion! 中国医械市场全球第二，规模
9582 亿！,” May 4, 2023, http://www.cn-witmed.com/list/13/6215.html;
Exchange rates between EUR-USD and EUR-CNY values in this report are based on the yearly average, as provided by
the Bundesbank. See:
Deutsche Bundesbank, “Yearly Average - Euro Foreign Exchange Reference Rates Published by the European Central
Bank,” n.d., https://www.bundesbank.de/dynamic/action/en/statistics/time-series-databases/time-series-
databases/759784/759784?statisticType=BBK_ITS&listId=www_sdks_b01012_1&treeAnchor=WECHSELKURSE.
5 CSET, “Translation: 35 Key ‘Stranglehold’ Technologies ‘卡脖子’的 35 项关键技术,” August 16, 2021,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/35-key-stranglehold-technologies/.
6 National Innovation Center for Advanced Medical Devices (NMED) 国家高性能医疗器械创新中心,
https://nmed.org.cn/index.html.
7Shenzhen Development and Reform Commission, “Notice of the Shenzhen Municipal Development and Reform
Commission on the Issuance of Three Policy Measures Including ‘Several Measures of Shenzhen to Promote the High-
Quality Development of Biomedical Industry Clusters’ 深圳市发展和改革委员会关于印发《深圳市促进生物医药产业集群高质量
发展的若干措施》等三个政策措施的通知,” January 1, 2023,
http://www.sz.gov.cn/zfgb/2023/gb1273/content/post_10403843.html.
8 Rebecca Arcesati, Alexander Brown, and Gregor Sebastian, “MERICS China Industries: Data Market + Foreign Talent +
Bio-Based Materials,” February 1, 2023, https://www.merics.org/de/merics-briefs/data-market-foreign-talent-bio-
based-materials.
9 Xinhua News Agency, “Government Work Report - March 5, 2021 at the Fourth Session of the Thirteenth National
People’s Congress 政府工作报告——2021 年 3 月 5 日在第十三届全国人民代表大会第四次会议上,” March 12, 2021,
https://www.gov.cn/premier/2021-03/12/content_5592671.htm.
10 “Measuring Distortions in International Markets: Below-Market Finance,” OECD Trade Policy Papers, vol. 247, OECD
Trade Policy Papers, May 12, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1787/a1a5aa8a-en.
11 NDRC and MOFCOM, “Encouraged Foreign Investment Catalog (2022) 鼓励外商投资产业目录（2022 年版）,” October 26,
2022, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2022-10/28/content_5722417.htm.
12 Xinhua News Agency, “Central Bank Sets up Special Refinancing for Equipment Upgrading and Reconstruction 央行设立
设备更新改造专项再贷款,” September 28, 2022, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2022-09/28/content_5713466.htm.
13 Sohu, “Official Order! Comprehensively Promote the Allocation of Domestically Produced Large-Scale Medical
Equipment! 官方下令！全面推进配置国产大型医疗设备！,” April 10, 2023,
https://www.sohu.com/a/665196333_121245970.
14 He Wei, “‘Localization’ Buzzword for Siemens Healthineers in China Expansion,” China Daily, June 15, 2022,
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202206/15/WS62a937a8a310fd2b29e62ce6.html.
15 European Chamber of Commerce in China, “European Business in China Position Paper 2022/2023,” September 11,
2022, https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/publications-position-paper.
16 China News, “The Decrease in Patients’ Income Has Led to the Bankruptcy and Reorganization of Hundreds of Private
Hospitals in the Past Two Years 患者减少收入下滑，疫情两年多来上百家民营医院破产重整,” July 11, 2022,
https://www.chinanews.com.cn/cj/2022/07-11/9801090.shtml.
17 European Chamber of Commerce in China, “Business Confidence Survey 2023,” June 21, 2023,
https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/publications-business-confidence-survey.
18 CMS, “Latest Development in PRC Legislation on Government Procurement,” September 1, 2022,
https://cms.law/en/chn/publication/latest-development-in-prc-legislation-on-government-procurement.
19 Reuters, “China’s ‘Buy Chinese’ Targets for State Firms against US Trade Deal, WTO: US Sources,” August 3, 2021,
https://www.scmp.com/economy/china-economy/article/3143582/chinas-buy-chinese-targets-state-companies-
against-us-trade.
20 Rebecca Arcesati et al., “MERICS China Industries: Medical Equipment + Cruise Ships + Drones,” September 7, 2022,
https://merics.org/en/merics-briefs/medical-equipment-cruise-ships-drones.
21 Fredrik Erixon, Oscar Guinea, and Anna Guildea, “When the State Becomes the Only Buyer: Monopsony in China’s Public
Procurement of Medical Technology” (ECIPE, March 2022), https://ecipe.org/publications/monopsony-in-chinas-
public-procurement-medical-technology/.https://ecipe.org/publications/monopsony-in-chinas-public-procurement-
medical-technology/; Amanda Pedersen, “China’s VBP Regulation Impacts Medtronic Sales” (Medical Device and
Diagnostic Industry (MD+DI), February 22, 2023), https://www.mddionline.com/regulations/chinas-vbp-regulation-
impacts-medtronic-sales.
22 Komral Urde, “Volume-Based Procurement (VBP) - MedTech” (BEROE, October 11, 2022),
https://www.beroeinc.com/whitepaper/volume-based-procurement-vbp-medtech/.
23 Market share estimated based on the share of procurement contracts won.
24 State Council, “Regulation on Supervision and Administration of Medical Devices 医疗器械监督管理条例,” March 18, 2021,
https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2021-03/18/content_5593739.htm.
25 “European Business in China Position Paper 2022/2023.”
26 European Chamber of Commerce in China, “Business Confidence Survey 2023,” June 21, 2023,
https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/press-releases/3529.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 55

27 See Articles 15 & 16 of State Administration for Market Regulation, “Medical Device Registration and Filing
Management Measures 医疗器械注册与备案管理办法,” August 26, 2021,
https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2021/content_5654783.htm;
2014 regulations, SFDA, “Medical Device Registration Management Measures 医疗器械注册管理办法,” July 30, 2014,
https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2014/content_2758500.htm;
2002 regulations, NMPA, “Notice on Issuing the ‘Standards for Acceptance of Registration Documents for Domestic Class
III and Imported Medical Devices’ 关于印发《境内第三类和进口医疗器械注册文件受理标准》的通知, ” January 22, 2002,
https://www.nmpa.gov.cn/directory/web/nmpa/xxgk/fgwj/gzwj/gzwjylqx/20020122010101715.html.https://www.
nmpa.gov.cn/directory/web/nmpa/xxgk/fgwj/gzwj/gzwjylqx/20020122010101715.html;
See also study by ECIPE, Fredrik Erixon et al., “China’s Public Procurement Protectionism and Europe’s Response: The
Case of Medical Technology” (ECIPE, September 2021), https://ecipe.org/publications/chinas-public-procurement-
protectionism/.
28 Brown, Alexander, et. al. “Accelerator State: How China fosters “Little Giant” companies,” MERICS, August 3, 2023,
https://www.merics.org/sites/default/files/2023-07/MERICS%20Report%20Accelerator%20State_final.pdf
29 Sina, “In the First Quarter, Nearly 50% of the Financing for Specialized and New Companies Was Concentrated in Beijing
and Shanghai, and 30% of the Newly Listed Companies on the A-Share Market Were Small Giants 丨 Specialized and
New Capital Markets Quarterly Report 一季度专精特新融资近五成集中在北京、上海，A 股三成新增上市企业为小巨人丨专精特
新资本市场季报,” May 15, 2023, https://finance.sina.com.cn/tech/roll/2023-05-15/doc-imytvrpe7311928.shtml.
Wind Financial Database
30 MIIT, “14th Five-Year Plan for Medical Equipment 十部门关于印发《‘十四五’医疗装备产业发展规划》的通知,” December 28,
2021, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2021-12/28/content_5664991.htm.
31 iResearch Inc., “Research Report on the Development of ‘Specialized SMEs’ in China--Health Edition 中国‘专精特新’企业发
展研究报告--医疗篇,” March 2023, https://pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP202303281584608294_1.pdf?1680028225000.pdf.
32 Gerard DiPippo et al., “Red Ink: Estimating Chinese Industrial Policy Spending in Comparative Perspective” (CSIS, May
23, 2022), https://www.csis.org/analysis/red-ink-estimating-chinese-industrial-policy-spending-comparative-
perspective.
33 See annex for the list of products included under each segment.
34 According to China’s “SME Classification Standards”, industrial firms with less than 1000 employees or annual revenue
of EUR 56.5 million (CNY 400 million) qualify as an SME. The Little Giant subset includes the data of firms both before
and after their nomination as Little Giants. The SME subset only includes the data of firms in years when they meet the
SME classification standards.
35 “Measuring Distortions in International Markets: Below-Market Finance,” OECD Trade Policy Papers, vol. 247, OECD
Trade Policy Papers, May 12, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1787/a1a5aa8a-en; “Government Support in Industrial Sectors:
A Synthesis Report,” OECD Trade Policy Papers, vol. 270, OECD Trade Policy Papers, April 7, 2023,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1d28d299-en.
Forms of state support as a share of revenue are recorded as follows: For China, government grants 0.65 percent, tax
concessions 0.75 percent, below-market borrowing 2.3 percent, below-market equity 0.75 percent; for OECD countries,
government grants 0.06 percent, tax concessions 0.32 percent, below-market borrowing 0.05 percent, below-market
equity 0.25 percent.
The benchmark figures for below-market equity (BME) are indicative. The value of 0.75 percent of revenue is assumed
given that the average value of BME derived by firms in OECD countries is approximately 0.25 percent.
36 While both domestic and foreign firms operating in China are eligible to benefit from tax benefits, they are more
important for indigenous Chinese firms considering the bulk of their R&D and production activities would likely take
place in China.
37 Xinhua News Agency, “Government Work Report - March 5, 2021 at the Fourth Session of the Thirteenth National
People’s Congress,” March 12, 2021, https://www.gov.cn/premier/2021-03/12/content_5592671.htm.
38 STA, “Announcement on Expanding the Applicable Scope of Preferential Policies for Accelerated Depreciation of Fixed
Assets 关于扩大固定资产加速折旧优惠政策适用范围的公告,” April 23, 2019,
https://www.chinatax.gov.cn/n810341/n810755/c4300874/content.html;
STA, “Notice on Policy Issues Related to the Pre-Tax Deduction of Enterprises’ Overseas R&D Expenses 关于企业委托境外研
究开发费用税前加计扣除有关政策问题的通知,” June 25, 2018,
http://www.chinatax.gov.cn/n810341/n810755/c3544428/content.html.
39 STA, “Enterprise Income Tax Law of the People’s Republic of China 中华人民共和国企业所得税法,” January 6, 2019,
https://www.chinatax.gov.cn/chinatax/n810341/n810825/c101434/c28479830/content.html.
40 STA, “Implementation Regulations of the Enterprise Income Tax Law of the People’s Republic of China 中华人民共和国企
业所得税法实施条例,” December 6, 2007,
https://www.chinatax.gov.cn/n810341/n810765/n812176/n812748/c1193046/content.html.
41 STA, “Tax Lecture: Interpretation of the New Policy on Pre-Tax Super Deduction of R&D Expenses in 2023 税务讲堂：
2023 年研发费用税前加计扣除新政解读,” https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2023-04/24/content_5752967.htm.
42 To calculate the real value of R&D related tax deductions, we refer to the “additional deduction of R&D expenses” listed
in the “Accounting profit and income tax expense adjustment process” section of company annual reports. In Chinese,
these are the "研发费用加计扣除" / "研发经费等加计扣除影响" / "加计扣除之研发费用" items under 会计利润与所得税费用调整
过程.
Since not all firms record this data in their annual reports and it is not retrievable via the financial data platforms, the
ratio of R&D expenses (which is retrievable) to R&D tax deductions is calculated for 12 firms across 2017 to 2022. This
ratio, together with reported R&D expenses, is then used to estimate R&D based tax deductions for the remaining 122
companies. The ratio varies between 7 percent and 13 percent between 2017 and 2022. This is to be expected given
that the corporate income tax rate applied to most listed MedTech firms is 15 percent, and the super deduction applies
to certain forms of R&D expenditure, but not all.
43 See point 37 in “Measuring Distortions in International Markets,” May 12, 2021.
44 CSET, “Translation: Notice of the State Council on the Publication of ‘Made in China 2025’ 国务院关于印发《中国制造
2025》的通知,” March 8, 2022, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/t0432_made_in_china_2025_EN.pdf;

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 56

CSET, “Translation: Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social
Development and Long-Range Objectives for 2035 中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和 2035 年远景目标纲
要,” May 12, 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/t0284_14th_Five-Year_Plan_EN.pdf.
45 PE ratios are taken as a proxy for government-guided investor interest in firms since they reflect the potential under- or
overvaluation of companies within a certain sector.
The comparison of PE ratios is based on the available data for 122 Chinese firms and 17 foreign MedTech firms (the
foreign firms are Medtronic, Siemens Healthineers, Stryker, Henry Schein, Boston Scientific, Owens & Minor INCVA,
Alcon, Zimmer Biomet, Terumo, Intuitive Surgical, Hologic, Edwards Life, Smith Nephew, Steris, Fresenius, Dentsply
Sirona and BioMérieux). Yearly values are calculated from the average of daily values in each year. Outliers above 250
were excluded from the calculation.
Between 2017-2022, the average PE ratio of Chinese firms was consistently higher than that of foreign firms, by an
average of 16.9 percent. Only in 2021 was the average PE ratio for Chinese firms below that of foreign firms. The
comparatively high PE ratio of Chinese MedTech firms is an indication that equity is being provided without the
expectations for return on investment.
46 Considering a relatively wide spread of PE ratio values is normal, this approach provides an estimate for which PE ratio
values are unusually high and could be a marker of government intervention in equity markets. Outliers above 100 were
excluded from the calculation of the standard deviation for foreign firm PE ratios.
47 This approach is supported by the fact that PE ratios of companies listed on stock markets in East Asia are in general
lower than companies listed in the US or Europe. More established stock exchanges lend greater security and higher
valuations to stocks. See: Reuters, “Asian Stocks’ Relative Valuations to Global Peers at 14-Month Low,” September 13,
2021, https://www.reuters.com/business/asian-stocks-relative-valuations-global-peers-14-month-low-2021-09-13/.
48 This paper uses the OECD methodology for calculating real interest rates by dividing interest payments in any given
year (t) by the average debt outstanding in the same year (t) and the previous year (t-1).
Given credit ratings for individual firms in our sample are mostly unavailable, we refer to the available data on credit
ratings for all listed companies in China. Since 2017, most listed SMEs have had a credit rating of AA- or below, while a
majority of listed large firms have had a credit rating of AA or below (figures based on Wind data). As such, we assume
that the average interest rates paid by listed MedTech companies ought to be equal to or above the benchmark rate for
AA- or AA, depending on their size.
To calculate annual benchmark interest rates for firms with an AA or AA- credit rating, we refer to the nominal lending
rate (within 1 year) for the period before 2019, and the 1-year loan prime rate for 2019 onwards, as the no-risk loan
rate. We then add the average spread between 1-year treasury bonds and 1-year enterprise bonds (AA and AA-). Data
for the nominal lending rate, loan prime rate, treasuring bond yields and enterprise bond yields are sourced from CEIC.
The difference between the average real interest rates paid and the benchmark rate is multiplied by interest-bearing
liabilities to calculate the value of below-market borrowing.
49 Since the real interest rate paid by large MedTech firms in 2022 was lower than the benchmark rate, no below-market
borrowings are recorded for large firms in that year.
50 “Measuring Distortions in International Markets.”
51 Endovastec, “Company Profile,” https://www.endovastec.com/24/.
52 Cofoe, “Cofoe Medical: 2022 Annual Report 可孚医疗：2022 年年度报告,” April 26, 2023,
https://vip.stock.finance.sina.com.cn/corp/view/vCB_AllBulletinDetail.php?stockid=301087&id=9079794; Cofoe,
“Cofoe Medical: 2021 Annual Report 可孚医疗：2021 年年度报告,” April 20, 2022,
https://vip.stock.finance.sina.com.cn/corp/view/vCB_AllBulletinDetail.php?stockid=301087&id=8017572.
53 Additional estimates suggest government spending on R&D in the field of medical and health sciences in 2021 in France
and the United Kingdom amounted to EUR 0.7 billion and EUR 0.4 billion respectively. Estimates are based on the OECD
figures for gross government expenditure on R&D, and the assumption that 10 percent is directed to the field of medical
and health sciences (this is true for Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom during the period of 2017-2019;
breakdown by field of R&D is not available for the United States and France).
OECD, “Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D by Sector of Performance and Type of R&D,” n.d.,
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=GERD_TORD; OECD, “Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D by Sector of
Performance and Field of R&D (FORD),” n.d., https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=GERD_FORD.
54 Tian Mengyao and Nan Yiyang, “Our University Was Approved by the Ministry of Science and Technology for the
‘Science and Technology Innovation 2030 - Brain Science and Brain-like Research’ Major Project. 我校获批科技部‘科技创新
2030—脑科学与类脑研究’重大项目,” Wuhan University of Science and Technology (blog), June 6, 2022,
https://www.wust.edu.cn/info/1521/228021.htm.
55 The dataset was compiled on the basis of an online portal by China’s Ministry of Science and Technology, see
“Innovation chain report” for more details: Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau and Michael Laha, “Controlling the Innovation
Chain,” February 2, 2023, https://merics.org/en/report/controlling-innovation-chain.
The query combined a search starting with medical keywords and one starting with generic technologies. Specifically,
the first approach combined one of the following: ['疫苗', 'DNA', '神经', '骨', '齿', '牙', '病', '心', '脑', '癌', '医', '关节', '肿瘤', '血', '麻
醉', '免疫', '炎症', '基因', '心电图', '手术', '急救', '放疗', '诊断', '血压', '内窥镜', '输液'] in combination with one of the following
terms: ['机器', '仪器', '器材', '技术', '设施', '器械']. The second approach combined one of the following: ['激光', '射频', '导管', '针
头', 'X 射线', '紫外线', '红外线', '影像', '超声波', '核磁共振', '显微', '支架', 'CT'] with one of: ['医','病'].
56 The trade analysis is based on data for fifty-two customs lines covering MedTech products, such as diagnostic imaging
equipment, orthopedics & prosthetics, dental products, patient aids, IVD equipment and reagents, medical consumables,
and so on (see annex for full list).
Trade data is based on location rather than nationality. For instance, when discussing the EU's share of global exports, this
refers to all companies that export from the EU (regardless of nationality).
57 Ping Zhu, “‘Domestic’ Redefined in Trillion Medical Device Blue Ocean Waiting to Be Tapped ‘国产’重新定义中 万亿医疗器
械蓝海待挖掘,” 21st Century Business Herald, September 24, 2022,
https://m.21jingji.com/article/20220924/1ef97bcf090e4297300dc24194004084.html.
58 Country grouping by income level - low, lower-middle, upper-middle, high - are from the World Bank authoritative
categorization for 2022/2023: Naha Hamadesh et al., “New World Bank Country Classifications by Income Level: 2022-

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 57

2023,” July 1, 2022, https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/new-world-bank-country-classifications-income-level-
2022-2023.
59 Francesca Ghiretti and Jacob Gunter, “COSCO’S Hamburg Terminal Acquisition: Lessons for Europe,” War on the Rocks,
November 28, 2022, https://warontherocks.com/2022/11/coscos-hamburg-terminal-acquisition-and-the-lessons-
europeans-should-take-away/; EUCCC and MERICS, “Decoupling - Severed Ties and Patchwork Globalisation,” January
14, 2021, https://merics.org/en/report/decoupling-severed-ties-and-patchwork-globalisation, p. 75-84.
60 Agatha Kratz and Janka Oertel, “Home Advantage: How China’s Protected Market Threatens Europe’s Economic Power”
(ECFR, April 15, 2021), https://ecfr.eu/publication/home-advantage-how-chinas-protected-market-threatens-europes-
economic-power/.
61 Yatang Lin, Yu Qin, and Zhuan Xie, “Does Foreign Technology Transfer Spur Domestic Innovation? Evidence from the
High-Speed Rail Sector in China,” Journal of Comparative Economics 49, no. 1 (March 2021): 212–29,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2020.08.004.
62 Kratz and Oertel, “Home Advantage: How China’s Protected Market Threatens Europe’s Economic Power.”
63 Fredrik Erixon, Oscar Guinea, and Anna Guildea, “When the State Becomes the Only Buyer: Monopsony in China’s Public
Procurement of Medical Technology.”
64 Xinyue Shen, Cong Guan, and Yunxu Qu, “Chinese Internet Giants Gear up for Global E-Commerce Push,” October 21,
2022, https://www.thinkchina.sg/chinese-internet-giants-gear-global-e-commerce-push.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
MERICS Report November 2023

MERICS l Mercator Institute for China Studies l 58

IMPRINT
CONTACT
Alexander Brown, Analyst, MERICS
alexander.brown@merics.de
AUTHORS
Alexander Brown
Analyst, MERICS
Gregor Sebastian
Analyst, MERICS
François Chimits
Analyst, MERICS
Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau
Head of Program, MERICS
Jacob Gunter
Lead Analyst, MERICS
MANAGING EDITOR
Claudia Wessling
Director Communications
and Publications, MERICS
EDITOR
Mary Hennock
Freelance editor
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Klosterstraße 64
10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
