
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
AI Ethics and Governance in the Job Market:
Trends, Skills, and Sectoral Demand
Lucas Wiese , Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Sonali Subbu Rathinam , Matthias Oschinski ,
Bryan DeWitt , and Daniel S. Schiff , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Demand for an AI-literate workforce has surged, in
large part to counter a growing skills gap. Meanwhile, expertise in
ethical and governance dimensions of AI is increasingly deemed
crucial to handle various organizational, regulatory, and social
concerns. However, the focus of AI literacy efforts to date has
been primarily technical. This paper helps close this gap by pro-
viding the ﬁrst large-scale analysis of AI ethics and governance
skills sought by employers in the labor market. Drawing on more
than four million job postings for AI-related professions over the
years 2018-2023, we provide an empirically-grounded character-
ization of AI ethics and governance competencies and perform
associated descriptive analyses. We ﬁnd that professionals with AI
ethics and governance competencies are requested by employers
to hold diverse skill sets, covering technical, managerial, and
regulatory domains, though the two professions remain distinct.
Moreover, the demand for expertise in these domains has grown
rapidly, both in absolute terms and as a proportion of AI-related
job postings. More than 100,000 professionals with expertise in
AI ethics and governance are now requested annually, with the
concentration highest in the ﬁnancial and information sectors.
These ﬁndings can help individuals, employers, and institutions
of higher education better design job requirements, educational
programs, and individual learning pathways, closing the career
competency gap in AI ethics and governance.
Index Terms—AI literacy, AI ethics, AI governance, workforce
development, labor market, career competencies.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE DEMAND for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-literate
workers has grown substantially in recent years, with
signiﬁcant efforts by policymakers, industry, and scholars
to cultivate a workforce capable of realizing AI’s role in
innovation and provision of goods and services. Calls to
prepare workers emanate from local to international scales,
with initiatives led by government, educational institutions,
and the private sector. For example, U.S. initiatives like
Received 14 February 2025; revised 24 April 2025 and 30 April 2025;
accepted 30 April 2025. Date of publication 20 May 2025; date of current
version 22 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the
U.S. National Science Foundation under Award 2134667. (Lucas Wiese,
Sonali Subbu Rathinam, Matthias Oschinski, and Daniel S. Schiff are co-ﬁrst
authors.) (Corresponding author: Daniel S. Schiff.)
Lucas Wiese is with the Department of Computer and Information
Technology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA (e-mail:
lwiese@purdue.edu).
Sonali Subbu Rathinam and Matthias Oschinski are with the Center for
Security and Emerging Technology, Georgetown University, Washington,
DC 20001 USA (e-mail: ss4608@georgetown.edu; matthias.oschinski@
georgetown.edu).
Bryan DeWitt is with the Department of Curriculum and Instruction, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA (e-mail: bdewitt@purdue.edu).
Daniel S. Schiff is with the Department of Political Science, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA (e-mail: dschiff@purdue.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TTS.2025.3567143
AI4K12 and AI4ALL, Finland’s Elements of AI, and China’s
AI+X program aim to cultivate a literate workforce through
primary, secondary, and tertiary education, certiﬁcates, and
retraining initiatives [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Initiatives are aimed
not only at future AI developers with advanced graduate
education, but also at workers who may interact with or utilize
AI, and at members of the general public of the general
public [6]. Government policies like the U.S. National AI
Initiative Act [7] and other efforts addressing AI adoption
and literacy are now providing funding in the billions of
dollars, as an extension of prior STEM-focused workforce
development strategies. These calls to invest in and develop
an AI workforce signal a concerning gap regarding the current
workforce’s capacity and the desired skills needed to maintain
an innovative yet inclusive AI workforce. Extending from a
decades-long concern about STEM skills competitiveness [8],
this mismatch is broadly described as the AI skills gap .
As deﬁned by Wu and Lin [9,p .1 ], “this gap refers to the
disparity between the growing demand for AI expertise and
the available talent pool—spanning both individual workforce
capabilities and national technological capacities.” Thus, the
AI skills gap has both domestic and global invocations, serving
as a hidden catalyst that exacerbates economic disparity and
social inequality. On this logic, those who hold the skills,
resources, and knowledge to shape and use AI will continue
to innovate, rendering it less feasible for other communities
and countries to catch up, causing the gap to expand at an
unprecedented rate compared to previous technologies.
An underlying skills mismatch in the labor market has long
been recognized [10], [11], especially in STEM. However,
the skills mismatch in AI is particularly unique; the large
investment in AI is hypothesized to play a heightened role
in inducing labor disruption and displacement. Thus, it may
be that AI advancement both silos AI jobs and disrupts
others. The scale of change, the requirements for upskilling
or reskilling, and the pace of change raise the stakes of the
skills gap from concerning to potentially economically and
socially existential [12], [13], [14], [15]. Heightened power
concentration, withdrawn economic development ladders, and
uncertainty about even the feasibility of keeping up with the
pace of innovation threaten to exacerbate the distance between
the haves and have-nots.
A. Beyond Technical AI: The Need for Socio-Ethical and
Governance Competencies
To mitigate the AI skills gap, stakeholders have thus
proposed a wide array of strategies: increased international
collaboration, social dialogue, equity-promoting policy frame-
works, and the potential of educational reform and institutional
2637-6415 c⃝ 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
WIESE et al.: AI ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE JOB MARKET: TRENDS, SKILLS, AND SECTORAL DEMAND 459
promotion of AI education in preparing workers across dis-
ciplines [16], [17], [18], [19]. Yet, a critical element of this
effort is the recognition that the AI skills gap is not manifested
just through the (uneven) distribution of technical expertise.
Instead, desired skills in AI literacy also consist of the capacity
to navigate complex socio-ethical issues, advanced critical
thinking and creative reasoning, and interpersonal and inter-
disciplinary collaboration skills, as well as more traditional
technical expertise [20], [21], [22], [23]. Associated AI ethics
and AI governance skills gaps are the focus of this paper.
Importantly, the aims of AI literacy—or competency—
initiatives also go beyond depositing necessary job skills for a
given workplace [21], [22]. They include training students and
future professionals to be independent agents capable of their
own learning and personal and professional growth [24], [25].
Insights from ethics education, professional ethics, AI liter-
acy, and business ethics are all pertinent. For instance, [20]
recommends that AI literacy efforts address how professionals
understand the socio-legal-technical impacts of their work,
practice collaboration with each other, and engage in self-
reﬂection over professional practices. Sidra and Mason [25]
similarly highlight the unique metacognitive skills required
for effective human-AI collaboration, corresponding with
accounts of day-to-day problems for AI ethicists [26], [27].
AI ethics and governance professionals also do not solve
problems in a detached, clean environment; moral decision-
making is subject to cognitive biases and heuristics and beset
by organizational pressures [28], and these dimensions of
“what it means to be an AI ethicist” are among many of
importance to consider for AI deployment in organizational
contexts.
Moreover, while these skill sets and competencies are
indeed essential for the technical design and development of
AI systems, they are equally essential for their responsible
adoption, implementation, monitoring, and governance, for all
professionals, including executive leadership [29]. Achieving
these goals is likely to require the efforts of (at least) tens of
thousands of individuals over many years, and across societal
sectors. For instance, to help manage AI’s implications for
safety, ethics, and human rights, recent years have seen land-
mark governance efforts like the European Union AI Act [30],
or the U.S. NIST AI Risk Management Framework [31]
which include proposals for independent auditing, conformity
assessment, safety testing, organizational governance, and risk
management.
Recent policy and initiatives emanating globally, such as
from the since-revoked 2023 U.S. Executive Order on Safe,
Secure, and Trustworthy AI [32] include: requirements for
public sector agencies to recruit chief AI ofﬁcers and advisory
councils; the public posting of AI inventories and evalu-
ation results; the development of responsible AI maturity
models for private organizations; and consortia of interested
professionals who participate in organizations, such as the
Ethical AI Governance Group and Responsible AI Institute,
potentially receiving certiﬁcation in AI ethics or governance
skills [33], [34]. Meanwhile, urged along by these consortia
and public policy, an industry has emerged to address respon-
sible AI, trustworthy or ethical AI, and AI governance within
private and public sector organizations [35], [36]
.T h a ti s ,a
consistent feature of AI policy and innovation is the need for
professional practitioners who can design and maintain frame-
works for responsible AI within and across organizations,
ranging from hospitals to schools to manufacturing ﬂoors.
Thus, while efforts to build the technical AI workforce,
emphasizing skills in computer science, software engineer-
ing, and data science remain dominant [6], this paper
highlights the need to understand and prepare the work-
force with respect to competence in AI governance and AI
ethics. A growing number of initiatives do exist, including
undergraduate and graduate courses [37], graduate degree
programs [38], professional certiﬁcations [39], and train-
ings offered by industry and civil society groups. Another
body of research discusses the prospects for teaching AI
ethics and governance to future practitioners [40], [41], [42],
aligned with a growing body of scholarship that addresses
the practice of AI ethics within organizations and associated
challenges [35], [43], [44]. Further, a portion of research has
sought to speciﬁcally understand the competencies for AI
ethics practitioners, a necessary step and literature to which
this study directly contributes [45], [46], [47].
B. Addressing Foundational Knowledge Gaps in AI Ethics
and Governance Workforce Development
Despite growing recognition of the importance of AI
ethics and governance competencies, major gaps remain in
scholars’ and decision-makers’ understanding of how these
ﬁelds are developing. Key uncertainties include: 1) the scale
and distribution of demand for AI ethics and governance
skills across sectors; 2) the degree of alignment or mismatch
between employer needs and available talent; and 3) the
design of effective educational programs, career pathways,
and instructional strategies to prepare future practitioners. For
instance, to what extent are skills in related ﬁelds, like privacy,
compliance, or risk management transferable to these new
AI ethics and governance roles? Further, should organizations
or educators concentrate AI ethics and governance skills
within dedicated specialist roles, or should these skills be
fostered across all technical and AI-engaged professionals?
This paper takes an initial step toward addressing these foun-
dational questions by conceptualizing these issues, analyzing
large-scale labor market data, and offering empirical insights
into the emerging composition of AI ethics and governance
professions.
In short, calls for safe, trustworthy, and responsible AI
governance will require attention comparable to that afforded
to training future scientists and technical AI practitioners.
Yet we have very little empirical understanding of these
professionals, their roles, and which skills are demanded of
them or truly needed of them. This paper aims to help close
these gaps by focusing on the composition of skills demanded
by AI ethics and governance jobs. Through our analysis, it is
important to note that our ﬁndings are drawn from empirical
evidence from job postings , but there remains a larger gap
between the deeper realities of these jobs and the market’s
preliminary conception of them. This may further reﬂect a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
limited understanding or even normatively undesirable neglect
of key skills and roles surrounding ethics. This paper is a ﬁrst
step in connecting prior work [26], [27], [46] on AI ethics to
these system-level trends and associated unresolved questions.
Speciﬁcally, we examine skills related to either AI ethics or
AI governance in job posting data from 2018-2023 compiled
by Lightcast.
1 In this descriptive analysis, we consider the
following three research questions (RQ):
1) RQ1: What core competencies characterize AI ethics
and governance roles as reﬂected in the labor market?
Speciﬁcally, what skill subcategories—including techni-
cal, managerial, regulatory, and socio-ethical—are most
desired for professionals in AI ethics and governance-
aligned job postings?
2) RQ2: How has the demand for professionals with AI
ethics and governance competencies changed from 2018
to 2023?
3) RQ3: How does the demand for professionals with AI
ethics and governance competencies vary across industry
sectors?
Next, we present our conceptual framework that outlines
the assumptions guiding our research and ﬁndings on the AI
(ethics and governance) skills gap. This framework situates
the role of individual learners, employing organizations, and
higher education institutions as amongst key stakeholders in
addressing the skills gap. Following, we present our methods
which describe our use of job posting data to determine
competencies and the analytical strategies applied to these data
to investigate job postings for AI ethics and AI governance
roles from 2018 to 2023. Our results section highlights key
ﬁndings across our three research questions, from under-
standing core competencies to trends over time and sectors.
Finally, we discuss the implications of our ﬁndings as the ﬁrst
comprehensive analysis on the demand of AI ethics and AI
governance using real-time job posting data. As our results
empirically operationalize AI ethics and AI governance as
concrete professional domains, and draw distinctions between
them, our study has practical implications for educational
design, policy development, and professional organizations
who are deﬁning these ﬁelds moving forward.
II. C
ONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
We approach our investigation under the assumption that
(1) individual learners, (2) employers, and (3) higher-education
institutions have a shared responsibility to effectively con-
tribute to a skilled AI ethics and AI governance workforce.
As a corollary, none of these actors alone can be solely
responsible for driving an AI-literate workforce: the uncer-
tainties surrounding these skills, regulatory and socioeconomic
developments, and the change of pace of AI technology make
planning especially difﬁcult. Under these conditions, it is
unrealistic to expect an individual to fully navigate these
dynamic conditions, to expect employers to be fully equipped
or incentivized to upskill their employees, or to expect
higher-education institutions to become prescient workforce
development factories. Understanding the interaction between
1Lightcast is a labor market analysis company that collects job postings
from multiple sources, and provides insight into the labor market.
these three actors (while not comprehensive) is critical to close
the gap in the availability and empowerment of AI ethics and
AI governance professionals.
The interactions between these three actors are additionally
nﬂuenced by efforts from government and regulatory agencies,
at both national and local levels. As depicted in Fig. 1, these
government and regulatory bodies are foundational to shaping,
informing, and encouraging the competencies and capabilities
that the labor market demands. For instance, government
agencies are motivated to advance national priorities, such
as economic growth and national security, and build public
trust in AI to help sustain a fair and competitive market.
Government agencies also strategically engage in agenda-
setting for AI regulations and policy. This may include
establishing standards and guidelines for AI development as
well as funding and investing in STEM education initiatives
or AI research at large. In total, individual learners, higher
educational institutions, and employers are inﬂuenced by the
strategic actions emerging from the public sector. Finally,
these dynamics are likely affected by other actors as well not
depicted here, like media, civil society, and the general public.
The framework presented in Fig. 1 represents an operational
understanding of the role of these three actors in addressing
the aforementioned AI skills gap [16]. It builds on the exist-
ing Competency-Capability Chasm (CCC) as developed by
Ward et al. [48], [49], which represents the distance between
the capabilities taught from higher education institutions and
the competencies sought in the job market. That is, the CCC
“exists between what is taught and what is sought” [49,
p. 898 ]. We expand this understanding to the AI context
by situating individuals, employers, and institutions within
the chasm to conceptualize responsible actors, institutions,
and mechanisms that might be activated to address the AI
skills gap.
For each actor, we present examples of key motivations
potentially driving their behavior in this ecosystem as well
as strategic actions they might take. For instance, individual
learners may be motivated both by the interest in secur-
ing career opportunities in AI ethics or governance roles,
as well as promoting their job security in an uncertain
labor market generally. Meanwhile, institutions of higher
education are motivated by ensuring their graduates are
prepared for these roles, as well as supporting organiza-
tional goals like student recruitment and stable funding.
Employers may likewise be motivated by the need to comply
with regulations and promote trust of consumers or the
public.
These motivations suggest ways in which the actors’ deci-
sions and actions are entangled. For instance, universities that
remain unaware of needs in industry may fail to promote the
relevant skills needed in their programs. Meanwhile, employ-
ers that present a narrow vision of AI ethics and governance
roles may lead to the creation of educational programs that
are unattractive for universities and students, and to conditions
which are deemed untrustworthy by the public. Along these
lines, Fig. 1 presents examples of suggested strategic actions
that can help support all three actors’ shared interests. In turn,
this conceptualization affords scholars the ability to map the
ﬁndings of the present study onto the broader literature, and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
WIESE et al.: AI ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE JOB MARKET: TRENDS, SKILLS, AND SECTORAL DEMAND 461
Fig. 1. Adapted Competency-Capability Chasm from [49] to account for individuals, employers, higher education institutions, and the public sector. The
framework represents how shared commitment between individuals, employers, and higher education institutions is necessary to close the capability-competency
chasm for AI ethics and governance.
helps future researchers and practitioners identify pathways to
close the gap further.
A. The Nature of Instructional Design and Aligning
Individuals, Employers, and Institutions
For this vision to be realized, it is important to understand
the traditional approach universities take with instructional
design, including when developing new educational programs
or degrees. This includes how institutions respond to individ-
ual learners and draw ideas from employer needs (or not).
Instructional designers in particular must apply their expertise,
experience, and understand the context to solve complex
problems in educational design, which are often novel [50].
That is, designing for AI ethics and AI governance education
requires synthesizing the requirements and constraints for each
actor in this model.
However, conventional approaches, while valuable, have
focused primarily on the start of a learner’s journey (what
skills or competencies they bring when beginning a program)
and typically design forward from there to scaffold their
learning [51]. Unfortunately, this strategy often fails to account
for how the learning journey will culminate into professional
applications down the road; that is whether the articulated
learning goals are reasonable, useful, and sufﬁcient. This
problem is not easily solved by backwards design approaches
either. Instead, we argue that it requires we argue it requires
deeper synthesis and collaboration.
For instance, appropriate learning paths must not only
account for the sought-after skills articulated as important
in the labor market; they should also account for learners’
motivations, needs, and expectations [52]. Moreover, learners’
motivations are themselves often inextricably linked with the
job market—they want the education that will afford them
the ﬂexibility, opportunity, impact, and compensation that they
desire [53], [54]. Consequently, this framework’s successful
application depends on recognizing what each stakeholder
brings to the table dynamically, rather than working from
ﬁxed assumptions. Importantly, this does not assume that
employers’ articulation of what the job market does or should
require is the ground truth. Rather, employers may also have
gaps in their knowledge and understanding, and may be overly
focused on short-term goals or attached to prior ways of
thinking. As argued in [48], [49], the CCC is a space where
stakeholders should constantly assess, reassess, and realign
workforce development and educational efforts.
When addressing the CCC, a few strategic options may
be prudent. First, individual learners must do the necessary
reﬂection and articulate their desires, trajectories, and interests.
This is no doubt informed by both the evolving demands
of the labor market and the messaging from higher edu-
cation institutions that construct curricula and opportunities
for students. Second, employers must maintain a culture and
atmosphere of continuous learning, growth, and professional
development [55]. With this, they can maintain an adaptive
workforce that responds to the fast paced AI landscape,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
without outsourcing employee learning entirely to individuals
or educational institutions [56], a growing approach which
risks increased employee turnover and skill stagnation.
Helpfully, employers can leverage programs like (in the
U.S.) the Section 127 Educational Assistance Program for up
to $5,250 in annual expenses per employee for professional
development [57]. Third, higher education institutions must
evolve beyond traditional instructional design practices and
foster foundational capabilities, respond to evolving market-
aligned competencies, and respect individuals’ experiences and
motivations. This might include innovative approaches like
non-credit-to-credit or earned-admission pathways that provide
ﬂexible degree trajectories [58], [59], [60]. Yet, universities
are also in a position to help identify and shape the skill
demands and future roles of students, not merely react to the
market, especially in dynamic settings like AI, or in arguably
underdeveloped settings like ethics.
These shared commitments, as we propose in Fig. 1, can
thus assist with more robustly closing the AI skills gap. Next,
we will examine the context surrounding AI ethics and AI
governance skills in particular.
B. Specifying the AI Ethics and AI Governance Domains
Designing and developing AI systems comes with a plethora
of social and ethical considerations to protect human life
and promote societal welfare. As such, ethical principles
and practices help to guide responsible AI, and governance
mechanisms must exist to connect and align AI systems with
human values [61], [62]. Across settings and disciplines, there
are practices that professionals can implement at each stage
of the AI development lifecycle, policies that organizations
can enforce, and national and local regulations that can guide
the AI industry and AI systems at large [25], [63]. While a
full review of relevant AI ethics and AI governance strategies
is outside the scope of this paper, it sufﬁces to say that
accomplishing these widely demanded goals of safe and
responsible AI requires unique socio-technical skill sets that
are important to target.
Responsible AI practitioners may range from technical
researchers, computer scientists, and engineers, to policy
experts and managerial professionals. Across these occu-
pations, [64] present a helpful taxonomy of different
skills thought necessary across technical and non-technical
professionals including: technical research capacities, interdis-
ciplinary communication, analytical systems thinking, policy
integration strategies, and business or human resources
expertise [64]. Extending the complexity of this unique,
multidisciplinary domain [26] argues that an AI ethicist should
possess a unique capacity to “apply and communicate ethical
principles in the context of artiﬁcial intelligence within a
corporate structure” which may require special skills like
bravery [26,p .4 ]. Moreover, the AI ethicist must be able
to hold conﬂicting personal and professional identities; as
identiﬁed by [27], the motivations of an AI ethicist may be
in conﬂict with those of their employing institution—whether
because of ﬁnancial, social, or philosophical differences.
While more explicit research has been done on the pro-
fessional capacities of the AI ethicist, we argue that this
understanding applies to AI governance professionals as well.
AI governance professionals are needed to understand techni-
cal components of the AI development lifecycle and integrate
legal, regulatory, and compliance frameworks seamlessly, min-
imizing the likelihood of harm while maximizing the capacity
and innovation of AI systems. And while many of these
dimensions are discussed in policy and educational discourse,
and present in general AI literacy frameworks, it remains
unclear exactly which sets of skills are important or prioritized
for AI ethics and governance professionals.
As such, we next detail the methods we used to conduct
a large-scale job posting analysis to study the sought-after
skills for these types of professionals. We emphasize again
that the current state of demands from employers do not
fully capture the ground truth about these professions or their
future. However, they provide important signals about how
AI ethics and governance skills and professions are emerging;
what skills are imagined to be important; to what extent these
professionals are unique compared to professionals in related
roles; and to what extent AI ethics and governance skills and
roles are concentrated or distributed.
III. M
ETHODS
A. Rationale and Data Collection
To ascertain skill requirements in AI ethics and AI gov-
ernance occupations, we leveraged real-time labor market
information from Lightcast, particularly their job posting data.
Lightcast collects job posting data by scraping over 65,000
websites globally, including company career pages, national
and local job boards, and data from job aggregators [65].T h e
use of job posting data, and Lightcast data in particular, is
increasingly common in labor market studies [66], [67], [68]
and has been used for purposes such as analyzing skills
demand [69], [70], assessing emerging job markets [71], [72]
and measuring the effects of technological change [73], [74].
Closely related to the current context, these data have been
used to assess trends in digital literacy [75] and competencies
in the green economy [76]. These data have also proven
valuable for analyzing the evolution of AI-related job postings
and skill requirements [77], [78].
Fig. 2 illustrates our methodological approach. In the ﬁrst
step, we followed [79] in using keywords that designate
an occupation as AI-related. The initial dataset included
U.S. job postings with associated metadata such as company
names, skills, industry taxonomies [80], and occupational
taxonomies [81]. Lightcast removes duplicates and we only
included job postings that contain skills mapped to Lightcast’s
publicly-available skills taxonomy.
We used a total of 72 AI (skills) keywords to extract
the primary AI-related dataset, all available in Lightcast’s
formal typology of terms [82]. To come up with our list of
AI keywords that we crosswalked with Lightcast’s available
terms, we drew on prior taxonomic research from [78] and
augmented this list by examining other AI-related keywords
articulated in the Lightcast skills taxonomy. We iterated this
list over several rounds as outlined as best practice for textual
analysis in [83], [84] and depicted in Fig. 2. This process
involved examining a subset of identiﬁed job postings and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
WIESE et al.: AI ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE JOB MARKET: TRENDS, SKILLS, AND SECTORAL DEMAND 463
Fig. 2. Determining AI ethics and AI governance occupations.
TABLE I
EXAMPLE CATEGORIES OF AI-R ELATED SKILLS KEYWORDS
adjusting keywords iteratively to ensure greater completeness
and accuracy of coverage.
Due to contractual limitations with our data provider,
we cannot share the proprietary set of ﬁnal keywords for
the AI, ethics, and governance datasets. However, Table I
presents examples of overarching categories synthesized from
the 72 skills keywords which were used to identify the
initial AI-related job postings. Finally, note that all keywords
must deﬁnitionally be part of the formal Lightcast typology
to enable extraction based on those keywords. The result-
ing dataset comprises 4,457,851 job postings for the years
spanning 2018 to 2023, covering the demand for AI-related
occupations.
Next, we conducted a second stage of iterative data col-
lection to pinpoint job postings speciﬁcally associated with
AI ethics and AI governance, respectively, using a reﬁned set
of 30 ethics and 58 governance keywords. This process was
similarly informed by literature and expert sources but was
also augmented by large language model support. To begin,
we used OpenAI’s GPT-4 large language model to brainstorm
keywords, consistent with the strategy used by [79].F o r
example, terms associated with AI ethics included: fairness,
accountability, transparency, privacy, bias, mitigation, and
ethical decision-making. For AI governance, terms included:
policy development, compliance, risk management, standards
development, oversight, and stakeholder engagement. Next,
we expanded this keyword set based on additional keywords
from previous studies on AI ethics and AI governance con-
cepts [85], [86], [87]. After expert review and several rounds
of iteration, similar to the process employed for the superset
of AI job postings, we identiﬁed ﬁnal sets of (skills) keywords
for AI ethics and governance jobs.
The results provided us with an AI ethics (job posting)
dataset of n=388,107, an AI governance (job posting) dataset
of n=367,439, and a dataset of job postings which contain
both AI ethics and AI governance terms of n=114,913. See
Fig. 3 for a Venn diagram of these datasets and their overlap.
We describe these individuals as AI ethics or governance
professionals, though this should be understood to include
individuals with a variety of roles and both greater or lesser
degrees of focus on AI ethics and governance. For instance,
a data scientist or risk management professional might devote
much, or only some, of their job to AI ethics or governance.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
Fig. 3. Frequency of AI ethics and AI governance job postings.
However, importantly, all individuals are ostensibly working
in AI-related roles, and the jobs they apply to require skills
like ‘privacy law’ or ‘fairness.’ So, while most of these
professionals would not have job titles like “AI Governance
Lead” or “AI Ethics Manager,” they are working at the
intersection of AI and ethics or governance, at least to some
degree.
B. Analysis
Our analysis procedure was designed to address each of
our RQs. To answer RQ1, regarding the core competencies
required of AI ethics and AI governance-aligned professionals,
we conducted a skill analysis using location quotients (LQ)
and a job title frequency analysis. As such, ﬁrst, we calculated
the LQ for ethics- and governance-related skills across job
postings.
The LQ is typically used to compare the concentration of a
speciﬁc industry or occupation in a region to its concentration
in a broader geography as a measure of specialization [88].
In this context, it measures the relative representation (or
importance) of a given skill in AI ethics or governance job
postings compared to that skill’s overall representation (or
importance) in the entire job posting dataset. For instance,
the entire job posting dataset for 2023 has approximately
39 million job postings. Skills with an LQ greater than 1 are
considered highly represented in the 388,107 AI ethics job
postings or 367,439 AI governance job postings, respectively,
meaning these skills are especially likely to be particular
emphases of AI ethics or governance jobs rather than just
generally important skills (i.e., they are core competencies).
Note that, for ease of interpretation, we aggregated individual
skills to a pre-deﬁned set of higher-level skill subcategories,
discussed in more detail later.
Next, we identiﬁed the most frequent jobs or job titles asso-
ciated with AI ethics and AI governance skills by calculating
the share of total AI ethics or AI governance postings in 2023
as a percentage of all job postings, analyzed per job title.
Here, we drew on a standardized set of job titles provided by
Lightcast because of the diversity of informal job titles used
in the marketplace. This analysis effectively highlights the top
types of occupations—or roles—that employers are targeting
when they ask candidates to have AI ethics or AI governance
skills when applying for a position.
To answer RQ2, regarding the evolution of demand from
2018 to 2023, we conducted a trend analysis by examining
how the frequency of job postings changed over this time
period. Speciﬁcally, we analyzed the amount of AI, AI ethics,
and AI governance job postings by year, which allows us to
glean insight into growth patterns, relative frequencies, and
changing employer priorities over time.
To answer RQ3, regarding how these skills vary across
economic sectors, we calculated the prevalence of AI ethics
and AI governance job postings for each year from 2018 to
2023 as a percentage of all job postings (not just AI-related)
in those industries. The results offer a sectoral perspective on
the demand for these competencies.
IV . R
ESULTS
A. RQ1: Core Competencies of AI Ethics and AI
Governance Professionals
As a ﬁrst step, we determined the core competencies
required of AI ethics and AI governance professionals by
identifying skills with the largest location quotients (LQ).
Using Lightcast’s built-in skill subcategories attached to a set
of 39M online job postings from 2023, we calculated the LQs
for all skill subcategories by comparing how frequently each
skill subcategory appeared in AI ethics or AI governance job
postings relative to how frequently it appeared across all job
postings, as described in (1) and (2). In this context, a LQ
greater than 1 indicates that a given skill is more concentrated
within a speciﬁc domain (i.e., AI ethics or AI governance
occupations) relative to its prevalence across the full set of
job postings. This suggests that the skill is disproportionately
important for that domain and can be considered a core
competency. For instance, if a skill appears in 4% of AI
ethics job postings but only 1% of job postings overall,
its LQ would be 4.0, indicating strong overrepresentation in
that domain. Here, all skills are aggregated into higher-level
Lightcast-provided skill subcategories to simplify analysis and
interpretation.
kAIEthics
nAIEthics
Pk
N
= LQ (1)
kAIGovernance
nAIGovernance
Pk
N
= LQ (2)
where
LQ = location quotient
k = number of job postings for skill subcategory
n = number of job postings for domain
P = number of total postings for subcategory k
N = total number of job postings
Table II presents skill subcategories that are most sought
after in AI ethics job postings, relative to all job postings. For
instance, the Lightcast-provided subcategory ‘Regulation and
Legal Compliance’ encompasses ‘Data Ethics,’ ‘Knowledge
of Data Privacy Laws,’ and ‘Ethical Standards and Conduct.’
Importantly, note that the core competencies demanded of
these professionals need not be limited to (obviously) ethics-
or governance-focused skills; more general skills are cer-
tainly also relevant. The diverse range of skill subcategories
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
WIESE et al.: AI ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE JOB MARKET: TRENDS, SKILLS, AND SECTORAL DEMAND 465
TABLE II
TOP SKILL SUBCATEGORIES IN AI E THICS JOB POSTINGS
TABLE III
TOP SKILL SUBCATEGORIES IN AI G OVERNANCE JOB POSTINGS
identiﬁed suggests that desired AI ethics competencies cut
across multiple disciplines, with prominent skills in domains
like technology, strategy, research, management, policy, and
regulation.
In contrast, in AI governance job postings, we see less
science, research, and technical skills required and more
project management-related skills. Table III showcases the
most sought-after skill subcategories for AI governance job
postings. Here, we see desired business-speciﬁc skills like
analysis, communication, leadership, operations, and manage-
ment as well as ﬁeld-speciﬁc skills such as regulatory, legal,
and data-related skills.
Overall, while the skill compositions that the job mar-
ket is seeking for professionals in AI ethics- and AI
governance-aligned roles differ, both are interdisciplinary and
multifunctional in nature.
To elaborate on this understanding, we next looked at
the speciﬁc occupations and job titles which seek AI ethics
and governance skills most. Table IV showcases the top ﬁve
standard occupational classiﬁcation (SOC) codes where AI
ethics job postings are common, subset to 2023, as a portion
of all job postings. The SOC codes come from a frequently
used taxonomy, linked to the Lightcast dataset, which enabled
us to view the concentration of AI ethics job postings by
(standardized) occupation.
As shown, job postings for Computer and Information
Research Scientists in 2023 most frequently cited AI ethics-
related skills in their requirements, with nearly 5% of all
postings for this occupation including a focus on AI ethics.
TABLE IV
TOP SOC C ODES WITH AI E THICS JOB POSTINGS
TABLE V
TOP SOC C ODES WITH AI G OVERNANCE JOB POSTINGS
This concentration is followed by postings for Computer and
Information Systems Managers, Data Scientists, and Database
Architects, each with similar shares in AI ethics postings.
Beyond the prevalence of AI ethics skills in computing-related
roles, we found that over 2% of job postings for Financial
Specialists were related to AI ethics. This is suggestive of the
importance of AI ethics professionals in this speciﬁc sector,
one which is highly regulated.
Similarly, for AI governance job postings, Table V show-
cases the top ﬁve SOC codes with AI governance job
postings. As seen, job postings for Financial Specialists had
the highest share of AI governance skills requested. Then,
a similar share of Financial Risk Specialist, Computer and
Information Systems Manager, Statistician, and Data Scientist
job postings reﬂected a desire for AI governance-competent
professionals. Currently, these concentrations suggest close
alignment between the ﬁnancial sector and AI governance
skills, and between computer professionals and AI ethics
skills. Importantly, however, these top ﬁve example occupa-
tions only reﬂect a fraction of the tens of thousands of total
job postings calling for AI ethics and governance skills, as
seen in Fig. 4.
Overall, the ﬁndings suggest that ethical and governance-
related skills are becoming core requirements for established
occupations, such as data scientists, machine learning engi-
neers, and ﬁnancial specialists. Concurrently, however, we also
observe the emergence of new, dedicated roles in these areas.
For example, McKinsey & Company describe the growing
trend of organizations hiring dedicated AI governance and AI
ethics specialists to complement their AI workforce strategy,
along with transforming expectations for data science and
machine learning roles [89]. Along these lines, a consortium of
leading global corporations identiﬁes AI ethics and responsible
AI skills as the overall most critical new skill domain for
information and communication technology jobs [90], increas-
ingly relevant to 100% of jobs analyzed in their study.
Together, these developments offer an initial map of the
diverse literacies that may become increasingly important for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
Fig. 4. Frequency of AI, AI ethics, and AI governance job postings over time, from 2018 to 2023.
jobseekers and institutions of higher education seeking to
prepare the future AI workforce.
B. RQ2: Evolution of AI Ethics and AI Governance Skills
The demand for skilled AI, AI ethics, and AI governance
jobs has grown from 2018 to 2022, with a noticeable dip
in job postings in 2023, potentially related to broader labor
market trends (i.e., sweeping layoffs in the technology sector).
In Fig. 4, we present a bar graph that depicts the total number
of each type of job posting, which provides a relative sense of
the prevalence of AI ethics and AI governance roles versus AI
roles more generally. Note the deﬁnition of skills associated
with each type of role remains consistent across these years
in our analysis.
As seen, job postings in AI nearly doubled from 2018 to
2022. Then, in 2023, numbers returned almost to 2018 levels
(albeit, with a higher proportion of AI ethics and governance
jobs). The 2024 AI Index Report [91] ﬁnds a similar dip in
AI labor demand in 2023, as the authors found that “every
AI-related skill cluster tracked by Lightcast had a decrease in
market share, with the exception of generative AI, which grew
by more than a factor of 10” [91,p .2 2 4]. Notwithstanding
2023’s decline, AI ethics and AI governance job postings do
not seem as affected by this dip, and it will be interesting
to observe whether this trend continues. Instead, the relative
demand for professionals with these skills is broadly increasing,
both as an absolute number compared to earlier years, and as a
proportion of AI-related jobs. For instance, while only around
6% of AI job postings featured ethics and governance skills
in 2018, around 10% did only ﬁve years later.
TABLE VI
INDUSTRIES WITH HIGHEST SHARE OF AI E THICS JOB POSTINGS
C. RQ3: Skills Across Sectors
Lastly, to address our third RQ, we analyzed the distribution
of AI ethics and AI governance job postings across industries,
focusing on the top four industries. We used the standard
North American Industrial Classiﬁcation System (NAICS)
codes to label industries and to subset our analyses. Presented
in Table VI and Table VII, we see that the “Finance and
Insurance” industry has the highest demand for AI ethics
and AI governance skills, followed closely by jobs in the
“Information” sector.
For both AI ethics and AI governance skills, the percentage
share out of all job postings in each industry steadily increased
from 2018 to 2022, but again, in 2023 seemed to stagnate. As
an example of the signiﬁcance of the change: the prevalence
of these skills has grown from about a quarter of a percentage
point to a one-half of a percentage point, roughly doubling
over only a ﬁve-year period.
Future research will be necessary to evaluate the stability
of these patterns, especially in light of other economic shocks
and cycles. Nevertheless, we see that the same industries are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
WIESE et al.: AI ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE JOB MARKET: TRENDS, SKILLS, AND SECTORAL DEMAND 467
TABLE VII
INDUSTRIES WITH HIGHEST SHARE OF AI G OVERNANCE JOB POSTINGS
represented, and in the same order: Finance and Insurance,
Information, Manufacturing, and Professional, Scientiﬁc, and
Technical Services. These sectors are amongst the leaders in
seeking AI ethics and AI governance skills, though again,
tens of thousands of positions are requested in other sectors,
ranging from healthcare to education to public administration.
V. D
ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
As demands for AI literacy in the general public and
demands for an AI-skilled workforce have grown, an ecosys-
tem has emerged to better understand and prepare for these
changes. While there has been ample focus on technical AI
literacy, AI ethics and AI governance skills are increasingly
deemed critical to address a wide range of social, regulatory,
and organizational needs. Meanwhile, employers and higher
education institutions are only beginning to make sense of the
skills required for these roles, and stakeholders broadly have
only a modest knowledge of the scale of labor demand.
Adapting ideas from the Competency-Capability Chasm,
this paper aims to provide insight to employers, educational
institutions, and individuals pursuing these professional goals,
along with scholars and policymakers. Drawing on more than
four million job postings related to AI over the years 2018-
2023, we adduce an empirically-grounded characterization of
AI ethics and AI governance as professional domains, as
articulated by job postings—that is, from the perspective of
employers. This deﬁnition encompasses both core specialists
in these ﬁelds, as well as other adjacent professionals for
whom these skills are important. For example, occupations as
diverse as statisticians to ﬁnancial risk specialists now require
these AI ethics or AI governance skills.
Moreover, we ﬁnd that professionals with AI ethics or AI
governance competencies—whether in technical, regulatory,
or business domains—require largely distinct yet overlapping
skill sets. Relatedly, while we ﬁnd some overlap between
AI ethics and AI governance job postings, the majority (as
depicted in Fig. 2) belong to one domain alone. Next, we ﬁnd
clear evidence of growing demand for both AI ethics and AI
governance roles since 2018, in absolute numbers and as a
percentage of all AI job postings. There is modest evidence
of a shift in relative demand as well; while AI governance
skills were initially more prominent, AI ethics skills have
slightly surpassed them in importance as of 2021. Either way,
the overall growth trend suggests increasing organizational
recognition of these roles’ and skills’ importance.
Finally, we ﬁnd the greatest demand for AI ethics or
AI governance-skilled professionals within the ﬁnancial and
information sectors, though the demands for these profession-
als are broader and extend to many sectors beyond the four
we highlight in our analysis. As of the early 2020s, more than
100,000 job postings annually in the AI industry in the U.S.
require AI ethics or AI governance skills.
The study provides the ﬁrst comprehensive analysis of
demand for AI ethics and AI governance-aligned roles using
comprehensive job posting data, drawing on empirical evi-
dence of how organizations conceive of these professional
domains. It also contributes by demonstrating the growth of
these ﬁelds as distinct professional domains, and by artic-
ulating the speciﬁc competencies (not limited to ethics or
governance skills construed narrowly) requested for individu-
als in job postings.
However, while our study reviews the market’s hiring
demands with respect to AI ethics and governance roles,
these should be carefully interpreted and not conﬂated with
the complex realities and deeper normative challenges that
demand the work of AI ethicists and governance professionals
in the ﬁrst place. As [27] highlights, the AI ethicist may be
required to work in industries that have potentially opposing
interests, objectives, and epistemological perspectives. For
instance, an AI ethicist may have to critically evaluate their
organization and recommend actions that conﬂict with the
economic interests of a ﬁrm, or, they may have to apply or
evaluate practices using approaches not already formalized,
understood, or valued within a ﬁrm. For instance, we might
expect ethicists to have particular skills in normative ethics,
systems thinking, sociotechnical thinking, sociology, and much
more, including even atypical skills like ‘bravery’ [26] which
are unlikely to show up in job postings.
On the one hand, it is understandable that job postings
and skills taxonomies might not list all skills down to a
maximal level of detail, which may be difﬁcult and unrealistic,
especially given the novelty of some of these job roles. In
line with the Competency-Capability Chasm, it may be up to
educational institutions to articulate all the micro skills that
feed into “AI ethics” or “AI governance,” allowing employers
to rely on this careful planning and associated training. On
the other hand, this gap could suggest that broader work
is needed. This could include better elucidating the deeper
sets of skills required, educating employers on the need for
certain unfamiliar skills and roles, and even advancing societal,
normative, or regulatory efforts to promote associated activities
or conceptions of those activities. In short, while the job
market’s current demands constitute an important signal, they
do not constitute a complete answer to how AI ethics and AI
governance skills, needs, and job roles will or should evolve.
While more work is needed, our paper helps identify how
the market thinks about these professionals, and helps surface
gaps between industry, educational institutions, and broader
normative goals. As a starting point, we encourage educational
programs to not only consider the desired qualiﬁcations of pro-
fessionals from job posting data like those evaluated here, but
also consider the ethnographic reports and other taxonomic,
qualitative, and conceptual work discussing AI ethics and AI
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
governance in industry. Educational decision-makers also have
an important role in being future-oriented: they should think
about how skills and roles will evolve—or should evolve—in
ﬁve or ten years.
These ﬁndings offer actionable guidance for educational
programs, professional certiﬁcations, and other community-
serving initiatives aimed at education and career development.
The identiﬁed skills, and associated overlaps, may be useful
for helping guide competency-based educational programs as
well as helping employers efﬁciently structure AI ethics and AI
governance job descriptions and job functions. And critically,
for individuals, understanding required competencies and labor
market demand can help guide their career pathways, whether
individuals are new to the labor market or transitioning.
Our research is limited by several factors. Data sharing
agreements limit the full set of details we are able to present
here. Further, while our methodology for deﬁning AI, ethics,
and governance roles are based on the literature, iterative
research design, and the available taxonomies, it necessarily
involved subjective decisions along the way and remains a
snapshot of an evolving process. Signiﬁcantly more research
is needed, including longitudinal studies of labor market
demand and supply, improved deﬁnitions of requisite skills and
competencies, studies of career trajectories, and evaluations of
educational programs’ effectiveness in supporting individuals.
Next, our research speaks most directly to the U.S. context,
where the data are drawn from. Other regions may have dif-
ferent trends with respect to AI, AI ethics, and AI governance:
for instance, the European Union might have greater need
for these competencies and professionals given its heightened
regulatory focus, whereas low-income countries with modest
AI industries might have less of a focus. Questions about the
deﬁnition and composition of these skills and roles, including
nuances like focuses on risk management versus ethics, are
worthy of future study. Finally, an important limitation of our
analysis is that it does not fully differentiate between core
AI ethics and AI governance professionals and professionals
in more peripheral roles. Future work should systematically
analyze associated differences, including how responsibili-
ties, skill compositions, and organizational positioning vary
between core and peripheral roles.
Along these lines, we hope this analysis encourages future
investigations into opportunities for growth as well as potential
misalignment between the skills articulated by employers in
job postings and the complex realities faced by AI ethics
and AI governance professionals. Our ﬁndings suggest that
these roles are diverse in nature and growing in prevalence
and importance. Looking ahead, additional research will be
essential to support concerted efforts by educators, employers,
regulators, and practitioners to better align training with
societal goals and professional practices, ultimately enabling
more effective AI ethics and AI governance work.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to Lightcast for their willing-
ness to share data with the research team. Thank you
to the Governance and Responsible AI Lab (GRAIL) at
Purdue University and the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology (CSET) at Georgetown University for support and
feedback, especially Veronica Jade Kinoshita.
R
EFERENCES
[1] A. Klein. “Bipartisan bill in congress seeks to help schools teach
AI literacy.” Education Week. Accessed: Dec. 21, 2023. https:
//www.edweek.org/technology/bipartisan-bill-in-congress-seeks-to-
help-schools-teach-ai-literacy/2023/12
[2] “How we’re improving AI literacy in young people.” Google.
2024. https://blog.google/technology/families/improving-ai-literacy-in-
young-people/
[3] N. DeCario and O. Etzioni (Allen Inst. AI, Seattle, W A, USA). America
Needs AI Literacy Now. Dec. 2021. https://pnw.ai/article/america-needs-
ai-literacy-now/72515409
[4] T. Roos (Univ. Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland). Elements of AI Has
Introduced One Million People to the Basics of Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.helsinki.ﬁ/en/news/artiﬁcial-
intelligence/elements-ai-has-introduced-one-million-people-basics-
artiﬁcial-intelligence
[5] C. Wei. “Nanjing University pioneers AI education system.” Accessed:
Mar. 20, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/
202403/20/WS65fa3a4ea31082fc043bda45.html
[6] D. Schiff, “Education for AI, not AI for education: The role
of education and ethics in national AI policy strategies,” Int.
J. Artif. Intell. Educ. , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 527–563, Sep. 2022,
doi: 10.1007/s40593-021-00270-2.
[7] M. Heinrich. “Artiﬁcial intelligence initiative act.” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/
1558
[8] National Commission on Excellence in Education, “A nation
at risk: The imperative for educational reform,” Elem. School
J., vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 113–130, 1983. [Online]. Available:
https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/461348
[9] N. Wu, “‘Restrict foreigners, not robots’: Partisan responses to
automation threat,” Econ. Polit. , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 505–528, 2023,
doi: 10.1111/ecpo.12225.
[10] M. J. Handel, “Skills mismatch in the labor mar-
ket,” Annu. Rev. Sociol. , vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 135–165, 2003,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100030.
[11] J. Handelsman and M. Smith. “STEM for all.” The White House Blog.
2016. [Online]. Available: https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/
2016/02/11/stem-all
[12] The New Frontier: Artiﬁcial Intelligence at Work . All Party Parliam.
Group AI (APPG AI) Secr., London, U.K., Nov. 2021.
[13] D. M. West and J. R. Allen. “How artiﬁcial intelligence is transforming
the world.” Brookings. [Online]. Available: https://www.brookings.edu/
research/how-artiﬁcial-intelligence-is-transforming-the-world/
[14] D. Gehlhaus and S. Mutis (Center Secur. Emerg. Technol., Washington,
DC, USA). The U.S. AI Workforce. Jan. 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//live-cset-georgetown.pantheonsite.io/research/the-u-s-ai-workforce/
[15] S. Bankins, A. C. Ocampo, M. Marrone, S. L. D. Restubog, and
S. E. Woo, “A multilevel review of artiﬁcial intelligence in organizations:
Implications for organizational behavior research and practice,” J.
Organ. Behav., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 159–182, 2024, doi: 10.1002/job.2735.
[16] Y . Wu and C. Lin, “The hidden multiplier: Unraveling the true cost
of the global ai skills gap,” IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag. , vol. 43, no. 4,
pp. 15–23, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/MTS.2024.3505618.
[17] J. Southworth et al., “Developing a model for AI across the curriculum:
Transforming the higher education landscape via innovation in AI
literacy,”Comput. Educ., Artif. Intell., vol. 4, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 100127,
doi: 10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100127.
[18] X. Fan, “Artiﬁcial intelligence’s impact on employment: Challenges,
potential consumers, and policy responses through automation and
workforce rehabilitating,” Lecture Notes Educ. Psychol. Public Media ,
vol. 73, pp. 50–55, Nov. 2024, doi: 10.54254/2753-7048/73/20241040.
[19] P. Cardon, C. Fleischmann, M. Logemann, J. Heidewald, J. Aritz,
and S. Swartz, “Competencies needed by business professionals in
the AI age: Character and communication lead the way,” Bus.
Prof. Commun. Quart.
, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 223–246, Nov. 2023,
doi: 10.1177/23294906231208166.
[20] T. K. F. Chiu, Z. Ahmad, M. Ismailov, and I. T. Sanusi, “What
are artiﬁcial intelligence literacy and competency? A comprehensive
framework to support them,” Comput. Educ. Open , vol. 6, Jun. 2024,
Art. no. 100171, doi: 10.1016/j.caeo.2024.100171.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
WIESE et al.: AI ETHICS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE JOB MARKET: TRENDS, SKILLS, AND SECTORAL DEMAND 469
[21] D. Long and B. Magerko, “What is AI literacy? Competencies and
design considerations,” in Proc. CHI Conf. Human Factors Comput.
Syst., Apr. 2020, pp. 1–16, doi: 10.1145/3313831.3376727.
[22] A. Bewersdorff, M. Hornberger, C. Nerdel, and D. S. Schiff,
“AI advocates and cautious critics: How AI attitudes, AI
interest, use of AI, and AI literacy build university students’
AI self-efﬁcacy,” Comput. Educ., Artif. Intell. , vol. 8, Jun. 2025,
Art. no. 100340, doi: 10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100340.
[23] M. Hornberger, A. Bewersdorff, and C. Nerdel, “What do university
students know about artiﬁcial intelligence? Development and validation
of an AI literacy test,” Comput. Educ., Artif. Intell. , vol. 5, Jan. 2023,
Art no. 100165, doi: 10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100165.
[24] G. Biesta, “Good education in an age of measurement: On
the need to reconnect with the question of purpose in educa-
tion,” Educ. Assess. Eval. Account., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 33–46, Feb. 2009,
doi: 10.1007/s11092-008-9064-9.
[25] S. Sidra and C. Mason, “Reconceptualizing AI literacy: The importance
of metacognitive thinking in an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-enabled
workforce,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Artif. Intell. (CAI) , Jun. 2024,
pp. 1181–1186, doi: 10.1109/CAI59869.2024.00211.
[26] O. Gambelin, “Brave: What it means to be an AI ethicist,” AI Ethics ,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 87–91, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s43681-020-00020-5.
[27] D. Burema, “The challenges of being an in-house AI ethicist and how
to overcome them,” J. Responsib. Innov. , vol. 12, no. 1, Dec. 2025,
Art. no. 2445322, doi: 10.1080/23299460.2024.2445322.
[28] G. Gigerenzer, “Moral satisﬁcing: Rethinking moral behavior as
bounded rationality,” Topics Cogn. Sci. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 528–554,
2010, doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2010.01094.x.
[29] M. Pinski, T. Hofmann, and A. Benlian, “AI literacy for the top
management: An upper echelons perspective on corporate AI orientation
and implementation ability,” Electron. Markets , vol. 34, no. 1, p. 24,
Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s12525-024-00707-1.
[30] (Eur. Comm., Brussels, Belgium). Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act: Regulation
(EU) 2024/1689. 2024. [Online]. Available: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/
2024/1689/oj/eng
[31] “AI risk management framework: AI RMF (1.0),” U.S. Dept. Comm.,
Nat. Inst. Stand. Technol., Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Rep. NIST AI 100-
1, 2023, doi: 10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1.
[32] Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and
Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , White House, Ofﬁce Sci. Technol. Policy,
Washington, DC, USA, Oct. 2023.
[33] “Responsible AI institute.” Responsible AI. Accessed: Oct. 2, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.responsible.ai/
[34] “Ethical AI governance group.” EAIGG. Accessed: Oct. 2, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.eaigg.org
[35] S. Kelley, “Employee perceptions of the effective adoption of
AI principles,” J. Bus. Ethics , vol. 178, pp. 871–893, Feb. 2022,
doi: 10.1007/s10551-022-05051-y.
[36] D. S. Schiff, S. Kelley, and J. Camacho Ibáñez, “The emergence of
artiﬁcial intelligence ethics auditing,” Big Data Soc. , vol. 11, no. 4,
2025, Art. no. 20539517241299732, doi: 10.1177/20539517241299732.
[37] L. Tuovinen and A. Rohunen, “Teaching AI ethics to engineering
students: reﬂections on syllabus design and teaching methods,” in Proc.
CEUR Workshop , 2021, pp. 19–33.
[38] E. Castillo. “Purdue launches online master of artiﬁcial intelligence
degree.” BestColleges. Accessed: Mar. 6, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bestcolleges.com/news/purdue-online-master-artiﬁcial-
intelligence-degree/
[39] (IEEE Stand. Assoc., Piscataway, NJ, USA). IEEE CertifAIEd
TM.
Accessed: Dec. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://standards.ieee.org/
products-programs/icap/ieee-certifaied/
[40] V . Bogina, A. Hartman, T. Kuﬂik, and A. Shulner-Tal, “Educating
software and AI stakeholders about algorithmic fairness, accountability,
transparency and ethics,” Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ., vol. 32, pp. 808–833,
Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s40593-021-00248-0.
[41] J. Borenstein and A. Howard, “Emerging challenges in AI and the need
for AI ethics education,” AI Ethics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 61–65, Feb. 2021,
doi: 10.1007/s43681-020-00002-7.
[42] (Univ. Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). DINS and CS Faculty Get
Grant from Google to Enhance Ethical Competence in Curriculum .
Accessed: Dec. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.dins.
pitt.edu/news/dins-and-cs-faculty-get-grant-google-enhance-ethical-
competence-curriculum
[43] G. Auld, A. Casovan, A. Clarke, and B. Faveri, “Governing AI through
ethical standards: Learning from the experiences of other private gover-
nance initiatives,” J. Eur. Public Policy, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1822–1844,
Aug. 2022, doi: 10.1080/13501763.2022.2099449.
[44] (CSIRO, Canberra, ACT, Australia). Catalogue of RAI Maturity Models.
Accessed: Oct. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://research.csiro.au/ss/
science/projects/responsible-ai-pattern-catalogue/rai-maturity-model/
[45] B. Walsh, B. Dalton, S. Forsyth, and T. Yeh, “Literacy and STEM
teachers adapt AI ethics curriculum,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. ,
vol. 37, Jun. 2023, pp. 16048–16055, doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i13.26906.
[46] M. Z. Cocchiaro, J. Morley, C. Novelli, E. Panai, A. Tartaro, and
L. Floridi, “Who is an AI ethicist? An empirical study of expertise, skills,
and proﬁles to build a competency framework,” AI Ethics , pp. 1–13,
Feb. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s43681-024-00643-y.
[47] T. Turja, T. Särkikoski, P. Koistinen, and H. Melin, “Basic human
needs and robotization: How to make deployment of robots worthwhile
for everyone?” Technol. Soc. , vol. 68, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 101917,
doi: 10.1016/j.techsoc.2022.101917.
[48] R. Ward et al., “Towards a 21st century personalised learning skills tax-
onomy,” in Proc. IEEE Global Eng. Educ. Conf. (EDUCON), Apr. 2021,
pp. 344–354, doi: 10.1109/EDUCON46332.2021.9453883.
[49] R. Ward, S. Grant, M. W. Larsen, and K. Giovacchini, “The universal
micro-credential framework: The role of badges, micro-credentials, skills
proﬁling, and design patterns in developing interdisciplinary learning
and assessment paths for computing education,” IEEE Trans. Educ. ,
vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 897–906, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TE.2024.3486016.
[50] P. A. Ertmer et al., “How instructional design experts use knowledge and
experience to solve ill-structured problems,” Perform. Improv. Quart. ,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 17–42, 2008, doi: 10.1002/piq.20013.
[51] W. Dick and L. Carey, The Systematic Design of Instruction . Glenview,
IL, USA: Scott, Foresman Co., 1978.
[52] J. Fulgencio and T. I. Asino, “Conducting a learner analysis,” in Design
for Learning: Principles, Processes, and Praxis . London, U.K.: EdTech
Books, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://edtechbooks.org/-TgiD
[53] Eduventures Research Staff, What We Learned in 2024: The Top 5
Takeaways From Our Analysts , Encoura, Austin, TX, USA. Accessed:
Feb. 10, 2025.
[54] “V oice of the online learner.” Risepoint. 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//risepoint.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/09/VOL-2024.pdf
[55] M. J. Ahsan, “Cultivating a culture of learning: The role of leadership
in fostering lifelong development,” Learn. Organ. , vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 282–306, Aug. 2024, doi:
10.1108/TLO-03-2024-0099.
[56] A. Muduli, “Workforce agility: A review of literature,” IUP J. Manag.
Res., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1–12, 2013.
[57] (IRS, Washington, DC, USA). Frequently Asked Questions About
Educational Assistance Programs Internal Revenue Service . 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/frequently-asked-
questions-about-educational-assistance-programs
[58] (ASU, Tempe, AZ, USA). ASU Earned Admission . Accessed: Oct. 2,
2025. [Online]. Available: https://ea.asu.edu/
[59] (Utah State Univ., Logan, UT, USA). USU Earned Admission. Accessed:
Oct. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.usu.edu/admissions/
apply/earned-admission
[60] Purdue Graduate Council, Non-Credit to Credit Policy and Guidelines
for Graduate Degrees at Purdue University , Purdue Univ., West
Lafayette, IN, USA, 2018.
[61] Y .-C. Chen and M. Ahn, “Governing AI systems for public values:
Design principles and a process framework,” in The Oxford Handbook of
AI Governance, J. B. Bullock et al., Eds., Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ.,
2024, doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780197579329.013.31.
[62] M. Sadek, E. Kallina, T. Bohné, C. Mougenot, R. A. Calvo, and
S. Cave, “Challenges of responsible AI in practice: scoping review
and recommended actions,” AI Soc. , vol. 40, pp. 199–215, Feb. 2024,
doi: 10.1007/s00146-024-01880-9.
[63] Q. Lu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, and J. Whittle, “Responsible-AI-by-design: A
pattern collection for designing responsible AI systems,” Sep. 2022,
arXiv:2203.00905.
[64] S. Rismani and A. Moon, “What does it mean to be a responsible
AI practitioner: An ontology of roles and skills,” in Proc.
AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, Soc. , Aug. 2023, pp. 584–595.
doi: 10.1145/3600211.3604702.
[65] “Job posting analytics (JPA) methodology lightcast knowledge base.”
Lightcast. Accessed: Apr. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://kb.
lightcast.io/en/articles/6957446-job-posting-analytics-jpa-methodology
[66] H. Choi and I. Marinescu, “Data for labor market concentration using
lightcast (formerly burning glass technologies),” Data Brief , vol. 55,
Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110647, doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110647.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY , VOL. 6, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2025
[67] B. Hershbein and L. B. Kahn, Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased
Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings , Nat. Bureau
Econ. Res., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2017.
[68] D. J. Deming and K. L. Noray (Nat. Bureau Econ. Res., Cambridge,
MA, USA). STEM Careers and the Changing Skill Requirements of
Work. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.nber.org/papers/w25065
[69] J. Fuller, S. Hansen, T. Ramdas, and R. Sadun, “The demand for
executive skills: Center for economic performance,” Nat. Bureau Econ.
Res., Cambridge, MA, USA, Working Papers, 2021.
[70] S. Hemelt, B. Hershbein, S. Martin, and K. Stange, College Majors
and Skills- Evidence from the Universe of Online Job Ads.pdf , Nat.
Bureau Econ. Res., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nber.org/papers/w29605
[71] W. Markow, Hughes, and A. Bundy, The New Foundational Skills of
the Digital Economy: Developing the Professionals of the Future ,B u s . -
Higher Educ. Forum, Washington, DC, USA, 2018,
[72] L. Jose Gonzalez-Gomez, S. Margarita Hernandez-Munoz, A. Borja,
J. Daniel Azofeifa, J. Noguez, and P. Caratozzolo, “Analyzing natural
language processing techniques to extract meaningful information
on skills acquisition from textual content,” IEEE Access , vol. 12,
pp. 139742–139757, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3465409.
[73] D. Acemoglu, D. Autor, J. Hazell, and P. Restrepo, “Artiﬁcial intel-
ligence and jobs: Evidence from online vacancies,” J. Labor Econ. ,
vol. 40, no. S1, pp. S293–S340, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1086/718327.
[74] P. Bastos, K. Stapleton, D. Taglioni, and H. Y . Wei, “Firm networks
and global technology diffusion,” World Bank Group, Washington, DC,
USA, Working Paper, 2024.
[75] A. Bergson-Shilcock, R. Taylor, and N. Hodge, Closing the Digital Skill
Divide- The Payoff for Workers, Business, and the Economy , Federal
Reserve Bank Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2023.
[76] C. Larsen et al., Eds., “The green transition in labour markets across
europe: an analysis of job postings data,” in Pathways of Greening
Labour Markets: Opportunities and Challenges for Regional and
Local Labour Market Observation in Europe and Beyond . Baden-
Baden, Germany: Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft mbH Co. KG, 2023,
doi: 10.5771/9783957104236.
[77] E. Beckett. “Demand for AI skills continues climbing.” Lightcast.
Accessed: Apr. 2, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://lightcast.io/
resources/blog/demand-for-ai-skills-continues-climbing
[78] D. Gehlhaus and S. Mutis, The U.S. AI Workforce, Center Secur. Emerg.
Technol., Washington, DC, USA, Jan. 2021.
[79] T. Eloundou, S. Manning, P. Mishkin, and D. Rock, “GPTs are GPTs:
An early look at the labor market impact potential of large language
models,” Aug. 2023, arXiv:2303.10130.
[80] Economic Census: NAICS Codes & Understanding Industry
Classiﬁcation Systems , United States Census Bureau, Washington, DC,
USA. Accessed: Apr. 20, 2025.
[81] Standard Occupational Classiﬁcation (SOC) System , U.S. Bureau Labor
Stat., Washington, DC, USA, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.
bls.gov/soc
[82] “Job postings data.” Lightcast. Accessed: Apr. 2, 2025. [Online].
Available: https://lightcast.io/products/data/overview
[83] J. Fereday and E. Muir-Cochrane, “Demonstrating rigor using thematic
analysis: A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and
theme development,” Int. J. Qual. Methods , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 80–92,
Mar. 2006, doi: 10.1177/160940690600500107.
[84] G. C. Banks, H. M. Woznyj, R. S. Wesslen, and R. L. Ross, “A review
of best practice recommendations for text analysis in R (and a user-
friendly app),” J. Bus. Psychol., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 445–459, Aug. 2018,
doi: 10.1007/s10869-017-9528-3.
[85] M. Prates, P. Avelar, and L. C. Lamb, “On quantifying and understanding
the role of ethics in AI research: A historical account of ﬂagship
conferences and journals,” Sep. 2018, arXiv:1809.08328.
[86] J. Fjeld, N. Achten, H. Hilligoss, A. Nagy, and M. Srikumar, “Principled
artiﬁcial intelligence: Mapping consensus in ethical and rights-based
approaches to principles for AI.” SSRN. 2020. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3518482
[87] D. S. Schiff, “Framing contestation and public inﬂuence on
policymakers: Evidence from U.S. artiﬁcial intelligence policy dis-
course,” Policy Soc. , vol. 4, no. 3, Apr. 2024, Art. no. puae007.
doi: 10.1093/polsoc/puae007.
[88] A. M. Isserman, “The location quotient approach to estimating regional
economic impacts,” J. Amer. Inst. Planners , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 33–41,
Jan. 1977, doi: 10.1080/01944367708977758.
[89] A. Singla, A. Sukharevsky, L. Yee, M. Chui, and B. Hall, The State of
AI: How Organizations Are Rewiring To Capture Value, McKinsey Co.,
New York, NY , USA, Mar. 2025.
[90] The Transformational Opportunity of AI on ICT Jobs: AI-Enabled ICT
Workforce Consortium, Cisco, San Jose, CA, USA, 2024.
[91] N. Maslej et al., The AI Index 2024 Annual Report: AI Index Steering
Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI , Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, Apr. 2024.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Georgetown University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 00:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
