
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
On The Outside Looking In:
Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in
European Defence-industrial
Collaboration Since the End
of the Cold War
Karl Dewey, Haena Jo, Fenella McGerty, Ester Sabatino
and Tom Waldwyn
July 2024
The International Institute
for Strategic Studies
Bilkent
Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
İhsan Doğramaci Peace Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Acknowledgements
This paper is a part of ‘National Defence Industry: From an Enabler of Turkey’s Pursuit of Strategic Autonomy to a Bridge
between Turkey and Europe’, a joint project between the Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research (CFPPR) and the
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS). The project is supported by the Centre for Applied Turkey Studies (CATS).
Disclaimers
The views outlined in this paper are exclusively those of the authors and do not represent institutional views of the
CFPPR or the IISS.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 3
Contents
Selected Acronyms 4
Executive Summary 5
Introduction 6
1. After the Cold War: The High Point of European Defence-industrial
Consolidation (1991–2001) 8
The Context of Consolidation 8
OCCAR, the LoI and the Beginning of EU Defence Cooperation 8
Reacting to the New Landscape: A Decade of Consolidation 10
Coming to Fruition but Reduced in Scope: Eurofighter, NH90 and Tiger 11
Turkiye: A Unique Path 12
2. The Second Wave of Consolidation (2002–13) 14
A Short-lived Return to Defence-spending Growth 14
The Beginnings of EU Defence Policy, NSPA, Lancaster House and NORDEFCO 14
A Widening of M&A Activity 17
The Long Road to Capability: A400M, FREMM, Boxer and F-35 17
Turkiye: The First Indigenous Designs 18
3. War in Europe (2014–21) 20
An Inflection Point but Little Change 20
The EU Enters the Defence Market 20
Consolidation at a Snail’s Pace 21
The Next Generation of Joint Programmes: FCAS, MGCS, Eurodrone and Others 22
The Militarisation of Turkish Foreign Policy 23
4. Painful Rearmament (2022–present) 25
War in Ukraine 25
New Initiatives to Boost Production 25
Expanding Capacity and Looking Ahead 27
New Partners: MMPC, GCAP and Korean Imports 27
Turkiye: A Balancing Act in Europe and Widening of Global Exports 28
Conclusion 30
Notes 31
Cover
The maiden flight of the first A400M prototype, Spain, December 2009 (aviation-images.com/Universal Images Group via Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Selected Acronyms
ASAP Act in Support of Ammunition Production
CSDP Common Security and Defence Policy
EADS European Aeronautic Defence and Space
 Company
EC European Commission
EDA European Defence Agency
EDF European Defence Fund
EDIDP European Defence Industrial Development
 Programme
EDTIB European Defence Technological and
 Industrial Base
ESDP European Security and Defence Policy
FCAS Future Combat Air System
MGCS Main Ground Combat System
MoU memorandum of understanding
M&A mergers and acquisitions
OCCAR Organisation for Joint Armament
 Cooperation
PESCO Permanent Structured Cooperation
TAI Turkish Aerospace Industries
UAV uncrewed aerial vehicle
WEAG Western European Armaments Group
WEU Western European Union

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 5
Executive Summary
Since the end of the Cold War, Turkiye and other
European states have had to grapple with an ever-
changing economic and security context. While this
has incentivised industrial consolidation, joint pro -
grammes and the creation of cooperation mecha -
nisms among many European states, Turkiye has
almost always been on the outside.
In the late 1990s, reduced defence spending in
Europe and mergers in the US drove some of the
largest European defence manufacturers to respond
with their own consolidation process. This took place
largely in the aerospace domain, where costs were
higher, and led to the creation of multinational firms
such as Airbus, AgustaWestland and MBDA. This
rush towards consolidation by European firms had
largely ended by 2001, and most of the later attempts
at merging large firms resulted in failure. By contrast,
the key elements of Turkiye’s defence industry had
already been created and consolidated in the 1970s
and 1980s. From the 1980s, Turkish companies cooper -
ated with European and other foreign firms through
joint ventures in Turkiye, before abandoning that
strategy from 2004 onwards and instead pursuing
indigenous designs, often with foreign subcontractors.
These approaches have resulted in a far more capable
Turkish defence industry than was previously the case.
Several European governments sought to drive
greater defence-industrial and procurement coop -
eration through different multinational mecha -
nisms. Early efforts, such as the 1998 Letter of
Intent, aimed to break down barriers between coun -
tries and promote consolidation, but with limited
success. Meanwhile, multinational organisations,
such as the Western European Union (WEU) and
later the European Union, were also given a greater
role in the defence-industrial sector by their mem -
ber states. Although Turkiye has at times procured
and supported equipment through such organi -
sations, for example the Organisation for Joint
Armament Cooperation and the NATO Support and
Procurement Agency, it has largely acquired equip -
ment through its own procurement agency. This has
particularly been the case since the WEU’s and the
Western European Armaments Group’s functions
were transferred to the EU during the 2000s, effec -
tively preventing Turkish involvement.
Several European joint programmes with origins
in the Cold War came to fruition during the 1990s,
while new ones were launched. Among the par -
ticipating states were those who hoped that some
of these programmes would be driven primarily
by commercial criteria, but national horse-trading
proved to be an inescapable dynamic in every case.
Because Ankara was pursuing its own indigenous
designs, aiming to achieve greater strategic auton -
omy and lessen reliance on foreign partners, it was
involved in very few of these projects. The A400M
and F-35 were the prime examples, with Turkiye
having the unique motivation of joining those pro -
grammes partly to lessen exposure to embargoes
and restrictions. While the F-35 would end in fail -
ure for Ankara, the A400M programme has been
much more successful from Turkiye’s perspective in
terms of industrial participation and end capability,
despite the challenges involved.
In 2024, the political divide between Ankara and
many European capitals is wide, following a dete -
rioration in relations over the past decade. Turkiye’s
entry into the A400M project took place in the con -
text of a relatively pro-European period of its pol -
itics, which is not the case today. It remains to be
seen whether Turkiye will seek to partner with other
European states to offset some of the challenges its
defence industry is now facing.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Introduction
During the Cold War, European states had large defence
budgets and high levels of political support for national
defence. Their armed forces were supplied by national
defence industries that typically consisted of multiple
companies per sector. Many countries still imported
significant amounts of defence equipment, but com -
paratively low financial and technical barriers to entry
(relative to today’s market conditions) allowed a greater
number of smaller industrial players to exist. The end of
the Cold War drastically changed this dynamic, incenti-
vising consolidation and cooperation.
Over the last half-century, Turkiye’s evolving rela -
tionship with its European partners has seen times of
close cooperation followed by periods of estrangement
and embargo. Attempts by Turkiye to achieve foreign-
policy goals and ameliorate security concerns – such
as its invasion of Northern Cyprus in 1974, or its han -
dling of Kurdish separatism and terrorism in the 1990s
– provoked condemnation from other European states
and continue to affect relations today. More recently,
Turkiye’s operations in northern Syria (2016–present),
its purchase of Russian S-400 (RS-SA-21 Growler) air-
defence systems (2017) and its slowness to approve
Sweden’s NATO accession (2023) have seen the rela -
tionship deteriorate. At the start of the Cold War,
Turkiye’s reliance on foreign equipment, principally
from the United States, meant that foreign partners
had significant influence over Turkish foreign policy
and military action, culminating in embargoes on sup -
plies of materiel following the military intervention
in Cyprus in 1974. Because of this, successive Turkish
leaders have since placed great emphasis on generating
local defence-industrial capability in order to give the
country greater autonomy and freedom of manoeuvre.
This report examines how Turkiye’s competing
desires for cooperation and autonomy have developed
since the end of the Cold War. Those two desires have
sometimes proved complementary but more often have
worked against each other. The report also examines
the changing security and economic dynamics that have
driven defence spending and thinking in Turkiye and
the rest of Europe: from the new defence paradigms of
the 1990s to the shared focus on rearmament and regen-
erating industrial capability following Russia’s 2022
invasion of Ukraine.
The report argues that early European efforts to insti-
tutionalise defence-industrial collaboration and consolida-
tion had mixed results. There were some success stories,
such as the Organisation for Joint Armament Cooperation
(OCCAR), but other initiatives failed to match ambi -
tions, such as the 1998 Letter of Intent. 1 From the late
1990s the European Union began to coordinate member
states’ cooperation in defence matters, and it was given a
greater role in the defence industry and market from the
mid-2010s. Several bilateral efforts, such as the Lancaster
House Treaties, led to joint defence programmes. Turkiye
remained outside most of these developments, which
were initially confined largely to Western European states
and would often proceed between close bilateral partners
or through the EU. Since 2013, major policy disagreements
and the languishing of Turkiye’s EU-membership bid have
widened the gap between Ankara and European capitals.
The report then sets out how, after the end of the
Cold War, the collapse of European countries’ defence
spending and the consolidation of US industry,
among other factors, drove a series of mergers and (Guenter Schiffmann/Bloomberg via Getty Images)
The EADS Eurofighter final assembly line at Manching, Germany,
September 2009

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 7
acquisitions (M&A) in Europe in the late 1990s that
culminated in the creation of large multinational com -
panies in the aerospace sector. The principal examples
were AgustaWestland, European Aeronautic Defence
and Space Company (EADS, later Airbus) and MBDA.
There were even more examples of industry consoli -
dating nationally, with a single national champion
created per sector or sometimes across sectors, such
as in the cases of BAE Systems, Finmeccanica (later
Leonardo) and Thales. Turkiye was not involved in
these developments, partly because its defence indus -
try had already been created and consolidated in the
1970s and 1980s, but also because of the same fac -
tors that caused Ankara to remain outside European
defence-cooperation initiatives: a desire to achieve
greater autonomy for its defence industry, plus its
troubled relations with other European states.
Like the national programmes, early joint pro -
grammes in Europe – such as the A400M, Eurofighter
and NH90 – suffered from cuts after the end of the
Cold War, while difficulties also arose in attempting
to reconcile the wishes of multiple partners. Several
projects were delayed by the necessary trade-offs,
and by countries leaving or joining. Later joint pro -
grammes typically had fewer participating coun -
tries, but still suffered from technical challenges and
reductions in requirements. Turkiye’s involvement in
multinational programmes has largely been limited
to the A400M and F-35. In those two instances there
was a unique motivating factor for Ankara, as it saw
the programmes partly as a potential means to shield
itself against potential embargoes and restrictions,
although in the case of F-35 this ultimately turned out
not to be the case.
Figure 0.1: Selected European countries’ defence spending, 1990–2023 (constant 2015 USDbn)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
UK
Turkiye
Spain
Italy
Germany
France
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
Defence spending (constant 2015 USDbn)
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
France Germany Italy Spain Turkiye UK
Sources: NATO, ‘Financial and Economic Data Relating to NATO Defence’; Military Balance+; IISS analysis

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
1. After the Cold War: The High Point
of European Defence-industrial
Consolidation (1991–2001)
The Context of Consolidation
The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 changed
Europe’s security paradigm, with the removal of the
principal threat that had driven US and European
defence planning for almost half a century. European
countries now enjoyed what was termed a ‘peace divi -
dend’, reducing defence spending and the size of their
armed forces. 2 Decreased demand and resourcing led
to change in the size and composition of the European
defence industry, albeit varying by sector. At the start of
the 1990s, Europe’s defence industry was almost entirely
divided into national silos, with several companies per
sector. But by 2001, several multinational ‘European’
firms had been established, following a burst of consoli-
dation efforts that began in the late 1990s.
This burst of consolidation was greatly incentivised
by events that took place in the US during the mid-
1990s, where a five-year rush (1993–98) of M&A greatly
changed the composition of US industry before com -
petition concerns halted further moves. 3 This included
the mergers of Northrop Aircraft with the Grumman
Corporation in 1994, the Lockheed Corporation with
Martin Marietta in 1995 and Boeing with McDonnell
Douglas in 1997. As a result, the US had fewer, but
much bigger, defence firms. These were more likely to
survive in a time of smaller budgets and to be competi-
tive in export markets.
During the 1990s, the use of precision-guided
weapons, satellite communications and stealth air -
craft in conflicts in the Middle East and the Balkans
also impacted European thinking. The long-standing
problem of ‘defence inflation’ – both in terms of the
higher costs of defence-relevant items due to the unique
aspects of the industry, and the overall cost of each
generation of defence equipment often being propor -
tionally greater than the previous one – meant that for
countries to afford this kind of capability they would
have to develop it together.4 Although some joint devel-
opment had taken place during the Cold War, such as
the bilateral SEPECAT Jaguar and trilateral Panavia
Tornado, the high cost of these systems, particularly in
the air domain, would incentivise joint procurement
and industrial consolidation to a much greater extent.
OCCAR, the LoI and the Beginning
of EU Defence Cooperation
These conclusions were accompanied by a series of
efforts to encourage consolidation and joint procure -
ment in Europe. They took place in the states with the
largest defence industries, with many initiatives hap -
pening independently of the European Union. In 1995, a
Franco-German summit in Baden-Baden agreed a num-
ber of defence-cooperation measures, including a struc-
ture for joint procurement that would be the forerunner
of a wider European agency. 5 This came to fruition in
1998 with an agreement by France, Germany, Italy and
the United Kingdom to establish OCCAR. 6 From 2001,
several pre-existing programmes were placed under the
management of OCCAR, with Belgium and Spain join -
ing the organisation soon afterwards. The participating
states hoped that OCCAR would be able to manage pro-
jects on a more commercial and less political basis, and
be more effective than the pre-existing mechanisms such
as the Western European Armaments Group (WEAG),
a body established in 1993 with the aim of strength -
ening the European defence industry and harmonis -
ing requirements. 7 While many OCCAR programmes

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 9
Figure 1.1: Examples of defence-industrial collaboration, cooperation and consolidation in Europe: 1991–2001
Matra BAe Dynamics is
formed by the 50:50
merger of Matra and
BAe Dynamics
Aug 1996
NATO Euro/f_ighter
and Tornado
Management
Agency (NETMA)
is formed
Jan 1996
GEC-Marconi and
Thomson-CSF merge
their sonar businesses
to form Thomson
Marconi Sonar
Apr 1996
Aérospatiale
and Matra
merge
Jun 1999
The Western European
Armaments
Organisation (WEAO) is
established,
subordinate to the WEU
Nov 1996
The EuroFlag
consortium is
established to develop
the European Future
Large Aircraft, later
the A400M
Jun 1991 1994
Finmeccanica
acquires the
defence businesses
of the liquidated
state holding
company EFIM
Aug 1994
GKN acquires
Westland
through a
hostile
takeover
Western European Union (WEU)
foreign and defence ministers
agree to pursue closer defence
cooperation, leading to the
formation of the Western European
Armaments Group (WEAG)
May 1993
France, Italy and the UK
sign an MoU to develop
the Common New
Generation
Frigate (CNGF)
Jul 1994 Dec 1995
France and
Germany sign
Baden-Baden
agreements
The Maastricht Treaty
comes into eﬀect and
creates the Common
Foreign and Security
Policy (CFSP)
Nov 1993
Aérospatiale and
DASA merge their
helicopter divisions to
form the Eurocopter
joint venture
Jan 1992
The European Security
and Defence Policy
(ESDP), part of the
Treaty of Amsterdam,
enters into force
May 1999
Celsius sells Kockums
Naval Systems to
Howaldtswerke-Deutsche
Werft (HDW)
Sept 1999
France and
Germany contract
Eurocopter to
supply 160 Tiger
attack helicopters
Jun 1999
MBDA is formed by
the merger of EADS
Aerospatiale Matra
Missiles, Matra BAe
Dynamics and Alenia
Marconi Systems
Dec 2001
Finmeccanica and GKN
merge their helicopter
operations to form
AgustaWestland
Jun 2000
Aerospatiale Matra,
Daimler Chrysler
Aerospace (DASA) and
Construcciones
Aeronáuticas (CASA)
merge to form EADS
May 2000
Saab acquires
99% of
Celsius
Feb 2000
British Aerospace
completes acquisition of
Marconi Electronic
Systems for GBP7.7bn
(USD12.46bn) and forms
BAE Systems
Nov 1999
The Netherlands
joins the
German–British
Boxer programme
Feb 2001
Four states award
NHIndustries a
EUR6.6bn
(USD6.1bn) contract
to supply 243 NH90
helicopters
Jun 2000
France and the
UK issue the
Saint-Malo
Declaration
Dec 1998
The majority of
Thomson-CSF
is privatised
Jun 1998
Dec 1998
Alenia Marconi Systems
is formed by the
merger of GEC-Marconi
Radar & Defence and
Alenia Difesa
The defence-electronics businesses
of Alcatel and Dassault Électronique
are merged with Thomson CSF. The
satellite businesses of Alcatel,
Aérospatiale and Thomson-CSF are
merged to form the Alcatel Space
joint venture.
Apr 1998
July 1998
Six states sign a Letter of
Intent to cooperate on
measures relevant to
defence-industrial
restructuring in Europe
Four states sign
the OCCAR
convention
Sept 1998
Four partner states
order a /f_irst batch of
148 Euro/f_ighter aircraft
Sept 1998
Nammo is formed
by the merger of
the ammunition
businesses of
Celsius, Patria
and Raufoss
1998
Merger, acquisition or industrial partnership Defence-cooperation agreement or mechanism Multinational programme
Sources: IISS analysis; various

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
proved to be successful, conflicting national interests
have often prevented some of the hoped-for efficiencies
from materialising.
A 1998 Letter of Intent (LoI) signed between France,
Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden and the UK set out plans
to restructure the European defence industry and was
followed by a framework agreement in 2000. 8 The LoI
had ambitions to harmonise processes and regulations,
including export controls, thereby making it easier for
companies to consolidate across borders. However,
beyond establishing political backing for industrial con-
solidation, few of the LoI’s aims were achieved.
Modest cooperation on defence and capability devel-
opment under the EU framework was long in coming.
That was because member states excluded the defence
sector from the EU project of institutionalised coop -
eration, as defence matters were formally discussed in
the Western European Union (WEU), a pan-European
organisation and military alliance with origins dating
back to 1948.
The concept of a European Security and Defence
Policy (ESDP) was first introduced in the 1997 Treaty
of Amsterdam as the operational arm of the Common
Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP). It marked the first
successful inclusion of defence in EU founding docu -
ments.9 The treaty included references to the WEU,
raising the prospect of integrating it into the EU. 10 This
aroused concern about the possibility of what the US
termed the ‘Three Ds’: diminution of NATO, duplica -
tion of NATO functions, and discrimination against
non-EU members such as Turkiye. 11 However, it was
the Treaty of Nice, in 2001, that created many elements
of the EU’s contemporary framework for cooperation
on defence matters, such as giving the Political and
Security Committee political control of managing crises.
In this process, the 1998 Saint-Malo Declaration issued
by France and the UK played a pivotal role. The inabil -
ity of EU members to respond effectively to the crisis
in the Balkans in the mid-1990s had triggered efforts
to improve crisis management. The basic text of Saint-
Malo was incorporated into the 1999 Declaration of the
European Council, and a few months later, EU lead -
ers agreed on the Helsinki Headline Goal: a military-
capability target, set for 2003, and the development of
a European Rapid Reaction Force.12 The WEU would be
formally dissolved in 2011 following the transfer of a
slightly modified mutual-assistance clause to the EU in
the 2011 Treaty of Lisbon.
After the beginning of the new century, defence
cooperation gained more traction among EU member
states. In 2001, the Laeken Council conclusions included
an annex on the operational capability of the Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), in which member
states called for ‘close coordination’ to reach a balanced
development of military and civilian capabilities. 13 The
Laeken declaration further called for the strengthening
of military capabilities, ultimately leading to the first
Capability Development Plan (CDP) in 2008.14
Reacting to the New Landscape: A
Decade of Consolidation
Newfound political backing eased several M&A efforts
within Western Europe as companies sought to adapt
to the new circumstances. Most of these efforts were
focused on the aerospace industry, where development
costs are particularly high, and the most significant
among these was the process that eventually led to the
creation of EADS.
After witnessing events in the US, from mid-1997
the largest European aerospace and defence companies
began discussing potential consolidation. 15 The idea
of a European aerospace and defence company was
endorsed by governments, and talks soon advanced
for a GBP15 billion (USD24.85bn) merger between
the UK’s British Aerospace (BAe) and Germany’s
DaimlerChrysler Aerospace (DASA). It was hoped
that later activity would also include French indus -
try.16 However, this initiative collapsed the following
year after BAe switched focus and created a national
tie-up with defence-electronics and shipbuilding com -
pany Marconi Electronic Systems (MES). Completed
in late 1999, BAe’s acquisition of MES for GBP7.7bn
(USD12.46bn) created what was then the third-largest
defence company in the world: BAE Systems. 17 Despite
UK government support for BAe’s merger with DASA,
there was concern that MES’s purchase by France’s
Thomson-CSF would damage its US business interests.
Similarly, concerns that MES could be bought by a large
US firm led to fears that a new tie-in would threaten
BAe’s business in the UK.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 11
With the UK consolidating nationally, France,
Germany and Spain pushed ahead with forming a
European aerospace and defence company. A major
obstacle to French participation was removed in 1999
with the privatisation of Aérospatiale and its merger
with Matra. 18 Following this, the formation of EADS
was completed in July 2000 through the merger of
the newly formed Aérospatiale-Matra, DASA, and
Spain’s Construcciones Aeronáuticas (CASA). EADS
brought together a range of competencies including the
Eurocopter helicopter business, shares of the Astrium
space company and 80% of the Airbus commercial-
aircraft business. This diverse portfolio subsequently
helped support the company through difficult periods
in different sectors.19
This included a capability in guided weapons.
Here, consolidation had been attempted as early as the
late 1980s, when a ‘Euro Dynamics’ merger, between
BAe and Thomson-CSF’s missile businesses, was pro -
posed.20 More successful was the merger of BAe’s
guided-weapons divisions with Matra in 1996, forming
Matra BAe Dynamics (MBD). Italy’s guided-weapons
sector had already been consolidated from three com -
panies (Aeritalia, OTO Melara and Selenia), all owned
by Finmeccanica since 1994, to just one (Alenia OTO
Sistemi Missilistici). This was then joined with parts of
MES’s business in the Alenia Marconi Systems (AMS)
joint venture in 1998. In 2001, BAE Systems, EADS and
Finmeccanica announced the merging of their indi -
vidual missile interests (Aérospatiale Matra Missiles,
AMS and MBD) to form MBDA, uniting the project
leaders of a series of pan-European weapon projects
under one company. 21
Elsewhere, the merger of Italian Finmeccanica’s
Agusta with British GKN’s Westland in 2000 created one
of the largest helicopter companies in the world, with a
combined turnover of EUR5bn (USD8.09bn).22 In north-
ern Europe, Finland’s Patria, Norway’s Raufoss and
Sweden’s Celsius (bought by Saab a year later) merged
their ammunition businesses in 1998 to form the Nordic
Ammunition Company (Nammo). 23 In a similar vein,
Celsius and Patria announced in the same year the crea-
tion of Nexplo, consolidating their explosives and pro -
pellants businesses.24 These moves were incentivised by
the same logic that was driving the mergers elsewhere,
although the defence budgets of the Scandinavian states
were much smaller. They also took place in the context
of wider Nordic defence-cooperation efforts, such as
joint submarine and helicopter acquisitions. However,
most of those other efforts proved to be less successful.25
Although BAE Systems in the UK was the most
significant example, several other European countries
consolidated sectors of their defence industry under
single national champions during the 1990s. For
example, French company Thomson-CSF became
majority private-owned in mid-1998 following its
merger with Dassault and Alcatel-Alsthom’s two
electronics businesses. This created a large European
defence-electronics company, with interests in other
European countries including the Netherlands. 26 Later,
in 2000, Saab’s acquisition of Celsius consolidated major
elements of Sweden’s defence industry under one roof.
Coming to Fruition but Reduced in
Scope: Eurofighter, NH90 and Tiger
During the 1990s, several programmes that had origi -
nated during the Cold War reached series-production
stage. As with American projects, those that were not
cancelled altogether often had their scale and budgets
reduced. Also, the difficulty of reconciling technical
requirements and industrial interests sometimes proved
fatal. Even in successful programmes, at least one coun-
try would typically drop out before the final contract.
Order reductions following the cuts of the early 1990s
also had a negative impact on defence-industrial scale,
as well as on frontline capability. These factors were
among the main reasons why very few new coopera -
tive programmes involving more than two states were
launched after the A400M.
The Eurofighter fighter-aircraft programme encapsu -
lated these tensions. In 1983, France, Italy, Spain, the UK
and West Germany agreed to explore the joint develop-
ment of a new combat aircraft. Divergent technical and
industrial requirements, such as the need to be carrier
capable, led to France leaving the project in 1985 and
developing the Rafale. After signing a development
contract in 1988, the end of the Cold War and German
reunification meant reduced funding and changing
threat perceptions. This led to a ‘reorientation’ of the
European Fighter Aircraft (EFA) programme in 1994,

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
with accompanying delays, and a reduction in planned
orders from 765 aircraft to 620.27 Like several other mul-
tinational programmes, such as the NH90, Eurofighter is
contracted through NATO. The NATO Eurofighter and
Tornado Management Agency (NETMA) was formed
in 1996 by the merger of two organisations represent -
ing the states of the EFA and Tornado programmes.
Common to many large multinational programmes,
workshare was determined by juste retour and decisions
required unanimity among the participating states.
This, combined with technical challenges, meant the
programme was plagued by inefficiencies that caused
delays and substantial cost increases, even if the end
aircraft has been successful.28
Dating back to a 1985 memorandum of understand -
ing on joint helicopter development, the NH90 (NATO
Helicopter 1990) programme faced similar challenges.
Post-Cold War cuts to armies and navies reduced
demand. The decision to base two helicopter require -
ments on the same airframe also added to development
challenges, as did the proliferation of unique national
requirements when other countries acquired the aircraft.
A 2000 production contract worth EUR6.6bn (USD6.1bn)
for up to 298 aircraft off three assembly lines was signed
before the development of the NH90 was sufficiently
mature.29 Similarly, issues around the production and
availability of spare parts impacted serviceability and
costs, leading to order cancellations despite the aircraft’s
deployment on operations by some countries.
The two-state Tiger attack helicopter had to navigate
similar issues. The project originated in the 1980s with
a requirement from France and West Germany for more
than 400 helicopters between them, and a first batch of
160 was ordered in 1999. Despite this commitment, the
first batch proved also to be the last.30 An early export to
Australia was followed by Spain joining the programme
in 2004, but this was the limit of the Tiger’s success on
the export market: it lost to Boeing’s AH-64 Apache in
the Netherlands and the UK, for example, and to the
Bell-Textron AH-1Z King Cobra in Turkiye. The aircraft
has been plagued by technical problems, development
delays and low availability. Germany now intends to
phase out all of its Tigers by 2032, much to the chagrin of
France and Spain, who are pursuing an upgrade effort.31
Turkiye: A Unique Path
Although several of the factors driving consolidation
and joint procurement in Europe were also true for
Turkiye, Ankara’s security situation actually deterio -
rated during the 1990s, in large part due to a rise in vio-
lence by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (Partiya Karkerên
Kurdistanê, PKK).32 As such, Turkish defence spending
(Sean Gallup/Getty Images)
The first series-production Eurofighter is rolled out at the EADS facility in Manching, Germany, June 2003

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 13
grew during that decade. While major equipment
orders continued to be placed with foreign contractors,
a growing number of programmes were contracted
locally. Starting during the economically liberal govern-
ment of Turgut Özal, 33 much of this was done through
joint ventures with foreign firms, involving technology
transfer and local production. Although a military coup
in 1997 slowed this down, the strategy enabled Turkiye
to greatly increase its defence-industrial capability.
This was motivated largely by a long-standing desire to
lessen reliance on partners that had periodically placed
restrictions or embargoes on Ankara since 1975. When
Turkiye joined multinational efforts, principally the
A400M and F-35 programmes, it had a unique motiva -
tion amongst participants of seeking to remove expo -
sure to such vulnerabilities.
From the 1980s onwards, a key element in Turkiye’s
efforts to reduce reliance was through diversification
of suppliers. Disagreements with NATO allies – over
concerns about human-rights violations during the
fight against the PKK, for example – saw many states
limit arms exports to Ankara. Also, Turkish demands
for high levels of technology transfer were sometimes
refused, for example by the US when Ankara was pur -
suing the AH-1Z King Cobra in the first iteration of its
ATAK programme. One alternative supplier during this
period was Israel. From the mid-1990s until 2009, Israeli
companies were preferred for various programmes,
such as the F-4E Phantom II upgrade. 34 One of the rea -
sons for this was that Ankara and Tel Aviv shared cer -
tain threat perceptions, but it also fitted the pattern of
overall growth of Israeli defence exports to European
states – including Italy, Poland and Romania – at the
time. South Korea would also become an important
source of defence equipment for Turkiye, most notably
with the transfer of the K9 Thunder howitzer design,
subsequently produced locally as the T-155 Fırtına.
The industrial consolidation during this period took
place largely between the leading European defence-
industrial states of the day. Turkiye and other European
states were mostly absent from the process because their
technological bases were less advanced, and because
they were not part of Western European mechanisms
that facilitated much of this dialogue. Furthermore,
Turkiye did not have many firms that needed con -
solidating. Single companies had been established for
many sectors in the 1970s and 1980s, including TUSAŞ
(1973), later Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI), in
the aerospace sector; ASELSAN (1975) for electronics;
HAVELSAN for avionics; and Roketsan (1988) for rock-
ets and guided weapons. While this core of Turkish-
owned companies remained intact during this period,
they established a series of joint ventures that would
expand and diversify Turkiye’s overall industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
2. The Second Wave of Consolidation
(2002–13)
A Short-lived Return to Defence-
spending Growth
Europe entered the twenty-first century on a weak eco-
nomic footing, with real-GDP growth stalling in 2002 and
2003 following a series of global shocks.35 Defence spend-
ing was growing only sluggishly, following the reduc -
tions of the 1990s, but then the impact of 9/11 on global
security and the consequent invasions of Afghanistan
(2001) and Iraq (2003) refocused attention. European
countries began increasing their investment in defence,
primarily to fund expeditionary operations and counter-
insurgency missions. Total regional spending increased
on average by 2% annually from 2005, before total spend-
ing peaked in 2009 at USD285bn (2015 USD).
This upward trajectory eventually faltered in the
wake of the 2007–08 global financial crisis, however.
The economic fallout of the crisis took two years to
manifest, with Europe’s real GDP contracting by almost
5% in 2009. 36 Moderate real-GDP growth returned in
2010 and 2011, but slowed again in 2012 in the wake
of the Eurozone debt crisis. 37 Several European states
pursued a policy of fiscal consolidation to try to reduce
deficits, resulting in five consecutive years of cuts in
defence spending. By 2011, Europe’s defence spending
had been overtaken by Asia’s. 38 Indeed, it would take
ten years for European defence spending to recover to
2009 levels, in real terms.39
While financial concerns impacted spending deci -
sions, conflicts on Europe’s periphery probably sof -
tened the consequent cuts. The 2008 Russia–Georgia
war demonstrated Moscow’s willingness to use force
in former Soviet states, though it would take the
2014 annexation of Crimea to reverse the decline in
European defence spending. In 2011, states deployed
forces to the NATO-led air campaign over Libya, 40
which exposed the limited depth of guided-weapon
magazines and the reliance on US combat enablers
such as air-to-air refuelling aircraft. 41
The sustained decline in military spending presented
serious issues for the defence industry. Having already
shrunk considerably since the end of the Cold War, a
further period of contraction served to exacerbate the
loss of capabilities and competitiveness of the indus -
trial base. Furthermore, other competitors of the larg -
est European defence companies began to emerge at
this time, including firms from South Korea, Israel and,
eventually, Turkiye.42
The Beginnings of EU Defence
Policy, NSPA, Lancaster House and
NORDEFCO
Throughout the 2000s, EU defence cooperation
evolved along three lines: operational, political, and
capability development.
From the operational perspective, the European Union
Police Mission (EUPM) in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
launched in 2003 and concluded in 2006, constituted
the EU’s first operational engagement and soon expe -
rienced difficulties. The EU itself lacked the structures
necessary to carry out the mission successfully, instead
relying on member states’ capabilities, although this
deficiency was eventually overcome by the EU–NATO
Berlin Plus Agreement signed in 2003. 43 Furthermore,
the employment of personnel and resources was often
problematic, due to member states’ different strategic
cultures and other interoperability issues.
As for the political dimension, in the early 2000s the
EU lacked a guiding document to delineate policy on
security and defence issues. The 2003 European Security
Strategy (ESS) remedied this, outlining the strategic
context and objectives for the ESDP. This document also
included several references to capability development,
recognising the lack of strategic capabilities among
individual member states.44
This activity led to several acquisition-related initia -
tives: the establishment of the Headline Goal for 2010
in 2004,45 the publication of a Green Paper on defence
procurement,46 and the creation of the European Defence

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 15
Figure 2.1: Examples of defence-industrial collaboration, cooperation and consolidation in Europe: 2002–13
Sagem and
Snecma merge
to form Safran
May 2005Dec 2005
BAE Systems
sells Atlas
Elektronik to
ThyssenKrupp
and EADS
Jan 2005
Finmeccanica
agrees to
acquire DRS
Technologies
for USD5.2bn
May 2008
STX Oﬀshore &
Shipbuilding
acquires a majority
stake in Chantiers de
l’Atlantique
Aug 2008
Strategic Airlift
Capability MoU
Sept 2008
Lockheed Martin sells
42% share of the TUSAS
Aerospace Industries
joint venture to Turkish
Aircraft Industries
Jan 2005
MBDA completes
the acquisition of
LFK, making it a
part-German
company
Mar 2006
Germany and the
Netherlands award
ARTEC the /f_irst Boxer
series-production
contract through OCCAR
Dec 2006
The EDA
adopts the
EDTIB strategy
May 2007
The EU adopts the
Intra-Community Transfers
Directive (Directive
2009/43/EC) on defence and
defence-related products
May 2009
The /f_ive Nordic states
sign the Nordic
Defence Cooperation
agreement
(NORDEFCO)
Nov 2009
NATO Support
Agency (NSPA)
formed
Jul 2012
France and
the UK sign
the Lancaster
House
Treaties
Nov 2010
BAE Systems
completes
acquisition of
United Defense
for USD4.19bn
Jun 2005
The EU establishes a
‘Working Group on
Defence’ that examines,
among other things, the
creation of an
armaments agency
Sept 2002
The EDA
produces the
/f_irst Capability
Development
Plan (CDP)
Jul 2008
General
Electric agrees
to acquire
Avio for
USD4.3bn
Dec 2012
The EU adopts the Defence
Procurement Directive (Directive
2009/81/EC) to increase the
transparency and competitiveness
of European defence procurement
Jul 2009
Dec 2003
The EU adopts its /f_irst
European Security
Strategy, de/f_ining the
strategic objectives of
the EU in defence
and security
Jul 2004
The
European
Defence
Agency is
established
Through OCCAR,
the seven partner
states order 180
A400M aircraft
for EUR19.7bn
(USD22.3bn)
May 2003
GKN sells its share
of AgustaWestland
to Finmeccanica
Jun 2004 Sept 2004
The European Commission
issues a Green Paper on
defence procurement for
the creation of a European
defence-equipment market
The UK
withdraws
from the Boxer
programme
Jul 2003
France and Italy sign an
agreement to cooperate in the
development and acquisition
of 27 FREMM frigates
Nov 2002
ThyssenKrupp completes the
acquisition of
Howaldtswerke-Deutsche
Werft to form ThyssenKrupp
Marine Systems
BAE Systems agrees
to sell its 20% share
of the Airbus
commercial-aircraft
business to EADS
Sept 2006
The Polish
Armaments Group
(PGZ) is formed to
consolidate the
state-owned defence
industry under it
Sep 2013
France and Germany sign a
Declaration of Intent to more closely
coordinate the designs of the next
generation of main battle tanks and
artillery, and to standardise on
existing common equipment
Jun 2012
The Treaty of
Lisbon enters
into force: the
CSDP succeeds
the ESDP
Dec 2009
USD45bn EADS
and BAE
Systems merger
falls through
Oct 2012
Merger, acquisition or industrial partnership Defence-cooperation agreement or mechanism Multinational programme
Sources: IISS analysis; various

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Agency (EDA). The EDA was expected to work on devel-
oping defence capabilities and armaments cooperation,
strengthening the European Defence Technological
and Industrial Base (EDTIB) and the European Defence
Equipment Market, and increasing the effectiveness of
defence research and development. 47 In its first years
it sought to define common rules and targets for the
level of investment, joint procurement and research and
technology among member states. Nonetheless, given
the intergovernmental character of the agency, it has
no enforcing powers, and member states maintain con -
trol when it comes to translating policy documents into
capability-development projects.
Improving cooperation in capability development
went together with efforts to open up the European
defence-equipment market to competition. Along these
lines, the EU issued the so-called 2009 ‘defence pack -
age’, which constituted the first legally binding package
of directives affecting the ruling and functioning of the
European defence market. However, its implementa -
tion never reached satisfactory levels. Legally, the Court
of Justice of the European Union is entitled to rule on
the implementation of the directives, but the delicate
balance of power between the different institutions and
the reluctance of members to criticise fellow partners,
prevented the involvement of the court.
The defence industry constitutes the only sector in
which the European Commission (EC) can influence
defence matters, as it is part of the EU’s broader indus -
trial policy. In fact, the defence market is one of the
seven areas in which the EU set the goal of establishing
a single market. On this basis, in 2013 the EC issued a
communication declaring the aim of working towards
a more competitive and efficient defence sector. 48 The
communication included an Action Plan to solve some
of the major issues in the defence market, such as secu -
rity of supply, inclusion of small and medium-sized
enterprises, and access to raw materials.49
While EU members were just beginning to explore
defence-industrial cooperation, NATO allies had been
cooperating on equipment for much longer. The estab -
lishment of the NATO Maintenance Supply Services
System in 1958 had provided the first mechanism for
collaboration on in-service support for equipment. In
the 1990s, the organisation, by then renamed as the
NATO Maintenance and Supply Agency (NAMSA),
grew to support operations and exercises by member
states. After the 2010 Lisbon Summit, when NATO
members agreed to ‘streamline’ agencies and coopera -
tion mechanisms to make them more effective, NAMSA
and two other agencies were merged in 2012 to form
what is now called the NATO Support and Procurement
Agency (NSPA). 50 Much of the NSPA’s work sup -
ports Alliance members’ maintenance and operation
of equipment, but the organisation has also managed
procurement programmes. This includes the nine-state
Strategic Airlift International Solution (SALIS) and
12-state (including then non-members Finland and
Sweden) Strategic Airlift Capability efforts, launched
in 2003 and 2006 respectively, where transport aircraft
have been leased or acquired for use by participating
countries. These programmes have typically included
states with smaller budgets, including former Warsaw
Pact states, that are not able to acquire the relevant capa-
bilities by themselves. For these states, which may not
need full-time ownership of such capabilities, procur -
ing a service through NATO-owned assets can often be
much more cost effective.
In 2010, France and the UK signed the Lancaster
House Treaties, aimed at improving interoperability,
expeditionary capability, and capability development.
The treaties envisaged the creation of joint opera -
tions and collaboration on equipment such as guided
weapons and mine countermeasures. 51 France also
sought to increase defence-industry cooperation with
Germany, adopting the Franco-German ‘ Agenda 2020’
in 2010. 52 Although this made only limited progress, 53
the Chantilly Process, in place from 2011, did encour -
age greater engagement between the two countries.54 A
2012 Franco-German agreement to cooperate on next-
generation land systems ultimately led to joint tank and
fighter-aircraft projects.55
Less successfully, in 2009, the five Nordic states
signed the Nordic Defence Cooperation agreement
(NORDEFCO), which aimed to strengthen individual
members’ national defence and explore cooperation in
areas including procurement. 56 Initially the emphasis
was on capability development, savings and efficiency.
However, Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 shifted
the focus towards enhancing security in the Baltic Sea

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 17
region, and the training and operational-cooperation
aspects of the agreement. 57 This is perhaps one of the
main reasons why there has been little progress in joint
acquisition, beyond a common uniform, although there
has been success in greater operational cooperation. 58
Also, as with several other mechanisms, competing
national interests have proved to be an obstacle.59
A Widening of M&A Activity
In 2002–13, the European defence industry responded
to shifting spending patterns not only by continuing
consolidation within and between European states,
but also through M&A activity further afield. Much
of this involved US companies, particularly before the
fiscal impact of the financial crisis. Notable examples
include BAE Systems’ acquisition of United Defense
for USD4.19bn in 2005,60 and Finmeccanica’s USD5.2bn
purchase of DRS Technologies in 2008. 61 The invest -
ment was not only one way, as US companies enlarged
their footprint in Europe with, for example, General
Dynamics purchasing armoured-vehicle companies in
Spain, Austria and Switzerland, in 2001, 2003 and 2004
respectively, and Sikorsky buying Polish helicopter
company PZL Mielec in 2007.62
Intra-European activity also saw some key deals in
this period. In 2003, STN Atlas Elektronik was split up:
the naval systems business was sold to BAE Systems
while the land, air and synthetic systems businesses
were purchased by Rheinmetall. 63 Three years later,
BAE Systems sold Atlas Elektronik to ThyssenKrupp
and EADS.64 In 2004, Finmeccanica signed a GBP1.06bn
(USD1.94bn) agreement to acquire GKN’s share of
AgustaWestland.65 In 2005, Italy’s Alenia Spazio and
Alcatel merged to form Alcatel Alenia Space, and in
2006, MBDA’s purchase of German missile company
LFK brought a German interest into the firm.66
Nationally, consolidation efforts included
ThyssenKrupp’s acquisition of Howaldtswerke-
Deutsche Werft (HDW) to form ThyssenKrupp Marine
Systems,67 and the merger in France of Sagem and
Snecma to form Safran.68 In the UK, in 2004, BAE Systems
acquired Alvis, which had itself purchased Vickers’
defence business from Rolls Royce in 2002. 69 In Poland,
the Polish Armaments Group (PGZ) was formed in 2013
to consolidate state-owned industry under its umbrella.
The failure of the merger between BAE Systems and
EADS in 2012 was a blow to European consolidation.
The GBP30bn (USD47bn) deal fell through because the
interests of government stakeholders could not be rec -
onciled.70 Berlin and Paris were uncomfortable with the
proposed size of their respective shares, with Berlin also
unhappy about the idea of merging the largely com -
mercial-sector-focused EADS with the almost entirely
defence-oriented BAE Systems. This exemplified the
challenges facing the European defence industry, and
its fragmentation. It has often been the case that smaller
firms compete and produce a range of platforms while
countries pursue national interests at the expense of
the potential benefits of cooperation and consolidation,
albeit with compromises.
The Long Road to Capability:
A400M, FREMM, Boxer and F-35
Several collaborative programmes saw production
contracts signed in the 2002–08 period, with varying
degrees of commercial and export success, but order
reductions, cost overruns and production delays were
ongoing themes throughout those years. These factors,
as well as the impact of the 2007–08 financial crisis on
defence spending, would then dampen the optimism
that had driven many multinational projects.
The A400M heavy-transport-aircraft programme,
whose origins lay in the 1980s, formally began devel -
opment in 2003 and constituted a unique instance
of Turkish involvement in a major European equip -
ment project. Through OCCAR, the seven partner
states (Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg,
Spain, Turkiye and the UK) finalised a EUR19.7bn
(USD22.3bn) contract to supply 180 aircraft, down
from earlier commitments for 225 aircraft. 71 Although
the programme was intended as a model for a new
‘commercial’ approach to procurement, national
interests would still intervene, as with the deci -
sion to acquire a European engine despite Airbus’s
preference for a Canadian system. 72 In 2009, Airbus
announced a three-year delay to the programme,
largely due to issues with the development of the
gearbox. 73 By early 2010, reported cost overruns
had reached EUR11.2bn (USD15.6bn), with Airbus
threatening to cancel the project if the contract

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
was not renegotiated, which was completed in late
2010. But more recently, Airbus has paid EUR6.5bn
(USD8.6bn) in penalties to customers since 2014. 74
The programme has also been beset with order reduc -
tions (UK, Germany), reschedules (France, Spain)
and cancellations (South Africa). Nevertheless, the
aircraft has shown its value on operations – includ -
ing by operating from unprepared runways, which is
a capability for which it was designed.
Following the conclusion in 2000 of a contract for four
Horizon-class destroyers, France and Italy continued
cooperation in the naval sphere with a 2002 agreement to
acquire 27 FREMM (Frégate Européenne Multi-Mission
/ European Multi-mission Frigate) frigates. 75 Although
France was to buy 17 vessels and Italy 10, Paris gradu -
ally reduced its planned buy to eight, trebling its average
unit cost. Despite this, and some delays in production,
the programme has largely been successful, with exports
to Egypt, Indonesia, Morocco and the US. While the
French and Italian FREMM versions both have unique
elements, the fact that they share a common self-defence
system increases efficiencies. This self-defence system
was jointly developed in the 1990s with the UK and is
also installed in the Horizon destroyers.
The Dutch–German Boxer programme began as a
Franco-German-UK effort in the early 1990s to jointly
develop a wheeled armoured vehicle. France withdrew
in 1999 due to differing technical requirements and went
on to develop a vehicle with more firepower.76 The Boxer
was dealt a further blow in 2003 when the UK cancelled
its participation to pursue a different design philosophy.
Despite this, the Netherlands became a full partner in
the programme in 2001, and in 2006, Germany and the
Netherlands placed a combined order of 472 vehicles.
Exports to Australia, Lithuania and the UK followed, and
London rejoined the programme in 2019.
Although not ‘European’, for many European states
the F-35 fighter aircraft is both their most expensive
acquisition ever and their most significant involvement
in a multinational project. Originating in a 1996 deci -
sion to merge several US Air Force and Navy fighter
projects into one Joint Strike Fighter, the programme
has suffered from trying to reconcile three different
aircraft roles in one platform, as well as from costly
 (Lionel Bonaventure/AFP via Getty Images)
The launch ceremony for the first French FREMM, Aquitaine , in Lorient, May 2010

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 19
software upgrades.77 Despite this, as the only Western
‘fifth generation’ fighter available for export, the aircraft
has repeatedly won competitions in Europe and else -
where. To date, 14 European states have selected the
aircraft – including Turkiye, which was ejected from the
programme in 2019 – and their industries have conse -
quently been brought into the supply chain.78 The domi-
nance of the F-35 has been much to the chagrin of some
European industrialists and politicians, who saw what
they had hoped would be a ‘home market’ become
dominated by their US rival.79
Turkiye: The First Indigenous
Designs
The Justice and Development Party ( Adalet ve Kalkınma
Partisi, AKP), led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, came to
power in Turkiye in 2002. Backed by rapid economic
growth, the AKP continued the relatively pro-Euro -
pean policies of the late 1990s, including pursuing EU
membership. This was reinforced in 2003 when Turkiye
found itself on the same side as many European states
in opposing the US-led invasion of Iraq. Furthermore,
relations with Greece began to improve, and although
the PKK abandoned the ceasefire in 2003, hostilities did
not return to the same level as in the 1990s.80
Turkiye retained its aim of achieving defence-
industrial self-sufficiency, however. From 2004
onwards, it abandoned the joint-venture approach and
instead pursued indigenous designs, albeit with a heavy
reliance on foreign subsystems in the early years. As part
of this new strategy, Turkish firms bought the foreign-
owned share of many joint ventures. The most notable
example was in 2005, when TUSAŞ acquired Lockheed
Martin’s and GE’s stakes in the TAI joint venture (42%
and 7% respectively). 81 Similarly, ASELSAN increased
its stakes in electronic-warfare company MİKES, a joint
venture with one of BAE Systems’ US businesses, before
absorbing the company entirely, a move reminiscent
of the creation of single-sector national champions in
many European states. 82 In fact, to help drive exports,
Turkiye began establishing joint ventures in friendly
states such as Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan.83
As well as beginning programmes for tanks and cor-
vettes, Turkiye also developed armed uncrewed aerial
vehicles (UAVs). Having witnessed the effectiveness of
US systems since 2001, Turkiye requested permission
to acquire armed MQ-1 Predators and MQ-9 Reapers to
help it fight the PKK. However, those requests were
ignored.84 Nonetheless, efforts to develop indigenous
systems were already under way. Local development
of an armed UAV was approved in 2004, eventually
acquiring the name Anka. The first series-production
UAVs were delivered to the air force in 2018.85 Similarly,
development of the Bayraktar TB2 for Turkiye’s land
forces began in 2011, with deliveries from late 2014. 86
These combat-proven systems, fitted with subsystems
from NATO allies, would go on to achieve export suc -
cess and allow for the development of follow-on sys -
tems. In this sector Turkiye had pushed ahead of other
European countries, as many of those states were
either hesitant to operate armed UAVs, as in the case of
Germany, or had long been denied access to US armed
systems, as in the case of Italy.
Turkiye had been an associate member of the WEU
and the WEAG since 1992. However, when those func -
tions were transferred to the EDA in 2005, Turkiye
was left on the outside despite earlier hopes that there
would be no ‘discrimination’ against non-members of
the EU. Both Norway and Turkiye sought to participate
in EDA discussions and projects, but although Norway
was admitted relatively early, Turkiye’s request was
denied.87 Vetoes by Cyprus and others have prohibited
Turkiye’s involvement in EU defence schemes, just as
Turkiye has blocked Cyprus’s participation in NATO
mechanisms. This dynamic has often contributed to dif-
ficulties in EU–NATO cooperation.88

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
3. War in Europe (2014–21)
An Inflection Point but Little Change
In 2014, Russia’s annexation of Crimea, invasion of the
Donbas region and shooting-down of a civilian air -
liner caused an inflection point in European attitudes. 89
Although relations between Russia and the West had
already deteriorated since the late 2000s, the invasion
shocked European decision-makers, re-energised NATO
and spurred an increase in defence spending, which had
been decreasing in real terms since 2009. European states
also became increasingly concerned by a more assertive
China and by widening instability in the Middle East. 90
However, increased budgets did not translate into new
industrial priorities. Instead, 2014–21 saw the furthering
of previous trends, including the ongoing consolidation
of the aerospace sector across borders and of naval and
land companies within national boundaries.
Although it had originally been agreed in 2006, most
NATO members had done little about their pledge to
spend the equivalent of 2% of GDP on defence.91 Russian
aggression drove a renewed interest on the part of
European states in defence modernisation and an appre-
ciation of the importance of NATO. This culminated in
the 2014 Wales Summit, where Alliance members reiter-
ated their commitment to 2%.92 Moreover, spending was
to be targeted to ensure military readiness, so all members
committed to allocate at least 20% of their annual defence
spending to major new equipment by 2024. 93 Since that
decision, collective defence expenditure by the Alliance’s
European members has risen from 1.47% of combined
GDP in 2014 to 2% in 2024, according to NATO figures.94
Furthermore, data captured by the IISS finds that the com-
bined defence spending of European NATO members has
increased in real terms every year since 2016. As such, the
political commitment to defence has endured, although
growth did slow in 2020 and 2021 as countries managed
the fiscal fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The EU Enters the Defence Market
After the first EU defence-industrial cooperation ini -
tiatives in the 2000s, in 2014 the EC inaugurated a set
of activities to more directly influence the EDTIB. The
Commission’s 2014 New Deal for European Defence report
outlined the steps EU institutions and member states
should take to improve the competitiveness and effi -
ciency of the market. 95 Among these, the Commission
proposed the European Defence Fund (EDF) in 2017 to
boost Europe’s defence and industrial capacity.96
The EDF, formally adopted in 2021, had two precur -
sor programmes: the Preparatory Action on Defence
Research (PADR) and the European Defence Industrial
Development Programme (EDIDP) respectively cover -
ing 2017–19 and 2019–20.97 To manage the EDF and other
defence-industrial-related activities, the von der Leyen
Commission (2019–24) created the Directorate-General for
Defence Industry and Space (DG DEFIS) in 2021, headed
by the Commissioner for Internal Market. This new insti-
tutional setting mirrored the increased importance of
defence-industrial cooperation but was accompanied by
new intergovernmental frameworks to gain the required
political consensus and coordination at national level.
The main intergovernmental-cooperation effort inau-
gurated in this period was the Permanent Structured
Cooperation (PESCO) framework. Included in Protocol
X of the 2009 Lisbon Treaty, PESCO was intended to
overcome the perennial problem of EU foreign- and
security-policy decisions requiring unanimity among
all member states. Instead, PESCO would encourage
subsets of willing and able member states to come
together and take the lead on some EU defence and
security objectives. PESCO was formally inaugurated
in 2017, and by 2024 included 68 projects. 98 It works
in conjunction with the Coordinated Annual Review
on Defence (CARD), which supports member states in
identifying opportunities for collaborative capability
development.99 However, both PESCO and CARD suf -
fer from the intergovernmental nature of their respective
frameworks and their lack of any robust enforcement
mechanism. As such, neither the scope of the projects
addressed nor the contributions from member states to

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 21
Figure 3.1: Examples of defence-industrial collaboration, cooperation and consolidation in Europe: 2014–21
Airbus Military, Astrium
and Cassidian are
merged to form Airbus
Defence and Space
Jan 2014 Jul 2015
Krauss-Maﬀei
Wegmann and
Nexter agree to
merge, eventually
forming KNDS
Mar 2017
France and the UK
launch the Future
Cruise/Anti-Ship
Weapon (FC/ASW)
concept phase
Dec 2017
The European Council – and all
member states except Denmark,
Malta and the UK – establishes the
Permanent Structured Cooperation
(PESCO) initiative, with 17 projects
Jun 2018
Belgium and the
Netherlands agree
to jointly acquire
new frigates and
mine-counter-
measures vessels
Jun 2016
The European External Action Service
publishes ‘A Global Strategy for the
European Union's Foreign and Security
Policy’. This sets a new level of ambition
of the EU, including on matters related
to capability development.
NATO members
reiterate a
commitment to
spend a minimum of
2% of GDP on defence
Jul 2014
Kongsberg completes the
acquisition of a 49.9%
stake in Patria for
EUR283.5m (USD313.72m)
May 2016
Feb 2017
Norway announces that it
will jointly acquire
submarines with Germany
May 2017
The EU establishes the
Coordinated Annual
Review on Defence (CARD)
Jun 2018
France and Germany agree to
jointly pursue the Main Ground
Combat System (MGCS) and the
Future Combat Air System
(FCAS) programmes
Saab completes
the acquisition
of Kockums for
SEK340m
(USD49.56m)
Jul 2014
The Viking submarine
project is cancelled
Feb 2014
Feb 2019
Spain joins the
FCAS project
as an equal
partner
Dec 2019
Estonia, Finland and Latvia
sign a letter of intent to
jointly develop a new
armoured vehicle: the
Common Armoured Vehicle
System (CAVS)
Jun 2019
Belgium acquires armoured
vehicles through a strategic
cooperation agreement
with France
Jan 2021
Fincantieri
abandons
acquisition of
Chantiers de
l’Atlantique
Feb 2021
The EU adopts the
Action Plan on
synergies between
civil, defence and
space industries
Apr 2021
The European
Defence Fund
Regulation is
adopted
Mar 2021
The EU establishes
the European
Peace Facility
Merger, acquisition or industrial partnership Defence-cooperation agreement or mechanism Multinational programme
Sources: IISS analysis; various
the activities taken forwards were considered satisfac -
tory by EU institutions.
Consolidation at a Snail’s Pace
At the national level the period 2014–21 saw little cross-
border consolidation of Europe’s defence industry
as states continued to prioritise national interests. In
2014, the reorganisation of EADS as the Airbus Group,
named after its commercial-aircraft business, marked
the culmination of a process that had begun in 1999.
Under this new arrangement, Eurocopter became
Airbus Helicopters, while Airbus Defence and Space
was created through the merger of Astrium, Cassidian
and Airbus Military, with commercial aircraft as the
third division.100 This new corporate structure reflected
the increased importance of the company’s civil aero -
space business, which generated two-thirds of its reve -
nue, following the collapse of the proposed EADS–BAE

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Systems merger in 2012. The reorganisation helped
the company weather difficulties with a major project,
the A380. Airbus spent some EUR25bn (USD29.59bn)
developing the A380 before ending production early in
2021. The decision followed cost overruns, delays and
order reductions, as well as difficulties on defence pro -
grammes such as the A400M.101
While structures set in place in the aerospace domain
were being deepened, the formation of KNDS via the
merger of Germany’s Krauss-Maffei Wegmann (KMW)
and France’s Nexter marked Europe’s first major cross-bor-
der consolidation in the land sector.102 Discussed as early
as 2013, concerns that the merger would allow KMW to
avoid German export controls did not hold the deal back,
and it was confirmed in 2015.103 Though the two companies
had been competitors for many decades, the tie-up was
designed to look to the next generation of land systems,
notably the planned Franco-German tank programme.104
In the maritime sector however, the planned acqui -
sition of France’s Chantiers de l’Atlantique by Italy’s
Fincantieri collapsed in 2021. Korean conglomerate STX
acquired a majority share in Chantiers de l’Atlantique
in 2008. STX then went bankrupt in 2016 and Fincantieri
began negotiations to acquire STX’s 66.66% stake.105 This
required the consent of the French state, a minority share-
holder with veto power. Chantiers de l’Atlantique’s main
business is cruise ships but it is also the only shipyard
in France capable of constructing aircraft carriers, which
makes the ownership of the company a strategic issue.
A 2017 share-purchase agreement, in which Fincantieri
was going to be the largest minority shareholder with
other shares acquired by French naval firm DCNS (now
Naval Group) and Italian investment group CR Trieste,
seemed to move the issue forward while waiting for the
approval of regulators.106 However, the French and Italian
governments announced in 2021 that the deal had been
cancelled. This was blamed on the COVID-19-induced
economic downturn and on resistance from EU regula -
tors who had concerns about competition in the European
cruise-ship sector, but French reluctance to let the Italian
government take a stake in such a strategic firm was prob-
ably more significant.107 While some hoped that the move
would create a cross-border naval giant akin to Airbus, it
was unlikely to do so because most of France’s capabil-
ity in this area resides in Naval Group. Nonetheless, the
proposed change marked the only significant attempt to
create a European naval-shipbuilding firm.108
Similarly, national interests would drive Saab’s
2014 acquisition of the Swedish naval shipbuilder
Kockums. As part of a wider privatisation of Swedish
defence firms in the late 1990s, Stockholm sold
Kockums to German rival HDW in 1999. 109 HDW was
later acquired by Germany’s ThyssenKrupp in 2004.
Despite the initial belief that foreign ownership would
not endanger Sweden’s national capabilities, a series
of disputes between TKMS and Sweden emerged that
led the Swedish authorities to conclude that Kockums
had essentially been purchased ‘to run down a major
competitor’.110 On 8 April 2014, procurement agency
(FMV) personnel entered the Kockums site and con -
fiscated equipment they suspected belonged to the
Swedish state. The decision to sell Kockums to Saab
came ‘less than 48 hours’ after the raid and the deal was
confirmed in July 2014.111
The Next Generation of Joint
Programmes: FCAS, MGCS,
Eurodrone and others
Despite the limited industrial consolidation, 2014–21
nonetheless saw the launch of a new round of multi -
national programmes. Compared to many of those of
the 2000s and early 2010s, these projects typically had
fewer participating states, reflecting the difficulties
that a larger number of partners can bring. 112 The most
important of these are two major efforts with a Franco-
German core: the Future Combat Air System (FCAS)
and the Main Ground Combat System (MGCS).
Although the two countries signed a declaration of
intent to cooperate on the next generation of tanks, artillery
and other projects in 2012, it was not until a 2017 meeting
that a more formal commitment was made.113 The follow-
ing year, a summit in Meseberg named these efforts FCAS
and MGCS, with the artillery idea forgotten.114 However,
although the top levels of government were committed to
the projects, difficulties in reconciling competing indus-
trial interests have delayed the early stages in both cases.115
Neither programme is a simple one-for-one replacement
of an earlier platform, as previous generations of fighters
and tanks had been; instead they involve a variety of new
platforms, one of which would be a fighter or a tank. To

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 23
manage this, both programmes have instituted technology
‘pillars’ to divide workshare between companies. FCAS’s
initial five pillars were established in early 2020, before
being expanded to seven when Spain’s industrial lead
Indra joined the programme later that year. 116 MGCS’s
eight development pillars were only agreed in 2024, when
ministers aimed to inject some life into the programme.
Key questions such as the calibre of the gun were set aside
for a later date.117 France and Germany originally hoped
to field MGCS in the mid-2030s, and FCAS from 2040, but
both programmes have now slipped back into the 2040s
or even 2050.118
The UAV programme known as ‘Eurodrone’ is a recent
exception to the post-1990s trend for multinational pro-
grammes to have fewer initial participants. The project dates
to a 2013 call from French, German and Italian industry to
jointly develop a medium-altitude long-endurance (MALE)
UAV, given concerns that Europe had fallen behind the US
and others, such as China and Israel, in drone technology.
Following an initial study in 2016 that now included Spain,
the four participating states awarded Airbus, through
OCCAR, a EUR7bn (USD7.4bn) contract to develop and
produce 60 aircraft, with the project passing the preliminary
design review in 2024. The development phase has been
part-funded by EDIDP since 2021.119
Although the Meteor air-to-air missile is MBDA’s
only programme involving all its home states to date,
the company has continued to be the vehicle through
which those countries partner in smaller groupings for
many of their guided-weapon needs. One example is
the France–UK Future Cruise/Anti-Ship Weapon (FC/
ASW), which aims to develop replacements for both
countries’ anti-ship and land-attack cruise missiles, the
latter of which were jointly developed by the two coun-
tries in the 1990s. Italy joined the effort in 2023.120
Many countries sought to join existing programmes
at the initial stages, allowing them to enjoy interoper -
ability and economies of scale with allies while also
benefitting from the reduced risk of joining a rela -
tively mature programme. In 2019, Estonia, Finland
and Latvia agreed to work on a new armoured vehicle,
eventually leading to the Patria-led Common Armoured
Vehicle System (CAVS). 121 Although Estonia would
drop out and go on to acquire Turkish vehicles, the
CAVS programme was subsequently joined by Sweden
and Germany, with over 670 vehicles currently under
contract.122 Other examples of this include the Belgian–
Dutch frigate and mine-countermeasures programmes,
later joined by France; the Franco-UK Maritime Mine
Counter Measures effort; and the German–Norwegian
Type-212CD submarine effort that now includes
guided-weapons development.123
The Militarisation of Turkish
Foreign Policy
Following the relatively pro-European politics of the
late 1990s and the 2000s, Turkish foreign policy took on
a more assertive and militarised form in the second half
of the 2010s. In 2016 Turkiye began the first of several
operations that sought to deny ISIS and other non-state
armed groups control of the Turkish–Syrian border, and
to create a Turkish-controlled buffer zone on the other
side of the border. These operations, along with the
deployment of forces to Qatar in 2017, military inter -
vention in Libya (2020) and support for Azerbaijan’s
offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh (also 2020), were
largely possible because of the greater strategic auton -
omy provided by local arms production. However, this
was not total self-sufficiency, and several key subsys -
tem suppliers, such as Canada and Germany, issued
embargoes due to these military operations. In turn, the
embargoes impeded progress on local programmes. 124
The rapid growth in defence exports – beginning with
the first exports of the Bayraktar TB2 UAV, to Qatar in
2018 and then Ukraine in 2019 – helped fund the contin-
ued development of Turkish industry and the creation
of local alternatives to foreign subsystems.
 (Benoit Tessier/AFP via Getty Images)
Government and industry officials, including French President
Emmanuel Macron, attend the unveiling of the full-scale fighter-
jet model of the France–Germany–Spain Future Combat Air
System (FCAS), Paris, June 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
As well as disagreements over Turkish military oper-
ations, relations between Turkiye and other European
states also deteriorated in other policy areas. These
included continued disagreement over the reunification
of Cyprus, the handling of the Syrian refugee crisis, the
lack of progress with Turkiye’s EU-membership bid,
a 2019 maritime-boundary memorandum of under -
standing with Libya and continued poor relations
with Greece, with increasingly virulent rhetoric from
President Erdoğan and others. 125 In turn, these dete -
riorating relations also inhibited Turkish participation
in EU defence schemes such as the PESCO Military
Mobility project and the EDF.126
Turkiye’s long-standing requirement for a long-range
air-defence system added another element to the deterio-
rating relations. After selecting a Chinese system in 2013
following a competition, Ankara dropped the decision
after pressure from NATO allies. Following the shooting-
down of a Russian jet in 2015, Turkiye sought to repair
relations with Moscow, and to diversify its relationships
more broadly in the wake of the 2016 coup attempt. This
led in 2019 to the acquisition of the Russian S-400 without
competition. The US reaction was strong: Turkiye was
ejected from the F-35 programme, which ultimately cost
Ankara billions of dollars of work from the programme
and much-needed combat-aircraft recapitalisation and
resulted in US sanctions against several senior members
of the Turkish procurement agency. In keeping with its
strategy of not relying too much on any one partner, from
2017 Turkiye also pursued the development of a system
with France and Italy based on those countries’ SAMP/T
system.127 However, the aforementioned foreign-policy
disagreements almost certainly contributed to that pro-
gramme’s demise by the early 2020s, as did Turkiye’s
desire to pursue the locally developed SİPER system.
Alongside the ultimately unsuccessful attempt to
acquire the F-35, Ankara separately pursued develop -
ment of an indigenous National Combat Aircraft ( Milli
Muharip Uçak , MMU). With development led by TAI,
Turkiye has sought foreign partners, notably for air -
craft design and local engine production. Following
talks with a number of foreign partners, TAI contracted
BAE Systems for aircraft design in 2017. 128 Finding a
partner for local engine production has proven more
difficult; talks with Rolls-Royce, through a joint ven -
ture with Kale Group, have seemingly led nowhere. 129
Instead, the MMU, now called Kaan, will be initially
powered by US firm GE Aerospace’s F110 engine, pre -
viously assembled by Turkish Engine Industries (TEI)
for the F-16, while Turkiye explores options. However,
as China and Russia have found, developing next-
generation aircraft engines is no easy feat. There is no
guarantee that a purely indigenous effort will be suc -
cessful, and it is highly likely to be hugely expensive.
Turkiye may need to revisit a foreign partnership to
ensure the Kaan project meets its ambitions.
(Tur Defence Industries Presidency/Anadolu via Getty Images)
The second flight of Turkish Aerospace Industries’ Kaan fighter-aircraft prototype, May 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 25
4. Painful Rearmament (2022–present)
War in Ukraine
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in early 2022
drastically changed the European security context and
altered the trajectory of regional defence spending,
which had stalled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As
European states looked through their inventories for
equipment to donate to Ukraine, many found the cup -
board almost bare. Where there was materiel, it was
often not in good condition. Furthermore, attempts to
acquire new equipment and increase production rates,
particularly of ammunition, ran into post-pandemic
supply-chain issues and the consequences of 30 years of
reductions in defence-industrial capacity. Despite this,
European states have spent billions of dollars to assist
Kyiv and have made significant progress in increasing
production rates of ammunition.
The war has brought about significant changes
in European states’ approaches to defence. Several
European NATO members advanced plans to reach
the 2% spending target by 2024, resulting in stronger
defence-spending growth for the region as a whole. In
real terms, total European defence spending grew by
2.9% in 2022 and 4.7% in 2023, and is projected to grow
by 8.6% in 2024. 130 The states closest to the threat, such
as the three Baltic states, Poland and Romania, have
implemented uplifts to defence and now spend well
above the 2% target. Many states are now grappling
with how to generate greater mass in the face of per -
sonnel challenges, including possible reintroductions of
conscription. A general sense that European states need
to do more for their own collective defence after years
of underfunding has also helped change this dynamic.
New Initiatives to Boost
Production
The Russian invasion of Ukraine triggered an unprec -
edented response from EU member states and served
as a wake-up call regarding the necessity to invest
more cooperatively in defence and on capabil -
ity development. The 2022 Strategic Compass – the
EU plan on security and defence up to 2030 – aims,
among other things, to improve the level of joint
development and procurement. 131
For the first time, shortly following the invasion, EU
member states agreed to transfer lethal military equip -
ment to a country in conflict, through an EU mechanism.
The European Peace Facility (EPF) is an off-budget
instrument initially intended to support CSDP deploy -
ments, but has been used since March 2022 to deliver
military equipment to Ukraine. 132 Member states who
transfer equipment to Ukraine are partially reimbursed
through the fund. Moreover, in view of depleted inven-
tories, EPF money will soon be used to acquire equip -
ment directly from industry, again changing the logic
on which the instrument was originally based.
As well as this, in 2023, the EU adopted the Act in
Support of Ammunition Production (ASAP), with the
aim of ramping up ammunition and missile production
until 2025.133 ASAP is part of a three-track approach to
support the replenishment of Ukraine’s stocks, address
ammunition shortfalls and boost production across
the bloc. However, several companies voiced concerns
that ASAP lacked clarity in terms of sharing trade
secrets with competitors. 134 The EDA’s latest Long-
Term Review institutionalised the agency’s role as
collector of demands and aimed to facilitate and incen -
tivise joint acquisition by members. 135 The European
Defence Industry Reinforcement through common
Procurement Act (EDIRPA), which entered into force in
October 2023, also incentivises common procurement of
EU-developed defence equipment but it and ASAP will
lapse after two years.136
At a policy level, the EC took a more prominent role
on defence through the publication of its first European
Defence Industrial Strategy (EDIS) in 2024. The strategy
aims to incentivise development and joint procurement
to address critical EU capability gaps, and to make full
use of the synergies between national and European
defence-planning processes.137 More specifically, it sets

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
the goals of procuring at least 40% of defence equip -
ment cooperatively by 2030 (the current figure is 18%,
according to the EC); boosting intra-EU defence trade
so that it represents at least 35% of the value of the
EU defence market by 2030; and for member states to
be procuring at least 50% of their equipment through
the EDTIB by 2030 (60% by 2035). 138 It also extends the
ASAP and EDIRPA logics to 2028, when the next EU
budget will enter into force.
The operationalisation of EDIS is expected to be
conducted through the European Defence Industry
Programme (EDIP), proposed by the Commission and
currently under discussion among member states. But
despite being ambitious, EDIS is likely to become a vic-
tim of EU politics. Its goal of industrial restructuring
reflects the views of the Commission, and the fact that
the Commission’s mandate on defence policy is guided
by defence-industrial considerations. These might
Figure 4.1: Examples of defence-industrial collaboration, cooperation and consolidation in Europe: 2022–present
On behalf of the four partner
states, OCCAR awards Airbus
the 'Eurodrone' production
contract, reported to be worth
EUR7bn (USD7.4bn)
Feb 2022 Oct 2022
France joins the
Belgian–Dutch naval
mine-countermeasures
programme
The EU Council approves
the Strategic Compass, the
aims of which include
generating more
collaborative development
and procurement
Mar 2022
Italy, Japan and the UK
announce they will collaborate
on developing a new /f_ighter
aircraft under the Global
Combat Air Programme (GCAP)
Dec 2022
14 NATO allies and
Finland sign a letter of
intent to cooperate on
the German-led European
Sky Shield Initiative (ESSI)
Oct 2022
Through the Versailles Declaration,
EU member states agree to take
more responsibility for the EU’s
own security and to investigate
gaps in defence investment
Mar 2022
Aug 2023
Rheinmetall
completes the
acquisition of EXPAL
Systems for EUR1.2bn
(USD1.3bn)
Oct 2023
The European Defence
Industry Reinforcement
through common
Procurement Act (EDIRPA)
is adopted to incentivise
joint acquisition
Jul 2023
The EU Act in Support of
Ammunition Production
(ASAP) is adopted. The act
oﬀers grant money to help
increase defence production.
Jun 2023
France and the UK sign a
letter of intent with Italy to
allow it to join the FC/ASW
programme
Jul 2023
Austria and
Switzerland sign a
Declaration of
Intent to join ESSI
Feb 2023
Denmark
and Sweden
join ESSI
Oct 2023
Ten NATO allies sign
an MoU to further
develop ESSI
Dec 2023
Leonardo and
KNDS announce
the forming of a
strategic alliance
Dec 2023
Thales
completes the
acquisition of
Imperva for
USD3.1bn
Feb 2024
BAE Systems
completes its
acquisition of Ball
Aerospace for
USD5.5bn
Mar 2024
The EU Commission
presents its /f_irst European
Defence Industrial Strategy
and proposed regulation
for the European Defence
Industry Programme
Jul 2024
Leonardo signs an
MoU with
Rheinmetall to
establish a 50:50
joint venture focused
on the land sector
May 2024
Fincantieri signs an agreement to
acquire Leonardo’s ‘Underwater
Armament Systems’ business for
EUR415m (USD447.53m). The
deal is expected to be completed
in 2025.
Apr 2024
Hensoldt completes
its acquisition of ESG
Elektroniksys-
tem-und Logistik for
EUR675m
(USD727.9m)
Jun 2024
Leonardo–KNDS
strategic-alliance
talks collapse
Merger, acquisition or industrial partnership Defence-cooperation agreement or mechanism Multinational programme
Sources: IISS analysis; various

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 27
differ from the priorities and interests of member states
and from the requirements of the national armed forces.
In October 2022, 14 NATO states launched the
European Sky Shield Initiative (ESSI). Coordinated
by Germany, the ESSI seeks to procure integrated
air-defence systems jointly, and currently has 21
countries, including Turkiye, signed up. 139 This
has already borne fruit for German industry, with
Austria, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia and Slovenia all
now acquiring German systems, including the IRIS-T
system used by Ukraine, either through the ESSI or
in concert with it. While the ESSI has prioritised gen -
erating capability as quickly as possible, other states
have disagreed with the approach. France, for exam -
ple, has voiced its unhappiness that the ESSI is domi -
nated by the acquisition of non-European systems
and has explored an alternative scheme. 140
Expanding Capacity and
Looking Ahead
As governments and industry have scrambled to boost
production to supply Ukraine and rearm themselves,
several companies have used M&A to boost their capac-
ity and strengthen their position in a particular sector.
Rheinmetall’s EUR1.2bn (USD1.3bn) acquisition of
Spanish company EXPAL Systems in 2023 is the most
significant example of this. 141 Already Europe’s largest
artillery-ammunition producer before 2022, the move
greatly increases the company’s capacity in larger-
calibre ammunition and showed that the company
was anticipating that the much higher level of demand
in Europe would continue beyond the short term.
Similarly, electronics company Hensoldt’s acquisition
of system integrator ESG and Fincantieri’s purchase of
Leonardo’s underwater-weapons business are aimed at
creating efficiencies through vertical consolidation.142
A ‘strategic alliance’ between Leonardo and KNDS,
announced in December 2023, had the potential to be
the most significant instance of cross-border consolida -
tion since the formation of KNDS in 2015, but collapsed
six months later.143 With the aim of uniting Leonardo’s
electronics expertise with KNDS’s armoured-vehicles
know-how, the agreement was intended to provide the
basis for Italy’s acquisition of Leopard 2A8 tanks and
probably would have been the vehicle through which
Italy joined the MGCS programme. However, negotia -
tions for the ‘strategic alliance’ collapsed in June 2024 as
KNDS and Leonardo were unable to reconcile demands
for technology transfer with Rome’s desire to install
Italian systems onto the Leopard 2. 144 KNDS’s healthy
order book probably made compromise unattractive
despite the lucrative value of the Italian programme
(EUR8.25bn (USD8.89bn)). 145 The collapse of the deal
was a reverse of the more typical process of industry
being pro-consolidation before government concerns
intervened, such as with BAE–EADS, as the deal had
government backing.
New Partners: MMPC, GCAP and
Korean Imports
Although from 2017 the PESCO framework very quickly
established dozens of capability projects, few efforts
have delivered capability into the hands of frontline
personnel. The Multi Modular Patrol Corvette (MMPC)
programme, however, may become the first substantial
effort to do just that. Starting life as the European Patrol
Corvette, the project is led by Italy and also includes
Denmark, France, Greece, Norway, Romania and Spain.
The initial design contract was contracted by OCCAR
to the Franco-Italian Naviris consortium in 2023 and
is mostly funded by the EDF. 146 Although there had
already been successful examples of Franco-Italian
naval collaboration, MMPC will provide a test case for
including more states and for the PESCO programme
itself. Its probable success could see funding for the
EDF increased further.147
While European countries have typically looked to
partner with other Europeans when jointly develop -
ing equipment, some are now looking further afield.
In 2022, for example, Italy and the UK came together
with Japan to announce the creation of Europe’s sec -
ond sixth-generation combat-aircraft project: the Global
Combat Air Programme (GCAP). 148 Although by itself
less broad than FCAS, in that it currently consists solely
of a manned fighter, GCAP has a much more ambi -
tious timeline, aiming to have an aircraft in service by
2035.149 GCAP will build on several development pro -
jects already under way between the UK and the other
two states. In the 1980s and 1990s, large multinational
programmes saw members drop out and new ones join

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
before getting to the series-production contract, and the
same may be possible for FCAS and GCAP. However,
changes to the membership of these programmes could
mean a loss of momentum and fresh arguments about
workshare, albeit while increasing funding and scale.
In 2022, Poland signed framework agreements with
three South Korean companies for tanks, artillery and
light fighter aircraft.150 This has been followed by Polish
orders for other systems, with Korean companies sup -
plying a further USD14bn-worth of equipment since
2022.151 Korean industry had built many indigenous
systems at large scale and was thus able to quickly sup-
ply customers with high-quality equipment at competi-
tive prices and undertake technology transfer. Other
European states have also opted for the Korean route,
with Estonia, Finland, Norway and Turkiye acquir -
ing Korean artillery. The growth of Korean exports in
Europe epitomises the contrasting priorities of many
European states: there are those who want equipment
now, and those who favour a European system, per -
haps for political reasons, and are prepared to wait to
develop it if necessary.
Source: IISS
A model of the Global Combat Air Programme (GCAP) aircraft displayed at DSEI 2023, London, September 2023
Turkiye: A Balancing Act in Europe
and Widening of Global Exports
Since Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine,
Turkiye has had to balance its interests as a NATO
member, its support for an independent Ukraine, and
its relationship with Russia, with which it shares a mari-
time border in the Black Sea and unofficial borders in
Syria and Armenia due to the Russian troops deployed
there. This has sometimes caused exasperation among
NATO allies. But on other matters Turkiye’s role has
been welcomed, as with the closure of the Bosphorus
and Dardanelles straits and Ankara’s role helping to
negotiate the Black Sea Grain Initiative in mid-2022.
The Turkish defence relationship with Ukraine predates
the 2022 invasion, having begun with a 2019 deal to sell
a first batch of Bayraktar TB2s.152 This was followed in
2020 by a deal to sell two MilGem corvettes, with out -
fitting to take place in Ukraine. 153 Further cooperation
efforts, including the establishment of joint ventures in
Ukraine, are under way.
Finland’s and Sweden’s announcements in May 2022
that they would both end decades of non-alignment

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 29
and seek to join NATO was met with surprise and
jubilation by all Alliance members, except Hungary
and Turkiye. Swedish–Turkish relations had frayed
after Stockholm’s criticism of Turkiye’s treatment of
its Kurdish population, and Ankara’s accusation that
Sweden harbours PKK supporters and refuses to sell it
defence equipment. A trilateral memorandum in June
2022 between the two Nordic countries and Turkiye
set out a roadmap of cooperation on these issues, as
well as assurances that both countries would assist
Turkiye in joining CSDP initiatives and the PESCO
Military Mobility project, but did not satisfy Ankara
sufficiently for it to sign off on Sweden’s member -
ship.154 Turkiye’s removal from the F-35 programme
in 2019 and the delay in securing US approval for the
sale of new F-16s and upgrade kits damaged Ankara’s
combat-aircraft recapitalisation plans and showed
the limits of the country’s rapid growth in defence-
industrial capability. Turkiye eventually signed off
on Stockholm’s accession when sufficient guarantees
regarding the F-16 deal and other subjects had been
given.155 While this transactional approach helped
secure long-standing Turkish objectives, it did little to
close the political gap that had grown between Ankara
and many European capitals.
Despite this, the growth in Turkish defence exports
has continued apace, including Ankara’s largest-ever
sale: more than USD3bn of Bayraktar Akıncı armed
UAVs to Saudi Arabia, involving local production. 156
Furthermore, Turkiye has moved onto a new genera -
tion of platforms, having completed production of
many that had started development in the 2000s. This
includes İstif-class frigates, Bayraktar Kızılelma and
Anka-3 uncrewed combat air vehicles, and the Kaan
crewed fighter aircraft. That said, Turkish industry has
suffered from a brain drain of experienced profession -
als, runaway inflation and a collapse in the value of
the lira, with the latter making Turkish products more
attractive on the export market but also raising the cost
of importing subsystems and materials. 157

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Conclusion
The European and Turkish defence industries have
spent the post-Cold War period on largely separate
trajectories. Both have had to react to periods of
fluctuating economic circumstances and changing
threat perceptions. Whereas many European countries
relaxed their commitment to defence in the 1990s,
Turkiye was confronted by a spike in violence by the
PKK and turmoil in Iraq and Syria that necessitated
greater spending and technological development. While
Western European states sought to rationalise their
industries, either within national borders or in some
instances across them, the major elements of Turkiye’s
defence industry had already been created, and instead
there was an expansion of companies through the joint-
venture strategy. This separation lasted beyond the
initial rush of consolidation and cooperation efforts in
the late 1990s and early 2000s.
Following the absorption of groups such as the
WEU and WEAG by the EU, member states gave
Brussels more of a role in the defence-industrial
space through mechanisms such as the EDF.
However, as European cooperation became more
EU-centric, Turkiye and others found themselves on
the outside of major European defence-cooperation
mechanisms. The gradual deterioration of the
relationship between Turkiye and many European
countries, alongside long-standing disagreements
such as over the status of Northern Cyprus, was
exacerbated by Turkish military operations in Syria
and elsewhere after the 2016 coup attempt. As many
defence-cooperation projects rest on a foundation of
close political alignment, this has made it impossible
for Turkiye to participate in many multinational
efforts that it was keen to join.
Turkiye’s search for autonomy in defence equip -
ment has led it to prioritise the development of its own
defence industry – first through the joint ventures with
foreign primes during the 1980s and 1990s, and then
through the development of indigenous designs from
2004 onwards. Since the 2010s this has led to an upsurge
in Turkish defence exports, albeit more gradually to
Europe than to customers elsewhere. Because of this,
Turkiye’s role in its relationship with European indus -
try since the end of the Cold War has transitioned from
customer and recipient of technology transfer to cus -
tomer of subsystems for indigenous designs, and now,
gradually, to exporter as well.
The A400M programme stands out as Turkiye’s only
involvement in a significant post-Cold War European
procurement project. Although the programme was
beset by technical challenges and continues to have
issues with availability and spare parts, Turkiye’s
involvement has been successful both in terms of end
capability and industrial workshare. Although this
programme could provide a model for future Turkish
collaboration with European partners, it must be
remembered that Turkiye’s entry into the project took
place in the context of a pro-European period in Turkish
politics. It is possible that Ankara will draw the lesson
from its involvement in the F-35 project that joining a
programme that is run by a single state, rather than a
collaboration of different states, does not guarantee the
kind of security of supply that Turkiye hopes for from
these arrangements.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 31
Notes
1 Its full name was the Letter of Intent concerning Measures to
Facilitate the Restructuring and Operation of the European
Defence Industry.
2 Hobart Rowen, ‘Making the “Peace Dividend” a
Reality’, Washington Post, 2 October 1991, https://www.
washingtonpost.com/archive/opinions/1991/10/03/making-
the-peace-dividend-a-reality/75d4ed2b-2f44-4830-ad87-
3d1153913da6/.
3 Thomas E. Ricks and Jeff Cole, ‘How Lockheed and
Northrop Had Their Merger Shot Down’, Wall Street
Journal, 19 June 1998, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB898139629613188500.
4 Fenella McGerty, ’Military Expenditure: Transparency,
Defence Inflation and Purchasing Power Parity’, IISS,
December 2022, p. 6, https://www.iiss.org/globalassets/
media-library---content--migration/files/research-
papers/2022/12/military-expenditure-transparency-
defence-inflation-and-purchasing-power-parity.
pdf; Keith Hartley and Binyam Solomon, ‘Special
Issue: Defence Inflation’, Defence and Peace Economics,
vol. 27, no. 2, 2016, pp. 172–5; and Michael Bruno,
‘ Augustine’s Law Continues, Pentagon Official Says’,
Aviation Week, 29 June 2011, https://aviationweek.com/
augustines-law-continues-pentagon-official-says.
5 ‘Déclaration de M. Charles Millon, ministre de la défense,
sur la réforme de l’OTAN, les nouveaux rapports de la
France avec l’OTAN et le rôle de l’UEO pour l’identité
européenne de défense, Paris le 19 décembre 1995’
[Statement by Mr Charles Millon, Minister of Defence, on
NATO reform, France’s new relations with NATO and the
role of the WEU for European defence identity, Paris, 19
December 1995], Vie Publique, 19 December 1995, https://
www.vie-publique.fr/discours/225076-charles-millon-
19121995-securite-europeenne-relations-france-otan.
6 ‘L’OCCAR a vingt ans : déclaration commune’ [OCCAR at
20: joint declaration], La Direction générale de l’armement
(DGA), 6 July 2022, https://www.defense.gouv.fr/dga/
actualites/loccar-a-vingt-ans-declaration-commune.
7 Jocelyn Mawdsley, ‘The A400M Project: from Flagship
Project to Warning for European Defence Cooperation’,
Defence Studies, 2013, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 14–32, https://eprints.
ncl.ac.uk/file_store/production/191375/22B8D13A-C283-
462B-A2BE-1B475FCCFB73.pdf.
8 ‘Framework Agreement Between the French Republic,
the Federal Republic of Germany, the Italian Republic,
the Kingdom of Spain, the Kingdom of Sweden, and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
concerning Measures to Facilitate the Restructuring
and Operation of the European Defence Industry’, 27
July 2000, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
media/5a80912ded915d74e33fb28e/TS0033_2001.pdf.
9 The CFSP was institutionalised through the Treaty of
Maastricht (1992). The novelty of the treaty was that it
introduced a 360-degree foreign policy for the EU, including
the ‘eventual framing of a common defence policy’.
10 ‘Treaty of Amsterdam Amending the Treaty on European
Union, the Treaties Establishing the European Communities and
Certain Related Acts’, Article J.7, Official Journal of the European
Communities, 10 November 1997, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:11997D/TXT.
11 Madeleine Albright (US secretary of state at the time),
‘The Right Balance Will Secure NATO’s Future’, Financial
Times, 7 December 1998, https://www.jstor.org/stable/
resrep06989.8?seq=1.
12 Permanent Representation of France to the European
Union, ‘Brief Guide to the European Security and Defence
Policy (ESDP)’, December 2005, https://ue.delegfrance.org/
IMG/0601%20Brief%20guide%20to%20ESDP.pdf.
13 European Council, ‘Conclusions of The Presidency’, 14 and 15
December 2001, https://aei.pitt.edu/43344/1/Laeken_2001.pdf.
14 European Council Meeting in Laeken, ‘Presidency
Conclusions’, Annex II: ‘Declaration on the Operational
Capability of the Common European Security and Defence
Policy’, 14 and 15 December 2001, https://www.consilium.
europa.eu/media/20950/68827.pdf.
15 Thomas Enders, ‘Defense Industry Restructuring and the
Implications of ESDI/DCI’, 17th International Workshop
on Global Security, Berlin, 2–5 June 2000, https://csdr.
org/2000Book/enders.htm.
16 ‘BAe and Dasa “Set to Merge”’, BBC News, 12 October
1998, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/191639.
stm; and ‘BAe in Defence Merger Talks’, BBC News, 7

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
December 1998, http://cdnedge.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/
the_company_file/229590.stm.
17 ‘Ill Wind Blows over BAe-GEC Deal’, BBC News, 20 January
1999, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/257935.stm.
18 ‘ Aérospatiale-Matra, naissance d’un géant’ [Aerospatiale-
Matra, birth of a giant], Le Monde, 16 February 1999, https://
www.lemonde.fr/archives/article/1999/02/16/aerospatiale-
matra-naissance-d-un-geant_3536737_1819218.html.
19 Murdo Morrison, ‘What if EADS Had Never Been Created?’,
FlightGlobal, 20 July 2010, https://www.flightglobal.com/
what-if-eads-had-never-been-created/94562.article.
20 Patrick Mercillon, European Tactical Missiles: The First
Hundred Years (Nanterre: ETAI, 2017), p. 370.
21 ‘European Missile Giant Formed’, BBC News, 27 April 2001,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/1238846.stm.
22 ‘Westland Merger Confirmed’, BBC News, 26 July 2000,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/852612.stm; and Fabio
Galvano, ‘Il nome AgustaWestland sugli elicotteridel
futuro’ [The name AgustaWestland on the helicopters of
the future], La Stampa, 27 July 2000, p. 15, http://www.
archiviolastampa.it/component/option,com_lastampa/
task,search/mod,libera/action,viewer/Itemid,3/page,15/
articleid,0436_01_2000_0202_0015_4369747/.
23 Celsius, ‘Nordic Merger Between Ammunition
Suppliers’, 9 September 1998, https://mb.cision.com/
wpyfs/00/00/00/00/00/00/28/1C/Nammeng.pdf.
24 Celsius, ‘Celsius Year-end Report 1999’, 24
February 2000, https://news.cision.com/celsius/r/
celsius-year-end-report-1999,e18500.
25 Celsius, ‘Celsius Interim Report January-March 1999’, 5
May 1999, https://news.cision.com/celsius/r/celsius-interim-
report-january-march-1999,e8922; and ‘Nordic Helicopter
Plan Falls Apart’, FlightGlobal, 18 September 2001, https://
www.flightglobal.com/nordic-helicopter-plan-falls-
apart-/39611.article.
26 Christophe Jakubyszyn, ‘Thomson-CSF est privatisé par
apports d’actifs d’Alcatel et de Dassault’ [Thomson-CSF
privatised by contribution of assets from Alcatel and Dassault],
Le Monde, 16 April 1998, https://www.lemonde.fr/archives/
article/1998/04/16/thomson-csf-est-privatise-par-apports-d-
actifs-d-alcatel-et-de-dassault_3649593_1819218.html.
27 Select Committee on Defence, ‘Further Memorandum
from the Ministry of Defence – Eurofighter’, 19 April 2000,
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm199900/cmselect/
cmdfence/528/528we06.htm.
28 Ron Matthews and Rashid Al-Saadi, ‘Organisational
Complexity of the Eurofighter Typhoon Collaborative Supply
Chain’, Defence and Peace Economics, vol. 34, no. 2, 2023, pp.
228–43; and ‘Delay Fears for Eurofighter’, BBC News, 13
February 2002, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1817815.stm.
29 NHIndustries, ‘NAHEMA and NHIndustries Signed
the Industrialisation and 1st Batch Production
Contract of 298 NH90 Helicopters’, 30 June 2000,
https://www.nhindustries.com/website/en/press/
NAHEMA-and-NHIndustries-SIGNED-THE-
INDUSTRIALISATION-AND-1ST-BATCH-PRODUCTION-
CONTRACT-OF-298-NH90-HELICOPTERS_87.html.
30 Eurocopter, ‘Production Contract for 160 Tiger Signed’, 18
June 1999, https://web.archive.org/web/20060311103806/
http:/www.eurocopter.com/publications/FO/scripts/
newsFO_complet.php?lang=EN&news_id=151.
31 Christian Schubert, ‘EADS kommt auch mit dem Tiger
zu spät’ [EADS is also late with the Tiger], Frankfurter
Allgemeine, 25 May 2010, https://www.faz.net/aktuell/
wirtschaft/unternehmen/luftfahrt-eads-kommt-auch-mit-
dem-tiger-zu-spaet-1980474.html; and Jon Lake, ‘Germany
to Retire Tiger Gunships Six Years Earlier Than Planned’,
Key.Aero, 20 February 2024, https://www.key.aero/article/
germany-retire-tiger-gunships-six-years-earlier-planned.
32 Alan Cowell, ‘Turks’ War with Kurds Reaches a New
Ferocity’, New York Times, 18 October 1993, https://www.
nytimes.com/1993/10/18/world/turks-war-with-kurds-
reaches-a-new-ferocity.html.
33 Özal was Turkiye’s prime minister from 1983–89, and
president from 1989–93.
34 ‘Turkey Takes Its First Upgraded F-4 Phantom’,
FlightGlobal, 10 March 1999, https://www.flightglobal.com/
turkey-takes-its-first-upgraded-f-4-phantom/25410.article.
35 European Commission, Directorate General for Economic
and Financial Affairs, ‘The EU Economy: 2002 Review’, 2002,
https://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/pages/
publication489_en.pdf.
36 IMF World Economic Outlook database, April 2024, https://
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/weo-database/2024/April.
37 Ibid.
38 IISS Military Balance+, accessed 17 June 2024.
39 Ibid.
40 NATO, ‘NATO and Libya, Operation Unified Protector,
February-October 2011’, 27 March 2012, https://www.nato.
int/cps/en/natolive/71679.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 33
41 Camille Grand, ‘The French Experience: Sarkozy’s War?’
in Precision and Purpose: Airpower in the Libyan Civil War,
RAND Corporation, July 2015, p. 190, https://www.rand.
org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR600/RR676/
RAND_RR676.pdf.
42 Rafał Wiśniewski ‘Defence Industry in the European Union
– Challenges and Opportunities in Times of Economic
Crisis’, Przegląd Strategiczny, 2012, no. 2, pp. 104–05, https://
cejsh.icm.edu.pl/cejsh/element/bwmeta1.element.ojs-
doi-10_14746_ps_2012_2_8/c/6027-6091.pdf.
43 Lt Gen. Olivier Rittimann, ‘Operation Althea and the Virtues
of the Berlin Plus Agreement’, NDC Policy Brief 02–21, 25
January 2021 (updated January 2024), https://www.ndc.nato.
int/news/news.php?icode=1521.
44 Council of the European Union, ‘European Security Strategy.
A Secure Europe in a Better World’, https://www.consilium.
europa.eu/media/30823/qc7809568enc.pdf.
45 ‘Headline Goal 2010’, available at https://www.
europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2004_2009/
documents/dv/sede110705headlinegoal2010_/
sede110705headlinegoal2010_en.pdf.
46 European Commission, Green Paper, ‘Defence Procurement’,
23 September 2004, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52004DC0608&from=mt.
47 ‘Council Joint Action 2004/551/CFSP of 12 July 2004 on
the Establishment of the European Defence Agency’,
EUR-Lex, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=celex%3A32004E0551.
48 European Commission, ‘Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council,
the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of the Regions – Towards a More Competitive
and Efficient Defence and Security Sector’, 24 July 2013,
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=C
ELEX:52013DC0542&from=en.
49 European Council, ‘Conclusions’, 20 December 2013,
https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/
ST-217-2013-INIT/en/pdf .
50 NATO, ‘Lisbon Summit Declaration’, 20 November 2010,
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_68828.
htm?mode=pressrelease; and Simon Michell, ‘ A Decade of
Support’, NITECH: NATO Innovation and Technology, July
2022, no. 7, pp. 34–7.
51 Claire Mills and Louisa Brooke-Holland, ‘UK-French
Defence Cooperation: A Decade on from the Lancaster
House Treaties’, House of Commons Library, 15 March 2023,
https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/
CBP-9743/CBP-9743.pdf.
52 German Federal Government, ‘Deutsch-Französische
Agenda 2020’ [Franco-German Agenda 2020], 4 February
2010, https://web.archive.org/web/20130209200838/https://
www.bundesregierung.de/Content/DE/Artikel/2010/02/2010-
02-04-deutsch-franzoesische-agenda-2020.html.
53 Andreas Marchetti and Louis-Marie Clouet,
‘Incertitudes sur la PSDC - Une nécessaire réflexion
franco-allemande‘ [Uncertainties about the PSDC - a
necessary Franco-German reflection], Visions franco-
allemandes, no. 19, July 2011, https://www.ifri.org/fr/
publications/notes-de-lifri/visions-franco-allemandes/
incertitudes-psdc-une-necessaire-reflexion.
54 Claudia Major, ‘France, Germany and European Defence:
More Pragmatism and Less Pathos, Please’, Ifri, January
2013, p. 13, https://www.ifri.org/sites/default/files/atoms/
files/vfa20majoreng_0.pdf.
55 ‘Neue Ära für deutsch-französische Rüstungskooperation’
[A new era for Franco-German armament
cooperation], Reuters, 14 June 2012, https://www.
reuters.com/article/deutschland-frankreich-rstung-zf-
idDEBEE85D04A20120614/.
56 NORDEFCO, ‘ About NORDEFCO’, https://www.nordefco.
org/the-basics-about-nordefco.
57 Ann-Sofie Dahl, ‘Back to the Future: Nordefco’s First Decade
and Prospects for the Next’, Scandinavian Journal of Military
Studies, vol. 4, no. 1, July 2021, pp. 172–82, https://storage.
googleapis.com/jnl-sms-j-sjms-files/journals/1/articles/85/
submission/proof/85-1-973-1-10-20210715.pdf.
58 Jacek Tarociński, ‘Nordic Countries: a Common Vision
for the Development of Defence Cooperation’, Centre for
Eastern Studies (OSW), 8 May 2024, https://www.osw.waw.
pl/en/publikacje/analyses/2024-05-08/nordic-countries-a-
common-vision-development-defence-cooperation.
59 Pauli Järvenpää, ‘NORDEFCO: “Love in a Cold Climate”?’,
April 2017, https://icds.ee/wp-content/uploads/2017/ICDS_
Analysis-NORDEFCO-Pauli_Jarvenpaa-April_2017.pdf.
60 BAE Systems, ‘BAE Systems Completes Acquisition
of United Defense Industries; Creates Global Land
Systems Enterprise’, 24 June 2005, https://web.archive.
org/web/20051123110417/http://www.baesystems.com/
newsroom/2005/jun/240605news1.htm.
61 Leonardo, ‘Finmeccanica to Acquire DRS Technologies’,

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
26 May 2008, https://www.leonardo.com/
documents/15646808/16736310/body_Finmeccanica_to_
acquire_DRS_Technologies_London13_May_2008_updated_
to_26_May_2008.pdf?t=1547474423458.
62 General Dynamics European Land Systems, ‘Our
Heritage’, https://www.gdels.com/our_heritage.php;
and ‘Sikorsky Acquires Polish Aircraft Maker’, Reuters, 9
August 2007, https://www.reuters.com/article/sppage023-
l10351857-oisbi/sikorsky-acquires-polish-aircraft-maker-
idUKL1035185720070110/#:~:text=The%20deal%20
includes%20the%20purchase,with%20a%20workforce%20
of%201%2C500.
63 Rheinmetall, ‘History 2000-2005’, https://www.rheinmetall.
com/en/company/history/2000-2005.
64 ‘BAE Forced into Cut-price Sale’, Financial Times,
December 2005, https://www.ft.com/content/
a060f412-7970-11da-8d99-0000779e2340.
65 GKN, ‘ About Us’, https://web.archive.org/
web/20150404052208/http://www.gkn.com/aboutus/
ourheritage/Pages/GKN-today-a-global-leader.aspx.
66 MBDA, ‘MBDA Completes Integration of German Missile
Company LFK’, 7 March 2006, https://www.mbda-systems.
com/press-releases/mbda-completes-integration-of-german-
missile-company-lfk/.
67 ‘Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft Acquired by
Thyssenkrupp’, Crunchbase, https://www.crunchbase.
com/acquisition/thyssenkrupp-acquires-howaldtswerke-
deutsche-werft--2a3a1818.
68 ‘ Archived Report: SNECMA’, Forecast International, 2005,
https://www.forecastinternational.com/archive/disp_pdf.
cfm?DACH_RECNO=281.
69 D. Mullholland, ‘BAE Seals Alvis Takeover’,
August 2004, https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/294251957_BAE_seals_Alvis_takeover.
70 BAE Systems, ‘BAE Systems plc - Interim Management
Statement for the Period from 1 July 2012 to 10 October
2012’, 11 October 2012, https://investors.baesystems.com/~/
media/Files/B/BAE-Systems-Investor/investors/shareholder-
information/reports-and-presentations/ims-oct-2012.pdf.
71 EADS, ‘Reference Document: Financial Year 2000’, 26 April
2001, p. 45, https://www.airbus.com/sites/g/files/jlcbta136/
files/2021-07/eads-reference-document-2000_0.pdf.
72 Mawdsley, ‘The A400M Project: from Flagship Project to
Warning for European Defence Cooperation’.
73 Military Balance+, accessed 17 June 2024.
74 Jorn Madslien, ‘ Airbus’ Military Plane Continues to Distract’,
BBC News, 3 February 2010, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/
business/8491206.stm; ‘FACTBOX-The Big Money Behind
Airbus A400M Talks’, Reuters, 21 January 2010, https://
www.reuters.com/article/eads-airbus-figures-idUSLD
E60K19R20100121/?type=marketsNews; and Airbus,
‘Financial Results’, https://www.airbus.com/en/investors/
financial-results-annual-reports.
75 Sénat, ‘Projet de loi pour finances pour 2004: Défense
– Marine’ [Finance bill for 2004: Defence – Navy], 20
November 2003, https://www.senat.fr/rap/a03-076-8/a03-
076-8_mono.html.
76 Hélène Masson, ‘Europe des véhicules blindés’ [Europe
of armoured vehicles], Fondation pour la Recherche
Stratégique, February 2022, pp. 4–5, https://www.frstrategie.
org/sites/default/files/documents/publications/recherches-et-
documents/2022/032022-2.pdf.
77 See, for example, US Government Accountability Office,
‘F-35 Joint Strike Fighter: Problems Completing Software
Testing May Hinder Delivery of Expected Warfighting
Capabilities’, March 2014, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-
14-322.pdf.
78 See, for example, ‘Patria and Lockheed Martin Signed
a Memorandum of Agreement for the Production and
Delivery of F-35 Landing Gear Doors’, Patria, 27 March 2024,
https://www.patriagroup.com/newsroom/news/2024/patria-
and-lockheed-martin-signed-a-memorandum-of-agreement-
for-the-production-and-delivery-of-f-35-landing-gear-doors.
79 Vivienne Machi, ‘How the F-35 Swept Europe, and
the Competition It Could Soon Face’, Defense News, 4
September 2022, https://www.defensenews.com/global/
europe/2022/09/04/how-the-f-35-swept-europe-and-the-
competition-it-could-soon-face/; and ‘Belgium’s Purchase
of US-made F35 jets ‘ Against European Interests’, Macron
Says’, France24, 26 October 2018, https://www.france24.com/
en/20181026-france-belgium-aviation-macron-purchase-usa-
f35-jets-eurofighter.
80 ‘Kurdish Rebels Abandon Truce’, BBC News, 2 September
2003, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3200907.stm.
81 Lockheed Martin, ‘Lockheed Martin Sells Its Share Of
Turkish Joint Venture To Turkish Aircraft Industries, Inc.
(TUSAS)’, 13 January 2005, https://news.lockheedmartin.
com/2005-01-13-Lockheed-Martin-Sells-Its-Share-of-Turkish-
Joint-Venture-to-Turkish-Aircraft-Industries-Inc-TUSAS.
82 MİKES, ‘Tarihçe’, https://web.archive.org/

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 35
web/20100609102823/http:/www.mikes.com.tr/tr/page.
asp?id=15; and ASELSAN, ‘2015 Annual Report’, April
2016, p. 114, https://wwwcdn.aselsan.com/api/file/2015_
ASELSAN_Annual_Report_1631.pdf.
83 See, for example, ‘ ASELSAN Middle East PSC LTD.
(AME) Is Officially Announced In SOFEX 2012’, ASELSAN
Middle East, 8 May 2012, https://www.aselsanmiddleeast.
com/ViewNews/22#:~:text=ASELSAN%20Middle%20
East%20PSC%20LTD%20(AME)%20is%20officially%20
announced%20in,(KADDB%20CEO)%2C%20Mr; KAE,
‘Kazakhstan ASELSAN Engineering LLP’, https://kae.ke.kz/
en; and Otokar, ‘Heritage’, https://www.otokar.com.tr/
about-otokar/heritage.
84 ‘Scenesetter: Your Visit to Turkey’, 13 October 2009, released
by WikiLeaks as Cable 09ANKARA1472_a, https://wikileaks.
org/plusd/cables/09ANKARA1472_a.html.
85 TAI, ‘İNSANSIZ SİSTEMLERDE YENİ DÖNEM BAŞLADI
UYDUDAN KONTROLLÜ ANKA-S’İN İLK TESLİMİ
GERÇEKLEŞTİRİLDİ’ [A new era in unmanned systems
has started. The first delivery of the satellite-controlled
Anka-S has been made], 3 February 2018, https://www.tusas.
com/medya-merkezi/haberler/insansiz-sistemlerde-yeni-
donem-basladi-uydudan-kontrollu-anka-s-in-ilk-teslimi-
gerceklestirildi.
86 Baykar, ‘Rekorlara imza atan Bayraktar İHA, TSK’da
hizmete hazır’ [Record-breaking Bayraktar UAV is ready
for service in the Turkish armed forces], 13 November
2014, https://web.archive.org/web/20160910041147/http:/
baykarmakina.com/rekorlara-imza-atan-bayraktar/.
87 Alyson J.K. Bailes and Graham Messervy-Whiting, ‘Death
of an Institution: The End for Western European Union, a
Future for European Defence?’, Egmont – Royal Institute for
International Relations, Egmont Paper 46, May 2011, p. 48,
https://www.egmontinstitute.be/app/uploads/2013/09/ep46.
pdf?type=pdf.
88 Judy Dempsey, ‘Between the European Union and NATO,
Many Walls’, New York Times, 24 November 2010, https://
www.nytimes.com/2010/11/25/world/europe/25iht-letter.html.
89 NATO, ‘Defence Expenditures and NATO’s 2% Guideline’,
updated 5 April 2024, https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/
topics_49198.htm
90 Jeremy Page, Carol E. Lee and Gordon Lubold,
‘China’s President Pledges No Militarization
in Disputed Islands’, Wall Street Journal, 25
September 2015, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
china-completes-runway-on-artificial-island-in-south-china-
sea-1443184818.
91 NATO, ‘Funding NATO’, updated 5 April 2024, https://
www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_67655.htm.
92 Ibid.
93 Ibid.
94 Ibid.
95 European Commission, ‘ A New Deal for European Defence
– Implementation Roadmap for Communication COM
(2013) 542; Towards a More Competitive and Efficient
Defence and Security Sector’, COM(2014) 387 final, June
2014, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:52014DC0387.
96 European Parliament, ‘European Defence Action Plan’, last
updated 20 April 2024, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
legislative-train/theme-europe-as-a-stronger-global-actor/
file-european-defence-action-plan.
97 European Commission, ‘Preparatory Action on Defence
Research (PADR)’, https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.
eu/eu-defence-industry/preparatory-action-defence-
research-padr_en; and European Commission, ‘European
Defence Industrial Development Programme (EDIDP)’,
https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/eu-defence-
industry/european-defence-industrial-development-
programme-edidp_en.
98 Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO), https://www.
pesco.europa.eu/.
99 EEAS, ‘Coordinated Annual Review on Defence
(CARD)’, https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/
coordinated-annual-review-defence-card_en.
100 Airbus, ‘Putting “Teeth” in Europe’s Front-
line Combat Aircraft’, undated, https://www.
airbus.com/en/our-history/defence-history/
putting-teeth-in-europes-front-line-combat-aircraft.
101 Jens Flottau, ‘What Went Wrong with the Airbus A380?’,
Aviation Week, 13 November 2021, https://aviationweek.com/
shownews/dubai-airshow/what-went-wrong-airbus-a380;
and Nicola Clark, ‘The Airbus Saga: Crossed Wires and
a Multibillion-euro Delay’, New York Times, 11 December
2006, https://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/11/business/
worldbusiness/11iht-airbus.3860198.html.
102 KNDS, ‘One Company – Two Histories: The History of
KNDS Deutschland Reaches Far Back into the 19th Century
and Begins in Two Places: Munich and Kassel’, undated,
https://www.knds.de/en/about-us/history/.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
103 Christian Schaudwet, ‘Grüne warnen vor Umgehung
von Waffen-Exportkontrollen’ [Greens warn
against circumventing arms-export controls], Neue
Osnabrücker Zeitung, 28 July 2015, https://www.noz.de/
deutschland-welt/wirtschaft/artikel/geplante-fusion-
kmwnexter-gruene-warnen-vor-umgehung-von-waffen-
exportkontrollen-23621878.
104 Michel Cabirol, ‘Nexter/Krauss-Maffei : un rapprochement
à n’importe quel prix ?’ [Nexter/Krauss-Maffei: a
rapprochement at any price?], La Tribune, 25 January 2015,
https://www.latribune.fr/entreprises-finance/industrie/
aeronautique-defense/20150125trib6245d7194/nexter-krauss-
maffei-un-rapprochement-a-n-importe-quel-prix.html.
105 Denis Cosnard and Philippe Jacqué, ‘L’Etat envisage une
nationalisation transitoire des chantiers de Saint-Nazaire’
[The state is considering a transitional nationalisation of
the Saint-Nazaire shipbuilders], Le Monde, 13 March 2017,
https://www.lemonde.fr/economie/article/2017/03/31/
un-plan-b-en-preparation-pour-les-chantiers-de-saint-
nazaire_5103744_3234.html.
106 Yann Bessoule, ‘STX. L’avenir des chantiers de Saint-Nazaire
au cœur du sommet franco-italien’ [STX. The future of the
Saint-Nazaire construction sites at the heart of the Franco-
Italian summit], Ouest-France, 27 September 2017, https://
www.ouest-france.fr/economie/entreprises/stx/stx-l-avenir-
des-chantiers-de-saint-nazaire-au-coeur-du-sommet-franco-
italien-5274881.
107 David Keohane and Javier Espinoza, ‘Franco-
Italian Shipbuilding Merger Collapses’ Financial
Times, 28 January 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/
abac9ebc-775e-457c-95b4-d6e283908a21.
108 Mitja Kleczka, Caroline Buts and Marc Jegers, ‘Six Decades
of Consolidation in the European Defence Industry (1960-
2022)’, Economics of Peace and Security Journal, vol. 18, no. 2,
2023, p. 8, https://www.epsjournal.org.uk/index.php/EPSJ/
article/view/371.
109 Martin Lundmark, ‘Kockums: the Repatriation of
the Swedish Underwater Crown Jewel (Part 1)’,
Défense&Industries, no. 1, June 2014, pp. 7–8, https://www.
frstrategie.org/en/publications/defense-et-industries/
kockums-repatriation-swedish-underwater-crown-jewel-
part1-2014.
110 Ibid.
111 Saab, ‘Saab and ThyssenKrupp Have Signed an MoU’,
14 April 2014, https://www.saab.com/newsroom/
press-releases/2014/saab-and-thyssenkrupp-have-signed-a-
mou-on-an-acquisition-of-thyssenkrupp-marine-systems-ab;
and Martin Lundmark, ‘Saab Kockums’ Maiden Voyage
(Part 2)’, Défense&Industries, no. 2, October 2014, p. 11,
https://www.frstrategie.org/sites/default/files/documents/
publications/defense-et-industries/2014/2-4.pdf.
112 IISS closed workshop: ‘EU Defence Industry: the Challenge
of Integration with non-EU Partners’, London, 5 March 2024.
113 ‘Neue Ära für deutsch-französische Rüstungskooperation’
[New era for Franco-German armaments cooperation],
Reuters, 14 June 2012, https://www.reuters.
com/article/deutschland-frankreich-rstung-zf-
idDEBEE85D04A20120614/; and ‘French, German Ministers
Meet in Paris’, DW, 13 July 2017, https://www.dw.com/en/
franco-german-cooperation-focuses-on-eu-reforms-defense-
enterprise-and-education/a-39666836.
114 France, Office of the Presidency, ‘Meseberg Declaration -
Renewing Europe’s Promises of Security and Prosperity’,
19 June 2018, https://www.elysee.fr/en/emmanuel-
macron/2018/06/19/meseberg-declaration-renewing-europes-
promises-of-security-and-prosperity.
115 See, for example, Vivienne Machi, ‘Dassault Chief Confirms
Fighter Prototype Delay amid Workshare Dispute’, Defense
News, 21 July 2022, https://www.defensenews.com/
global/europe/2022/07/21/dassault-chief-confirms-fighter-
prototype-delay-amid-workshare-dispute.
116 Airbus, ‘Demonstrator Phase Launched: Future Combat
Air System Takes Major Step Forward’, 12 February
2020, https://web.archive.org/web/20200301211859/
https://www.airbus.com/newsroom/press-releases/
en/2020/02/demonstrator-phase-launched-future-combat-
air-system-takes-major-step-forward.html; and Indra,
‘Indra Joins the FCAS Concept Study as Contractor’, 28
July 2020, https://www.indracompany.com/en/noticia/
indra-joins-fcas-concept-study-contractor.
117 France, Ministry of the Armed Forces, ‘ Allemagne : signature
de la phase 1A du programme de char du futur’ [Germany:
signature of Phase 1A of the ‘tank of the future’ programme],
30 April 2024, https://www.defense.gouv.fr/actualites/
allemagne-signature-phase-1a-du-programme-char-du-futur.
118 Germany, Federal Ministry of Defence, ‘Europäische
Rüstung stärken’ [Strengthening European armaments],
19 June 2018, https://www.bmvg.de/de/aktuelles/
europaeische-ruestung-staerken-25498; and Fabrice
Wolf, ‘Potential Failure of FCAS and MGCS Must Be

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 37
Anticipated for 2025, Says Senate Report’, Meta-Defense,
10 January 2024, https://meta-defense.fr/en/2024/01/10/
scaf-and-mgcs-2025-senate-report/.
119 Airbus, ‘ Airbus and OCCAR Sign Eurodrone Contract’, 24
February 2022, https://www.airbus.com/en/newsroom/press-
releases/2022-02-airbus-and-occar-sign-eurodrone-contract;
and Airbus, ‘ Airbus Achieves Eurodrone’s Preliminary
Design Review’, 16 May 2024, https://www.airbus.com/
en/newsroom/press-releases/2024-05-airbus-achieves-
eurodrones-preliminary-design-review.
120 Tim Fish, ‘Italy Finally Funds Naval Missile Projects’,
Shephard Media, 17 November 2023, https://
www.shephardmedia.com/news/naval-warfare/
italy-finally-funds-naval-missile-projects/.
121 Antti Kauppinen, ‘Suomi ja Latvia sopivat
panssariajoneuvojärjestelmän kehittämisestä – Patrian
ajoneuvoalusta valittiin kehitystyön pohjaksi’ [Finland and
Latvia agree on development of armoured vehicle system
– Patria’s vehicle platform chosen as basis of development
work], Reserviläinen, 29 January 2020, https://reservilainen.
fi/suomi-ja-latvia-sopivat-panssariajoneuvojarjestelman-
kehittamisesta-patrian-ajoneuvoalusta-valittiin-kehitystyon-
pohjaksi/; and Finland, Ministry of Defence, ‘Finland, Latvia
and Patria Reach Agreement on Common Armoured Vehicle
System’, 30 August 2021, https://www.defmin.fi/en/topical/
press_releases_and_news/press_release_archive/2021/
finland_latvia_and_patria_reach_agreement_on_common_
armoured_vehicle_system.12129.news#acd8d81f.
122 ‘Germany and Sweden Take Next Steps in the Joint
Armoured Vehicle CAVS Programme’, Patria, 17 April
2023, https://www.patriagroup.com/newsroom/news/2023/
germany-and-sweden-take-next-steps-in-the-joint-
armoured-vehicle-cavs-programme.
123 The Netherlands, Ministry of Defence, ‘Nederland vervangt
marineschepen samen met België’ [The Netherlands is
replacing naval ships together with Belgium], 30 November
2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20161220042941/https://
www.defensie.nl/actueel/nieuws/2016/11/30/nederland-
vervangt-marineschepen-samen-met-belgie; Thales, ‘Thales
Wins French-UK Mine Countermeasures Contract’, 27
March 2015, https://www.thalesgroup.com/en/united-
kingdom/press-release/thales-wins-french-uk-mine-
countermeasures-contract; Thyssenkrupp, ‘Thyssenkrupp
Marine Systems: Strategic Partner to the Norwegian Navy’,
2 February 2017, https://www.thyssenkrupp.com/en/
newsroom/press-releases/thyssenkrupp-marine-systems-
-strategic-partner-to-the-norwegian-navy-1555.html; and
Norway, Ministry of Defence, ‘Tyskland kjøper norske
missiler’ [Germany buys Norwegian missiles], 13 February
2017, https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumentarkiv/
regjeringen-solberg/aktuelt-regjeringen-solberg/fd/
pressemeldinger/2017/tyskland-kjoper-norske-missiler/
id2538620/.
124 ‘Germany Bans Exports of Arms to Turkey’, Reuters, 12
October 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-syria-
security-turkey-germany-idUSKBN1WR0EL/; and Chris R.
Kelford, ‘Notable Challenges in Canada-Turkey Relations’,
Canadian Intelligence Council, 29 May 2020, https://thecic.
org/notable-challenges-in-canada-turkey-relations/.
125 ‘Turkey Threatens Greece over Disputed Mediterranean
Claims’, DW, 9 June 2020, https://www.dw.com/en/turkey-
threatens-greece-over-disputed-mediterranean-territorial-
claims/a-54828554.
126 FINABEL - The European Land Forces Commanders
Organisation, ‘Turkey’s Participation in the PESCO Military
Mobility Project’, 9 September 2021, https://finabel.org/
turkeys-participation-in-the-pesco-military-mobility-
project%EF%BF%BC/; European Commission, ‘Commission
Staff Working Document: Turkey 2021 Report’, 19 October
2021, p. 117, https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/
publication/f7862961-3197-11ec-bd8e-01aa75ed71a1/
language-en; and Oliver Noyan, ‘ Austria Opposes Turkey’s
Bid to Join EU Military Project’, Euractiv, 27 July 2021,
https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/short_news/
austria-opposes-turkeys-bid-to-join-eu-military-project/.
127 MBDA, ‘Eurosam, Together with ASELSAN and Roketsan,
Lay the Foundation of Strategic Cooperation in Air and
Missile Defence’, 20 July 2017, https://www.mbda-systems.
com/2017/07/20/eurosam-together-aselsan-roketsan-lay-
foundation-strategic-cooperation-air-missile-defence/.
128 BAE Systems, ‘BAE Systems Signs Heads of Agreement
for a Future Contract with Turkish Aerospace Industries
for TF-X Programme’, 28 January 2017, https://www.
baesystems.com/en-uk/article/bae-systems-signs-heads-of-
agreement-for-a-future-contract-with-turkish-aerospace-
industries-for-tf-x-programme.
129 Mekhla Raina, ‘Rolls-Royce Scales Back on Joining Fighter
Jet Project with Turkey’s Kale Group’, Reuters, 4 March
2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKCN1QK0O7/.
130 IISS Military Balance+, accessed 17 June 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
131 Council of the European Union, ‘ A Strategic Compass
for Security and Defence - For a European Union That
Protects Its Citizens, Values and Interests and Contributes
to International Peace and Security’, 21 March 2022,
https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/
ST-7371-2022-INIT/en/pdf .
132 Council of the European Union, ‘European Peace
Facility’, https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/
european-peace-facility/.
133 European Commission, ‘ ASAP – Boosting Defence
Production’, https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/
eu-defence-industry/asap-boosting-defence-production_en.
134 EEAS, ‘EP Plenary: Speeding Up Production and Deliveries
of Weapons and Ammunitions to Ukraine’, 15 March 2023,
https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/ep-plenary-speeding-
production-and-deliveries-weapons-and-ammunitions-
ukraine_en; and Tom Kington and Elisabeth Gosselin-Malo,
‘Behind Europe’s Ammo Pledge to Ukraine, Some
Manufacturers Grow Leery’, Defense News, 19 June 2023,
https://www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2023/06/19/
behind-europes-ammo-pledge-to-ukraine-some-
manufacturers-grow-leery/.
135 European Defence Agency, ‘2024 Long-term Review’,
May 2024, https://eda.europa.eu/docs/default-source/
documents/2024-long-term-review-of-the-european-
defence-agency.pdf .
136 ‘Regulation (EU) 2023/2418 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 18 October 2023 on Establishing an
Instrument for the Reinforcement of the European Defence
Industry Through Common Procurement (EDIRPA)’, Official
Journal of the European Union, 26 October 2023, https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L_202302418.
137 The following document identified major gaps: European
Commission, ‘Joint Communication to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – On
Defence Investment Gaps Analysis and Way Forward’,
18 May 2022, https://commission.europa.eu/document/
download/4bcf9a69-ed82-4a74-836f-b85bb16725f6_
en?filename=join_2022_24_2_en_act_part1_v3.pdf.
138 European Commission, ‘Joint Communication to the
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – A
New European Defence Industrial Strategy: Achieving EU
Readiness Through a Responsive and Resilient European
Defence Industry’, 5 March 2024, https://defence-industry-
space.ec.europa.eu/document/download/643c4a00-0da9-
4768-83cd-a5628f5c3063_en?filename=EDIS%20Joint%20
Communication.pdf.
139 NATO, ‘14 NATO Allies and Finland Agree to Boost
European Air Defence Capabilities’, 13 October 2022, https://
www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_208103.htm; and Ezgi
Akin, ‘Turkey, Greece Formally Join German-led Defense
Shield Project’, Al-Monitor, 15 February 2024, al-monitor.
com/originals/2024/02/turkey-greece-formally-join-german-
led-defense-shield-project.
140 France, Ministry of the Armed Forces, ‘Défense aérienne et
anti-missile : comment l’Europe veut protéger l’Europe’ [Air
and missile defence: how Europe wants to protect Europe],
20 June 2023, https://www.defense.gouv.fr/actualites/
defense-aerienne-anti-missile-comment-leurope-veut-
proteger-leurope.
141 Rheinmetall, ‘Rheinmetall Completes Acquisition of
Spanish Defence Contractor Expal Systems’, 1 August
2023, https://www.rheinmetall.com/en/media/news-watch/
news/2023/8/2023-08-01-rheinmetall-completes-acquisition-
of-spanish-defence-contractor-expal-systems.
142 Hensoldt, ‘Hensoldt completes acquisition of ESG’, 2
April 2024, https://www.hensoldt.net/news/hensoldt-
completes-acquisition-of-esg/; and Fincantieri, ‘Fincantieri
Signs Agreement for the Acquisition of Leonardo S.p.A.’s
“Underwater Armament Systems” business’, 9 May 2024,
https://www.fincantieri.com/en/media/press-releases/2024/
fincantieri-signs-agreement-for-the-acquisition-of-leonardo-
spas-underwater-armament-systems-business/.
143 KNDS, ‘KNDS and Leonardo Form Strategic
Alliance’, 13 December 2023, https://www.
knds.com/newsroom/press-releases/detail/
knds-and-leonardo-form-strategic-alliance/.
144 Tom Kington, ‘KNDS-Leonardo Rupture Could Nix Italian
Leopard 2 Tank Buy’, Defense News, 11 June 2024, https://
www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2024/06/11/knds-
leonardo-rupture-could-nix-italian-leopard-2-tank-buy/.
145 ‘La Commissione Difesa della Camera approva l’acquisto
dei carri armati Leopard 2A8’ [House Defence Committee
approves acquisition of Leopard 2A8 tanks], AnalisiDifesa,
21 Feburary 2024, https://www.analisidifesa.it/2024/02/
la-commissione-difesa-camera-approva-lacquisto-dei-carri-
armati-leopard-2a8/.
146 Naval Group, ‘Launching of the First Phase of the European

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
On The Outside Looking In: Turkiye’s Peripheral Role in European Defence-industrial Collaboration Since the End of the Cold War 39
Patrol Corvette Project with Signature of Modular and Multirole
Patrol Corvette Contract’, 25 October 2023, https://www.naval-
group.com/en/launching-first-phase-european-patrol-corvette-
project-signature-modular-and-multirole-patrol.
147 Tim Fish, ‘Make or Break: Can the European Patrol Corvette
Programme Save Shipbuilding in Europe?’, Shephard
Media, 28 November 2023, https://www.shephardmedia.
com/news/naval-warfare/make-or-break-will-the-european-
patrol-corvette-programme-become-the-standard-bearer-for-
defence-pro/.
148 UK Government, ‘PM Announces New International
Coalition to Develop the Next Generation of Combat
Aircraft’, 9 December 2022, https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/pm-announces-new-international-
coalition-to-develop-the-next-generation-of-combat-aircraft.
149 The three countries are pursuing other next-generation
aerosapce systems separately.
150 Polish Armament Agency, ‘Czołgi, haubice i samoloty z
Korei dla Sił Zbrojnych RP’ [Tanks, howitzers and planes
from Korea for the Polish armed forces], 27 July 2022,
https://www.wojsko-polskie.pl/au/articles/aktualnosci/
czolgi-haubice-i-samoloty-z-korei-dla-sil-zbrojnych-rp/.
151 IISS, Military Balance+, accessed 17 June 2024.
152 Burak Ege Bekdil, ‘Turkish Firm to Sell Drones to Ukraine
in $69 Million Deal’, Defense News, 14 January 2019,
https://www.defensenews.com/unmanned/2019/01/14/
turkish-firm-to-sell-drones-to-ukraine-in-69-million-deal/.
153 Ukraine, Ministry of Defence, ‘Corvettes and Combat Drones
- Ministry of Defence Has Concluded Direct Agreements
with Turkish Companies - Andrii Taran’, 15 December
2020, https://web.archive.org/web/20210120142002/https://
www.mil.gov.ua/en/news/2020/12/15/corvettes-and-
combat-drones-ministry-of-defence-has-concluded-direct-
agreements-with-turkish-companies-andrii-taran/; and
Kadriye Elif Cantürk, ‘Ukrayna’nın ilk Milgem gemisi seyir
denemesinde’ [Ukraine’s first Milgem ship in sea trials],
DefenceTurk.net, 30 May 2024, https://www.defenceturk.net/
ukraynanin-ilk-milgem-gemisi-seyir-denemesinde.
154 NATO, ‘Trilateral Memorandum’, June 2022, https://www.
nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/2022/6/pdf/220628-
trilat-memo.pdf.
155 Jonathan Spicer, ‘US Envoy Sees Rapid F-16s Sale to Turkey
after Sweden NATO Bid Sign-off’, Reuters, 25 January 2024,
https://www.reuters.com/world/us-envoy-sees-rapid-f-16s-
sale-turkey-after-sweden-nato-bid-sign-off-2024-01-25/;
and Defense Security Cooperation Agency, ‘Türkiye – F-16
Aircraft Acquisition and Modernization’, 26 January 2024,
https://www.dsca.mil/press-media/major-arms-sales/
turkiye-f-16-aircraft-acquisition-and-modernization.
156 Baykar (@BaykarTech), post on X, 18 July 2023, https://x.com/
BaykarTech/status/1681232192159076353.
157 Burak Ege Bekdil, ‘Turkish “Brain Drain”: Why Are
Defense Industry Officials Ditching Their Jobs in Turkey
for Work Abroad?’, Defense News, 8 January 2019, https://
www.defensenews.com/industry/2019/01/08/turkish-
brain-drain-why-are-defense-industry-officials-ditching-
their-jobs-in-turkey-for-work-abroad/; and Marc Jones,
‘TRYing Times: the Slide and Fall of the Turkish Lira’,
Reuters, https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/
trying-times-slide-fall-turkish-lira-2023-06-07/.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
The Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research (CFPPR) aims to develop agendas and pro-
mote policies that contribute to the peaceful resolution of international and inter-communal
conflicts, particularly in the regions surrounding Turkey, through analyzing and interpreting
contemporary policies from a critical, comparative, but also constructive, and peace-oriented
perspective. Together with All Azimuth, it provides a platform for homegrown international
relations and foreign policy research conceptualizations
The Centre for Applied Turkey Studies (CATS) at the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik (SWP)
in Berlin is funded by Stiftung Mercator and the Federal Foreign Office. CATS is the curator of
the CATS Network, an international network of think tanks and research institutions working on
Turkey. ‘National Defence Industry: From an Enabler of Turkey’s Pursuit of Strategic Autonomy
to a Bridge between Turkey and Europe’ is a project of CATS Network.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) is an international institute that owes
allegiance to no government. It is a registered UK charity and company. Its core objective is to
promote the development of sound policies that further global peace and security, and maintain
civilised international relations. IISS experts work from five offices in London, Washington DC,
Berlin, Bahrain and Singapore. They carry out fact-based research, convene and frame discus -
sions, and produce publications including The Military Balance, the definitive annual assessment
of defence capabilities, and Survival, the global politics and strategy journal. The IISS organises
and convenes conferences including the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue and IISS Manama Dialogue,
world-leading forums for the discussion of security issues. IISS research helps governments,
academics, the media and the private sector.
Bilkent
Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
İhsan Doğramaci Peace Foundation
