
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial
Relationships with Other
European States
Tom Waldwyn

With contributions from Guillem Colom-Piella, Davis Ellison, Andrea Gilli, Mauro Gilli, Patrice
Moyeuvre, Simona R. Soare and Konrad Zasztowt
September 2024
The International Institute
for Strategic Studies
Bilkent
Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
İhsan Doğramaci Peace Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Acknowledgements
This paper is a part of ‘National Defence Industry: From an Enabler of Turkey’s Pursuit of Strategic Autonomy to a Bridge
between Turkey and Europe’, a joint project between the Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research (CFPPR) and the
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS). The project is supported by the Centre for Applied Turkey Studies (CATS).
Disclaimers
The views outlined in this paper are exclusively those of the authors and do not represent institutional views of the
CFPPR or the IISS.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Cover
A T129 ATAK helicopter, based on the Leonardo A129 Mangusta, takes part in the EFES-2024 exercise, 27 May 2024
Contents
Executive Summary 2
Introduction 3
Section 1: Turkiye’s Bilateral Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 4
Section 2: France 6
Section 3: Italy 9
Section 4: The Netherlands 12
Section 5: Poland 15
Section 6: Romania 17
Section 7: Spain 19
Section 8: United Kingdom 22
Conclusion 24
Notes 25

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
2 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Executive Summary
Turkiye’s defence-industrial relationships with key
European partners have changed over time. In the
1980s Turkiye pursued joint ventures with foreign firms
to procure equipment and develop defence-industrial
capability. Although the most significant of these were
the agreements with US firms to set up F-16 fighter-
aircraft assembly in Turkiye, many projects were pur-
sued with European companies, including for aircraft,
guided weapons and communications equipment.
From 2004, Turkiye changed its approach to focus more
on acquiring locally developed equipment. Many of
these platforms were either designed with assistance
from foreign firms or were fitted with their subsystems,
although over the past two decades Turkiye has been
seeking to replace the latter with its own systems.
Over the last four decades, and in some cases for even
longer, French, Italian, Dutch, Spanish and British compa-
nies have been important in supporting Turkish defence-
industrial objectives. Today, however, some of those
companies are less involved than they were previously, due
to a series of political disagreements between Ankara and
their respective national governments. The main causes of
discord have been Turkiye’s military operations in Syria
since 2016, particularly the 2019 Operation Peace Spring,
and its acquisition of the Russian Almaz-Antey S-400 air-
defence system in 2017. Due to these political differences,
France’s and the Netherlands’ levels of defence-industrial
engagement with Turkiye are now at historic low points.
By contrast, although Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom
share many of these concerns and have at times limited
defence exports to Turkiye, they largely seek to engage
with Turkiye as an important NATO ally that has a key role
in security matters in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
This includes seeking defence-industrial opportunities,
such as the design support for Turkiye’s Anadolu amphibi-
ous assault ship and Kaan fighter-aircraft programmes pro-
vided by Spanish company Navantia and the UK’s BAE
Systems, respectively.
Meanwhile, Turkiye’s defence-industrial relation-
ships with Eastern European states such as Poland and
Romania are in their early stages, with Turkiye the sup-
plier of defence equipment rather than the customer.
Although these countries share many policy concerns
with their allies in other parts of Europe, the threat they
face from Russia, which they regard as existential, has
pushed them towards greater engagement with Turkiye
in defence and security.
The countries analysed in this report have assessed
Turkiye’s defence industry to have strong capabili-
ties, particularly in aerospace and electronics. Turkish
equipment is now often combat proven, of good qual-
ity, low cost, and sold with few or no end-user restric-
tions. This makes Turkish products competitive on the
export market against traditional suppliers. While some
European companies now consider Turkish firms to be
potential competitors in certain markets, other compa-
nies – particularly from Italy, Spain and the UK – see
opportunities to collaborate and achieve joint success
in export markets where Turkiye has sold equipment
recently, such as Africa, Central Asia, the Middle East
and Southeast Asia.
Turkiye’s participation in the A400M transport-aircraft
project is the country’s most significant involvement in a
European multinational programme to date. However, it
is unlikely that future engagement with Turkiye will take
place in a similar multinational format. Instead, efforts
will probably proceed in a bilateral manner with individ-
ual countries supporting Turkish projects or collaborat-
ing with its industry to export to third countries, or with
Turkiye beginning to make further export inroads with
other European states. While many of the EU member
states examined in this report are keen to pursue these
avenues, Ankara may have to navigate a situation where
EU-supported projects or initiatives designed to encour-
age joint procurement by members will have the effect of
discouraging collaboration with Turkiye. Other avenues
outside the bilateral format, such as the Organisation for
Joint Armament Cooperation (OCCAR) and the NATO
Support and Procurement Agency (NSPA), could repre-
sent more viable options for Turkiye.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 3
As Turkiye’s defence-industrial capability and require-
ments have developed over the last four decades, its
relationship with European partners has changed, with
foreign companies adapting their offers over time. After
initially selling off-the-shelf equipment directly from their
own production lines or facilitating licensed production
in Turkiye, those European companies established joint
ventures (JVs) with Turkish firms to produce equipment
locally through technology transfer. Then, more recently,
many have moved towards providing design support or
key subsystems and subcomponents for Turkish designs.
Beginning in the 1980s under the liberalising economic
policies of Turgut Özal, Turkiye pursued a strategy of
acquiring equipment through JVs with foreign companies.
The most significant of these were the series of deals, start-
ing in 1983, that established final assembly in Turkiye of the
F-16 Fighting Falcon through the Turkish Aircraft Industries
(now Turkish Aerospace Industries, TAI) JV between US
firm General Dynamics and Turkish Aerospace (Türk
Uçak Sanayii Anonim Ortaklığı, TUSAŞ).1 In the period up
to 2004, European firms from France, the Netherlands and
the UK would also establish JVs with Turkish partners,
either to manufacture equipment directly for the Turkish
armed forces or to partner with Turkish firms in setting
up production of their equipment locally. These included
the licensed production of French AS532AL/UL Cougar
helicopters, through the EUROTAI JV between TAI and
Eurocopter (now Airbus Helicopters), Rapier air-defence
systems through cooperation between BAe Dynamics
(now part of MBDA) and several Turkish firms, and TAI
licensed production of Construcciones Aeronáuticas
(CASA) CN235 transport aircraft.
Since 2004, in order to boost defence-industrial
autonomy, Turkiye has changed its approach to focus
on acquiring domestically designed equipment, devel-
oped either independently or in partnership with for-
eign firms. Examples of the former include the MilGem
corvette and the Bayraktar TB2 uncrewed aerial vehi-
cle (UAV); the latter include the T129 ATAK attack
helicopter developed with AgustaWestland (now
Leonardo Helicopters), Navantia’s support for the TCG
Anadolu amphibious assault vessel, and BAE Systems’
design work for the Kaan multi-role fighter aircraft.
Where Turkiye has not developed local alternatives,
it has acquired foreign subsystems, for example tur-
bojet engines for Turkish missile programmes from
Microturbo, or Rolls-Royce MTU diesel engines from
Germany for Turkish naval vessels.
Throughout these two periods, Turkiye has prin-
cipally partnered with France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, Spain, the UK and the US. Israeli firms
also featured from the mid-1990s to 2009, and Korean
firms enjoyed some success in the Turkish market in
the 2000s. More recently, a surge in exports since 2019 –
initially driven by the widespread sale of armed UAVs
to the Middle East and Africa, and now broadening
to include other systems such as corvettes and guided
weapons – has seen Turkiye engage with other coun-
tries as a supplier of its own equipment. The custom-
ers for these systems now include Eastern European
countries such as Estonia, Poland and Romania, who
are now beginning to engage with Turkiye as a supplier
capable of meeting their defence-modernisation needs.
This report features contributions from specialists
providing the perspectives of seven countries: France,
Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Spain and the
UK. These states either have, have had, or could in the
future have significant defence-industrial relationships
with Turkiye, and examining their respective situations
gives us a sense of the range of perspectives towards
Turkiye among European countries. Based on a variety of
sources, including interviews with industrialists and offi-
cials, the report provides an overview of these countries’
defence-industrial relationships with Turkiye and how
they have changed over time. It also discusses how those
countries perceive Turkiye’s defence-industrial capabil-
ity, and how their respective degrees of political friction
with Ankara impact defence cooperation. Finally, the
report looks at how Turkiye is seen as either a potential
defence partner or as a competitor for exports, or both.
Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
France and the UK have long histories of defence-
industrial engagement with Turkiye as suppliers of
equipment, dating back to the Ottoman period, while
Italy, the Netherlands and Spain began their defence-
industrial relationships with Turkiye at different points
in the last 50 years. Whereas Italian, Spanish and UK
companies continue to seek opportunities in Turkiye,
French and Dutch engagement appears either to be
waning or at a standstill. By contrast, Turkish compa-
nies have been interested in the Polish and Romanian
markets for some time but only recently secured their
first successes: the Bayraktar TB2 UAV was sold to
Poland in 2021 and to Romania in 2023, with deals for
sales of other types of equipment to Romania likely to
follow soon.
Many officials and industrialists in the states fea-
tured in this report acknowledge the rapid pace of
Turkiye’s defence-industrial development and speak
of its competencies in the aerospace and defence-elec-
tronics sectors in particular, as well as the broader engi-
neering skills that the Turkish workforce possesses.
The Defence Industry Agency (Savunma Sanayii
Başkanlığı, SSB), Turkiye’s procurement organisation,
is assessed to be key to this process not only in terms
of managing programmes but also through its leading
role in planning the broader defence-industrial effort.
However, concerns about aggressive offset require-
ments, political influence in the procurement process
and unpredictable or controversial actions in the for-
eign-policy sphere act as constraints on many compa-
nies’ engagement with Turkiye.
Generally, despite the increasing difficulties due to
foreign-policy divergences, Turkiye is viewed as a valu-
able NATO ally with a key role in security dynamics
in the Balkans, the Black Sea, Eastern Europe and the
Middle East. European partners appreciated Turkiye’s
closing of the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits to for-
eign warships in February 2022, and its role in facilitat-
ing the Black Sea grain deal in July 2022. Also, in some
European states, changes in policy towards formal
recognition of a Palestinian state may see greater align-
ment with Turkiye on that issue going forward.
As for the foreign-policy disagreements, all states in
this report took issue with Turkiye’s acquisition of the
Russian S-400 (RS-SA-21 Growler) surface-to-air missile
(SAM) system in 2017, which appeared to mark a move-
ment away from NATO allies in Ankara’s foreign-policy
and defence trajectories. Since the 2016 coup attempt,
the Turkish government has adopted a more assertive
foreign policy that has often sought to deal with secu-
rity threats through military means. A prime exam-
ple is Turkiye’s operations in northeastern Syria since
2016, particularly the Operation Peace Spring mission in
2019, which have also strained ties with other European
states. Some countries, such as France, have chosen to
make public their disagreements with Ankara, whereas
others, such as the UK, have opted to keep disagree-
ments private in the hope of having a more constructive
relationship. Other areas of concern include Turkiye’s
bilateral relationship with Russia more broadly, its
slowness in ratifying Sweden’s NATO candidacy, its
military activity in Libya, and its energy exploration in
the Eastern Mediterranean. Operation Peace Spring and
the gas exploration resulted in many European states
restricting export licences to Turkiye for several years,
often on a case-by-case basis.
Eastern European states such as Poland and Romania
are also concerned with some of these issues, but because
of their geographical proximity to Russia and the exis-
tential threat they perceive, security issues in Eastern
Europe and the Black Sea have taken precedence in
their respective dialogues with Ankara. Because of this,
Poland and Romania see their current bilateral relations
with Turkiye as largely positive and constructive, and
there are hopes that a trilateral format may emerge even
if many bilateral defence-industrial initiatives have yet
to take off.
Turkish defence equipment is widely seen as being
affordable and of increasingly good quality. Also, it
has few end-user restrictions, and in many cases it
1. Turkiye’s Bilateral Defence-industrial
Relationships with Other European States

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 5
is combat proven. These factors combine to make it
attractive on the export market and mean that even
if Turkish designs are not judged to be of the same
technical quality as some of their European competi-
tors, they are still competitive. Over the last five years
Turkiye has enjoyed significant success with UAV
exports, and a growing portfolio in other domains,
such as land and naval systems, could mean greater
competition for European companies going forward.
However, there are also opportunities for Turkish and
other European companies to combine expertise, some
of which are currently being exploited. For example,
in 2024, Otokar and Leonardo have showcased a
light-tank offer. At the same time, foreign companies
remain concerned about Turkiye’s aggressive offset
policies, the potential for political interference when
privately owned companies have been contracted,
high inflation, a ‘brain drain’ causing highly trained
Turkish staff to leave the country, and an unpredict-
able foreign policy that can make long-term engage-
ment more difficult.
Italy, Spain and the UK are the European countries
most open to supporting Turkish defence-modernisation
ambitions, and the most able to do so. Companies from
those three countries are also the most disposed to col-
laborate with Turkish firms in seeking opportunities in
other markets. However, these initiatives would proba-
bly be on a bilateral basis and there is no sense at present
that they would be multinational programmes aimed
at meeting the equipment requirements of all parties,
like the A400M transport-aircraft programme in which
Turkiye participates with six other European countries.
The proposed Eurofighter Typhoon deal would repre-
sent a rare sale of equipment to Ankara from a foreign
production line and would be a major investment by
Turkiye in its defence relationships with Italy, Spain and
the UK, as well as with Germany. In a reverse of those
dynamics, Poland and Romania, particularly the latter,
see potential for Turkiye to support their own defence
and industrial needs, although so far there is little to
show for it.
Another likely avenue will be partnerships at
the industrial level whereby Turkish companies are
included in the supply chains of other European com-
panies and vice versa. Here, some countries, such as
the UK, see mutual benefit in partnering with Turkiye
to exploit each other's technical strengths and to build
on each other’s success in selling to certain other coun-
tries. Turkiye’s recent sales to countries in Africa,
Central Asia and Southeast Asia are seen as presenting
such opportunities.
The EU member states analysed in this report
strongly support recent EU initiatives to encourage
joint procurement and strengthen the ‘European
defence technological and industrial base’, which
naturally includes their own firms. 2 It is likely that
such mechanisms will continue and be expanded
in the future, as proposed by the EU Commission.
This represents a problem for Turkiye, and other
non-members of the EU, as it may shift the incen-
tives for member states away from cooperating with
third parties even if, as in the case of Romania, they
are keen to work more closely with Turkiye. There
are other avenues however, such as the six-nation
Organisation for Joint Armament Cooperation
(OCCAR), the defence-programme-management
body through which Turkiye has acquired the
A400M, and NATO, through the NATO Support and
Procurement Agency (NSPA). 3 These could be more
viable options for Ankara in terms of other avenues
for partnering with European states on equipment
programmes, outside the purely bilateral approaches.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
6 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Patrice Moyeuvre, Associate Research Fellow,
The French Institute for International and
Strategic Affairs (IRIS)
Franco-Turkish relations in the field of armaments have
a long historical background that dates back to the late
Ottoman period, although they were interrupted by the
two world wars. More recently, French defence exports
to Turkiye have been extensive both in terms of quantity
and variety, reflecting the broad capabilities of France’s
defence industry.
In the land domain, French industry has been con-
tracted to support Turkish armoured-vehicle and
guided-weapon programmes. A contract for the deliv-
ery of 515 Dragar vehicle turrets and 575 M-811 25mm
cannons was concluded in 1992 between GIAT and
Turkish company FNSS, a JV between Nurol Holding
and US firm FMC, whose defence business is now part
of BAE Systems. 4 The turrets and cannons were man-
ufactured under licence by, respectively, Nurol and
the Mechanical and Chemical Industry Corporation
(Makine ve Kimya Endüstrisi, MKE). However, the pro-
gramme experienced manufacturing difficulties, such as
the discovery of cracks on the turrets. Similarly, starting
in 1998, MKE produced 19,200 Eryx anti-tank missiles
and 1,600 launchers under licence from Aérospatiale.
However, according to Turkish sources, some of the
munitions were defective and did not reach their tar-
gets, resulting in Turkiye terminating the contract.
In the maritime domain, Turkiye acquired a variety
of ships that had previously been in service with the
French Navy, before it developed a more capable naval
shipbuilding industry able to construct its own designs.
In the 1970s, seven French-built mine-countermeasures
vessels were transferred to Turkiye by France and
Germany. Five Circé-class minehunters were acquired
by the Turkish Naval Forces (TNF) between 1998 and
1999, followed by six D’Estienne d’Orves-class corvettes
between 2000 and 2002. More recently, Turkiye con-
tracted Thales in 2002 to provide nine AMASCOS mar-
itime-surveillance systems for the CN235 aircraft-based
Meltem II programme: six of them for TNF and three for
the Turkish Coast Guard. The TNF’s follow-on Meltem
III programme, based on Italian ATR-72 aircraft and
contracted in 2008, saw Thales deliver a further ten
AMASCOS systems. However, Meltem II was delayed
by five years, resulting in Turkiye imposing financial
penalties on Thales.
The wide variety extends to the aerospace domain.
In the 1990s, Eurocopter sold 50 AS532 Cougar helicop-
ters in two separate contracts: 20 AS532UL Cougar Mk
1 helicopters in 1993 for the Turkish Army’s Phénix 1
programme and 30 AS532AL/UL Cougar Mk 1s in 1997
for the air force and army’s Phénix 2 programme. The
latter programme saw TAI produce most of the helicop-
ters under licence. Also, 14 French TRS-22XX deploy-
able radars were produced between 1992 and 1997
by the JV between Thomson Tekfen Radar Sanayi ve
Ticaret (TTR) (now Havelsan Teknoloji Radar (HTR))
and Thomson-CSF (now Thales). Elsewhere, from 2007,
Thales contributed to the development of the T129
ATAK attack helicopter with its TopOwl Helmet-Mounted
Sight & Display in partnership with ASELSAN.
Since the 1970s the Turkish Air Force has operated
the Franco-German C-160D Transall (although the air-
craft were acquired from Germany rather than France),
which it is now replacing with A400M heavy airlifters.
France, through Aérospatiale, had a significant role in
the efforts that led to that aircraft, with Turkiye com-
mitting in the late 1990s to acquire ten A400Ms. The ten
aircraft included in the 2003 production contract were
subsequently delivered between 2013 and 2022. The
A400M represents the most significant multinational
programme featuring both Paris and Ankara, and is
managed through OCCAR.
In the space domain, French companies, with Italian
partners, have manufactured satellites for commercial
and/or military use for Turkiye for about 30 years, going
2. France

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 7
back to the Türksat-1 series of communications satellites
built by Aérospatiale in the 1990s. In 2009 Turkiye signed
a contract with the Franco-Italian JV Telespazio for the
development of the Göktürk-1 optical-observation satellite,
in which another Franco-Italian JV, Thales Alenia Space,
was also involved.5 Significantly, on the Turkish side, the
firms involved included ASELSAN, Roketsan and TAI.
Two Türksat-5 communications satellites launched in 2021
have taken this a step further, with an ASELSAN payload
integrated into an Airbus satellite bus in Toulouse.
One significant area of recent cooperation has been
air and missile defence. Turkiye launched the Improved
Long-range Air-defence System/Long-range Regional
Air- and Missile-defence System (Geliştirilmiş Uzun
Menzilli (Hava Savunma) Sistemi/Uzun Menzilli
Bölgesel Hava ve Füze Savunma Sistemi, GUMS/
UMBHFSS) programme in 2016 through ASELSAN and
Roketsan. In parallel, these companies partnered with
Eurosam, a JV between Thales and the French and Italian
elements of MBDA, on the development of a new high-
altitude missile-defence system, with Turkiye awarding
a definition study contract to the three companies in
2018.6 Public announcements at that time stated that the
intention was for this to lead to a joint three-nation pro-
gramme that would be ready for operations by the mid-
2020s. This cooperation work continues but has not yet
yielded results, following on from the failure of the sale
of Eurosam’s SAMP/T air-defence system and Turkiye’s
acquisition of the S-400.
The strength of Turkiye’s defence industry lies in its
centralised organisation and planning. With the SSB
placed under the direct responsibility of the Presidency
of the Republic since 2018, the needs expressed by the
armed forces are taken into consideration at the high-
est level of the state and are subject to a rigorous plan-
ning system. This structure has contributed to a rapid
increase in the number of equipment projects: in 2002
there were 62 but in 2024 there are more than 1,000, col-
lectively worth USD96 billion, according to President
Erdoğan.7 Many of these systems are combat proven
and the prices remain affordable. This has resulted in
increased exports, with 230 types of equipment sold to
185 countries in 2023 for a total of USD5.5bn, according
to official figures.8
With regard to many systems, however, Turkiye has
not yet achieved complete technological mastery because
they are being manufactured through technology transfer.
Turkiye declares that it is largely autonomous in its defence-
industrial capability, with 85% of its defence equipment
manufactured domestically according to official figures,
but it still depends on foreign firms for some advanced tech-
nologies, such as engines and missile-defence capabilities.9
(ADEM ALTAN/AFP via Getty Images)
A Turkish Army AS532 Cougar takes part in an exercise in Northern Cyprus, June 2019

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
8 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
In Paris, Turkiye does not inspire political confi-
dence. There are many frictions between the two coun-
tries, such as over recognition of the Armenian genocide
and French concerns about human rights. Having
engaged more closely with Armenia and Greece in
recent years, France no longer has a high-level dialogue
with Turkiye on armaments issues. And since Turkiye’s
2019 Operation Peace Spring in northeastern Syria, France
has approved export licences on a case-by-case basis,
due mainly to fears that equipment will be transferred
to third parties. As for the sale of weapons systems to
Turkiye, France no longer authorises them. As a result,
Turkiye only ranked 30th among the buyers of French
arms exports during the period 2013–22.10
Today, bilateral cooperation between the French and
Turkish governments on weapons programmes is close
to zero. French small and medium-sized enterprises
therefore have the best sales potential either directly
or in partnership with Turkish companies, especially
if their activities do not require export authorisation.
The most significant exchanges take place within the
framework of NATO, but French companies participate
regularly in arms fairs in Turkiye, and vice versa, and
there are also some partnership mechanisms between
professional groups. There is potential for coopera-
tion and export opportunities in the aerospace sector,
including sharing lessons learned during UAV opera-
tions, and also in meeting Turkiye’s requirement for a
replacement for its KC-135R Stratotanker tanker aircraft.
It is possible that cooperation in these areas will help to
improve broader relations between the two countries.
When it comes to competition between French and
Turkish defence exporters, it is notable that the lat-
ter do not face the numerous restrictions and onerous
processes involved in the granting of export licences
in France. The land sector is the principal arena for
competition, given the extensive portfolio of systems
the Turkish defence industry has developed. Turkish
companies are currently judged not to be matching the
technical level of their French counterparts in the naval,
aerospace (with the exception of UAVs) and space sec-
tors. The same is true of the Turkish defence-electronics
sector, despite recent progress by companies such as
ASELSAN and HAVELSAN.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 9
Andrea Gilli, Lecturer, University of
St Andrews & Mauro Gilli, Senior
Researcher, ETH-Zurich
Since the 1967 Cyprus crisis and the embargoes on
Turkiye that followed its 1974 invasion of Northern
Cyprus, Italy has become a leading supplier of mili-
tary equipment to Turkiye. In 2022, Turkiye was the
leading destination for Italian defence-export authori-
sations (EUR598.2m (USD630.43m)), and the sixth in
2023 (EUR231.3m (USD250.17m)). 11 These sales have
largely consisted of the delivery of four types of mate-
riel: aircraft, particularly helicopters (such as the ATR-
72 turboprop aircraft and the AW109, AB-212/412 and
T129 ATAK attack helicopters); naval guns (such as Oto
Melara’s series of 76mm systems); military and dual-use
satellites (often through French–Italian JVs); and guided
weapons for naval vessels (such as the A244 lightweight
torpedo and the Aspide SAM). Italian industry has also
supplied subsystems for Turkish systems that are then
exported to third parties, such as Leonardo’s Osprey
30 radars for the Bayraktar TB2 UAVs purchased by
Poland.12 These transfers have typically been processed
through two types of programme: direct sale from an
Italian production line (as in the case of the AB-212/412)
or licensed production of a Turkish version of an Italian
design (the Dost-class coastguard patrol ships and the
T129 ATAK helicopter, for example).
Defence-industrial relations between Italy and
Turkiye are seen in broadly positive terms. However,
observers stress that political dynamics have often
played an important role in shaping those relations. The
success of the Italy–Turkiye partnership, and also the
surrounding dynamics, is probably best illustrated by
the ATAK programme.
After the programme was launched in 1996 with a
request for proposals (RFP) for 145 attack helicopters
through licensed production, Italy’s AgustaWestland was
initially unsuccessful, partly because of a political crisis
between Rome and Ankara over Italy’s refusal to extra-
dite Abdullah Öcalan, the then-leader of the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (Partiya Karkerên Kurdistanê, PKK), dur-
ing his brief stay in the country in 1998–99. The situation
soon changed, however. Turkiye became an official can-
didate for EU membership in 1999, and in 2001 the newly
elected Italian government of Silvio Berlusconi threw its
weight behind the candidacy. Following the cancellation
of the first ATAK programme, a new RFP was issued in
2006; AgustaWestland emerged as the winner with its
A129 Mangusta, and in 2007 Turkiye contracted TAI for
the first batch of T129 helicopters.
The ATAK program is largely seen as a success because
of the significant transfer of technology, made possible by
Turkiye’s solid science and technology base and the close
working relations between Italian and Turkish engineers,
and because of the T129’s export successes in Nigeria and
the Philippines. The programme played a major part in
establishing the Turkish helicopter industry, which now
works on indigenous designs such as Gökbey.
Other successful projects in recent years have
included Fincantieri supporting Turkish construction of
four Dost-class patrol ships for the Turkish Coast Guard;
the work by Vitrociset, now part of Leonardo, on a digi-
tal data-acquisition system, on command and commu -
nication centres, and in consulting for the Turkish space
programme; and Leonardo’s provision of technologies
for maritime and airborne traffic control.13
Because of this record of success, Italian industrial-
ists and officials view Turkiye as an attractive market.
This is due to several factors, including strong growth in
Turkish defence spending; a solid science and technology
base, with significant investment in defence electronics;
and Turkish experience in working through JVs and with
foreign partners. Turkiye’s defence-procurement agency,
the SSB, is well regarded by Italian officials who have
experience of working with it.
However, these positives are balanced by concerns
about Turkiye’s limited research-and-development
3. Italy

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
(R&D) budget, which is spread across many projects,
and the significant demands regarding intellectual
property rights, technology transfer and industrial
returns that Turkiye demands when negotiating deals.
Furthermore, many interlocutors privately assessed
that political connections sometimes play an important
role in determining contracts involving private-sector
companies. This poses a risk to Italian companies, as
a Turkish company that they engage with could sub-
sequently fall out of favour. Several interlocutors were
also unsure whether Turkiye will be able to maintain
its strong defence-spending growth, given rampant
inflation rates and the fiscal pressure caused by socio-
economic issues that may require additional funding.
Turkiye’s growing defence exports to, and broader
engagement with, states in Africa, Central Asia and the
Middle East might also create risk, depending on how
those systems are used.
On many issues, such as concerns over Turkish sup-
port for Azerbaijan’s offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh,
Italy shares the same ambitions, goals and interests as
its EU partners. Italy often seems content to let other
European states take the lead on contentious areas
with Turkiye, and therefore its disagreements with
Turkiye can be understood within that broader con-
text. However, some of these issues – such as the earlier
stages of the civil war in Libya, or energy exploration in
the Eastern Mediterranean – are deeper or more acute,
and impinge more directly on Italian security concerns.
Some divergences between Italy and Turkiye – such
as on relations with Israel, and Turkish activity in the
Horn of Africa – do not seem to affect defence-industrial
relations. Others, however, have major implications.
This has been the case, for example, with Turkiye’s
acquisition of the Russian S-400 air-defence system;
Turkiye’s operations in Libya and Syria, which led to
the interruption of some projects and the derailing of
others, as in the case of Italian and French cooperation
with Turkiye on air and missile-defence; concerns about
potential arms exports from Turkiye to third countries;
and Turkiye’s slowness to ratify Sweden’s NATO acces-
sion. All these factors have influenced Italian views
about Turkiye’s participation in future NATO and mul-
tinational defence projects.14 Also, the two countries are
simultaneously seeking to exert influence in Africa and
the Eastern Mediterranean, although in some respects
their interests align – Italy sees the Turkish military
presence in Libya as a stabilising factor, for example,
and both countries have a strong interest in the territo-
rial integrity of Somalia.
Many Italian industrialists and officials believe there
is scope to further expand defence-industrial relations,
citing Turkiye’s recent defence-budget growth, its capa-
bility ambitions, and the defence-industrial capability
gaps that could be filled or at least partly addressed by
foreign partners. Areas of potential cooperation include
(Orhan Cicek/Anadolu via Getty Images)
A Turkish Naval Forces ATR-72-600 (P-72) anti-submarine-warfare aircraft

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 11
maritime search and rescue and underwater critical-
infrastructure security. Given that Italy has a leading
naval defence industry, and that Italy and Turkiye are
both Mediterranean powers, there would appear to be
potential for further cooperation in that sector. However,
according to some observers, the significant degree of
interdependence between the Italian and French naval
defence industries could represent a political barrier,
given the more complicated relations between Ankara
and Paris. An example of recent cooperation, in 2024, is
the unveiling of a light tank by Leonardo and Otokar,
combining the former’s turret with the latter’s vehicle.15
Furthermore, the Italian Air Force is seeking to acquire
Roketsan Cirit laser-guided rockets as part of its planned
acquisition of Leonardo’s Astore UAVs, in a rare example
of a potential Turkish defence export to a major European
defence-industrial country.16 As for competition from
Turkiye, the view from the industrialists and officials is
that the Turkish defence industry is focused largely on
sectors and markets different from those where Italian
companies’ efforts are concentrated. One possible excep-
tion, however, is the lucrative Middle East market, where
Turkiye’s greater willingness to transfer technology may
give its companies a competitive advantage.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Davis Ellison, Strategic Analyst, The Hague
Centre for Strategic Studies
To date, the defence-industrial relationship between
the Netherlands and Turkiye has generally been lim-
ited. Other than the sale of second-hand fighter air-
craft, bilateral trade in this sector has been largely
limited to the sale to Turkiye of Thales Nederland fire-
control and air-search radars, such as the SMART-S,
STIR, WM-25 and WM-28, for Turkish naval vessels. 17
In 1996 the TNF established a software-development
centre and sent engineers to work with Signaal (now
Thales Nederland) on combat-management systems,
forming the basis of Turkiye’s current know-how
in that area. 18 In the land domain, in the 1990s there
was the sale of infantry-fighting-vehicle turrets, sup-
plied by DAF for some of the vehicles in Turkiye’s
Armoured Combat Vehicle (Zırhlı Muharebe Aracı,
ZMA) project. These are now being replaced by a
Turkish alternative. 19 Technology-transfer arrange-
ments as part of these deals have contributed to the
improvement of Turkish defence-industrial capabili-
ties, with ASELSAN locally producing the SMART-S
air-surveillance radar for MilGem corvettes, among
other platforms, and having been integrated into the
Thales Nederland supply chain for the system. 20 In the
other direction, there are almost no Dutch imports of
Turkish defence equipment: the last purchase of note
was a 2005 deal to buy a small batch of Pedestal Mounted
Stinger air-defence systems from ASELSAN, to be fit-
ted onto Royal Netherlands Army Fennek armoured
vehicles.21 The current generation of Turkish naval ves-
sels are now being fitted with Turkish-sourced sensors
instead of the Dutch systems used on previous class-
es.22 Even the limited defence-equipment trade that
does still exist, then, appears to be waning.
The broader relationship between The Hague and
Ankara has been strained for years by a wide range of
issues. These include how Europe and Turkiye handle
refugees fleeing conflicts in the Middle East; Turkiye’s
EU candidacy, along with the wider EU–Turkiye
4. The Netherlands
relationship; Ankara’s refusal to recognise the Republic
of Cyprus; Dutch legislative recognition of the Armenian
genocide; and tensions related to President Erdoğan’s
Justice and Development Party (Adalet ve Kalkınma
Partisi, AKP) campaigning among the Turkish diaspora
in the Netherlands. On specific defence and security
issues, the Netherlands has regularly opposed Turkiye’s
military operations in Syria since 2016 and Ankara’s
support of Azerbaijan’s offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh
in 2020. Much of the Dutch–Turkish defence relation-
ship is mediated by shared membership in NATO.
The two countries’ limited defence-industrial
relations were frozen following the 2019 Operation
Peace Spring offensive into northeastern Syria. The
Netherlands joined other EU member states in effec-
tively suspending arms exports to Turkiye through
a comprehensive ‘presumption of denial’ approach
to any sale of materiel. 23 As a result, the already-
low value of defence-export licences issued by the
Netherlands for sales to Turkiye totalled a measly
EUR4.23m (USD4.56m) during 2020–22. 24 This restric-
tion was lifted in the summer of 2023, largely as part
of a normalisation of relations following Russia’s inva-
sion of Ukraine but also partially in service of Dutch
ambitions to join the 2021 France–Germany–Spain
arms-control agreement. 25 There is a politically pow-
erful lobby in the Netherlands against closer defence-
industrial ties with Turkiye, represented in large part
by the Foundation for the Campaign Against the Arms
Trade (Stichting Campagne tegen Wapenhandel)
pressure group. The anti-arms-exports groups in the
Netherlands are far more politically salient than in
many other NATO states and actively lobby parties in
parliament, although they have limited influence on
those currently in government. Turkiye has been a par-
ticular target of this campaigning, with the Erdoğan
government’s human-rights record being the main
point of contention. 26

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 13
In 2022, the Advisory Council on International
Affairs (Adviesraad Internationale Vraagstukken,
AIV) an independent body that provides analysis and
information to both the government and parliament,
authored a report that urged the government to con-
duct a thorough review of its relations with Ankara. 27
The main driver of the advice, unsurprisingly, was the
Russian invasion of Ukraine. In the advice, improved
bilateral defence relations were raised, though heavily
caveated in light of the above-mentioned tensions. It
noted that Turkish involvement in either the Permanent
Structured Cooperation (PESCO) projects or in any sub-
stantive EU–NATO cooperation is a non-starter due
to the Cyprus issue, which is unlikely to change soon.
However, the AIV did argue that the EU’s Schuman
Forum on defence and security partnerships, estab-
lished in 2023, could be a way to begin improving rela-
tions and discussing issues, and Turkish representatives
did in fact take part in the second iteration in 2024.28
In its response to the AIV report, the Dutch cabinet
concurred with the overall finding that while better
overall relations with Ankara do need to be a priority
in Dutch foreign policy, the wider political issues in the
relationship are preventing improvements in the bilat-
eral defence relationship. The government also noted
that Turkiye’s use of the Russian S-400 air-defence sys-
tem was an additional barrier to greater Dutch interest
in military exports and collaborative projects, due to
concerns regarding technological security.29
This advisory exchange preceded both the lifting of
export restrictions and the latest Dutch election in 2023.
Under the new government of Prime Minister Dick
Schoof there is a possible opening for some improved
bilateral defence-industrial cooperation. As the gov-
ernment is prioritising issues of asylum by increasing
resources and revisiting the legal regime surrounding
asylum policies, this could open doors to improved
practical relations with Ankara given Turkiye’s lynch-
pin role in that area. However, defence-industrial rela-
tions will remain only a subset of the two countries’
broader relations, which will continue to face major
structural hurdles.
The Dutch defence industry has remained hesi-
tant about exploring new opportunities to export to
(Berkan Cetin/Anadolu via Getty Images)
An Ada-class MilGem corvette, TCG Kınalıada, arrives in Tokyo, 12 June 2024. The class of vessels is fitted with Thales Nederland SMART-S
and Sting EO Mk2 radars.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
14 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Turkiye. One apparent indicator of this is the fact that
the Netherlands Industries for Defence & Security
(Nederlandse Industrie voor Defensie en Veiligheid,
NIDV), an industry representative body, has no pub-
licly available materials related to exporting to or col-
laborating with Turkiye and its defence industry. This
is unlikely to change without a more positive intergov-
ernmental signal, such as a Dutch–Turkish memoran-
dum of understanding on which longer-term defence
planning and manufacturing decisions could be based.
It should also be noted that the Netherlands is a strong
supporter of the new European Defence Industrial
Strategy, published in 2024, which has an explicit aim
of reducing member states’ dependence on third-coun-
try suppliers of defence materiel in favour of procuring
from other members. 30 There is not, therefore, a posi-
tive investment environment that might encourage
Dutch companies to look far outside their immediate
neighbourhood for markets.
Another issue is that several Dutch and Turkish com-
panies, principally in the shipbuilding and sensor sec-
tors, are now competitors in the export market. Damen
Shipyards Group and Thales Nederland have effective
monopolies in the Netherlands itself and have long-
standing relationships with Belgium, Germany and
the United Kingdom. However, Dutch exports further
afield, particularly to Gulf states and in the maritime-
subsystem market, will probably become more com-
petitive as Turkish companies seek to expand their
business there, often with government backing.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 15
Konrad Zasztowt, Assistant Professor,
Warsaw University
Although there have been attempts for over three dec-
ades to start projects, defence-industrial cooperation
between Poland and Turkiye is still in its early stages.
Turkish industry has shown great interest in the Polish
market, and company representatives have been pre-
sent at Poland’s annual International Defence Industry
Exhibition (Międzynarodowy Salon Przemysłu
Obronnego, MSPO) every year since the event began in
1993. Moreover, Turkiye is the only country in the his-
tory of the MSPO to have appeared at the fair twice (in
2013 and 2022) as the official leading exhibitor, which is
to say the country with the largest presence. 31 In 2022,
Turkiye’s and Poland’s defence ministers, Hulusi Akar
and Mariusz Błaszczak, made a joint visit to the event.
Talks between Polish and Turkish defence-industry
representatives have ranged over several potential fields
of cooperation. In most cases this has involved Turkish
companies offering to meet Polish objectives such as the
acquisition of air- and missile-defence systems, UAVs
and helicopters (such as the Turkish T129 ATAK); the
acquisition and upgrade of new submarines; Arma 6x6
armoured vehicles; satellite reconnaissance systems;
the modernisation of frigates and Leopard 2A4 tanks;
and servicing and logistics related to the F-16 and C-130
Hercules aircraft.32
Poland has also considered cooperation in the pro-
duction of guided anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles,
including for the modernisation of its Mi-24 Hind attack
helicopters, and the purchase of hulls for Krab tracked
howitzers from a Turkish manufacturer, but the projects
did not go ahead.33 Memoranda of understanding have
been signed between Polish and Turkish companies,
such as MESKO and Wojskowe Zakłady Lotnicze No.
1 on the Polish side, and ASELSAN, Roketsan and TAI
on the Turkish.34 Roketsan, for instance, has expressed
interest in participating in Poland’s Homar multiple
rocket launcher (MRL) programme, offering a guided
122mm rocket for the Polish WR-40 Langusta in 2017 at
the MSPO, but without success.35 Overall, most Turkish
companies have had little to show for their efforts.
One of the reasons for the lack of implementation of
proposed Polish–Turkish modernisation projects is the
Polish armed forces’ abandonment (gradual until 2022,
but more rapid since then) of Soviet-era equipment that
was to be improved with the help of Turkish companies.
Poland transferred much of that equipment to Ukraine
after the full-scale Russian invasion in February 2022. 36
Also, in recent years, successive Polish governments
have prioritised cooperation with companies from the
United States, the UK and, since 2022, South Korea.
So far, Poland–Turkiye defence-industrial coop-
eration has been mostly limited to Poland’s procure-
ment of Turkish UAVs. During a visit to Turkiye by
President Andrzej Duda in 2021, in the presence of
President Erdoğan, Poland contracted Baykar to supply
24 Bayraktar TB2 UAVs for approximately USD268m. 37
Deliveries have been made on schedule since 2022,
accompanied by ground-control stations, Leonardo
Osprey 30 active electronically scanned array radars,
simulators, and a training, logistics and weapons pack-
age.38 The Polish government’s decision to purchase the
Bayraktars was influenced by having seen the capability
of the TB2 UAVs in combat, but there was also a politi-
cal context: a desire to deepen bilateral cooperation
with Turkiye. More recently, Warsaw has hoped to step
up the trilateral discussions with Turkiye and Romania
that started in 2012. 39 These discussions are an impor-
tant element of Poland’s strategy to strengthen coopera-
tion between the countries on NATO’s eastern flank.40
As well as their geographical position on the eastern
edge of NATO, Poland and Turkiye also share views
on issues such as support for the territorial integrity of
states. On the other hand, the two countries have dif-
ferent threat perceptions. While the greatest threat to
Poland remains Russia, for Turkiye the conflicts in the
Middle East, including the current wars in Gaza and
5. Poland

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Syria, are more important. At the same time, successive
governments in Warsaw, both the United Right led by
Mateusz Morawiecki (prime minister from 2017–23) and
the Civic Coalition of Donald Tusk (prime minister since
2023), have maintained good relations with Ankara,
and Poland remains one of the biggest supporters of
Turkiye’s accession to the EU. None of the Polish politi-
cal parties is openly critical of Ankara’s Middle Eastern
policy or its policy towards the Kurdish minority. This
distinguishes Poland from Scandinavian countries such
as Sweden and Finland, which have significant Kurdish
immigrant populations and whose governments
emphasise human-rights issues, which have often been
a problem in their relations with Turkiye.
In recent years Poland’s leaders have begun to pay
more attention to the role of the defence industry as
a potential driver of economic growth and one of the
most important guarantors of national security. Polish
companies have been involved in a variety of mod-
ernisation projects across different sectors, with local
workshare and technology transfer prized in deals with
foreign firms.41 It is likely that the new government will
concentrate less on acquiring equipment off the shelf
from the United States and more on cooperating with
other European companies – especially French and
German ones, given the current revival of the Weimar
Triangle format (France–Germany–Poland). 42 Poland
has also invested heavily in South Korean defence
equipment, with industrial workshare included in the
deals. However, shared security interests in Eastern
Europe and the Black Sea could create opportunities for
Poland–Turkiye defence collaboration going forward.
(Polish Ministry of Defense/Handout/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images)
The first batch of Bayraktar TB2 UAVs is delivered to Poland, 28 October 2022

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 17
Simona R. Soare, Professor of Strategy and
Technology, Lancaster University
Romania and Turkiye are close trading partners, with
Romania the fourth-largest buyer of Turkish exports in
2023 (USD627.7m).43 Bucharest and Ankara are allies in
NATO and share a common interest in the stability and
security of the Black Sea, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and
the Western Balkans. Yet this remains an incomplete and
imperfect partnership, and Romanian political leaders
have occasionally acknowledged its limitations. Within
NATO, as well as on a regional level, Bucharest and Ankara
share important security, energy and trade interests, even
if the two capitals do not always share the same views on
relations with Russia, the Israel–Palestine conflict, counter-
terrorism efforts in the Middle East, or European restric-
tions on defence-industrial cooperation with Turkiye.
Within this context, defence-industrial collaboration
has not proceeded at the same pace as other areas of coop-
eration. This is explained both by structural factors, such as
Romania’s underdeveloped and under-resourced defence
industry and Bucharest’s off-the-shelf approach to defence
procurement, and strategic factors related to the consoli-
dation of the partnership between Romania and the US,
Germany and Israel in the last three decades. But things
may be about to change. Both sides hope that a growing
bilateral trade and greater security cooperation – includ-
ing through the trilateral security-consultation framework
between Romania, Poland and Turkiye, initiated in 2012,
and the trilateral demining initiative in the Black Sea – can
form the basis for more success going forward.44
Since 2022, Romania–Turkiye bilateral efforts have
sought to broaden defence-industrial cooperation. In
October 2023, on the celebration of 100 years of military
relations between the two countries, they signed a frame-
work agreement on military cooperation. This came
amid a series of reciprocal visits between Romanian and
Turkish high-level officials, which had started in 2022.45
The agreement is described as ‘reflect[ing] the current
level of military relations’ between the two countries,
but specific follow-up actions are yet to be defined.
Bucharest is particularly interested in collaboration
that incorporates significant technology-transfer and
localised-production elements, although low margins
and tough contract conditions on the Romanian side
have been obstacles in Romanian procurement and
collaboration efforts in the past. 46 One example is the
memorandum of understanding signed in late 2022 by
the Romanian state-owned defence company, Romarm,
and the Turkish defence company ASELSAN. 47 This is
expected to enable Romarm to acquire the technology to
produce guided weapons, including for air-defence sys-
tems and Romanian Piranha V infantry fighting vehicles.48
The 2023 procurement of 18 Bayraktar TB2 UAVs, worth
USD321m, and the ongoing negotiations over the pro-
curement of 1,059 light armoured vehicles, worth up to
ROM4.58bn (USD1bn), for which Otokar is the only bid-
der with its Cobra II, are more concrete examples of recent
Turkish–Romanian defence-industrial engagement.49
The most recent Romanian efforts to develop defence-
industrial cooperation with Turkiye are driven mainly
by changes in the regional security environment follow-
ing Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February
2022 and by Romania’s defence-modernisation pro-
gramme, which includes expanding the capabilities of
the Romanian defence industry. Furthermore, Romanian
overtures to Turkiye come against the background of the
rapid development of the Turkish defence industry and
Bucharest’s efforts to diversify its defence procurement
towards newcomers in the market.
Starting with the signature of the bilateral strategic
partnership between the two countries in 2011, both
the centre-right and centre-left Romanian governments,
and more broadly the Romanian parliament, have sup-
ported efforts to engage Turkiye in more meaningful
defence-industrial cooperation. Since 2022, high-level
Romanian officials have repeatedly restated the key role
of Turkiye in the region and emphasised that it is one of
Romania’s most important regional strategic partners.50
6. Romania

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
In May 2024, during a joint press conference with
President Erdoğan, Romanian Prime Minister Marcel
Ciolacu argued that Romania wanted ‘closer cooperation
with Turkiye in two domains which it considers strategic,
namely the defence industry and energy’.51 In June, the
defence minister, Angel Tilvar, underlined Bucharest’s
commitment to enhancing defence-industrial collabo-
ration with Ankara as a means to achieve the country’s
defence and industrial goals.52
It is notable that these steps forward are quite new. In
the defence-industrial arena over the last two decades, the
relationship between Romania and Turkiye has been spo-
radic, featuring more failures than successes. In the period
2014–15, for example, there were unsuccessful attempts by
Bucharest to engage Ankara in the upgrade and moderni-
sation of 12 F-16 Fighting Falcon fighter aircraft acquired
from Portugal, the upgrade of Gepard air-defence systems,
and technological cooperation in the development of
UAVs. The contract to upgrade the Romanian F-16s was
eventually won by Lockheed Martin.53
More broadly, however, Romania has shown a willing-
ness to expand its relationships beyond traditional partners
such as France, Germany, Israel and the US. For example,
turning down rival Western bids, in 2023 Romania acquired
Turkish Bayraktar TB2 UAVs (see above), and in July 2024 it
announced it had signed a USD1.04bn contract with South
Korea’s Hanwha Aerospace for the procurement of 54 K9
self-propelled howitzers.54 The latter contract includes local
production, technology transfer and the creation of a facil-
ity for maintenance, repair and overhaul.55 From Romania’s
perspective, it is usually the price point that has given these
new suppliers their competitive edge.
Bucharest is pragmatically seeking to consolidate for-
eign investment in and technology transfer to its defence
industry, with a view to increasing local production and
capability. This is largely because in recent years many
prospective investment contracts for Romania have gone
instead to its neighbour Hungary. Romania has also initi-
ated collaboration efforts with Turkiye and South Korea,
which it regards as two examples of rapid defence-
industrial development, and there has been some progress
in that respect. But in the last three years Bucharest has also
been aiming to increase engagement with other, more tra-
ditional defence suppliers, such as US, German, French
and Israeli companies. Furthermore, as cooperation inten-
sifies in the EU context through the deployment of com-
mon funding for R&D and joint procurement of munitions,
Bucharest will have greater financial incentives to enhance
cooperation with European, American and Israeli partners
that have agreed defence-industrial cooperation frame-
works with the EU. The fact that Ankara has not done so
will be a disincentive to work with Turkish companies.
(Marek Antoni Iwanczuk/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images)
The Turkish, Polish and Romanian foreign ministers hold a joint press conference, 26 June 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 19
Guillem Colom-Piella, Associate Professor,
Pablo de Olavide University
Turkiye is one of the most attractive markets for Spanish
defence manufacturers, with Spain authorising exports
of military equipment worth EUR6.11bn (USD6.59bn)
from 2013 to 2022, including EUR1.18bn (USD1.28bn)
in 2022 alone.56 The vast majority of this value has been
related to the multinational A400M heavy transport
aircraft, which is assembled in Spain. Broader trade
between the two states is projected to reach EUR20bn
(USD21.57bn) by 2024. 57 Spanish defence companies,
such as Navantia, have collaborated extensively with
Turkish firms on naval projects, including the construc-
tion of the Anadolu amphibious assault ship for the TNF.
Additionally, Ankara has imported a variety of Spanish
military technology and equipment, including aircraft
and naval systems, contributing to a generally positive
bilateral defence-industrial relationship.
Turkiye is a significant operator of the CASA (now
part of Airbus) CN235 aircraft in various configurations,
including transport, maritime patrol and maritime sur-
veillance. The Turkish Air Force, TNF and Turkish Coast
Guard collectively operate more than 50 CN235s. The
initial contracts were signed in the early 1990s, with the
aircraft being produced under licence by TAI. More sig-
nificantly, Turkiye is a key partner in the Airbus A400M
heavy transport aircraft. TAI has played an essential
role in the design and production of this transport air-
craft, manufacturing parts such as the forward centre
fuselage and tailcone for assembly by Airbus at the
San Pablo plant in Seville. Turkiye ordered ten A400M
planes in 2003, with final delivery completed in 2022. In
addition, in 2023, Turkiye began discussions to acquire
40 Eurofighter Typhoon fighter jets, following delays in
the acquisition of F-16 Fighting Falcons from the US. 58
This highlights Turkiye’s ongoing efforts to diversify
and modernise its military capabilities.59 Recently there
have been rumours of an exchange between the two
7. Spain
(Dogukan Keskinkilic/Anadolu via Getty Images)
The TCG Anadolu amphibious assault ship, based on Spain’s Navantia-designed Juan Carlos I, takes part in a naval parade off Northern
Cyprus, 20 July 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
countries involving 24 TAI Hürjet jet trainer aircraft
in return for six A400Ms, to replace the ageing F-5M
trainers in the Spanish Air Force. In this arrangement,
Spain would apparently finance the acquisition of these
planes through the sale of A400Ms via Airbus, making it
a trade transaction between the two countries. 60
Spain has also cultivated significant relationships
in the naval sector. State-owned company Navantia
provided design, technology transfer, equipment and
technical assistance to Turkiye’s Sedef Shipyard for
the construction of the amphibious assault ship TCG
Anadolu. Entering active service in 2023, the Anadolu is
based on the Spanish Navy’s Juan Carlos I. Negotiations
are under way for a second ship based on the same
design.61 Media sources also highlight ongoing discus-
sions between Navantia and the Turkish government
for the supply of new submarines and frigates, with
Navantia positioned as the project’s technological part-
ner. Notably, a high-level summit in June 2024 addressed
potential cooperation in the field of uncrewed underwa-
ter vehicles (UUVs) and UAVs, reflecting the evolving
nature of defence collaboration between the two states. 62
When assessing Turkiye’s defence-industrial strengths
and weaknesses, specific primary or secondary sources
are scarce. However, there is a general consensus within
the defence community regarding Turkiye’s significant
progress, emphasising self-reliance and the develop-
ment of indigenous technology. Key strengths include
advanced UAV technology, the production of armoured
vehicles, and a robust defence-manufacturing sector more
broadly.63 Despite these advances, Turkiye continues to
face challenges, such as reliance on certain foreign compo-
nents and the need for ongoing technological innovation.
Spain and Turkiye have had disagreements on
various foreign-policy issues, including Ankara’s
military operations in Syria and its maritime claims
in the Eastern Mediterranean. These have occasion -
ally impacted defence cooperation. Aligning with EU
policies, Spain has at times limited the sale of specific
defence equipment to Turkiye. However, these limita-
tions have generally been situational and specific rather
than comprehensive, indicating a nuanced approach to
maintaining the balance between cooperation and regu-
latory compliance. 64 Spanish recognition of a Palestinian
state may help to increase the strategic ties between the
two countries, at the expense of weakening the defence-
military relationship between Spain and Israel.
The likelihood of continued defence-industrial coop-
eration between Spain and Turkiye is high, particularly
on a bilateral basis in the naval and aerospace sectors. 65
Both countries could benefit from sharing technological
advances and cooperating to achieve greater access to
target export markets. Additionally, cooperation could
extend to multilateral frameworks within NATO, as
both countries are members and can contribute to joint
defence initiatives.
Turkish companies are likely to be strong competi-
tors in sectors such as UAVs, armoured vehicles, and
naval systems. Turkiye’s success in these areas is driven
by cost-effective production and robust performance,
making their products attractive to a wide range of buy-
ers. As Turkiye continues to enhance its defence-export
capabilities, Spanish companies may face competition in
markets such as Africa, the Middle East and Southeast
Asia, where Turkiye has been actively expanding its
defence sales.
Overall, the defence-industrial relationship between
Spain and Turkiye is complex, involving a mix of coop-
eration and competition. Both states have benefitted
from past collaboration, and despite occasional political
disagreements there is strong potential for future joint
projects and mutual growth in the defence sector.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 21
Tom Waldwyn, Research Associate for
Defence Procurement, IISS
Like France, the UK has a defence-industrial relation-
ship with Turkiye that dates back to the beginnings
of the republic and beyond. Ankara largely stopped
acquiring equipment from European states following
the end of the Second World War, as the donation of
US equipment through the Lend-Lease programme
replaced sales by European suppliers, but Turkiye’s
switch to a JV-based procurement strategy in the 1980s
changed this dynamic and created opportunities for
UK companies. UK industry success during this period
included the supply of communications equipment
through Marconi’s JV with HAVELSAN, Marconi
Kominikasyon (MKAS); armoured vehicles through
Shorland’s partnership with Otokar; and air-defence
systems, such as MBDA’s Rapier SAM for which pro-
duction took place in Turkiye with technology transfer
to ASELSAN, KALEKALIP and Roketsan. 66 However,
other equipment was also sold directly from UK pro-
duction lines, such as British Aerospace (BAe) naval
radars, BAe Dynamics Sea Skua anti-ship missiles and
GEC-Marconi Tigerfish torpedoes. 67 BAe was a mem-
ber of the Future International Military Airlifter indus-
trial effort in the early 1980s that became the European
Future Large Aircraft Group in 1991. Turkiye formally
committed to buying the resulting A400M in the late
1990s, having been in discussions on the project since
the early part of the decade.
As Turkiye’s defence-industrial strategy changed
from 2004, UK companies found themselves hav-
ing to adapt their offers. Subsequent defence deals
between the two countries were typically character-
ised either by the localisation of UK designs in Turkiye
through technology transfer or by UK support for
Turkish design development. Examples of the former
included Ultra Electronics’ torpedo-defence system
for the MilGem corvettes with HAVELSAN, and BAE
Systems’ display systems for TAI’s Hürkuş and Hürjet
aircraft with Fotoniks. 68
In the latter case, in 2017 BAE Systems won a tender
against European competition to support TAI’s devel-
opment of Turkiye’s ‘fifth generation’ National Combat
Aircraft (Milli Muharip Uçak, MMU) fighter-aircraft
programme, also known as TF-X and now called Kaan,
up to preliminary design review. 69 That work has been
finished and TAI completed the first flight of the Kaan
prototype in February 2024. The first Kaans will be fit-
ted with the GE Aerospace F110 engine that Turkish
company Turkish Engine Industries (TUSAŞ Motor
Sanayii, TEI) had previously assembled locally as part
of the F-16 licence-production programme. However,
Turkiye’s highly ambitious power requirements for
the Kaan will require a new engine. Due to the inher-
ent difficulties of aerospace-engine design, Turkiye has
considered partnering with a foreign company, as it did
with BAE Systems on the aircraft design. Rolls-Royce
established the TAEC JV with Kale Group in 2017 to
compete for this requirement against Turkish compa-
nies such as TEI.70 However, despite a strong push from
the UK government and industry, at the time of writing
it seems that Turkiye has opted to partner other local
firms with Ukraine’s Ivchenko-Progress instead.71
More recently, Turkiye has been negotiating to
acquire up to 40 Eurofighter Typhoon fighter aircraft.
This would represent a major, multi-decade investment
in the bilateral relationship with the UK, as well as with
the other Eurofighter partner nations. However, as with
potential exports of the Eurofighter Typhoon to certain
other countries, some parts of the German coalition
government are hostile to defence exports to Turkiye
and are holding up the deal.
The UK–Turkiye industrial engagement has been
accompanied by a series of government-to-government
agreements on defence. Shortly after taking office in
2010, then-prime minister David Cameron visited
Ankara, where he signed a strategic-partnership agree-
ment and made a speech strongly backing Turkiye’s EU
candidacy, which represented a continuation of previ-
ous UK government policy, and calling the relationship
8. United Kingdom

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
22 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
a ‘vital strategic tie’. 72 This was followed in 2011 by an
agreement that set out the terms of future military col-
laboration, including in industry and procurement, and
in 2016 by an agreement governing the sharing of sen-
sitive information.73 More recently, in November 2023,
the two countries signed a Statement of Intent (SoI) on
defence cooperation during a visit by the UK defence
minister to Ankara. 74 The SoI aims to facilitate greater
defence-industrial cooperation, principally through
the Kaan programme and Turkiye’s hoped-for acquisi-
tion of Typhoons but also through joint exercises in the
Eastern Mediterranean and wider security cooperation
in the Middle East and North Africa.
UK industrialists assess that Turkiye’s defence indus-
try is capable and has benefitted from the value attrib-
uted to engineering skills within the education system
and in Turkish society more broadly. Strong and con-
sistent UK government engagement with Turkiye on a
variety of issues gives industrialists a certain amount
of confidence that they can commit time and resources
to the Turkish market. Aerospace companies, and par-
ticularly TAI, have developed a strong capability in the
aerostructures market and are now part of the supply
chain for a variety of military and commercial aircraft.
Projects involving UK industry are assessed to have
been successful, with companies working well together
to navigate technical challenges, albeit sometimes with
different approaches to problem-solving and risk toler-
ance. The SSB is viewed as professional and well suited
as an organisation to the defence-industrial strategy
that Turkiye is pursuing. The current low value of the
lira makes sourcing parts from Turkish industry attrac-
tive, although it also makes partnerships with foreign
companies more difficult for Turkish firms because of
the increased expense in acquiring items from abroad.
The ‘brain drain’ of talented engineers and managers
from the country is also seen as an area of weakness.
Additionally, Turkiye has a very aggressive offset pol-
icy that creates a significant challenge for foreign com-
panies, and indeed there is speculation among British
industrialists that Turkiye may soon need to adjust this
policy to keep attracting partners.
The UK government assesses Turkiye to be an
important partner in European, Middle East and North
African security matters through its NATO membership
and important bilateral relationships with countries in
those regions. High-level visits between London and
Ankara have been frequent and for the UK have repre-
sented a degree of engagement comparable even to that
which it has with key European allies such as France and
(Mehmet Kaman/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images)
The TAI Kaan fighter-aircraft prototype, designed with assistance from BAE Systems, at the ‘Debut of the Century of the Future’ event in
Ankara, 1 May 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 23
Germany. The UK praised Turkiye’s role in closing the
Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits and brokering the
Black Sea grain deal in 2022, and has also been a long-
time supporter of Turkiye’s fight against the PKK, which
London proscribed as a terrorist organisation in 2001,
and against the Islamic State (ISIS) more recently. Two
British military bases in Cyprus give London a unique
interest in relations between Cyprus and Turkiye, and
the UK supported the UN reunification proposal in 2004
that was rejected in a referendum by Greek Cypriots. 75
More recently, the British government has continued
to support a peaceful reunification of the island under
a ‘bi-zonal, bi-communal federation’. 76 Since the coup
attempt in 2016, the UK has engaged with Ankara in a
way that is intended to show understanding of Turkiye’s
internal and external security concerns. 77 There have
been sources of tension, however, including Turkiye’s
S-400 acquisition and the 2019 Operation Peace Spring
in northeastern Syria – after the latter the UK joined
with other European states in halting export licences
to Turkiye.78 In 2020 the UK also enforced EU sanctions
against Turkiye due to its gas drilling in waters inside
Cyprus’s exclusive economic zone.79
That Turkish companies are now more competitive
is no surprise, and along with the rise of other new
competitors, such as South Korea, it makes the market
increasingly complex. However, this does not affect UK
defence companies’ overall strategies, which rely on
staying at the cutting edge of technical and engineer-
ing practices and offering strong after-sale support
that newer defence exporters, as well as some legacy
ones, have little or no experience in. In fact, UK gov-
ernment and industry see opportunities to collaborate
with Turkiye to achieve mutual export success in mar-
kets where Turkiye is now selling equipment, such as
Southeast Asia, Central Asia and the Gulf.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Although all European states examined in this report
have taken issue, at one time or another, with elements
of Turkiye’s foreign policy, each has a different approach
to engaging with Turkiye in the defence-industrial
sector and more broadly. French and UK support for
Turkiye’s defence requirements can be traced back to
the start of the Turkish republic or even further. Dutch,
Italian and Spanish activity in the Turkish defence mar-
ket is more recent but has also been strong, albeit to dif-
fering degrees today. Companies from these states have
had to adapt their offers over time as Turkish defence-
industrial requirements have changed: they have gone
from selling equipment directly to Turkiye, to establish-
ing local assembly lines for those systems through JVs
with Turkish firms, to supporting Turkish indigenous
system development either through design support or
the supply of key subsystems.
Following recent export successes, Italy, Spain and
the UK maintain a strong interest in the Turkish mar-
ket. But although there are some examples of Turkish
companies working with Italian, Spanish and UK indus-
try to co-develop products for market, it seems likely
that most collaboration in the foreseeable future will be
solely to meet Turkish requirements, rather than involv-
ing Turkiye in a multinational project in the vein of
A400M. Meanwhile, engagement from France and the
Netherlands is at a low point, with little political sup-
port following a series of policy disputes.
By contrast, Poland and Romania, although also
disagreeing with some aspects of Turkish activity, are
keener to prioritise cooperation because of their proxim-
ity to Russia and a desire to involve Ankara in Eastern
European and Black Sea security issues. Whereas the
other countries in this report have advanced defence
industries, Warsaw and Bucharest are at earlier stages
in growing their industrial capability, but see Turkiye as
a potential partner in that process. This is reciprocated
by Turkish firms, who have shown great interest in the
Polish and Romanian markets, albeit with little success
to date.
All seven countries assess Turkiye’s defence industry
to have strong capabilities in key areas such as aero-
structures, electronics and UAVs, even if those with
advanced industries do not regard Turkiye’s manu-
facturers as being at the same level. While Turkiye’s
workforce possesses strong engineering skills and has
extensive experience of working with foreign partners,
other factors – such as political influence in the domes -
tic procurement process, aggressive technology-transfer
and offset requirements, and broader economic troubles
– give European industry pause for thought.
A range of policy disagreements concern all of
Turkiye’s European partners, though they have
responded differently in terms of their levels of engage-
ment with Ankara. The most serious disagreements
have been over Turkiye’s acquisition of the S-400 and
its military operations in northeastern Syria, with the
former in particular seen as emblematic of Turkish drift
away from Western, European and NATO alignment.
The other issues include Turkiye’s gas exploration in the
Eastern Mediterranean and its refusal to recognise the
Republic of Cyprus, with the latter particularly damag-
ing to Turkiye’s relationship with the EU.
The EU’s efforts to incentivise greater defence coop-
eration among member states, to the deliberate or unin-
tended exclusion of other countries, will inevitably
disincentivise working with Turkiye as it is prohibited
from participating. This will probably be the case even
if an individual EU member state is in favour of coop-
erating with Turkiye more broadly. Nevertheless, the
bilateral approach will remain an important avenue for
Turkiye and the countries that wish to cooperate with
it, as will utilising organisations such as NATO’s NSPA
and OCCAR.
Conclusion

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 25
Notes
1 Sıtkı Egeli et al., ‘From Client to Competitor: The Rise
of Turkiye’s Defence Industry’, CFPPR–IISS, May 2024,
p. 10, https://www.iiss.org/globalassets/media-library--
-content--migration/files/research-papers/2024/05-new/
iiss_from-client-to-competitor-the-rise-of-turkiyes-defence-
industry_010520242.pdf.
2 See, for example, European Commission, ‘ A New European
Defence Industrial Strategy: Achieving EU Readiness
Through a Responsive and Resilient European Defence
Industry’, 5 March 2024, https://defence-industry-space.
ec.europa.eu/document/download/643c4a00-0da9-4768-
83cd-a5628f5c3063_en?filename=EDIS%20Joint%20
Communication.pdf.
3 The six nations comprising OCCAR are Belgium, France,
Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK.
4 France, National Assembly, National Defence and Armed
Forces Commission, ‘Rapport d’information sur la situation
de Giat Industries’ [Report on GIAT Industries], 17
December 2002, https://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/12/rap-
info/i0474.asp.
5 Leonardo, ‘Turkey’s Göktürk-1 Satellite Ready to Undergo
Environmental Tests’, 13 May 2015, https://www.
leonardo.com/en/news-and-stories-detail/-/detail/turkey-
s-g%C3%B6kt%C3%BCrk-1-satellite-ready-to-undergo-
environmental-tests.
6 Eurosam, ‘Turkey Contracts Eurosam, ASELSAN and
Roketsan to Define Its Future Indigenous Air and Missile
Defence System’, 5 January 2018, https://eurosam.com/
turkey-contracts-eurosam-aselsan-and-roketsan-to-define-
its-future-indigeneous-air-and-missile-defense-system/.
7 Turkiye, Ministry of National Defence, ‘Cumhurbaşkanımız
Sn. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, EFES-2024 Tatbikatı’nın Seçkin
Gözlemci Günü’nde Konuştu’ [Our President Mr Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan Speaks at Distinguished Observer Day of
EFES-2024 Exercise], 30 May 2024, https://www.msb.gov.tr/
SlaytHaber/47b036f74dd249c099a8d199cf3999ac.
8 ‘SSB Announces Top Ten Turkish Defence Exporters’, TurDef
Global Defence News, 4 January 2024, https://turdef.com/
article/ssb-announces-top-ten-turkish-defence-exporters.
9 ‘Turkey to Allocate 150% More to Defense
Budget in 2024 – Minister’, Reuters, 17
October 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/
middle-east/turkey-allocate-150-more-defense-budget-2024-
minister-2023-10-17/.
10 France, Ministry of the Armed Forces, ‘Rapport au
Parlement sur les exportations d’armement de la France’
[Report to Parliament on French arms exports], July 2023,
pp. 72–5, https://www.vie-publique.fr/files/rapport/
pdf/290724.pdf.
11 Italy, Senate of the Republic, ‘Relazione sulle operazioni
autorizzate e svolte per il controllo dell’esportazione,
importazione e transito dei materiali di armament (Anno
2023)’ [Report on the operations authorised and carried out
for the control of the export, import and transit of military
goods (2023)], 25 March 2024, p. 28, https://www.senato.it/
service/PDF/PDFServer/BGT/1411693.pdf.
12 Elisabeth Gosselin-Malo, ‘Poland to Break New Ground
with Osprey on TB2’, Shephard, 7 December 2021, https://
www.shephardmedia.com/news/digital-battlespace/
poland-to-break-new-ground-with-osprey-on-tb2/.
13 ‘Fincantieri Aims to Strengthen the Relationship with
Turkey’, Defence Turkey, 19 January 2009, https://
www.defenceturkey.com/en/content/fincantieri-aims-
to-strengthen-the-relationship-with-turkey-fincantieri-
ceo-giuseppe-bono-321; and Giacomo Cavanna, ‘Le
industrie italiane della Difesa in Turchia’ [The Italian
defence industries in Turkiye], Ares Osservatorio
Difesa, 15 October 2019, https://aresdifesa.it/
le-industrie-italiane-della-difesa-in-turchia/.
14 Eurosam, ‘Turkey, France and Italy Sign an Agreement on
Air Defence’, 9 November 2017, https://eurosam.com/turkey-
france-and-italy-sign-an-agreement-on-air-defense/; and
Tayfun Ozberk, ‘Turkey and Italy Hint at Return to SAMP/T
Air Defence Efforts’, Defence News, 1 April 2022, https://
www.defensenews.com/industry/techwatch/2022/04/01/
turkey-and-italy-hint-at-return-to-sampt-air-defense-efforts/.
15 Paolo Valpolini, ‘WDS 2024 – Otokar and Leonardo Unveil
New Tulpar Light Tank Solution’, European Defence
Review, 5 February 2024, https://www.edrmagazine.eu/
otokar-and-leonardo-unveil-new-tulpar-light-tank-solution.
16 Tiziano Ciocchetti, ‘ Astore: the First Made in Italy
Drone Armed with Turkish Rockets’, Difesa Online, 11
December 2020, https://en.difesaonline.it/mondo-militare/
astore-il-primo-drone-made-italy-armato-con-razzi-turchi.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
26 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
17 ‘WM-20 Series FCS’, Forecast International, March 2002,
https://www.forecastinternational.com/archive/disp_old_
pdf.cfm?ARC_ID=1683.
18 Doğan Özdemir, ‘Deniz teknolojileri Durum Tespiti’
[Marine technologies: due diligence], paper presented
at the Turkish Maritime Power Situational Detection
workshop, 9 September 2016, p. 3, https://kudenfor.ku.edu.
tr/dokumantasyon/.
19 ‘First Modernized ACV-15 Back in Inventory’, TurDef Global
Defence News, 1 December 2022, https://turdef.com/article/
first-modernised-acv-15-back-in-inventory.
20 ASELSAN, ‘SMART-S’, https://www.aselsan.com/en/
defence/product/3162/smarts; and ‘Thales Group to Use
Aselsan Modules for Radars’, Defence Turkey, September
2014, https://www.defenceturkey.com/en/content/
thales-group-to-use-aselsan-modules-for-radars-1717.
21 ‘SIPRI Arms Transfers Database’, https://armstransfers.
sipri.org/ArmsTransfer/; and ‘ Aselsan Signed the Contract
with the Royal Netherlands Army’, Defence-Aerospace,
29 September 2005, https://www.defense-aerospace.com/
turkish-firm-wins-dutch-stinger-contract-sep-29/.
22 ‘New Platforms of the Turkish Navy to Enter
Service’, TurDef Global Defence News, 18
January 2024, https://turdef.com/article/
new-platforms-of-the-turkish-navy-to-enter-service.
23 Government of the Netherlands, ‘ Aanpassingen
wapenexportcontrolebeleid’ [Adjustments to arms-
export-control policy], 4 October 2023, https://www.
rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/exportcontrole-
strategische-goederen/nieuws/2023/10/04/aanpassingen-
wapenexportcontrolebeleid; and Sarah Jacob, ‘Dutch
Government Removes Arms Export Restrictions to Turkey’,
Bloomberg, 21 July 2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2023-07-21/dutch-government-removes-arms-export-
restrictions-to-turkey?embedded-checkout=true.
24 See Government of the Netherlands, ‘Rapportage over
de uitvoer van militaire goederen van de minister voor
Buitenlandse Handel en Ontwikkelingssamenwerking
en de minister van Buitenlandse Zaken [Report by the
Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation
and Minister of Foreign Affairs on the export of military
goods], 2020–22, https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/
rapporten/2016/10/01/archief-jaarrapporten-wapenexportbeleid.
25 Germany, Federal Law Gazette Year 2021, Part II, no.
22, ‘Bekanntmachung des Übereinkommens über
Ausfuhrkontrollen im Rüstungsbereich’ [Announcement
on the agreement on arms export controls], 28 October
2021, https://www.bgbl.de/xaver/bgbl/start.xav#__
bgbl__%2F%2F*%5B%40attr_id%3D%27bgbl221s1094.
pdf%27%5D__1722438494414.
26 Djuna Farjon, ‘Militarisation of Europe at the Cost
of Arms Export Control’, Stop Wapenhandel,
30 May 2024, https://stopwapenhandel.org/
militarisation-of-europe-at-the-cost-of-arms-export-control/.
27 The Netherlands, Advisory Council on International
Affairs, ‘De Geopolitieke Rol van Turkije: Trends En
Toekomstscenario’s’ [Turkiye’s geopolitical role: trends
and future scenarios], 1 November 2022, https://www.
adviesraadinternationalevraagstukken.nl/documenten/
publicaties/2022/11/08/aiv-advies-de-geopolitieke-rol-van-
turkije-trends-en-toekomstscenarios.
28 Schuman Security & Defence Forum 2024, ‘List of
Participants’, https://www.eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/
files/documents/2024/FINAL%20LIST%20OF%20
PARTICIPANTS%20FORUM%20AND%20THINK%20
TANKS%20FOR%20WEBSITE.pdf
29 W.B. Hoekstra, Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
‘Kabinetsreactie Op De Geopolitieke Rol van Turkije: Trends
En Toekomstscenario’s’ [Cabinet response to Turkey’s
geopolitical role: trends and future scenarios], 8 March 2023,
https://www.adviesraadinternationalevraagstukken.nl/
documenten/kabinetsreacties/2023/03/08/kabinetsreactie-op-
de-geopolitieke-rol-van-turkije-trends-en-toekomstscenarios.
30 European Commission, Directorate-General for Defence
Industry and Space, ‘EDIS Joint Communication’, 5
March 2024, https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/
edis-joint-communication_en.
31 Targi Kielce, ‘Turecka Wystawa Narodowa po
raz drugi na MSPO’ [Turkish national exhibition
for second time at MSPO], 18 May 2022, https://
www.targikielce.pl/o-firmie/aktualnosci/
turecka-wystawa-narodowa-po-raz-drugi-na-mspo,28308.
32 Canan Uslu and Murad Cinoğlu, ‘Potencjalne obszary
współpracy Turcji i Polski w zakresie przemysłu lotniczego,
kosmicznego i obronnego’ [Potential areas of cooperation
between Turkiye and Poland in the fields of aviation, space
and the defence industry] in Relacje polsko-tureckie z
perspektywy bezpieczeństwa narodowego [Polish-Turkish
relations from a national-security perspective], National
Security Bureau of the Republic of Poland, Warsaw,

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 27
2014, pp. 155–6, https://www.mgk.gov.tr/en/kaynaklar/
yayinlar/polish_turkish_relations_from_national_security_
perspective/polish_turkish_relations_from_national_
security_perspective_whole.pdf.
33 Turkish Aerospace Industries, ‘TUSAS – Polonyalı Firmalar
WCBKT, WZL1, ITWL ve MESKO ile Mutabakat Muhtırası
İmzaladı’ [TUSAS – memorandum of understanding
signed with Polish companies WCBKT, WZL1, ITWL and
MESKO], https://www.tusas.com/medya-merkezi/haberler/
tai-polonyali-firmalar-wcbkt-wzl1-itwl-ve-mesko-ile-
mutabakat-muhtirasi-imzaladi.
34 ‘Tureckie pociski dla polskich śmigłowców? Współpraca
Roketsan z WZL 1 i Mesko’ [Turkish missiles for Polish
helicopters? Roketsan cooperation with WZL 1 and Mesko],
Defense24, 10 September 2015, https://defence24.pl/tureckie-
pociski-dla-polskich-smiglowcow-wspolpraca-roketsan-z-
wzl-1-i-mesko.
35 Robert Czulda and Adam M. Maciejewski, ‘Oferta Roketsana
w programie Homar’ [Roketsan’s offer in the Homar
programme], Wojsko i Technika, no. 1, 2017, https://zbiam.pl/
artykuly/oferta-roketsana-w-programie-homar/.
36 Interview with an expert on the Polish defence industry, 2
July 2024.
37 Poland, Ministry of National Defence, ‘Bayraktar TB2
tactical UAVs Will Serve in the Polish Armed Forces’, 24 May
2021, https://www.gov.pl/web/national-defence/bayraktar-
tb2-tactical-uavs-will-serve-in-the-polish-armed-forces.
38 Aleksander Skrzypek, ‘Final Bayraktars Delivered to
Poland’, Defense24, 16 May 2024, https://defence24.com/
armed-forces/final-bayraktars-delivered-to-poland.
39 Poland, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ‘Heads of Polish,
Romanian, and Turkish Diplomacies Meet in Bucharest’, 24
April 2021, https://www.gov.pl/web/diplomacy/heads-of-
polish-romanian-and-turkish-diplomacies-meet-in-bucharest.
40 Aleksandra Maria Spancerska, ‘Turkey’s Defence
Industry as a Foreign Policy Tool’, Polish
Institute of International Affairs, bulletin no. 81,
19 May 2022, https://www.pism.pl/publications/
turkeys-defence-industry-as-a-foreign-policy-tool.
41 Witold Lewandowski, ‘Znaczenie przemysłu obronnego i
współpraca w tym obszarze między Polską a Turcją’ [The
importance of the defence industry and cooperation in this
area between Poland and Turkiye], in Relacje polsko-tureckie
z perspektywy bezpieczeństwa narodowego [Polish-Turkish
relations from a national security perspective], National
Security Bureau of the Republic of Poland, Warsaw,
2014, pg. 161, https://www.mgk.gov.tr/en/kaynaklar/
yayinlar/polish_turkish_relations_from_national_security_
perspective/polish_turkish_relations_from_national_
security_perspective_whole.pdf.
42 One example is the recent agreement to cooperate on the
European Long-Range Strike Approach (ELSA) missile.
See, for example, ‘France, Germany, Italy, Poland Agree to
Jointly Develop Long-range Cruise Missiles’, Reuters, 11
July 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/france-
germany-italy-poland-agree-jointly-develop-long-range-
cruise-missiles-2024-07-11/.
43 Ankara Chamber of Industry, ‘2023 Yılında İhracat
Rakamları Değerlendirme Raporu’ [2023 export figures
evaluation report], February 2024, p. 15, https://aso.org.tr/ihr
acatdestekofisi/2023RAPOR/2023.pdf.
44 Robert Lupițu, ‘România și Turcia au semnat 80 de proiecte
de cooperare economică. Miniștrii transporturilor și energiei
s-au întâlnit cu Erdogan la Istanbul’ [Romania and Turkiye
sign 80 economic cooperation projects. Transport and energy
ministers meet with Erdogan in Istanbul], Caleaeuropeana.
ro, 1 April 2022, https://www.caleaeuropeana.ro/
romania-si-turcia-au-semnat-80-de-proiecte-de-cooperare-
economica-ministrii-transporturilor-si-energiei-s-au-intalnit-
cu-erdogan-la-istanbul/; and Esra Tekin, ‘Trilateral Meeting
of Türkiye, Romania, Poland Proved Its Effectiveness:
Romanian Foreign Minister’, Anadolu Ajansı, 26 June 2024,
https://www.aa.com.tr/en/europe/trilateral-meeting-of-
turkiye-romania-poland-proved-its-effectiveness-romanian-
foreign-minister/3259212#.
45 ‘Framework Agreement Between Romania’s Gov’t and
Turkey’s Gov’t for Cooperation in Military Field’, Agerpres,
6 October 2023, https://www.agerpres.ro/english/2023/10/06/
framework-agreement-between-romania-s-gov-t-and-
turkey-s-gov-t-for-cooperation-in-military-field--1182183;
and Sarp Ozer, ‘Türkiye, Romania Sign Military Framework
Agreement’, Anadolu Ajansı, 6 October 2023, https://
www.aa.com.tr/en/europe/turkiye-romania-sign-military-
framework-agreement/3009494.
46 ‘Turcii de la Otokar au rămas singuri în competiția privind
achiziția de blindate 4x4 a României. Motivele pentru
care ceilalți grei au spus „pas”’ [Turkish firm Otokar left
as sole remaining company in Romania’s armoured 4x4
competition. Here are the reasons why major companies
passed on the project], 20 March 2024, https://www.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
28 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
defenseromania.ro/turcii-de-la-otokar-au-ramas-singuri-in-
competitia-privind-achizitia-de-blindate-4x4-a-romaniei-
motivele-pentru-care-ceilalti-grei-ai-spus-pas_627471.html.
47 Romarm, ‘Memorandum de înțelegere cu
ASELSAN’ [Memorandum of understanding with
ASELSAN], 27 October 2022, https://romarm.ro/
memorandum-romarm-aselsan/?cn-reloaded=1.
48 Romarm, ‘Oportunități de colaborare româno-turce în
cadrul ICDDA 2022’ [Romanian-Turkish collaboration
opportunities within the ICDDA 2022], 18 October 2022,
https://romarm.ro/oportunitati-de-colaborare-romano-turce-
in-cadrul-icdda-2022/?cn-reloaded=1.
49 European Union, EU Tenders, ‘243865-2023-Result’ [Contract
for UAVs with Baykar], 25 April 2023, https://ted.europa.
eu/en/notice/-/detail/243865-2023; Catalina Mihai, ‘Romania
Buys 18 Bayraktar TB2 Drones from Turkey’, Euractiv, 28
April 2023, https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/
news/romania-buys-18-bayraktar-tb2-drones-from-turkey/;
DefenseRomania, ‘Industria de apărare din România face
primii pași pentru a se implica în posibila achiziție de
blindate turcești Cobra II 4x4 pentru Armată’ [Romanian
defence industry takes first steps to acquire Turkish Cobra
II 4x4 armoured vehicles for army], 18 April 2024, https://
www.defenseromania.ro/industria-de-aparare-din-romania-
face-primii-pasi-pentru-a-se-implica-in-posibila-achizitie-de-
blindate-turcesti-cobra-ii-4x4-pentru-armata_627918.html;
and S.I. Catalin, ‘Romania Has Officially Launched a
Programme for the Acquisition of 4x4 Armoured Vehicles
for the Armed Forces. We Know the Big Favourites’,
DefenseRomania, 30 May 2023, https://www.defenseromania.
ro/romania-has-officially-launched-a-programme-for-the-
acquisition-of-4x4-armoured-vehicles-for-the-armed-forces-
we-know-the-big-favourites_622897.html.
50 ‘România a încheiat cu Turcia un acord militar de cooperare.
Angel Tîlvăr: Unul dintre cei mai importanţi parteneri
strategici’ [Romania concludes military-cooperation
agreement with Turkiye. Angel Tîlvăr: one of the most
important strategic partners], Digi24, 6 October 2023, https://
www.digi24.ro/stiri/economie/romania-a-incheiat-cu-turcia-
un-acord-militar-de-cooperare-angel-tilvar-unul-dintre-cei-
mai-importanti-parteneri-strategici-2532813.
51 ‘Ciolacu: România îşi doreşte o cooperare mai strânsă cu
Turcia în două domenii strategice-industria de apărare şi
energia’ [Ciolacu: Romania wants closer cooperation with
Turkiye in two strategic fields – the defence industry and
energy], Agerpres, 21 May 2024, https://www.agerpres.
ro/politica/2024/05/21/ciolacu-romania-isi-doreste-o-
cooperare-mai-stransa-cu-turcia-in-doua-domenii-strategice-
industria-de-aparare-si-energia--1298751; Robert Lupițu,
‘România și Turcia au semnat 80 de proiecte de cooperare
economică. Miniștrii transporturilor și energiei s-au întâlnit
cu Erdogan la Istanbul’ [Romania and Turkiye sign 80
economic-cooperation projects. Transport and energy
ministers meet with Erdoğan in Istanbul], Caleaeuropeana.
ro, 1 April 2022, https://www.caleaeuropeana.ro/
romania-si-turcia-au-semnat-80-de-proiecte-de-cooperare-
economica-ministrii-transporturilor-si-energiei-s-au-intalnit-
cu-erdogan-la-istanbul/.
52 ‘Romanian Defense Minister Visits Türkiye to Enhance
Defence Capabilities’, Türkiye Today, 28 June 2024, https://
www.turkiyetoday.com/turkiye/romanian-defense-minister-
visits-turkiye-to-enhance-defence-capabilities-24649/.
53 ‘Carpathian Vipers’, Key.Aero, 22 December 2016, https://
www.key.aero/article/carpathian-vipers.
54 European Union, EU Tenders, ‘243865-2023-Result’ [Contract
for UAVs with Baykar], 25 April 2023; Hanwha Aerospace,
‘“10번째 K9 도입국 탄생”… 한화에어로스페이스,
루마니아와 1.4조 계약’ [‘10th K9 import-country born’…
Hanwha Aerospace signs 1.4 trillion contract with Romania],
10 July 2024, https://www.hanwha.co.kr/newsroom/media_
center/news/news_view.do?seq=13589.
55 ‘România cumpără „Tunetul sud-coreean”, tunul care
lovește precis până la 40 de kilometri. Contractul, estimat la
1 miliard de dolari’ [Romania buys ‘South Korean thunder’,
cannon that strikes accurately from up to 40 km. Contract
estimated at 1 million dollars], 10 July 2024, https://www.
digi24.ro/stiri/actualitate/romania-cumpara-tunetul-sud-
coreean-tunul-care-loveste-precis-pana-la-40-de-kilometri-
contractul-estimat-la-1-miliard-de-dolari-2855947; Alexandra
Loy, ‘Ministrul Florin Spătaru anunță semnarea unui
memorandum de cooperare industrială militară între
Romarm și cea mai mare companie de apărare din Coreea de
Sud’ [Minister Florin Spătaru announces signing of military-
industrial-cooperation memorandum between Romarm and
largest defence company in South Korea], Caleaeuropeana.
ro, 6 February 2023, https://www.caleaeuropeana.
ro/ministrul-florin-spataru-anunta-semnarea-unui-
memorandum-de-cooperare-industriala-militara-intre-
romarm-si-cea-mai-mare-companie-de-aparare-din-coreea-
de-sud/; and Romanian Agency for Investment and Foreign

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Turkiye’s Defence-industrial Relationships with Other European States 29
Trade (ARICE), ‘Comitetului Mixt pentru Cooperare
Industrială România – Republica Coreea’ [Joint Committee
for Industrial Cooperation, Romania – Republic of Korea], 2
April 2024, https://arice.gov.ro/1/comitetului-mixt-pentru-
cooperare-industriala-romania-republica-coreea/.
56 Spain, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Business,
‘Histórico de informes de material de Defensa’ [Archive
of reports on defence exports], https://comercio.gob.es/
ImportacionExportacion/Informes_Estadisticas/Paginas/
Hitorico_Material_Defensa.aspx.
57 Spain, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Business, ‘España y
Turquía intensifican sus relaciones comerciales y movilizan
inversión conjunta’ [Spain and Turkiye strengthen trade
relations and mobilise joint investment], 13 June 2024, https://
comercio.gob.es/es-es/NotasPrensa/2024/Paginas/RAN-
espana-turquia.aspx; Spain, Office of the President of the
Government, ‘Pedro Sánchez anuncia acuerdos en cinco áreas
clave para intensificar la cooperación económica y comercial
con Turquía’ [Pedro Sánchez announces agreements in five
key areas to step up economic and commercial cooperation
with Turkiye], 13 June 2024, https://www.lamoncloa.gob.es/
presidente/actividades/Paginas/2024/130624-sanchez-foro-
empresarial-espana-turquia.aspx.
58 Agnes Helou and Tim Martin, ‘The “Dual Purpose” in
Turkey’s Bid for 40 Eurofighter Typhoons: Analysts’,
Breaking Defense, 17 November 2023, https://
breakingdefense.com/2023/11/the-dual-purpose-in-turkeys-
bid-for-40-eurofighter-typhoons-analysts/.
59 Ashish Dangwal, ‘German Bone in Turkish Kebab! Turkey
Eyes 40 Eurofighter Typhoons But Berlin Could Block
The Deal’, Eurasian Times, 17 November 2023, https://
www.eurasiantimes.com/german-bone-in-turkey-kebab-
ankara-eyes-40-eurofighte/#:~:text=Turkey%20Eyes%20
40%20Eurofighter%20Typhoons%20But%20Berlin%20
Could%20Block%20The%20Deal,-By&text=Turkey’s%20
announcement%20of%20its%20plans,oppose%20the%20
sale%20to%20Turkey.
60 ‘España cambiará 24 HÜRJET por 6 A400M’ [Spain to
exchange 24 HÜRJETs for 6 A400Ms], Avión Revue, 26 July
2024, https://www.avionrevue.com/aviacion-militar/espana-
cambiara-24-hurjet-por-6-a400m/. It should be noted that
Spain agreed to purchase 27 A400Ms to maintain its share in
the programme, even though the air force only needed 14.
61 Mario Saavedra, ‘Turquía busca colaborar con España
para construir un nuevo portaviones y drones de combate’
[Turkiye seeking to collaborate with Spain to build
new aircraft carrier and combat drones], El Periódico de
España, 13 June 2024, https://www.elperiodico.com/es/
internacional/20240613/turquia-colabora-espana-construir-
nuevo-portaviones-drones-combate-103751009.
62 Ibid.
63 Sonia Muñoz, ‘Radiografía de la industria de defensa
española en Turquía: del TCG Anadolu al avión A400M’
[X-ray of the Spanish defence industry in Turkyie: from
the TCG Anadolu to the A400M aircraft], Infodefensa, 11
June 2024, https://infodefensatv.infodefensa.com/videos/
view/6835866/radiografia-industria-defensa-espanola-
turquia-tcg-anadolu-avion-a400m.
64 Eduard Soler i Lecha, ‘¿Qué horizonte estratégico a 10 años
para las relaciones hispano-turcas?’ [What is the 10-year
strategic horizon for Spanish-Turkish relations?], Análisis
del Real Instituto Elcano, 17/2014, 26 May 2024, https://
www.realinstitutoelcano.org/analisis/que-horizonte-
estrategico-a-10-anos-para-las-relaciones-hispano-turcas/;
and Albert Naya, ‘España busca su papel geopolítico
como mediador del socio más incómodo de la UE’ [Spain
seeks its geopolitical role as mediator of the EU’s most
awkward partner], El Confidencial, 17 November 2021,
https://www.elconfidencial.com/mundo/2021-11-17/
espana-mediador-geopolitico-socio-turquia-ue_3326257/.
65 Spain, Office of the President of the Government, ‘Pedro
Sánchez anuncia acuerdos en cinco áreas clave para
intensificar la cooperación económica y comercial con
Turquía’ [Pedro Sánchez announces agreements in five key
areas to step up economic and commercial cooperation with
Turkiye], 13 June 2024.
66 Marconi Communication Systems Limited, ‘The First of
Many Scimitar Radios for Turkey’, Newslink, December
1990, p. 2, https://themarconifamily.pbworks.com/w/
file/fetch/123425820/Link%20December%201990.pdf;
and ‘ROKETSAN: Turkish Defence Industry’s Growing
Power’, Defence Turkey, no. 11, June 2008, https://www.
defenceturkey.com/en/content/roketsan-turkish-defence-
industry-8217-s-growing-power-257.
67 ‘BAe Puts Radar Systems on Turkish Frigates’,
ElectronicsWeekly.com, 4 November 1999, https://www.
electronicsweekly.com/news/archived/resources-archived/
bae-puts-radar-systems-on-turkish-frigates-1999-11/; and
İbrahim Sünnetci, ‘Past and Present Cooperation Within
the Defence Industry Between Turkey and the United

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
30 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Kingdom’, Defence Turkey, no. 83, July 2018, https://www.
defenceturkey.com/en/content/past-and-present-cooperation-
within-the-defence-industry-between-turkey-and-the-united-
kingdom-3094.
68 ‘Turkish Delight for Ultra’, The Engineer, 15 August 2007,
https://www.theengineer.co.uk/content/news/turkish-
delight-for-ultra/; and BAE Systems, ‘BAE Systems and
Fotoniks Develop Head-up Display Technologies’, 6 May
2015, https://www.baesystems.com/en-uk/article/bae-
systems-and-fotoniks-develop-head-up-display-technologies.
69 BAE Systems, ‘BAE Systems Signs Heads of Agreement
for a Future Contract with Turkish Aerospace Industries
for TF-X Programme’, 28 January 2017, https://www.
baesystems.com/en-uk/article/bae-systems-signs-heads-of-
agreement-for-a-future-contract-with-turkish-aerospace-
industries-for-tf-x-programme.
70 Kale Group, ‘TAEC’, https://kalegrubu.com.tr/en/sectors/
aerospace/taec.
71 Tony Osborne, ‘Turkish Aerospace Tackling Supply Chain
Issues as Kaan Progresses’, Aviation Week, 23 July 2024, https://
aviationweek.com/shownews/farnborough-airshow/turkish-
aerospace-tackling-supply-chain-issues-kaan-progresses.
72 UK Government, ‘PM’s Speech in Turkey – A Transcript of a
Speech Given by Prime Minister David Cameron in Ankara,
Turkey, on 27 July 2010’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
speeches/pms-speech-in-turkey.
73 UK Government, ‘Framework Agreement between the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Government of the Republic of
Turkey on Military Cooperation’, 23 November 2011, https://
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a7c8a0240f0b62662
8acc52/8344.pdf; and UK Government, ‘Security Agreement
between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the
Republic of Turkey concerning the Protection of Defence
Classified Information’, 25 February 2016, https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a7f1d0640f0b6230268d83d/
Turkey_1.2016_Security_Cm_9376_WEB.pdf.
74 UK Government, ‘UK and Türkiye to Boost Stability,
Security and Prosperity’, 23 November 2023, https://
www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-and-turkiye-to-boost-
stability-security-and-prosperity#:~:text=Two%20NATO%20
Allies%2C%20the%20UK,and%20prosperity%20to%20
both%20nations.&text=Blueprint%20signed%20for%20
a%20closer,to%20maintain%20support%20for%20Ukraine;
and Republic of Türkiye, Ministry of National Defence (@
tcsavunma), post on X, 23 November 2023, https://x.com/
tcsavunma/status/1727672043007615037.
75 Keith Kyle, ‘ A British View of the Annan Plan’, Cyprus Review,
vol. 16, no. 1, 2004, pp. 13–28, https://cyprusreview.org/index.
php/cr/article/view/358.
76 UK Government, ‘PM Call with President Erdoğan of Turkey:
8 March 2021’, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
pm-call-with-president-erdogan-of-turkey-8-march-2021.
77 House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, ‘The
UK’s Relations with Turkey’, 25 March 2017, pp. 7–8,
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/
cmfaff/615/615.pdf.
78 ‘Turkey–Syria Offensive: UK Government Halts Arms Export
Licences to Turkey’, BBC News, 15 October 2019, https://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-50056358.
79 UK Government, ‘The Turkey (Sanctions) (Unauthorised
Drilling Activities in the Eastern Mediterranean) (Overseas
Territories) Order 2020’, 8 April 2020, https://www.legislation.
gov.uk/uksi/2020/283/contents#:~:text=There%20are%20
currently%20no%20known,)%20Order%202020%20(revoked).

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
The Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research (CFPPR) aims to develop agendas and pro-
mote policies that contribute to the peaceful resolution of international and inter-communal
conflicts, particularly in the regions surrounding Turkey, through analyzing and interpreting
contemporary policies from a critical, comparative, but also constructive, and peace-oriented
perspective. Together with All Azimuth, it provides a platform for homegrown international
relations and foreign policy research conceptualizations
The Centre for Applied Turkey Studies (CATS) at the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik (SWP)
in Berlin is funded by Stiftung Mercator and the Federal Foreign Office. CATS is the curator of
the CATS Network, an international network of think tanks and research institutions working on
Turkey. ‘National Defence Industry: From an Enabler of Turkey’s Pursuit of Strategic Autonomy
to a Bridge between Turkey and Europe’ is a project of CATS Network.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) is an international institute that owes
allegiance to no government. It is a registered UK charity and company. Its core objective is to
promote the development of sound policies that further global peace and security, and maintain
civilised international relations. IISS experts work from five offices in London, Washington DC,
Berlin, Bahrain and Singapore. They carry out fact-based research, convene and frame discus -
sions, and produce publications including The Military Balance, the definitive annual assessment
of defence capabilities, and Survival, the global politics and strategy journal. The IISS organises
and convenes conferences including the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue and IISS Manama Dialogue,
world-leading forums for the discussion of security issues. IISS research helps governments,
academics, the media and the private sector.
Bilkent
Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
İhsan Doğramaci Peace Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
© The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2023
