
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
The Accelerator State: Small
Firms Join the Fray of China’s
Techno-Industrial Drive
ALEXANDER BROWN
Summary
China is creating an "accelerator state” through a multi-layered system to identify
and fast track the growth of high-tech SMEs in strategic sectors. Certified high-tech
SMEs enjoy unique advantages, most notably privileged access to public and private
financing. An analysis of the “Little Giants” program—a central feature of the accelerator
state—proves that selected firms are indeed benefiting from enhanced financing. The
study also reveals flaws in its selection process. The implications for foreign actors are
significant. The accelerator state aims to replace imports in key value chains, which
poses a direct challenge to foreign firms. The blurred lines between state support and
market forces in the scheme also make it more difficult for foreign governments to track
distortionary practices and enforce fair competition.
This brief is part of a special series organized jointly by the University of
California Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC) and the
Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS). This analysis was originally
presented at the Conference on the Chinese National Innovation and
Techno-Industrial Ecosystems in Berlin, September 5–6, 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Key Findings
• The emergence of an “accelerator state” in
China marks a dramatic extension of the
industrial focus of Chinese policymakers
toward smaller companies. High-tech small
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are
being supported to specialize in niche
markets, develop domestic alternatives
to foreign inputs, and reinforce China's
industrial supply chain.
• Beijing’s tiered cultivation system combines
state guidance with market forces. China
has developed a dynamic multi-level
evaluation and support system, active at
the local, provincial and national levels, to
first identify specialized high-tech SMEs and
then fast-track their growth. Government-
certified high-tech SMEs are labeled as
“Specialized SMEs” or “Little Giants.”
• The support system seeks to cover all
the needs of its SMEs. The government
is guiding both public and private actors
to help high-tech SMEs. This means
increased collaboration with public
research institutes and cooperation with
large firms. Beijing has also mobilized
financial institutions and is pushing
private investors to direct capital toward
government-certified start-ups and SMEs.
• The application of the Little Giants program
in the robotics sector shows
its benefits and drawbacks. The system
is channeling more funding to high-tech
SMEs, some of which are advancing self-
reliance in core technologies. Y et, there
are also signs of weaknesses. The system
relies on the capacity of officials to identify
the most promising firms, which could
result in misallocated investments and
misused funds.
• Foreign actors should be prepared for
challenges in navigating China’s accelerator
state. Foreign manufacturing firms ought
to be aware of the large pool of state-
backed SMEs which could target their
core business. In addition to increased
competition within China, these SMEs will
be able to leverage their home market
advantages to increase their market share
abroad. By blurring the lines between
state support and market forces, Beijing
has made it more difficult for foreign
governments to track distortionary
practices and enforce fair competition.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
This analysis uses the robotics sector as a case
study for the implementation of the high-tech SME
cultivation system. The recent Five-Y ear Plan for
the sector highlighted the need to foster several
internationally competitive firms and incubate
innovative SMEs.1 The latter is a new addition
that signifies Beijing's renewed determination to
enhance the capabilities of its indigenous robotics
firms, particularly in the high value-added core
components segment, where foreign firms continue
to dominate.
The accelerator state and Little Giant
robotics firms
1. Cultivating high-tech SMEs: The emergence
of China’s accelerator state program
China has gained a new appreciation of the
role played by private enterprise and small
firms in driving innovation. In emerging sectors
characterized by continuous technological
evolution, SMEs are pivotal actors who experiment
with new technologies, production methods, and
business models. In areas where established
players dominate, SMEs can exploit niche markets
or serve as critical suppliers. While larger firms still
play a central role, Beijing aims to augment the
contributions of smaller enterprises.
Leaderdrive is a prominent example of a high-tech
SME that has developed domestic alternatives to
foreign inputs to reinforce China's industrial chain.
In 2021, Leaderdrive ranked second in terms of
domestic market share for harmonic reducers, a
core component for robots. It has garnered acclaim
from the Chinese Institute of Electronics for its
success in achieving breakthroughs in “bottleneck”
technologies and developing core technologies in
the robotics field.2,3
To replicate this model, China has established a
dynamic multi-level evaluation and support system
that operates at the local, provincial, and national
levels to identify and help grow specialized high-
tech SMEs (see Figure 1).4
Introduction: The rise of small firms in
China’s industrial policy
China's industrial policy is undergoing a remarkable
transformation centered on the role of high-tech
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
These agile companies, specializing in niche
markets, are becoming a new driving force behind
China's self-reliance efforts and industrial supply
chain reinforcement. The ultimate ambition is
not only to excel in the domestic market, but to
compete internationally.
Traditionally, Beijing's industrial policy emphasized
large-scale projects and the nurturing of national
champions. However, China is now evolving into an
“accelerator state”, which champions smaller firms
as well as large companies. Officials are seeking
to smooth the pathway for innovative SMEs in
strategic sectors to develop core technologies and
scale up. In a sense, the government has turned
into a coach for high-tech SMEs. It is conducting
trials and offering support to build up a highly
competitive “Olympic team” of innovators across a
wide range of sectors.
The accelerator state brings together a broad array
of stakeholders, including banks, investors, firms,
and universities, to offer comprehensive support
measures. It embodies the “whole-of-nation”
approach promoted under Xi Jinping, enlisting
SMEs—together with other actors—to advance
national strategic goals.
The Little Giants initiative—arguably the core of
China’s accelerator state system—supports SMEs
in the key industries outlined in the Made in China
2025 plan, such as next generation information
technology (IT), high-end machinery, medical
equipment, and robotics. The initiative also reflects
a hybrid approach combining market forces with
state guidance to nurture a vibrant ecosystem of
entrepreneurial talent.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
This system categorizes companies as “Innovative
SMEs” and “Specialized SMEs” at the provincial
level, and “Little Giant” firms at the national level.
Once they have risen to become leading firms in
a particular product—by which stage, they may no
longer be an SME—companies can be recognized
as industry leaders in specific subsectors or
“Manufacturing Champions.”
Each category of firms adheres to distinct selection
criteria, with escalating standards for innovation
and competitiveness. For instance, "Little Giant"
status is granted to firms that align with Made in
China 2025 priority sectors or contribute to China's
industrial localization and import substitution
objectives. Further evaluation factors include
economic performance in terms of revenue and
profit, as well as exports. The status is valid for
three years, meaning firms must stay competitive
to retain their privileged label as a government-
backed enterprise.
Source: MIIT, © MERICS
figure 1
China's pyramid cultivation system works akin to a sport league
“Little giant” program intends to foster world class small and medium-sized enterprises
Manufacturing Champions
1,000 by 2025
Little Giants
10,000 by 2025
Specialized SMEs
100,000 by 2025
Innovative SMEs
1,000,000 by 2025
Promoted to next tier/
Demoted to lower tier
New entrant/Drop out
Status renewed
Cultivation targets
To date, provincial authorities have identified
98,000 “Specialized SMEs,” while national
authorities have selected over 12,000 “Little Giants”
for preferential government support. Furthermore,
268 Little Giants firms have been promoted to
the level of “Manufacturing Champion”, making
up 22 percent of the 1,200 current Manufacturing
Champions.5 In the most recent batches of
Manufacturing Champion announcements, almost
40 percent of companies were drawn from the pool
of Little Giants.6 Leaderdrive's rapid ascent within
this framework, going from a Little Giant in 2019
to a Manufacturing Champion in 2020, shows the
potential for SMEs to thrive in China's evolving
industrial landscape.7

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Simultaneously, China's recent stock market
reforms were designed to encourage the listing of
innovative SMEs. In 2022, 40 percent of listings
on the Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Beijing stock
exchanges were made by Little Giants.10 These
listings incentivize private investors to bet early on
such firms in the pursuit of large profits when they
go public.
The surge in listings by government-backed
SMEs demonstrates the effectiveness of China’s
new blend of state capitalism. Despite their
concentration in industrial sectors—which tend
to be capital-intensive, difficult to scale, and thus
requiring more caution from investors—Little
Giants are increasingly viewed as attractive
investment options.11
The dangers of ignoring political signals has
become even more clear for investors following
Beijing’s recent tech rectification campaign.12 Since
November 2020, China’s largest tech companies
have been under intense government scrutiny for
practices of unfair competition, violations of data
and cybersecurity laws, and misalignment with
Beijing’s interests.
2. The golden ticket: Key support measures for
state-backed SMEs
Certified high-tech SMEs in China enjoy unique
privileges akin to sponsored athletes. Like Olympic
athletes that have access to a state-funded salary
and training facilities, government-backed SMEs
benefit from greater state subsidies, increased
collaboration with universities and research
institutes, and a more favorable intellectual property
(IP) system. The government encourages all state-
connected entities to smooth the development
pathway for high-tech SMEs, exemplary of the
“whole-of-nation” approach (see Figure 2). Officials
are also pushing for larger firms, especially state-
owned enterprises (SOEs), to engage with local
SMEs and incorporate them into their supply chains.
Crucially, policymakers have also redirected the
financial system to channel additional capital
toward innovative SMEs. This marks a noteworthy
departure from the traditional focus on large
state-connected firms, which often disadvantaged
SMEs. Beijing's initiatives include expanded access
to loans, domestic stock market reforms, and
dedicated funds to bolster innovative SMEs.8
A case in point is the substantial support received
by Little Giant robotics firms. A sample of 44
robotics firms selected in the first two batches
benefited from annual financing equivalent to
approximately 13.7 percent of their annual revenue
between 2016 and 2021. This support included
direct subsidies, state-guided equity investments,
and below-market debt.
China's government acts as a patient investor in
early-stage high-tech SMEs, leveraging government
guidance funds and directing state-owned banks
to lend to the firms. Some banks have even
established dedicated high-tech SME departments
in collaboration with government authorities to
facilitate low-interest loans.9

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Source: MERICS based on MIIT, Leaderdrive annual reports and website, industry reporting and Wind Financial
Terminal, © MERICS
FINANCIAL SECTOR
figure 2
Beijing orchestrates state-connected actors to support high-tech SMEs
Key actors in China's SME support ecosystem and their respective roles
Resources,
funding,
information
about SME
Fill technological
gaps in supply chain
Returns
Certification,
subsidies
Loans,
investment
Preferential
treatment
R&D support,
spinoffs, talent
Commercialization
of R&D output
Guaranteed market,
resources, funding
information
Government
guidance
funds (GGFs)
Banks
UNIVERSITIES
IPR COURTS
Certified
high-tech
SMEs
Pool of
SMEs
Stock
market
Other
investors
LARGE
FIRMS,
SOEs
GOVERNMENT
Theory
Party state entity Private entity Provides Guides

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Party state entity Private entity Provides Guides
FINANCIAL SECTOR
Source: MERICS based on MIIT, Leaderdrive annual reports and website, industry reporting and Wind Financial
Terminal, © MERICS
figure 2, continued
Beijing orchestrates state-connected actors to support high-tech SMEs
Key actors in China's SME support ecosystem and their respective roles
R&D support
*Values for 2022
Key customers
GGFs:
Advanced
Manufacturing
Ind. Investment
fund
Banks
UNIVERSITIES:
Harbin Institute
of Technology,
Shanghai Jiao
Tong University,
Southeast
University
Leaderdrive
Shanghai
Stock
Exchange
STAR Market
Other
investors
LARGE
FIRMS, SOEs:
Estun, Siasun
Robotics,
Huashu Robot,
Shanghai
STEP Electric
GOVERNMENT
Practice: The case of Leaderdrive
CNY 14 million
in subsidies*
CNY 1.1 billion
raised by IPO
CNY 310 million
in short- & long-
term loans*
Owns 4.96%
of shares
CNY 169 million
paid-in capital

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
3. Deficiencies in the high-tech SME
cultivation system
China's accelerator state is a pivotal force in
promoting high-tech SMEs, but it appears to
suffer from local political interference. Officials
at the municipal and provincial levels employ
detailed selection criteria to identify innovative
SMEs by considering aspects like niche product
focus, growth performance, patent possession,
and research and development (R&D) intensity.
However, close examination of the firms selected
reveals that not all align with the accelerator
program's objectives. Large firms are obtaining
Little Giant status for themselves or their
subsidiaries. The program will only be as effective
as its selection process allows.
Among the sample of 44 Little Giant robotics
firms mentioned above, approximately one-in-
four appear to fall short of selection standards or
contradict program objectives. Two companies
exceed the SME threshold in terms of revenue
and employees, while another two demonstrated
lackluster economic performance. Nine of the 44
companies were fully owned subsidiaries of larger
firms. For instance, Siasun Robot & Automation and
Shanghai STEP Electric Corporation are among
China’s leading robot manufacturers, yet their
subsidiaries were both selected as Little Giant firms.
The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
(MIIT) allows some exceptions for firms which score
particularly well in some areas but fail in others.13 Y et
leniency with selection criteria suggests challenges
in finding enough firms that meet prescribed
benchmarks. It may also indicate that the scheme
is being repurposed to suit local priorities, or that
personal connections are influencing the results.
China’s previous efforts to stimulate high-tech
SME R&D efforts through the Innofund program
have faced similar selection issues.14 While the
accelerator state system demonstrates impressive
scope and resource allocation capabilities, it is
susceptible to the misdirection of funds toward less
innovative firms.
Outlook: Increased challenges
for foreign actors
China's accelerator state program, aimed at
nurturing high-tech SMEs, has far-reaching
implications for foreign companies and
governments. First, it threatens the position of
foreign firms in China and abroad. The program
explicitly targets foreign-dominated sectors,
aiming to replace imports in key value chains.
With almost 100,000 Specialized SMEs and more
than 12,000 Little Giants receiving state support,
foreign enterprises need to prepare for heightened
competition. While the program may not deliver
immediate results in all areas, government pressure
to adopt indigenous suppliers will steadily increase
across the board.
The sheltered position of China’s high-tech
SMEs within their enormous home market is a
crucial advantage. Once they scale up domestic
production and invest more in R&D, they are well
placed to tackle foreign markets. Foreign firms do
not have access to this sort of “safe haven.” The
impact will be felt acutely in emerging technologies
where China expects its high-tech SMEs to act
as key innovators and lead market growth, such
as renewable energy, power equipment, medical
technology, and electric vehicles.
Foreign firms need to invest more in innovation
and digitalization to maintain their competitiveness.
The rise of local Chinese companies such as
Leaderdrive, which are acquiring market share
in areas long dominated by foreign companies,
ought to be a wake-up call for foreign firms. While
many foreign companies have enjoyed favorable
positions in China due to specialization and
technological advantages, the tide may quickly turn.
Second, by further blurring the lines between state
support and market forces, Beijing has made it
more difficult to track distortionary practices and
enforce fair competition. Foreign governments
must recognize that many of China’s SMEs now
enjoy the full backing of Chinese industrial policy
and represent a new conduit for market distortions.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Close exchange between governments and their
businesses operating in China will be necessary to
monitor developments and take remedial action.
In Europe, for instance, institutions like the European
Union (EU)’s SME Trade Defence Helpdesk monitor
market distortions that disadvantage European SMEs
and take prompt action where needed. The application
of a “government-backed” label to relevant Chinese
high-tech SMEs should be considered by the EU to
fend off subsidized foreign products and entities. EU
ambitions to reform the international trade rulebook
should also consider the challenges posed by China’s
direct and indirect support for high-tech SMEs.
Foreign governments can engage in dialogue to
encourage China to change course. It is important to
make clear that undermining the position of foreign
firms in China in turn both weakens the ties between
China and other advanced economies and sets
relations on a more adversarial footing.
Finally, on the macro level, the extensive and skewed
ambition of China’s accelerator state program could
slow economic growth in China. The broadly defined
scope, which targets a wide range of industrial
sectors, could be overly ambitious as Chinese
firms are unlikely to make significant strides in all
areas. Pursuing ever greater localization will lead
to economic inefficiencies. The sectoral focus also
excludes consumer-oriented service-based industries,
such entertainment and education, which served as
strong drivers of growth in recent decades. Growth-
enhancing innovation may be more likely to come
from areas like gaming, fintech, or e-commerce, but
these are ignored in favor of hard technologies.
The government steerage of capital markets also
harbors risks. Bad investments and misuse of funds
earmarked for high-tech SMEs could further drag
down growth. This can be seen, for instance, in the
flawed process of identifying innovative firms. There
is a risk that due to political distortions, a significant
share of resources will flow into large parent
companies or underperforming firms rather than
promoting the growth of dynamic, independent firms.
That being said, to the degree that funds that would
have otherwise been dedicated to large firms are
now going to SMEs, the new approach could be
considered an improvement. The accelerator state
suggests that efficiency gains could be achieved by
relying more on market forces as well as improving
the technological and commercial parameters for
directing funding.
Conclusion
China is extending its industrial policy
toward small and medium-sized enterprises,
heralding the emergence of an “accelerator
state.” Government support is increasingly
being directed toward high-tech SMEs
that can specialize in niche markets and
localize key industrial supply chains.
To do so, Beijing has created a tiered
cultivation system that blends state
guidance with market forces to address
the holistic needs of SMEs, particularly
by offering preferential access to finance.
The Little Giants program demonstrates
that the preferential treatment given
to SMEs has its drawbacks. While some
high-tech SMEs are advancing self-reliance
in core technologies, others appear to be
gaming the system through connections
with local officials and large industry.
Foreign manufacturing firms should
be aware of the risks posed to their
business by Chinese state-back SMEs.
These firms have developed an unfair
advantage in their home market that can
be leveraged to increase market share
abroad. By creating ambiguities between
state support and market forces, China
has made it more difficult for foreign
governments to track distortionary
practices and enforce fair competition.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Endnotes
1. “Notice on Issuing the “14th Five-Y ear Plan” Robot
Industry Development Plan,” Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology of the People’s Republic of
China, December 28, 2021, https://
www.miit.gov.cn/zwgk/zcwj/wjfb/tz/art/2021/rt_1
4c785d5a1124f75900363a0f45d9bbe.html.
2. “Humanoid Robots Wind up, Core Components Help Sail
Away -- Robot Industry in-Depth Report,”
Zheshang Securities, October 15, 2022, https://
pg.jrj.com.cn/acc/Res/CN_RES/INDUS/2022/10/
15/5d546581-4fdc-4b14-aea8-7741818b8a97.pdf.
3. “China Robotics Industry Development Report
(2021),” Chinese Institute of Electronics, September
2021, http://www.worldrobot
conference.com/202109/2021%E4%B8%AD%
E5%9B%BD%E6%9C%BA%E5%99%A8%E4%
BA%BA%E4%BA%A7%E4%B8%9A%E5%8F%91%E5%B1%
95%E6%8A%A5%E5%91%8A.pdf.
4. “Small and Medium Enterprises Service Month |
Zhou Pingjun: “Specialized, Specialized, Special
and New” Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Policy Orientation,” Advanced
Manufacturing Technology Business School,
June 2022, https://www.amtbs.cn/article/
e8244eb50e794f388acb547a202ca9c6.
5. “Three “new” and one “hot” reflect the development
potential of “little giant” enterprises,” Xinhua, September
20, 2023, http://www.news.cn/tech/20230920/
909bea7e3d844472a5a639cb24eb0bae/c.html.
6. Zhu Haibin, “[Open Source] Beijing Exchange Second
Anniversary Special Topic 1: Born toward the sun,”
golden key to wealth via Sohu, September 1, 2023,
https://www.sohu.com/a/716938494_121123885.
7. Leaderdrive, accessed January 19, 2024, http://www.
leaderdrive.cn/companyIntroducePage.
8. “Notice on Issuing Several Measures to Help Small,
Medium and Micro Enterprises Stabilize Growth,
Adjust Structure and Strengthen Capabilities,”
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of
the People’s Republic of China, January 15, 2023,
https://www.miit.gov.cn/zwgk/zcwj/wjfb/tz/art/2023/
art_0ac5cd8988084fff9e4a70da792baa10.html.
9. “Financing credit for specialized and special
new enterprises may become more flexible,”
Shi Qingchuan, Sina Finance, May 30, 2022,
https://finance.sina.com.cn/roll/2022-05-30/
doc-imizirau5634939.shtml.
10. “Nearly 50% of the special new financing in the first
quarter was concentrated in Beijing and Shanghai, and
30% of the newly listed A-share companies were small
giants | Specialized
Special New Capital Market Quarterly Report,” Sina
Finance, May 15, 2023, https://finance.sina.com.cn/tech/
roll/2023-05-15/doc-imytvrpe7311
928.shtml.
11. “Discovering Specialized SMEs and Little
Giants – Joint report on Specialized SMEs total number
and sectors,” Everbright Securities, October 23, 2021,
https://pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/
H3_AP202110261525051169_1.pdf?1635266
793000.pdf.
12. “Explainer | A timeline of China’s 32-month Big Tech
crackdown that killed the world’s largest
IPO and wiped out trillions in value,” Lillian
Zhang, South China Morning Post, July 15, 2023, https://
www.scmp.com/tech/big-tech/article/3227753/timeline-
chinas-32-month-big-tech-crackdown-killed-worlds-
largest-ipo-and-wiped-out-trillions-value.
13. “Interpretation of the “Interim Measures for the Gradient
Cultivation and Management of High-Quality Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises”,” Government of the People’s
Republic of China,
June 3, 2022, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/
2022-06/03/content_5693839.htm.
14. Yanbo Wang, Jizhen Li, and Jeffrey L. Furman, “Firm
performance and state innovation funding: Evidence
from China’s Innofund program,” Research Policy 46, no
6, (2017): 1142-1161.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
IGCC • MERICS • March 2024
The Accelerator State: Small Firms Join the Fray of China’s Techno-Industrial Drive
Author
Alexander Brown is an analyst at the Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS). His research focuses on
industrial policy and foreign economic policy. Before joining MERICS, he was an associate consultant and
project consultant at APCO Worldwide in Frankfurt am Main and Beijing. Alexander holds a master’s degree in
international political economy from Peking University, and a bachelor’s in politics and international relations
from the University of Melbourne.
About IGCC
The UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC) is a network of researchers from across the
University of California and the Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore national labs who produce and use
research to help build a more peaceful, prosperous world. We conduct rigorous social science research on
international security, the environment, geoeconomics, nuclear security, and the future of democracy; help
to educate and train the next generation of peacemakers; and strive to ensure that what we are discovering
contributes to a safer world.
For more information: ucigcc.org
About MERICS
The Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS) was founded in 2013 by the German Stiftung Mercator to
strengthen knowledge and debate about China in Germany and Europe. With international researchers from
Europe, the United States and Australia, MERICS is currently the largest European research institute focusing
solely on the analysis of contemporary China and its relations with Europe and the wider world. MERICS experts
have a wide range of expertise on China, scientific qualifications and methodological skills. With its main
premises in Berlin, MERICS also operates an office in Brussels.
For more information: merics.org
