
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Vol. 361
Role and Challenges of Small Businesses from the
Perspective of Transformative Innovation Policy

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
｜Vol. 361. April 27th. 2026｜

Role and Challenges of Small
Businesses from the Perspective
of Transformative Innovation
Policy

Jieun Seong· Hyejin Jo· Wichin Song

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
STEPI Insight | VOL.359

Role and Challenges of Small Businesses from the Perspective of
Transformative Innovation Policy
Jieun Seong· Hyejin Jo· Wichin Song
Small businesses are being reexamined as key agents of regional innovation and
national growth amid complex crises including low birthrates, aging populations,
regional decline, and structural low growth. As small businesses are increasingly
included as major beneficiaries of AI and digital transformation policies, a paradigm
shift toward strengthening innovation capabilities has begun in earnest. This report
presents policy challenges for strengthening the role of small businesses and their
innovation capabilities from the perspective of transformative innovation policy.
Recently administration has redefined small businesses as economic, cultural,
and social innovation a gents and established related policy foundations. Under the
‘People’s Sovereignty Government’ initiative, small businesses are positioned as ‘core
agents of economic sovereignty’ and ‘public and social agents maintaining the
community safety net’, expanding their role beyond simple protection and support
targets. Institutional foundations have also been established, including the designation
of small businesses as AI support targets in Article 16 of the AI Basic Act, AI and digital
support system construction under National Agenda No. 61, and the establishment of a
dedicated vice-ministerial office for small business policy within the Ministry of SMEs
and Startups. While the administration’s small business policies show positive
direction from a transformati ve innovation policy perspective - particularly in
redefining small businesses as innovation agents and pursuing differentiated policies
reflecting regional characteristics - fragmented support systems across ministries,
limitations of individual firm -centered support, and the need to transition policy
outcomes toward tangible social and economic impact remain 30 Summary as key
challenges.
SUMMARY

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Small businesses account for 95.2% of all businesses and are core economic
agents, yet structural vulnerabilities and insufficient innovation capabilities call for
their growth as transformative innovation agents. Interview results indicate that most
small businesses focus on livelihood and sales growth, with very low awareness of
regional sustainability and public value creation. Meanwhile, success cases are
emerging among entrepreneurial small businesses that combine local resources and
culture with differentiated business models and AI utilization, highlighting the need for
customized nurturing strategies to scale and model these cases.
Based on this analysis, this report proposes four policy challenges for
strengthening transformative innovation activities of small businesses. First, mission-
oriented innovation with differentiated approaches by target group is needed. Clear
missions should be set for solving challenges such as regional depopulation, with mid-
to-long-term innovation programs linking small business empowerment, digital
capability building, financial support, and regulatory reform to social and economic
impact creation. Entrepreneurial small businesses should be prioritized as initial
targets, with successful models gradually scaled to subsistence-type small businesses.
Second, strengthening small business innovation capabilities through AI utilization
requires moving beyond supplier - centered one-time training toward customized
education by industry and growth stage, living lab-based demand-driven solution co-
design, and the establishment of field-oriented support systems that small businesses
can tangibly experience. Third, responding to regional challenges and expanding roles
as co-creation agents calls for linking small business innovation activities to regional
challenges such as local revitalization, super -aging, and energy transition, while
operating systematic programs to foster small businesses as active stakeholders and
co-developers of regional innovation. Fourth, pursuing collective innovation through
innovation ecosystem formation requires building shared resources at regional and
sectoral levels, fostering participation of diverse agents including academic, cultural,
and social economy organizations, and strengthening the intermediary role of middle
support organizations that connect small businesses, government, businesses,
universities, and research institutions.
