
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits
Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing
Sam Howell

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the Author
Sam Howell is an adjunct associate fellow
at the Center for a New American Security
(CNAS) and a military operations and security
force assistance analyst on the Afghanistan
War Commission. Her research interests
include quantum information science,
semiconductors, STEM workforce issues, and the use of
emerging technologies to enhance human performance.
Howell previously worked as an intelligence analyst at a
risk consulting firm in Washington, DC. She also worked as
a counterterrorism researcher at the National Consortium
for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism
(START) and the Elliott School of International Affairs. She
began her career as a staff assistant on Capitol Hill. Howell’s
commentary and analysis have appeared in outlets including
The Economist, Foreign Policy, Lawfare, The Diplomat,
and Voice of America. She holds an MA in Security Policy
Studies from the George Washington University and a BA in
Bioethics and Political Science from Baylor University.
About the Technology and National
Security Program
The CNAS Technology and National Security Program
explores the policy challenges associated with emerging
technologies. A key focus of the Program is bringing
together the technology and policy communities to
better understand these challenges and together develop
solutions.
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Jeffrey Grover and Bob Sorensen for their
feedback and comments on an initial draft of this report.
She also thanks the subject matter experts who participated
in CNAS’s quantum technology workshops or agreed to
be interviewed for this report. Within CNAS, the author
thanks Julia Arnold for her research assistance; Maura
McCarthy, Caroline Steel, Melody Cook, and Rin Rothback
for their editing and design support; and Vivek Chilukuri,
Martijn Rasser, and Paul Scharre for their guidance and
encouragement. This report was made possible with the
generous support of the Carnegie Corporation of New York.
As a research and policy institution committed to the
highest standards of organizational, intellectual, and
personal integrity, CNAS maintains strict intellectual
independence and sole editorial direction and control over
its ideas, projects, publications, events, and other research
activities. CNAS does not take institutional positions on
policy issues, and the content of CNAS publications reflects
the views of their authors alone. In keeping with its mission
and values, CNAS does not engage in lobbying activity and
complies fully with all applicable federal, state, and local
laws. CNAS will not engage in any representational activities
or advocacy on behalf of any entities or interests and, to
the extent that the Center accepts funding from non-U.S.
sources, its activities will be limited to bona fide scholastic,
academic, and research-related activities, consistent with
applicable federal law. The Center publicly acknowledges on
its website annually all donors who contribute.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
TABLE OF CONTENTS
01 Executive Summary
03 Introduction
04 Technology Primer: What is Quantum?
11 A U.S.-China Comparison
22 Securing U.S. Leadership in
 Quantum Computing
30 Conclusion
32 Appendix: Global Entities Engaged in
 Quantum R&D

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
T
Executive Summary
he United Nations General Assembly recently
declared 2025 the International Year of
Quantum Science and Technology.1 Quantum
information science, a field once exclusive to
academic researchers, has rapidly expanded to
“include significant private sector development and
commercialization.”2 At this particularly opportune
moment, science now “stands at the verge of a new
quantum revolution.”3
Amid climate crises, widespread food insecurity,
pandemics, and countless other societal challenges,
the new quantum revolution promises to benefit nearly
every facet of modern life. Quantum technologies,
with their unparalleled speed and processing power,
could unlock transformative innovations in a range of
industries, from energy and agriculture to medicine
and finance. At the same time, however, irrespon-
sible actors could use quantum technologies to break
encryption, enable mass surveillance, and design new
weapons systems. In short, global advancements in
quantum technology have profound implications for
U.S. economic and national security. The United States
needs a long-term strategy to boost its competitiveness
in quantum technology and ensure that the technology
develops in alignment with U.S. values and interests.
This report takes stock of the global quest to build
and scale quantum computers and emphasizes the
U.S.-China dynamic. To counter the risk of U.S. adver-
saries achieving surprise scientific breakthroughs and
weaponizing quantum systems, U.S. policymakers
must understand the potential power of quantum com-
puters, the state of quantum technology research and
development, and the barriers to continued progress.
They must also understand what U.S. adversaries hope
to achieve in quantum technology and the implications
of ceding U.S. leadership in this critical field.
This report arrives at several policy recommenda-
tions for the United States to secure its advantages in
quantum computing and mitigate any vulnerabilities.
The recommendations fall under two particularly
pressing policy areas: supply chain management and
workforce development.
Supply Chain Management
A well-established quantum technology supply chain
with limited dependence on foreign suppliers is critical
to U.S. leadership and competitiveness in quantum
technology. To foster the development of a secure and
reliable supply chain, the White House should:
 ¡ Conduct a comprehensive review of the quantum
technology supply chain to identify key inputs, detect
critical nodes and potential vulnerabilities, and assess
opportunities to develop additional suppliers across a
range of regions.
 ¡ Leverage financial incentives and the Tech Hubs
Program to promote domestic production of quantum
technology inputs deemed too sensitive to reside
outside of the United States. The White House should
leverage the Defense Production Act, Small Business
Innovation Research program, Small Business
Technology Transfer program, and related tools to
support U.S. companies developing key quantum
technology inputs, and incentivize them to align
research and development efforts with U.S. govern-
ment priorities.
 ¡ Direct and resource the Quantum Economic
Development Consortium to continually monitor U .S.
and foreign competitor quantum computing supply
chains. Early detection of emerging vulnerabilities
will give policymakers the opportunity to shape the
quantum computing supply chain before the United
States develops unsustainable dependencies on
competitors. Supply chain monitoring will also help
illuminate which modalities adversaries are pursuing
and how rapidly they are progressing toward
fault-tolerant quantum computing.
 ¡ Establish an international forum to coordinate supply
chains with U .S. allies and partners, which will allow
like-minded countries to maximize their compara-
tive advantages and facilitate supply chain burden
sharing.
1

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Workforce Development
Access to a skilled and diverse quantum workforce
is critical to a country’s competitiveness in quantum
technology. Human talent is required to design quantum
technologies, identify quantum applications, and ensure
responsible technology use. But quantum expertise
is a commodity in short supply and skills gaps could
undermine the United States’ ability to reach critical
development milestones. The U.S. government, private
industry, and academia can take several steps to grow and
enhance the United States’ pool of human talent.
 ¡ The National Quantum Coordination Office should
develop processes to understand workforce require-
ments and skills gaps within the quantum ecosystem.
The United States needs a mechanism to pinpoint
human talent vulnerabilities, identify opportunities
for reskilling and upskilling initiatives, and assess the
capacity of U.S. institutions—including universities,
national labs, and private companies—to effectively
nurture quantum talent. An annual systematic study
of quantum workforce needs and projections will help
policymakers, business leaders, and the academic com-
munity make more informed decisions about how best
to foster a quantum-capable workforce.
 ¡ Congress should establish a national quantum educa-
tion and workforce development center to harmonize
and support existing initiatives to build a more robust
pipeline of quantum talent. A national center will
provide a needed venue to coordinate disparate
ongoing workforce development programs, share
resources and best practices, and connect job seekers
to relevant employers.
 ¡ The White House should work with allies and partners
to create cross-training and reciprocal research exchange
programs with quantum centers worldwide. No country
has exclusive access to the people required to advance
state-of-the-art quantum technology. The White
House should collaborate with allies and partners
so that every country can benefit from readily avail-
able quantum expertise. The Biden administration
should start by increasing the size of the Quadrilateral
Security Dialogue (Quad) STEM Fellowship program
and leveraging the budding U.S.-Japan-South Korea
trilateral relationship to activate new workforce devel-
opment initiatives.
 ¡ Universities and quantum companies should work
together to develop industry-specific postsecondary
education programs, which will ensure that students
gain the practical experience required to fill critical
quantum talent gaps immediately upon graduation.
 ¡ Quantum companies should partner with K–12 school
systems to develop quantum curricula and experiential
learning opportunities for students. Such engagement
will help teachers gain confidence teaching quantum
principles and increase student exposure to and
interest in quantum technology.
 ¡ Quantum companies should partner with state and local
governments to expand quantum education and profes-
sional development opportunities to individuals in rural
areas. Quantum apprenticeship programs, acceler-
ated skill development programs, online certification
programs, or similar initiatives will allow individuals
in rural areas—a sizable untapped talent pool—to hone
their skills and advance their earning and promotion
potential, ultimately contributing to a more robust and
diverse quantum workforce.
@CNASDC
2

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Quantum computing is a
subset of QIS that harnesses
the laws of quantum mechanics
to solve large and complex
problems that are otherwise
intractable on classical
computing counterparts.
T
Introduction
he United States and the People’s Republic of
China are locked in a long-term, strategic contest
for geopolitical power. One critical and emerging
technology area—quantum information science (QIS)—
is set to play an outsized role in determining which
country prevails.
China increasingly aims to reshape the long-standing
U.S.-led international order in its own image and is devel-
oping the economic, diplomatic, and military capabilities
to do so. The gap in national strength between the United
States and China is narrowing rapidly. For the first time
since the Cold War, the United States risks losing its
position as the global superpower.
Technology is a key battleground of U.S.-China com-
petition. Critical and emerging technologies—including
QIS, artificial intelligence, biotechnology, and semicon-
ductors—are tools that help countries promote their
interests and maximize their global competitiveness. As
National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan acknowledged in
a 2022 speech, “Advancements in science and technology
are poised to define the geopolitical landscape of the 21st
century.”4 The United States cannot prevail in strategic
competition without first establishing leadership in
emerging technologies.
Maintaining an edge
in QIS, a technology area
with tremendous economic
and military potential, is
especially important to U.S.
technological and global
leadership. U.S. government
officials across multiple
administrations have iden-
tified QIS as an area that
demands attention over the coming decade.5 They under-
stand that competitiveness in quantum technology could
significantly enhance overall national competitiveness.
The countries with the best quantum technologies could
also have the best pharmaceuticals, batteries, fertilizers,
intelligence collection, and weapons systems.
Quantum technologies promise to support transforma-
tive advancements in industries like healthcare, finance,
and agriculture.6 Quantum computers could simulate
interactions between complex molecules, paving the
way to more effective medications, diagnostics, and
vaccines. They could also interpret financial data and
model trends, contributing to dramatically improved
portfolio optimization, risk analysis, fraud detection,
and capital allocation. Quantum computers even have a
role to play in mitigating climate change and fostering
sustainability. They could accelerate improvements in
electric battery technology, unlock more eco-friendly
fertilizer manufacturing processes, and help solve
power grid optimization problems.7 Nearly every facet of
modern life stands to benefit from the unmatched power
of quantum computers.
But quantum computers could become a
double-edged sword. Countries that harness the power
of quantum computers for good might simultane-
ously use the technology for more nefarious purposes.
Quantum systems could help improve the accuracy and
lethality of militaries and intelligence services, making it
easier for governments to identify and neutralize targets
or surveil and repress specific populations. Quantum
systems could also help countries design new weapons,
overwhelm adversaries’ defensive capabilities, or rapidly
analyze data across multiple domains of warfare.8 Many
emerging technologies possess such dual-use appli-
cability, but quantum technologies are exceptionally
challenging to manage—quantum is a relatively new and
rapidly evolving technology whose full potential has yet
to be fully explored or even conceived. The first-mover
advantages of quantum technologies are thus significant.
The first country to master the process of building a
useful quantum computer will
possess not just a powerful
tool, but technical know-how
that is extremely difficult
to cultivate.
The first country to develop,
scale, and integrate quantum
technologies could attain an
upper hand in establishing
market dominance, setting
technology standards, and
crafting frameworks for quantum governance. The global
leader in QIS will gain a set of tools that could be used to
crack encryption methods and threaten the security of
adversaries’ corporate, military, and government infra-
structure. Quantum computing could also bestow new
capabilities to shape ethical norms—the technology holds
the potential to exacerbate global socioeconomic divides,
breach individuals’ privacy and security, and contribute
to job displacement.9 In other words, the country leading
in QIS will significantly influence whether quantum
technologies are used to promote and protect democratic
values or undermine them.
There are three primary subsets of quantum tech-
nologies: quantum computing, quantum sensing, and
quantum communications. This report focuses on
3
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
quantum computing, the subset of QIS that has received
the largest share of public and private funding in the
United States thus far, reflecting its perceived impor-
tance to U.S. national security.10 It is also the subset
in which the United States arguably faces the fiercest
competition. Quantum computing has the most compet-
itors among the three QIS subsets, the largest estimated
market, and the most funding globally. At least 17
countries have national strategies to support quantum
computing research and development (R&D), including
the United States and China.11 According to most esti-
mates, China outspends the United States on quantum
technology R&D by approximately $13.4 billion.12
This report explores how the United States can
maintain and advance its competitiveness in quantum
computing. It provides an overview of QIS and the
current state of quantum computing R&D. It also
compares the United States’ and China’s quantum com-
puting priorities and capabilities, as well as their capacity
for continued innovation. Thereafter, the report high-
lights two key policy areas—supply chain management
and workforce development—that demand policymakers’
immediate attention. U.S.-China competition in quantum
computing raises several pressing policy concerns,
including questions about export controls, outbound
investment restrictions, standard setting, and interna-
tional governance frameworks. However, the United
States cannot effectively address these questions without
first establishing a resilient quantum supply chain and
fostering the workforce required to remain at the cutting
edge of this fast-moving field. The report concludes
with recommendations to maximize U.S. advantages
in these areas to ensure sustained American quantum
competitiveness.
Technology Primer:
What Is Quantum?
wo major advances of the 20th century—quantum
mechanics and information technology—gave
rise to the field of QIS in the 1980s.13 Quantum
mechanics is a subfield of physics that describes the
behavior of nature at the atomic and subatomic level.14
Information technology involves the use of so-called
classical computers, digital communication, and
related devices to solve problems on a broad scale.15
QIS combines the two fields by leveraging “the laws of
quantum physics for the storage, transmission, pro-
cessing, and measurement of information.”16 QIS will
theoretically provide the capability to overcome the
physical limits of classical information systems and
technologies, unlocking new discoveries and innovations
in a range of industries.
Quantum computing is a subset of QIS that har-
nesses the laws of quantum mechanics to solve large
and complex problems that are otherwise intractable
on classical computing counterparts.17 Quantum com-
puters take advantage of several quantum-mechanical
phenomena that distinguish them from classical com-
puters. The foundation of classical computing is binary
bits that switch on and off and can only exist in states
of either zero or one. Quantum computers are based
on qubits, which can exist in multiple combinations of
states. This phenomenon is referred to as superposition.18
Superposition makes quantum computers significantly
more powerful than classical computers. Because
qubits can represent zero, one, or any combination of
the two, the number of possible states for a qubit far
exceeds the possibilities for binary bits, giving quantum
computers greater capacity to absorb, explore, and
process information.
However, qubits can only hold superposition until an
observation, measurement, or undesired environmental
disturbance occurs, at which point they collapse into
a single state. Each quantum state maintains a certain
probability ranging between zero and one. Quantum
interference, which refers to the way that wavelike
quantum particles in a superposition of multiple states
engage with each other, is one way to affect probability
amplitudes and bias the outcome of an observation or
measurement toward a particular state.19 Interference is
used to control quantum states, perform computations,
and detect and correct computational errors. It can also
support significant improvements in a quantum comput-
er’s computational speed.20
Visualizing a “quantum coin” illuminates the concepts
of superposition and interference. A traditional coin
only exists in one of two possible states—heads or tails.
But a quantum coin can exist in a superposition of these
classical states. When the quantum coin is not being
observed or measured, it can be any particular combi-
nation of both heads and tails. Once one measures the
quantum coin—such as observing the result of a coin
toss—the quantum coin collapses into one of its two
states, heads or tails.21 Interference allows the observer
to increase the likelihood that the coin lands on their
desired outcome. In other words, interference helps
program quantum systems so that correct answers are
more likely and incorrect answers are less likely.22
Entanglement is another unique quantum
phenomenon that affords quantum computers unpar-
alleled power and speed. Unlike digital bits that have
T
@CNASDC
4

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
independent states, entangled qubits interrelate in such
a way that the properties of one cannot be described
independently from the properties of the others, even
when separated by distance. Entangled qubits cohere
with each other and function as a connected system or
unit. One can measure the state of a qubit and know the
state of the others in the system, even without measuring
them directly.
Assume, for example, that two particles are in a
superposition of red and blue under conditions in which,
if one is red, the other must be blue. The concept of
entanglement means that measuring the color of one
particle fixes the color of the other, regardless of any
space between the two. Like superposition, entanglement
enables quantum systems to process exponentially higher
volumes of information than their classical counterparts
and gain exponentially more power with the addition of
more qubits that can interact and communicate with each
other. This means that quantum computers can solve a
narrow subset of complex problems that are beyond the
capacity of classical computers.
Technologies that rely on these quantum phenomena
already exist, including lasers, the Global Positioning
System (GPS), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).23
But existing technologies do not require a significant
amount of control over quantum particles and only
leverage quantum effects to a limited degree.
Researchers and engineers must address several
obstacles to build more robust quantum technolo-
gies. One such obstacle is quantum decoherence, which
refers to quantum systems’ fragility and sensitivity to
external disturbances such as variation in magnetic
fields or radiation from nearby objects. Decoherence
causes quantum particles to fall out of superposition
and entanglement and lose their utility.24 The QIS field
broadly aims to “advance the theory and experimental
capabilities needed” to increase the amount of time that
particles can maintain superposition and entanglement
Key Concepts
Qubit: The basic unit of information in quantum
computing.
Superposition: Qubits can represent zero, one, or any
combination of the two states.
Entanglement: The properties of qubits cannot be
described independently of one another, even when
separated by distance.
Quantum Interference: The ability of one particle’s
wavelike action to diminish or amplify the action of
other particles. In quantum computing, this
wavelike interaction between particles can be used
to influence the probability of outcomes when a
quantum state is measured.
Quantum Coherence: Qubits' ability to maintain
superposition and entanglement during computation.
Noise: External disturbances—such as variation in
magnetic fields, radiation from nearby objects, or
cross talk between particles—that cause qubits to
decohere or fall apart.
(referred to as coherence times), control quantum par-
ticles, and leverage quantum phenomena for new tasks
and capabilities.25
Quantum Computing Applications
Quantum computers lack general-purpose functionality
and will not replace classical computers for a wide range
of classical computing jobs. Classical computers will
continue to outperform quantum computers at simple,
straightforward tasks like arithmetic operations, as well
as tasks like web browsing, email communication, and
word processing.26 Quantum computers are best suited
for specific applications. They are expected to be particu-
larly good at solving optimization, simulation, and prime
factorization problems.
A few key quantum algorithms—which define the
steps required to complete computations—enable these
applications.27 Shor’s algorithm, which finds the prime
factors of an integer exponentially faster than classical
algorithms, supports prime factorization problem-solv-
ing.28 The algorithm could thus enable quantum
computers to break the widely implemented public-key
encryption systems near-universally relied on for secure
data transmission and protection. The algorithm could
also undermine the security of most blockchain proto-
cols, which rely on the inability of classical computers to
factor large numbers.29 Grover’s algorithm, which rapidly
searches large databases and identifies ideal solutions
from a set of available alternatives, supports optimization
problem-solving. Quantum computers running Grover’s
algorithm could potentially help maximize efficiency and
cost savings across a wide range of industries.30
Quantum computers are also well-suited to simulate
quantum-mechanical effects and illuminate quantum
interactions within large, complex systems. This
feature could expedite scientific learning, research, and
discovery in areas like biochemistry and advanced mate-
rials.31 Newer quantum algorithms indicate that quantum
5
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
computers could also help solve various mathematical
problems—such as linear differential equations, least-
square curve fitting, and matrix inversions—far faster
than classical computers. The Harrow-Hassidim-Lloyd
quantum algorithm, for example, performs rapid linear
algebra calculations and could be used to develop more
robust machine learning systems or overcome complex
engineering challenges.32
In short, quantum computers could solve highly
complex problems that classical computers cannot,
opening significant real-world opportunities—even
if they will not replace classical computers for a wide
range of compute problems.33 It is still unclear, however,
whether quantum computers can solve these highly
complex problems at a reasonable cost. Grover’s algo-
rithm, for example, may not provide enough of an
efficiency advantage to offset the time and resources
required to perform error correction, a process described
in subsequent sections that gives quantum computers
the capacity to execute the algorithm.34 But quantum
researchers and engineers are working to overcome these
overhead costs, and the benefits are already apparent in
the aerospace, automotive, and port logistics industries.
The U.S. aerospace company Boeing is exploring the
use of quantum computers to design ply composites,
the fundamental building blocks of wings, fuselages,
and other critical aerospace components. Ply design
problems, which require “finding the optimal way to
stack layers of material on top of one another” and
can involve up to 100,000 variables, are too large and
complex for classical computers.35 Boeing’s routine
approach to ply design thus involves a time and
resource-intensive process of breaking problems into
smaller pieces that a classical computer can digest and
patching together disparate results.
Quantum computers could help streamline the
process. In 2023, Boeing researchers successfully ran a
ply composite problem involving 40 variables on an IBM
quantum computer. The experiment demonstrated that
“a single qubit could handle three times the informa-
tion load of a classical bit and represent three times as
many variables.”36 With additional maturation, quantum
computers could expedite and simplify Boeing’s design
process by solving ply composite problems in a single
computation. Boeing is already exploring additional
quantum computing applications as well, including the
use of quantum computers to develop advanced corro-
sion-resistant chemicals.37
In the automotive industry, Mercedes-Benz is
exploring the use of quantum computers to aid in the
design of lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, an essential
component of electric vehicles, energy storage systems,
and other green technologies. Classical computers lack
the capacity to efficiently find solutions to Li-ion elec-
trolyte optimization problems, a key feature of battery
design. Quantum computers can use superposition
and entanglement to explore possible chemical reac-
tions in liquid Li-ion electrolytes at the molecular level
and identify possible designs. They can then leverage
interference to amplify optimal designs and diminish
suboptimal ones.
Quantum computers’ computational power and
speed could improve understanding of electrochem-
ical reactions and pave the way to higher-performing
car batteries.38 Instead of testing hundreds of different
chemicals for their performance in a battery, quantum
computers could simulate their performance more effi-
ciently and reduce the number of physical experiments
in chemistry laboratories. Quantum computers could be
used to solve a series of other optimization problems in
the automotive industry as well. BMW , for example, is
investigating the use of quantum computers to determine
the best locations to install electrical charging stations,
find more efficient ways to purchase BMW components,
and increase aerodynamic performance and safety.39
The Port of Los Angeles has also used quantum com-
puting to improve infrastructure capacity, efficiency, and
supply chain resilience at Pier 300, the nation’s largest
facility for handling shipborne cargo. The Port deployed
the Hyper Optimization Nodal Efficiency (HONE)
quantum-powered AI engine in July 2020 to create a
“digital twin” of the terminal, identify key inefficiencies,
and simulate possible solutions. HONE has contributed
to “dramatically streamlined port operations” across
a number of key productivity performance indicators.
The terminal uses nearly 40 percent less rubber-tired
gantry crane resources for the unloading process since
deploying HONE. The cranes have also increased the
number of deliveries by more than 60 percent and trucks
arriving at the terminal spend approximately 10 minutes
less receiving their payload.40
Barriers to the Quantum Breakthrough:
Error Mitigation and Correction
Though quantum computing already demonstrates
great potential, it is a nascent technology that requires
additional maturation to deliver on its full economic and
military potential. Quantum computers available today
are noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) com-
puters—they are prone to considerable error rates and
relatively small in scale, which limits their applicability
to exploration and discovery.41 While NISQ computers
@CNASDC
6

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
can perform a few simple tasks, quantum computers—
and qubits specifically—must reach a higher level of
complexity to solve real-world problems successfully and
accurately. Fault-tolerant quantum computers that can
compensate for qubits’ inherent fragility and respond
to failures in quantum processors are key to executing
the most advanced quantum algorithms. Quantum error
mitigation and quantum error correction are tools to
offset the weaknesses of NISQ computers and unlock
fault tolerance.
Quantum error mitigation aims to address errors that
occur during algorithmic execution and impact the mea-
surement of a quantum computer’s output. Rather than
fixing a specific problem, error mitigation simply aims
to increase the stability of the computational environ-
ment. One approach to quantum error mitigation—which
includes “randomized compiling, measurement-error
mitigation, zero-noise extrapolation, and probabilistic
error cancellation”—can involve “running many slightly
different versions of a target algorithm, combining the
results to extract the correct answer” from a series of
flawed outputs, and modifying the original algorithm to
lessen the effect of errors.42 Error mitigation strategies
vary in their levels of accuracy, and each approach has
tradeoffs. An algorithm must run hundreds of times with
different configurations to derive maximum benefit from
most error mitigation strategies, for example, which
increases computing time and costs.43
Quantum error correction (QEC) aims to build redun-
dancies so that a quantum system produces accurate
outcomes even if a few qubits experience errors. QEC
involves encoding quantum information across multiple
physical qubits to form a logical qubit. These qubits
monitor the quantum processor and detect when errors
occur, without disturbing the information stored in indi-
vidual qubits. A correction code is then deployed based
on the type of error. The most common errors include
phase flip errors, in which a qubit loses its phase informa-
tion, bit flip errors, in which qubits depolarize into other
states, and gate operation errors, in which quantum gates
damage qubits.44 QEC is a “feedback stabilization process
that uses indirect measurements to gain the information
required to correct these errors.”45
QEC is a necessary step toward fault-tolerant quantum
computing, but it is challenging to implement. The
quantum threshold theorem indicates that quantum
hardware must reach a minimum error rate before it can
benefit from error correction.46 Current estimates suggest
that the error rate for the minimum unit of quantum
computation—a quantum gate—must be below 1 percent
to run the surface code, one of the most promising QEC
codes.47 Researchers are progressing toward hardware
that meets threshold requirements, but building systems
that can perform entangling quantum operations with
high fidelity remains a central engineering challenge.48
Further, some leading error-correcting codes require
more qubits than today’s quantum machines can rea-
sonably produce. The ratio between the number of
physical qubits required to support a single logical
qubit varies depending on the type of hardware, the
type of algorithm, and the amount of noise a quantum
system endures, but a large number of qubits could be
required to create one useful error-corrected logical
qubit.49 Google, which is at the leading edge of QEC
development, announced that it created a logical qubit
from 49 physical qubits in February 2023.50 The Google
team admitted that while the “error correction demon-
stration shows a clear path for scaling up the size of
quantum computing systems, it still falls well short
of the error correction rate needed to make quantum
computing practical.”51
Quantum computers will not reach maximum utility
until researchers overcome qubits’ fragility and sus-
ceptibility to errors. To unlock the most advanced
applications of quantum computing, quantum systems
must be large and scalable with the ability to manage a
lot of qubits—potentially up to one million—in a single
computation.52 But scale alone is insufficient. Fault-
tolerant quantum computing also requires high-quality,
error-corrected qubits that can maintain coherence for
extended periods of time. This means that the number of
qubits in a quantum system is just one important metric
for assessing performance. The system’s error and
fidelity rates matter too.
Quantum Computing Modalities
As countries around the world race to develop the first
full-scale quantum computer, governments and com-
panies have placed bets on which quantum hardware
architecture will prove most useful or commercially
viable. Quantum computers have several possible
designs and there are multiple modalities under devel-
opment. The approach to developing qubits, the building
block of the quantum computer, distinguishes one
modality from another.53
A quantum modality or hardware architecture must
do three things to deliver real-world impact: 1) create
well-characterized qubits, 2) allow qubits to be con-
trolled and measured, and 3) correct or mitigate errors.54
The system must also do these things at scale, meaning
it must manage a lot of qubits in a single computation.55
It is not yet clear which modality will be the first to meet
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing
7

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
these criteria, and it is possible that multiple modalities
could eventually check all the boxes.
No modality is flawless, but several demonstrate strong
potential. The most promising architectures at this stage
of development include superconducting qubits, trapped
ions, photonics, and neutral atoms.56 The United States
and China maintain capabilities in each of these four
areas, and both countries aim to be the first to deter-
mine which modalities meet the criteria for impactful
quantum computing. The subsequent section offers a
brief overview of each modality to illuminate the differ-
ences between them and the overall state of the quantum
computing development race.
Modality Advantages Disadvantages Leading Companies
Superconducting
Qubits
 ¡ Operation speed
 ¡ Well-developed fabrication techniques
 ¡ Artificially manufactured—high degree
of control over design
 ¡ Circuit logic similar to classical
computing
 ¡ Quick to decohere
 ¡ Dependent on cryogenic cooling
 ¡ Large infrastructure and power
requirements
 ¡ Artificially manufactured—no two
qubits are exactly alike
 ¡ IBM
 ¡ Google
 ¡ Atlantic Computing
 ¡ Rigetti Computing
 ¡ Origin Quantum Computing
 ¡ Tencent
Trapped Ions ¡ Long coherence times
 ¡ Low error rates
 ¡ Naturally occurring—identical qubits
 ¡ Can potentially operate at room
temperature
 ¡ Strong connectivity across qubits
 ¡ Slow gate times, measurement,
shuttling, and cooling
 ¡ Immature fabrication techniques
 ¡ Potential for crosstalk between qubits
 ¡ Quantinuum
 ¡ IonQ
 ¡ Qike Quantum
 ¡ Alpine Quantum Technology
Photonics ¡ Qubits resistant to interference
 ¡ Fast gate times
 ¡ Low cryogenic cooling demands
 ¡ Well-developed fabrication techniques
 ¡ Leverages microchip fabrication
techniques
 ¡ Not all-purpose machines
 ¡ Lack of connectivity between photons
 ¡ Difficult to entangle and scale
 ¡ Xanadu Quantum Technologies
 ¡ Orca Computing
 ¡ PsiQuantum
 ¡ TundraSystems Global
 ¡ Quandela
 ¡ Bose Quantum
 ¡ TurningQ
 ¡ Tencent
Neutral Atoms ¡ Strong coherence and connectivity
 ¡ Low error rates
 ¡ Naturally occurring—identical qubits
 ¡ Can potentially operate at room
temperature
 ¡ No complex electrical wiring required
 ¡ Challenging to scale
 ¡ Need for more advanced laser
technologies
 ¡ Slower processing times
 ¡ Nondestructive measurement is
challenging
 ¡ Atom Computing
 ¡ Pasqal
 ¡ QuEra
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Leading Quantum Computing Modalities57
SUPERCONDUCTING QUANTUM COMPUTERS
Superconducting quantum computers rely on qubits
developed from electrical circuits that have been cooled
to near–absolute zero temperatures. Electrical circuits
are composed of metals that transmit an electric current.
When cooled to low temperatures, they become supercon-
ducting and quantum mechanical, creating a solid-state
qubit. They conduct a current without resistance, do not
lose energy to the environment, and can occupy specific
energy states. Physical operations—such as the application
of microwave pulses or magnetic flux pulses—help control
and measure superconducting qubits.
Superconducting qubits have fast operation times and
complete computations faster than several molecular
qubit architectures. Additionally, many of the fabrica-
tion techniques used to build superconducting qubits
are the same as those used to build classical technol-
ogies, meaning that they have existed for decades and
undergone continual refinement. Superconducting
qubits are thus relatively easy to construct and could be
more scalable than qubits that require novel techniques.
Engineers also have significant control over the design
@CNASDC
8

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
of superconducting qubits, which could enable more
complex and tailored computational operations.58
At the same time, no two superconducting qubits are
exactly alike because they are manufactured, unlike
counterpart modalities like neutral atoms, which build
qubits out of naturally occurring individual atoms.
Superconducting quantum computers thus require
calibration that could become complicated as the size
of systems increases. Superconducting qubits also
decohere—or fall out of alignment with one another—
quickly, resulting in information losses. This means that
superconducting quantum systems may require more
qubits, operations, and error correction to perform
accurate computations.59
Superconducting qubits’ dependence on cryogenic
systems—the mechanism by which qubits are cooled to
near–absolute zero temperatures—is another disadvan-
tage. Cryogenic systems are expensive, only available
from a limited number of providers, and reliant on
helium, a scarce commodity.60 The compressors used to
precool cryogenic systems also consist of magnets con-
taining rare-earth elements that are largely located and
processed in China, presenting another potential supply
chain challenge.61 Despite their pitfalls, superconducting
qubits form the foundation of several leading-edge
quantum computers, including IBM’s Condor and
Google’s Sycamore.62
ION-TRAP QUANTUM COMPUTERS
Ion-trap quantum computers rely on qubits developed
from ions or charged atoms. Electromagnetic fields
“trap” or suspend ions in free space and align their elec-
tronic states. Trapped ions can be spin up, spin down, or
exist in a superposition of these two states. The appli-
cation of optical and microwave signals to suspended
ions enables manipulation of their states and induces
coupling between them.63 Such coupling affords ion-trap
quantum computers infinitely more computational speed
and processing power than conventional computers.
Stability is a key advantage of the qubits used in
ion-trap computers. The complex array of electric and
magnetic fields in trapped-ion quantum computers
absorb random motions and noise from the environ-
ment. Trapped ions thus demonstrate longer coherence
times and lower error rates than superconducting qubits.
Ions are also naturally occurring, which means they are
identical, interchangeable, and can interact easily with
each other.64
Trapped ions can also operate at room temperature.
Cooling is required to maximize the performance of
trapped ions, but they demand less cooling capacity
than superconducting qubits. While superconducting
qubits must be cooled to nearabsolute zero, trapped
ions perform sufficiently at approximately four degrees
above absolute zero, a significant difference at this level
despite the seemingly small gap in temperature.65
Slow gate times—which refers to the amount of time
required to perform an operation on a quantum state—
are the primary disadvantage associated with trapped
ions. Trapped-ion quantum computers require more
time to complete operations than superconducting
quantum computers. It also takes a lot of time to cool,
move, and measure trapped-ion quantum computers.
Further, the technology involved in creating ion traps—
such as the vacuum used to hold the ions—is somewhat
less mature than the technology used to fabricate
superconductors. Trapped-ion quantum computers
could thus be more difficult to scale.66
PHOTONIC QUANTUM COMPUTERS
Photonic quantum computers rely on qubits developed
from particles of light, which can vibrate in different
directions or polarized states. Photonic systems fire
laser beams at a finely polished piece of glass, causing
beams to break into two and vibrate in unison. These
coherent beams reflect to a common point at which the
photons entangle with one another, and the resulting
beam exists in a superposition of the entangled
photons’ states, creating a qubit.67
There are several benefits associated with photonic
quantum computing. Unlike noise-sensitive electrons,
photons are resilient against disturbances from the
environment because they are not charged. Photonic
quantum computers thus require fewer qubits for
robust fault-tolerant operations than electron-based
systems. Photons also travel at the speed of light. This
means that they can theoretically complete more
operations before they decohere, or lose their infor-
mation.68 As a result, photonic quantum computers
may be able to run advanced algorithms faster than
other modalities.
Further, photonics-based systems can operate at
room temperature. The process of generating photonic
qubits may require cryogenic cooling, but the complete
photonic quantum processing unit is not cryostat-de-
pendent, lowering the complexity and cost associated
with completing computations. Similar to super-
conducting quantum computers, photonic quantum
computers also rely on well-developed technologies
that are already used in telecommunications infrastruc-
ture and fiber optics, which lowers the engineering
hurdles associated with building scalable systems.69
9
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
However, photonic computers are not all-purpose
machines that can be programmed for instant cal-
culations. Photonic computers historically involve a
collection of mirrors and beam splitters that must be
rearranged for each problem and consume a lot of space,
so their primary applications may be narrow due to time
and resource constraints. Much of photonic quantum
computing is now based on chips using photonic wave-
lengths and other fabricated elements, which reduces
the number of moving parts. But photonic computers
remain bulky relative to other modalities. Photons also
do not easily interact with each other, making it difficult
to build increasingly complex qubits, and are sensitive
to loss, which degrades performance.
NEUTRAL ATOM QUANTUM COMPUTERS
Neutral atom quantum computers rely on qubits devel-
oped from atoms, which consist of a positively charged
nucleus surrounded by negative electrons. Atoms from
the first two groups of the periodic table—such as
rubidium, caesium, and strontium— are most commonly
used to develop neutral atom qubits because their
electronic structures are well-suited for cooling and
trapping. Neutral atom quantum computing involves
the manipulation of electrons’ energy levels, which can
be employed as qubit states.70
The core of a neutral atom qubit consists of a vacuum
cell containing a geometric arrangement of atoms.
Strong magnetic fields and lasers are applied to the
atoms to slow their movement, cool them to near–
absolute zero temperatures, and form an atom cloud.
The atom cloud is then moved into a chamber where
optical tweezers, or highly focused laser beams, move
the atoms into specifically designed arrays. Once an
array is filled in an organized grid, laser pulses trans-
form atoms into qubits by adjusting their nuclear spin.
Exciting atoms to the highly energized Rydberg state,
in which their electrons orbit the nucleus at a much
greater distance than usual, facilitates interaction with
nearby atoms and entanglement, enabling quantum
computations.71 Once a quantum circuit is complete, the
results of the computation are read out optically and
qubits can be reinitialized to run new computations.72
Strong coherence and connectivity are the key
advantages associated with neutral atoms. Relative to
other qubit modalities, neutral atoms retain quantum
information for long periods of time and can easily
interact with each other, allowing for many successive
quantum logic operations.73 They also operate at room
temperature, removing the need for cryogenic cooling.
Because the functions to control neutral atom qubits
are mediated by light propagating through free space,
neutral atom quantum computers reduce the need for
complex electrical cables and wiring as well.74
The primary challenge associated with neutral atom
quantum computing is speed—it takes a long time to
move atoms, measure atoms, and replenish atoms after
they are measured.75 The tradeoff between the size of
neutral atom systems and qubit coherence presents
another challenge—increasing the size of a neutral
atom system also increases the complexity and time
required to construct organized grids of atoms that can
stick together. Scientists and engineers may need to
improve register preparation, gates, and measurement
protocols and develop more advanced laser technolo-
gies before neutral atom quantum computers become
sufficiently scalable.76
Takeaways
It is not yet clear which hardware platforms will enable
fault-tolerant quantum computing—the level of perfor-
mance needed to run complex quantum computations
and build useful quantum computers—but supercon-
ducting qubits, trapped ions, photonics, and neutral
atoms demonstrate the greatest potential at this stage
of development.77
Given the uncertainty surrounding which hardware
architecture will “win” the race to deliver the first
fault-tolerant quantum computer, countries that aim
to enhance their competitiveness in quantum com-
puting would be wise to fund broad and diverse R&D
projects. Governments should devote funds to prom-
ising hardware architectures, as well as novel ones that
could emerge as unanticipated contenders in the race to
build a quantum computer. This distributed approach
to R&D will help ensure that countries have technical
expertise and experience with whichever quantum
computing modalities prove most useful. However,
once it is clear which modalities can produce useful
quantum systems, a more targeted and concentrated
approach to funding may be required to achieve scale
and commercialization.
The following section evaluates the United States’
and China’s respective quantum computing ecosys-
tems. It aims to determine which country currently
maintains a lead in quantum computing research,
development, and commercialization. It also assesses
each country’s capacity and potential for continued
innovation. The comparative strengths and weaknesses
illuminated in this analysis inform subsequent policy
recommendations to promote U.S. competitiveness in
quantum technology.
@CNASDC
10
@CNASDC
10
@CNASDC
10

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
A U.S.-China Comparison
elevant U.S. and Chinese strategy documents
indicate that both countries view quantum as
a strategically significant technology with the
potential to dramatically enhance the economic and
military aspects of national power. Though the United
States and China have different quantum technology
priorities, both ultimately aim to reach the cutting edge
of quantum technology R&D.
The United States plans to advance its quantum
competitiveness by pursuing a science-based approach
to technology development, supporting private industry,
and building a quantum workforce to meet the needs
of a growing field. China intends to achieve domi-
nance by pushing the boundaries of existing research,
developing indigenous quantum capabilities, and
eliminating reliance on foreign technology components
and materials. Several key metrics—including total
R&D expenditures, patents, and research publications—
suggest that the U.S. approach is superior. The United
States currently maintains an edge over China in the
pursuit of scalable, fault-tolerant quantum computing.
But this lead is far from secure. China clearly intends to
surpass the United States in quantum computing and is
garnering the resources and know-how to do so.
The United States’ Quantum
Technology Strategy
The United States’ quantum technology efforts rest
on two policies: the National Strategic Overview for
R
National Quantum Initiative
(NQI)
National Institute of Standards
and Technology
(NIST)
National Science Foundation
(NSF)
Department of Energy
(DOE)
Quantum Information Science (National Quantum
Strategy) and the National Quantum Initiative (NQI)
Act. Several additional efforts—including the QIS
Workforce Development National Strategic Plan, the
Quantum Frontiers Report, and National Security
Memorandum-10 (NSM-10)—supplement the National
Quantum Strategy and the NQI to advance U.S. global
leadership in QIS.
The National Quantum Strategy provides the United
States’ overarching vision and framework for quantum
technology R&D. The strategy articulates three primary
objectives—the United States aims to 1) pursue a
science-based approach to quantum technology devel-
opment focused on identifying and solving “problems
whose solutions enable transformative scientific and
industrial progress”; 2) enhance national competitive-
ness by “accelerating technology development toward
useful economic and mission applications of QIS and
working with international partners, while also pro-
tecting national security”; and 3) “build a quantum-smart
and diverse workforce to meet the needs of a growing
field.”78 The National Quantum Strategy recommends
advancing these objectives by focusing on six areas:
science, workforce, industry, infrastructure, security, and
international cooperation.
The NQI, initially enacted in 2018, articulates the
United States’ plan to execute the National Quantum
Strategy and serves as a blueprint for quantum-related
activities in the United States.79 The NQI authorizes
three agencies—the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), the National Science Foundation
Primary NQI Agencies
11
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
(NSF), and the Department of Energy (DOE)—to “estab-
lish centers and consortia and carry out new programs
to foster QIS R&D.”80 Despite its specificity to NIST, NSF,
and DOE, the NQI is a whole-of-government program
calling for coordination of QIS R&D efforts across the
federal government, as well as with industry and the
academic community.81 Twenty-three federal agencies
were involved in the NQI as of April 2022.82
The National Quantum Coordination Office (NQCO),
located within the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP), is responsible for overseeing
the NQI program and supporting its implementa-
tion.83 The NQI Act also legislates some oversight and
advisory responsibilities to the National Science and
Technology Council (NSTC) Subcommittee on QIS
(SCQIS), the NSTC Subcommittee on the Economic
and Security Implications of Quantum Science
(ESIX), and the National Quantum Initiative Advisory
Committee (NQIAC).
Two additional pieces of legislation—the Creating
Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS)
and Science Act of 2022 (CHIPS Act) and the National
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for fiscal year
(FY) 2022—broadened the scope of the NQI Act. The
CHIPS Act authorized quantum networking infrastruc-
ture R&D, the development of quantum networking
and communication standards, the establishment of a
program to facilitate researchers’ access to quantum
computing resources, and the integration of QIS into
national education curricula. It also included QIS in
the NSF Directorate for Technology, Innovation, and
Partnerships, “as well as in existing federal scholarship
programs.”84 The FY 2022 NDAA further amended the
NQI Act to include the ESIX.85 The FY 2019 and FY
2020 NDAAs also contain quantum-relevant legislation,
including authorization for the Department of Defense
(DoD) to conduct and support quantum technology R&D,
but do not directly amend the NQI Act.86
In summary, quantum activities in the United States
are informed and guided by the National Quantum
Strategy, the NQI, and supplementary documents and
legislation. The United States takes a whole-of-govern-
ment approach to quantum R&D, with robust support
from private industry and academia.
PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR QUANTUM COMPUTING
In line with the National Quantum Strategy and the NQI,
the U.S. government has made “substantial and sustained
investments in fundamental QIS R&D.”87 U.S. govern-
ment funding aims to foster innovation and exploration
of several quantum technology modalities and appli-
cations. Federal investments in quantum technology
are thus broad and diverse, spanning several different
agencies and departments. The primary drivers of QIS
R&D spending include the three agencies targeted by
the NQI Act—NIST, NSF, and DOE—as well as the DoD,
the Department of Homeland Security, and NASA. A
fuller list of the entities involved in quantum R&D in the
United States is included on page 14.
The United States’ distributed funding strategy,
coupled with the fact that the United States lacked a
designated body to track annual spending on QIS R&D
National Quantum
Coordination Oﬃc e
(NQCO)
Whit e House Oﬃc e of Scienc e
and T echnology Policy
(OSTP)
Subc ommitt ee on Quantum
Information Scienc e
(SCQIS)
National Quantum Initiativ e
A dvisory Committ ee
(NQIAC)
Subc ommitt ee on the E co nomic
and Security Implications of
Quantum Scienc e
(ESIX)
NQI Oversight Bodies
@CNASDC
12

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
until the creation of the Subcommittee on Quantum
Information Science (SCQIS) in 2019, makes it difficult
to ascertain total U.S. federal investment in QIS.88 It is
clear, however, that the NQI has played a significant role
in spurring federal interest and investment in QIS. R&D
budgets for QIS have roughly doubled since FY 2019.
According to the SCQIS, agencies reported actual QIS
R&D budget expenditures of $449 million in FY 2019,
$672 million in FY 2020, and $855 million in FY 2021,
followed by $918 million of enacted budget authority in
FY 2022. The Biden administration requested budget
authority of $844 million for QIS R&D in FY 2023.89
Federal funding for QIS R&D is spread across multiple
quantum technology component areas including
quantum sensing and networking, but quantum com-
puting has received the largest share of public funding
in the United States since at least FY 2021, reflecting
its perceived importance to U.S. national security.90 A
2022 report by McKinsey & Company indicates that
57 .6 percent of U.S. government funding for quantum
technology has gone toward quantum computing, while
quantum sensing and quantum communications have
received 28.5 percent and 13.9 percent, respectively.91
Prior studies suggest that quantum computing has a
larger number of distinct federal funding sources than
other quantum technology component areas and that
federal agencies—particularly defense and intelligence
agencies—fund the majority of quantum technology pub-
lications in the United States.92
Prior studies also indicate that it is difficult to assess
whether U.S. government funding is sufficient to accel-
erate U.S. quantum technology innovation and maintain
U.S. competitiveness for three reasons: 1) the U.S.
quantum technology ecosystem lacks universal metrics
or a clear roadmap by which to measure progress; 2)
quantum technologies remain in their infancy, and there
are no explicit examples of a dramatic breakthrough
that can be directly connected to a funding surge; and
3) there are few “comprehensive measures of how U.S.
QIS research has changed over time.”93 However, there
is “widespread consensus” that additional funding is
required to continue driving progress. In March 2023,
the NQIAC noted in recommendations to Congress that
increased funding for quantum R&D “will be necessary
for the nation to win the race to realize the benefits of
QIS.”94 The Energy Sciences Coalition—“a group of more
than 100 organizations representing scientists, engineers,
and mathematicians from industry, universities, and
national laboratories”—suggested increasing authoriza-
tion funding levels for DOE alone to at least $675 million
per year to maintain U.S. competitiveness in QIS.95
While the ideal level of funding is not clear, government
is an important source of patient capital to provide long-
term support for quantum technology and overcome high
initial R&D costs. Government investment in QIS plays a
critical role in developing a national network for research
and design and facilitating the translation of research
into real-world applications and technology commer-
cialization.96 It also plays an important role in conveying
the potential and importance of quantum technologies to
various stakeholders, including industry, the media, and
the public. Federal spending levels are a strong indicator
of government priorities, and U.S. government budgets
for QIS R&D have remained strong and consistent for
several years, with no signs of dramatically decreasing in
the near term.97
Public funding and support for QIS has also played a
role in expanding the number and type of institutions
involved in quantum computing R&D. For example, NSF
funds five Quantum Leap Challenge Institutes, which
are “large-scale, university-led interdisciplinary research
institutes to advance specific frontiers of quantum science
and engineering.”98 Participating universities include the
University of Maryland, Duke University, the University
of Chicago, and the California Institute of Technology,
among others. NSF also funds several university-directed
quantum foundries, which are “specialized research
centers developing and manufacturing the materials
required for quantum technologies, such as qubits and
sensors.”99 In August 2023, NSF also launched the $38
million Expanding Capacity in Quantum Information
Science and Engineering (ExpandQISE) program to
“lower barriers to access and broaden the diversity of
institutions” participating in quantum R&D.100
Separately, DOE has helped engage national laborato-
ries in quantum R&D efforts through the creation of five
National Quantum Information Science Research Centers,
which include:
 ¡ The Co-Design Center for Quantum Advantage (C2QA),
led by Brookhaven National Laboratory, focused on
building the tools necessary to create fault-tolerant
quantum computer systems;
 ¡ The Next Generation Quantum Science and
Engineering (Q-Next), led by Argonne National
Laboratory, focused on how to reliably control, store,
and transmit quantum information;
 ¡ The Quantum Science Center (QSC), led by Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, focused on advancing quantum
materials, sensors, and algorithms;
13
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Coordination,
Oversight, and
Support
 ¡ U.S. House of Representatives and U.S.
Senate
 ¡ National Quantum Coordination Office,
Office of Science and Technology Policy
 ¡ Subcommittee on Quantum Information
Science
 ¡ Subcommittee on the Economic and
Security Implications of Quantum Science
 ¡ National Quantum Initiative Advisory
Committee
 ¡ U.S. Department of State
 ¡ Federal Bureau of Investigation
 ¡ U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Civilian R&D
Entities
 ¡ National Science Foundation
 ¡ Department of Energy
 ¡ National Institute of Standards and
Technology
 ¡ NASA
Military R&D
Entities
 ¡ Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency
 ¡ Army Research Office
 ¡ Air Force Office of Scientific Research
 ¡ Office of Naval Research
 ¡ Army Research Laboratory
 ¡ Naval Research Laboratory
 ¡ Air Force Research Laboratory
 ¡ Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research & Engineering
Intelligence R&D
Entities
 ¡ Intelligence Advanced Research Projects
Activity, Office of the Director of National
Intelligence
 ¡ Laboratory for Physical Sciences, National
Security Agency
 ¡ Central Intelligence Agency
 ¡ Department of Homeland Security
Federally Funded
National
Laboratories
 ¡ Argonne National Laboratory
 ¡ Brookhaven National Laboratory
 ¡ Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
 ¡ Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
 ¡ Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
 ¡ Los Alamos National Laboratory
 ¡ Sandia National Laboratories
 ¡ Oak Ridge National Laboratory
 ¡ Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
 ¡ The Quantum Systems Accelerator (QSA), led by
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, focused on
developing scalable quantum systems; and
 ¡ The Superconducting Quantum Materials and
Systems Center (SQMS Center), led by Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory, focused on developing super-
conducting materials and devices for next-generation
quantum computers.101
DOE has also funded various quantum R&D collabora-
tions between national laboratories, universities, and
research institutes. In July 2023, for instance, DOE
“announced $11.7 million in funding for six projects
to improve understanding of whether, when, and how
quantum computing might advance the frontiers of
computational science.”102
Universities, research institutes, and national labora-
tories are critical nodes in the U.S. quantum technology
ecosystem and have played key roles not only in tech-
nology development, but in expanding QIS training,
education, and outreach. However, these entities face
significant administrative hurdles and onerous federal
grant requirements that prevent them from fully con-
tributing to quantum technology R&D initiatives. A 2022
study by the NSF’s National Science Board found that
cumbersome federal requirements on U.S. research uni-
versities impede the efficiency and quality of university
science and engineering research.103 The NQIAC further
conveyed to Congress in March 2023 that a lack of desig-
nated professional administrative staff at NSF institutes
required quantum-focused employees to assume admin-
istrative responsibilities, adversely impacting progress
on funded quantum research projects.104
University professors and research institute direc-
tors interviewed for this project further noted that
federal funding for quantum research often requires
grant recipients to undertake educational outreach and
engagement efforts that they are not trained to execute,
and which distract time and resources away from the
quantum R&D initiatives envisioned by the grant.105
They also cited difficulty accessing federal resources
for quantum R&D. For example, while DOE’s National
Research Centers aim to make quantum resources more
accessible to a broader range of users, individuals inter-
viewed for this report observed that traveling to such
centers is cumbersome and inefficient. They suggested
that a more effective approach may involve broadly
distributing resources to different universities across
the country, rather than concentrating resources in five
national centers.106
U.S. Government QIS Ecosystem107
@CNASDC
14

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
PRIVATE SUPPORT FOR QUANTUM COMPUTING
The private sector has also played an increasingly prom-
inent role in driving quantum technology innovation
and the development of a robust quantum technology
ecosystem in the United States. Private investment in
quantum technology has steadily increased since 2013,
hitting a record high globally of $2.2 billion in 2022.108
However, venture capital (VC) investment dropped
approximately 50 percent in 2023 to around $1.2 billion
globally, prompting some concern from technology
experts about a looming “quantum winter” of dwin-
dling interest and investment in the technology.109 But
such concerns may be exaggerated and premature. The
decline in quantum investments aligns with macro VC
trends and financial downturns in other technology
areas, such as biotechnology. Despite an overall decrease
in VC investment, quantum technology witnessed 21
new disclosed private funding rounds in the second
quarter of 2023, $329 million in new private capital in
the third quarter of the year, and an increase in govern-
ment-backed funding commitments and contracts, which
could offset any gaps in investor apprehension.110
VC and other private capital constituted more than
70 percent of global quantum technology investments
as of June 2022, with nearly 90 percent of this funding
going to established Series A, B, C, and D start-ups.111
U.S. companies, specifically those focused on quantum
computing, received the greatest share of private funds
between 2001 and 2021, and five of the eight top-
funded quantum technology companies in 2022 were
headquartered in the United States.112 Approximately
49 percent of private funds in 2022 went toward the
quantum computing component area.113 Heightened
interest in quantum computing relative to other quantum
technology areas is likely due to quantum computing’s
tremendous market potential, which is estimated to be
upward of $90 billion annually by 2040.114 It is important
to note, however, that despite a significant increase in
activity in recent years, quantum technology still rep-
resents less than 1 percent of global VC investment.115
Several investors interviewed for this report noted that
venture capitalists’ reluctance to enter the quantum
industry typically stems from uncertainty about antic-
ipated technology development timelines, returns on
investment, and which applications will ultimately
prove profitable.116
In 2023, venture funding for quantum in the United
States declined approximately 80 percent from 2022
levels, marking the largest decrease globally.117 As pre-
viously noted, this decline aligns with broader trends in
the venture market. Further, 2021 and 2022 were notable
years of significant, perhaps unsustainable quantum
technology investments with large special-purpose
acquisition companies and funding rounds. The decline
in funding in 2023 could thus represent recalibration
back to pre-2021 figures. According to The Quantum
Insider, a quantum technology media and market intel-
ligence platform, the future outlook for the quantum
industry is positive, suggesting “a continued interest
in quantum technologies” with “expectations of more
technical and engineering breakthroughs, increased
government procurement, and a possible evolution in
venture capital focus towards deep tech.”118
Investors’ relatively consistent interest and invest-
ment in quantum technology has sparked significant
growth in the U.S. quantum industry. The NQI-funded
Quantum Economic Development Consortium (QED-
C)—a group of stakeholders “that aims to enable and
grow the quantum industry”—contained 182 corporate
members as of late 2023.119 Prior studies determined
that nearly half of QED-C companies work on quantum
computing and that the United States is the most
active country globally in quantum computing, as
measured by the number of entities involved in quantum
computing R&D.120
Though most U.S. quantum computing companies
are component and application software companies,
hardware start-ups receive the largest share of funding.121
This is likely because hardware is capital intensive; it is
complex, requires specialized expertise, entails signif-
icant risk, and demands long development timelines.
At the same time, investors anticipate that hardware
will generate significant returns in the application and
commercialization phase of quantum technology devel-
opment.122 Large technology players like IBM dominate
the hardware investment landscape and primarily
focus on superconducting qubits.123 However, the U.S.
quantum computing industry is broad—the United States
is home to at least one company pursuing each quantum
computing modality.124 This diversified approach helps
ensure that the United States has the technical knowl-
edge, domestic infrastructure, and R&D capacity to be at
the leading edge of whichever modalities win the race
to build the first commercially viable quantum system.
Other countries similarly pursue a variety of modalities
simultaneously, but no one country has a level of breadth
and depth comparable to that of the United States.
China’s Quantum Technology Strategy
China’s objectives in quantum technology are inter-
twined with its broader ambition to become a “global
leader in innovation.”125 Chinese President Xi Jinping
15
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
that “building an independent industry chain” for the
quantum sector and overcoming the “increasing techno-
logical containment of Western nations” have become
“China’s top priorities.”131
Further, in remarks before the Political Bureau of the
CCP Central Committee in October 2020, Xi referred to
quantum as a “major disruptive technological innovation
that impacts and restructures the traditional techno-
logical system” and will “lead a new round of sci-tech
revolution and industrial transformation.” He noted
China’s intent to “gain an upper hand in international
competition” and “build new advantages” in quantum
while stressing “the importance of strengthening
strategic planning and systematic layout for the develop-
ment of quantum science and technology.” Xi noted that
China aims to “follow the path of independent innova-
tion, make breakthroughs in key core technologies, and
ensure the safety of industrial and supply chains.” He
also highlighted the importance of talent, calling for the
development of quantum training programs and curric-
ula.132 In line with these objectives, the CCP has made
significant investments to bolster the country’s quantum
technology ecosystem.
PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR QUANTUM COMPUTING
Authoritative public information on total levels of gov-
ernment funding for quantum R&D in China is limited,
and different sources provide drastically different
estimates.133 A June 2022 McKinsey & Company report
estimated that China has earmarked a total of $15.3
billion for quantum technology, placing it well ahead of
the European Union’s $7 .2 billion and the United States’
$1.9 billion in planned public funding.134 A 2022 Wilson
Center report similarly estimated that China has devoted
over $15 billion to quantum technology, but noted that
“doubts persist on the accuracy of these amounts.”135
A 2023 analysis by The Quantum Insider also valued
Chinese President Xi Jinping
views technology as a means
to enhance China’s economic
and military capabilities,
bolster national power, and
emerge as the global ‘science
and technology power.’ Xi
views progress in quantum
technology as key to fulfilling
this vision.
views technology as a means to enhance China’s
economic and military capabilities, bolster national
power, and emerge as the global “science and technology
power.” Xi views progress in quantum technology as key
to fulfilling this vision.
Although the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has
long supported basic quantum research, its interest in
quantum intensified in 2013 after former U.S. National
Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden leaked
classified documents detailing the United States’ intelli-
gence capabilities and activities in China. As Elsa Kania
and John Costello noted in a 2017 report, Snowden’s
revelations sparked “anxieties over domestic information
security and vulnerabilities to cyber espionage and influ-
ence, provoking a search for new cyber security solutions
developed indigenously.”126 Chinese leaders subsequently
established the development of quantum technologies
as a national priority, noting their potential to enable the
“absolute security” of sensitive information and commu-
nications and “reset the military and intelligence balance
in China’s favor.”127
China lacks a public national strategy for quantum
similar to the United States’ National Quantum Strategy.
Instead, China promotes quantum technology R&D
through a series of broader national science and tech-
nology plans and projects. The 13th Five- Year Science
and Technology Military-Civil Fusion Special Projects
Plan, for example, highlighted the importance of
quantum technology and launched a “megaproject” for
quantum communications and computing focused on
“driving major quantum technology breakthroughs,”
including the “expansion of China’s national quantum
communications infrastructure, the development of
a general quantum computer prototype, and the con-
struction of a practical quantum simulator.” 128 The 13th
Five- Year National Science and Technology Innovation
Plan similarly prioritized advancements in quantum
communications and computing, including the devel-
opment of a universal quantum computing prototype
and practical quantum simulator.129 All of China’s
quantum-relevant plans and projects reflect the CCP’s
intent to achieve key technology breakthroughs by
2030 and apply quantum technologies to defense and
security challenges.
Public comments from high-level government offi-
cials reinforce these documents and underscore China’s
primary quantum technology objectives: self-reliance
and global leadership.130 In a May 2024 interview with
the South China Morning Post, Guo Guoping—a deputy
of China’s National People’s Congress and founder of
Chinese quantum company Origin Quantum—stated
@CNASDC
16

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
China’s state investment at $15 billion. If accurate, this
means that China’s state funding comprises more than 50
percent of the world’s public spending on quantum.136
Other estimates attempt to capture China’s year-to-
year investments yet similarly fail to produce consensus.
The Congressional Research Service (CRS) estimated
China’s annual funding for quantum technology R&D
at $244 million.137 As observed in a recent RAND
Corporation study, however, quantum experts within
China report much different figures. In a November 2019
academic article, Jian-Wei Pan—a prominent quantum
technology researcher who is often referred to as China’s
“father of quantum”—reported that quantum technology
R&D expenditures in China were significantly lower than
the CRS’s estimate, totaling $84 million between 2016
and 2020 (as of November 2019), $98 million between
2011 and 2015, $30 million between 2006 and 2010, and
$1.25 million between 1998 and 2006.138
At the same time, Chinese media outlets have sug-
gested that expenditures are higher than the CRS’s
estimate. The Anhui Business Daily Newspaper reported
that the CCP planned to spend $2.95 billion annually on
quantum between 2017 and 2022, while other Chinese-
language news media reported $1.06 billion in state
funding for a single Chinese quantum research facility—
the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences
at the Microscale, where most Chinese quantum com-
puting research occurs—in 2017 alone.139 In 2017 , the
Chinese government also directed the construction of
the $10 billion, 91-acre National Laboratory for Quantum
Information Sciences, which is now the world’s largest
national laboratory for quantum science.140
In short, official reports of Chinese state funding for
quantum R&D vary dramatically. According to RAND,
“these conflicting reports of funding levels are not
unusual in China.” The CCP “often announces ambitious
(and often highly politicized) spending goals, and it is
not uncommon for these goals to go unmet.”141 Although
exact figures are uncertain, most analysts agree that
China is outspending the United States on quantum
technology.142 In April 2023, The Quantum Insider
concluded that “China has significantly higher public
spending” compared to the United States, spending
approximately four times more.143 Previous studies
observe that like in the United States, government QIS
R&D investment in China appears to be relatively stable
and consistent. Though China lacks public legislation
similar to the United States’ NQI that “formally autho-
rizes multiyear appropriations for specific purposes,”
China’s five-year plans and related planning documents
“indicate that quantum technology has been a sustained
strategic priority” of the Chinese leadership that is only
“increasing in importance.”144
Various Chinese government agencies and state-
linked organizations are involved in driving QIS R&D,
including the Ministry of Science and Technology, the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology,
the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the China
Construction Bank.145 State-linked defense entities—
such the Aviation Industry Corporation of China and
the Academy of Military Science—have also engaged
in quantum R&D efforts, and quantum technology
is included in China’s broader national strategy for
civil-military fusion. The 13th Five- Year Science and
Technology Military-Civil Fusion Special Projects Plan,
for example, highlighted quantum computing and com-
munications projects. But as RAND physical scientist Dr.
Edward Parker noted in recent congressional testi-
mony, China’s “overall priorities, plans, and timelines
for integrating quantum technology into operational
military systems are much less clear than those of the
U.S. government.”146
China has established several collaborative insti-
tutes and projects to explore military applications of
quantum technologies, including the Front-Line Cross-
Disciplinary Technologies Research Center, the Beijing
Academy of Information Science, and joint University of
Science and Technology of China–China Shipbuilding
Industry Corporation quantum laboratories.147 But
quantum radar—which the U.S. DoD considers “scientif-
ically impractical”—is one of the only military-specific
quantum technologies that China is explicitly pur-
suing.148 Though China reportedly has a successful
quantum radar prototype, there are several challenges
associated with its successful implementation. It is not
clear, for example, whether China will be able to inte-
grate quantum radars into existing platforms, or whether
quantum radars will provide enough of an advantage to
justify China’s investments.149
Further, China’s military-affiliated universities—
including the People Liberation Army (PLA) Academy of
Military Sciences and PLA National Defense University—
“are not at the forefront of Chinese public research in
quantum science.”150 Only one military-affiliated univer-
sity—The National University of Defense Technology—is
included on the list of China’s top 20 publishers of
quantum technology research.151 While the CCP certainly
appreciates the role that quantum technology could
play in enhancing its military power and will continue
exploring military applications of quantum, on balance,
China appears to prioritize intelligence and civilian
applications at this stage of development.
17
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Like in the United States, public funding for QIS R&D
in China is spread across multiple quantum technology
component areas. Driven by its desire to improve infor-
mation security in the wake of the Snowden leaks, China
has prioritized funding for quantum communications
and is considered the global leader in the development
and deployment of quantum communications technol-
ogies. In recent years, however, China has increased
the share of funds it devotes to the quantum computing
component area as part of a broader push to assume lead-
ership in this realm.
The Quantum Insider estimates that China now
devotes as much as 26 percent of QIS R&D funding to
quantum computing and 22 percent to hardware devel-
opment.152 Research from RAND further demonstrates
that while quantum communications still maintains
the widest breadth of state investment sources in China
with 27 distinct funding sources, quantum computing
is a close second with 24 distinct sources.153 The level
of quantum computing research activity in China
matches this funding trend. Between 2010 and 2019,
the number of quantum computing patent applications
filed in China grew 40 percent, while quantum com-
munications and quantum sensing patents grew 38 and
29 percent, respectively.154
Academic journal publications, reporting in local
media outlets, and previous studies indicate that the
“bulk of Chinese research on quantum computing is
done at the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical
Sciences at Microscale.”155 Researchers and engineers in
China appear to focus on the four most common tech-
nical approaches to quantum computing, which were
previously outlined in this report—superconducting,
photonics, neutral atoms, and trapped ions.156 According
to several technical experts, China’s development and
deployment of superconducting qubits is “at rough parity
with the United States.”157 China is also considered the
“clear world leader in photonic boson sampling,” a sim-
plified approach to linear optical quantum computing.
Though boson sampling cannot produce a full-scale,
fault-tolerant quantum computer, it could be a useful tool
for experimentation and education.158
China’s expansive approach to hardware R&D has
yielded results across multiple modalities. China
reportedly possesses two quantum computers—the
photonics-based Jiuzhang 2 computer and supercon-
ducting-based Zuchongzhi 2 computer—that outperform
Google’s Sycamore quantum computer, a 54-qubit
transmon superconducting processor capable of per-
forming a calculation in 200 seconds that would take a
classical computer thousands of years to complete.159 The
Jiuzhang 2’s computational speed and power allegedly
exceeds the Sycamore computer “by factors thought to
be in the billions,” while the Zuchongzhi 2 “cracked a
problem three times tougher” than what the Sycamore
could solve.160
In 2021, China also became the third country—behind
Canada and the United States—to develop and deliver a
completely domestically built superconducting quantum
computer.161 This milestone illuminates China’s broader
aim to develop indigenous development capabilities
and ensure technological independence. In addition to
prototype quantum computers, Chinese researchers are
pursuing algorithmic development. In December 2022,
Chinese researchers announced that they had designed
an algorithm capable of breaking public-key encryption,
years before anticipated.162 Many experts question the
validity of the announcement, but nonetheless, it serves
as a reminder that “China could achieve surprising
quantum computing breakthroughs in the near term.”163
China has also reached milestones in other quantum
technology component areas that could support and
expedite its development of quantum computing. For
example, the Chinese Academy of Sciences launched
its Quantum Experiments at Space Scale Micius satel-
lite—the world’s first quantum satellite—in 2016. The
Micius launch enabled China to deploy quantum key
distribution (QKD), a type of quantum-based encryp-
tion that allows for secure communications over long
distances. China has used Micius for a range of exper-
iments and now maintains a quantum network that
includes two quantum satellites and approximately 700
fiber-optic cables.164
The U.S. National Security Agency and several
quantum experts question the value of QKD, highlighting
the technology’s various technical limitations.165 But
China’s execution of QKD at scale demonstrates its
ability to overcome challenging technological require-
ments. A January 2024 report by the Mitchell Institute
noted that China’s progress in QKD indicates that it
can “produce and encode on-demand photonic qubits,
maintain signal strengthen across thousands of miles
using both free-space and fiber-optic transmission
means, and develop secure and accurate repeater sta-
tions.”166 This knowledge and expertise could potentially
give Chinese researchers and engineers an advantage
when tackling analogous challenges associated with
quantum computing. China’s existing capability in
quantum communications could also help it deploy other
quantum technologies faster. As the Mitchell Institute
observed, China’s quantum communications network
“serves as a foundational infrastructure to discover,
@CNASDC
18

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
understand, and solve the problems that become clear
only once a capability moves out of the laboratory and
into the real world.” The United States “does not cur-
rently have a similar architecture.”167
PRIVATE SUPPORT FOR QUANTUM COMPUTING
Private industry assumes a less prominent role in China’s
quantum technology ecosystem than U.S. industry
assumes in the United States’ ecosystem. Nonetheless,
Chinese research in quantum computing “has started to
involve a higher degree of private sector involvement and
investment, motivated by the tremendous commercial
potential of quantum computers.”168 A sample list of the
entites involved in quantum technology R&D in China
can be found on page 20.
Just as it is difficult to determine the level of state
funding for QIS R&D in China, information about
which Chinese firms are meaningful participants in
China’s quantum activities is opaque and contradic-
tory. According to a Chinese business report, more than
4,200 firms claimed to work on quantum technology
as of October 2020.169 Further examination by RAND,
however, revealed that most of these firms are “‘quantum’
in name only.” After evaluating Chinese media, quantum
industry publications and media reports, and patent
searches, RAND identified only 13 Chinese firms engaged
in “meaningful R&D in quantum technology,” including
five large, diversified technology companies and eight
specialized quantum technology start-ups. Three of the
start-ups focus exclusively on quantum computing, while
another three focus on quantum communications, one
focuses on quantum sensing, and one tackles multiple
component areas. Though Chinese quantum technology
start-ups are similar in age to U.S. start-ups, Chinese
companies have announced significantly lower levels of
capital funding than their U.S. counterparts.170
A study by the QED-C similarly concluded that
China’s quantum industry is smaller than Chinese
business reporting suggests. The QED-C identified only
nine Chinese companies that “have material quantum
computing R&D capabilities.”171 The nine identified
companies specialize in various quantum computing
modalities, including superconducting, photonics,
trapped ions, and neutral atoms. This diversity signals
China’s desire to reach the cutting edge of quantum R&D
and develop indigenous capabilities across the spectrum
of quantum computing hardware. Pursuing multiple
quantum computing modalities could also bolster
the Chinese quantum industry’s resilience to export
controls—because each modality requires different
components and materials, it will be difficult for China’s
adversaries to identify chokepoint controls that impact
the country’s entire quantum computing ecosystem.
Though the private investment environment remains
significantly smaller than state spending, China’s private
investments in quantum are increasing. According to
The Quantum Insider, investment in Chinese quantum
start-ups reached $194 million in 2022, a marked increase
from the $62 million invested in 2021. The majority of
investments in 2022—approximately 66 percent—were
devoted to companies focused on superconducting
quantum computers.172 Origin Quantum Computing
had a particularly notable year, raising $148 million in a
Series B funding round.173 Several government-affiliated
investors led by the China Internet Investment fund con-
tributed to the funding round.174
At the same time, several of China’s largest technology
companies appear to be losing interest in quantum.
Chinese company Baidu, one of the largest internet
companies in the world, announced the termination of
its quantum R&D efforts in January 2024. Baidu—which
was primarily focused on the development of quantum
computing software and hardware solutions, including a
quantum hardware-software integration system—report-
edly plans to donate its quantum computing laboratory
and equipment to the state-linked Beijing Academy of
Quantum Information Sciences.175 Two months prior,
Alibaba, another Chinese technology giant, cut its
quantum computing research portfolio—which was pri-
marily focused on open-source initiatives and quantum
algorithm development—and donated its laboratory
and related experimental equipment to the state-linked
Zhejiang University.176
Neither Baidu nor Alibaba provided a public explana-
tion for the termination of their programs, but there are
several factors that could have influenced their decisions.
The two companies donated their quantum computing
laboratories and equipment to state-linked entities with
robust government-funded quantum R&D programs.
It is thus plausible that the CCP compelled Baidu and
Alibaba to relinquish their quantum capabilities as part
of a broader government effort to centralize and gain
more control over quantum R&D activities. Alternatively,
Baidu and Alibaba may seek to focus on developing more
advanced emerging technologies with distinct business
applications, such as artificial intelligence, rather than
quantum, which is expensive and resource intensive with
no clear use cases or immediate return on investment.
Another possibility is that Baidu and Alibaba want
to avoid developing clearly demonstrated progress in
domestic quantum computing due to increasingly strong
U.S.-based export controls in areas related to advanced
19
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
computing, including semiconductor manufacturing
equipment, processor design software, and accelera-
tors.177 The United States has also already implemented
some quantum-specific export controls targeting certain
quantum sensing capabilities and China-based end users,
and U.S. officials have signaled that additional quantum
technology controls may be forthcoming.178 Visible
demonstrations of world-class quantum computing
R&D capabilities that threaten U.S. dominance in the
field could thus subject Baidu and Alibaba to strict U.S.
policies that limit the flow of key quantum computing-re-
lated intellectual property, materials, or subcomponents.
Regardless of the motivation behind the decisions,
Baidu and Alibaba were two significant players in China’s
already small private quantum technology industry and
their departure from the quantum R&D landscape could
adversely affect China’s overall advancement in quantum
technology. Large, diverse companies have unique
understandings of technology markets and business
requirements and will thus likely play important roles in
the quantum commercialization process.
Government
Bodies and
National
Laboratories
 ¡ Ministry of Science and Technology
 ¡ Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology
 ¡ National Development and Reform
Commission
 ¡ National Natural Science Foundation of
China
 ¡ Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
 ¡ China Construction Bank
 ¡ China Internet Investment Fund
 ¡ China Reform Fund
 ¡ Municipal governments of Shanghai and
Beijing
 ¡ Hefei National Laboratory for Physical
Sciences at the Microscale
 ¡ National Laboratory for Quantum
Information Sciences
Universities and
Research Insti-
tutes
 ¡ Chinese Academy of Sciences
 ¡ Tsinghua University
 ¡ University of Science and Technology of
China
 ¡ Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
 ¡ Nanjing University
 ¡ Peking University
 ¡ Shanghai Jiao Tong University
 ¡ Zhejiang University
 ¡ National University of Defense Technology
 ¡ Shanxi University
 ¡ Dalian University of Technology
 ¡ Anhui University
 ¡ Front-Line Cross-Disciplinary Technologies
Research Center
Companies ¡ Huawei Technologies
 ¡ CIQTEK
 ¡ Origin Quantum
 ¡ Qasky
 ¡ QuantumCTek
 ¡ QuDoor (also referred to as Guokaike
Quantum Technology and Qike Quantum)
 ¡ Tencent Quantum Lab
 ¡ ZTE Corporation
 ¡ Kunfeng Quantum Technology
 ¡ SpinQ
 ¡ Shenzhou Quantum Communication
Technology
 ¡ Bose Quantum
 ¡ TurningQ
China’s QIS Ecosystem179
Takeaways
While the United States and China share the goal of
achieving global leadership in quantum technology,
their approaches to quantum technology R&D differ
dramatically. The United States takes an industry-led,
government-supported approach. The U.S. quantum
industry, which includes a mix of established technology
companies and recently founded start-ups, tends to drive
innovation and key development milestones. In China,
quantum technology R&D is generally government-led
and industry-supported. China’s quantum industry is
significantly smaller than the United States’, and most
quantum breakthroughs in China stem from govern-
ment-funded laboratories and research institutes.
The United States and China both pursue a variety of
quantum computing modalities, including supercon-
ducting, trapped ions, photonics, and neutral atoms.
According to several technical metrics—including
quantum computers’ physical qubit counts, coherence
times, and error rates—the United States leads in every
modality except superconducting transmon qubits, an
area in which China is at rough parity with the United
States.180 The United States has developed high-per-
forming prototypes across all modalities and is exploring
a wide range of applications, from scientific discovery
and materials research to logistics and advanced elec-
tronics. China’s technical progress is largely confined to
superconducting qubits and photonic boson sampling,
@CNASDC
20

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
a nonuniversal approach to quantum computing.
Chinese researchers are particularly focused on devel-
oping encryption-breaking applications.181
Though total R&D expenditures, patents, and
research publications are imperfect and potentially
misleading measures of a country’s capacity for
technology development and diffusion, they can help
further illuminate the United States’ and China’s
potential in quantum computing.182 By most estimates,
the Chinese government dramatically outspends the
U.S. government on quantum technology R&D, but
the United States maintains a higher level of private
investment. The United States is also the global leader
in quantum computing patent applications according
to a February 2023 QED-C study. The United States
Patent Office received approximately 1,838 quantum
computing patent applications between 2010 and
2022, while China’s National Intellectual Property
Administration received only 908.183 During the same
timeframe, the United States also had the largest
number of entities among the top 19 entities that filed
quantum computing patents. Of the top 19 patentees,
nine were based in the United States and five were
based in China.
U.S. entities similarly dominate the list of the top
20 entities filing international quantum computing
patents. International patents, which are filed in
patent offices across multiple countries, are more
difficult to acquire and typically reserved for high-
er-quality patents.184 As of 2021, IBM had the largest
number of international patent families—401. Nine
additional U.S. entities were included on the top 20
list of international patentees. Only one Chinese
company—Alibaba—made the list, and Alibaba report-
edly terminated its quantum computing R&D efforts in
November 2023.185
The volume and quality of research publications are
other metrics to assess a country’s potential to achieve key
breakthroughs in quantum computing. China produces
the highest volume of quantum computing research,
accounting for approximately 22.8 percent of research
globally, while the United States ranks second, accounting
for approximately 21.3 percent of global research.
However, the Hirsch index (H-index), which measures
total publications and the number of citations a publica-
tion receives, indicates that the United States produces
higher quality, more impactful research than China.
The United States leads the world in quantum research
quality with an H-index of 92. China ranks second with an
H-index of 52.186
Taken together, these metrics suggest that the United
States is the global leader in quantum computing but faces
stiff competition from China. Though China lags behind
the United States in overall technical progress, Chinese
experts produce a high volume of quantum-relevant
research and receive a high level of government support.
China clearly intends to surpass the United States in
quantum computing and is rapidly assuming the capabili-
ties to do so.
It is not too late for the United States to secure its lead in
quantum computing, but policymakers must act quickly to
maximize U.S. strengths and patch existing vulnerabilities.
To ensure American competitiveness in quantum com-
puting, U.S. policymakers should focus on supporting the
development of a secure and resilient quantum technology
supply chain and building a diverse quantum workforce.
Though China lags behind the United
States in overall technical progress,
Chinese experts produce a high volume
of quantum-relevant research and receive
a high level of government support.
21
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Securing U.S. Leadership
in Quantum Computing
hough U.S.-China competition in quantum
computing raises several important policy ques-
tions—including questions about export controls,
outbound investment restrictions, and technology stan-
dards—the United States cannot effectively address these
areas without first tackling supply chain and workforce
challenges. Absent a secure and resilient quantum supply
chain and a well-trained workforce, the United States
lacks the leverage, technical knowledge, and scientific
edge required to craft and implement effective policies
in other areas. In the near term, the United States can
ensure competitiveness in quantum computing by con-
ducting a comprehensive supply chain review, leveraging
financial incentives to boost domestic production of sen-
sitive quantum technology inputs, sharing resources with
allies and partners, creating new educational opportuni-
ties, and fostering public-private cooperation.
Building a Robust Quantum
Technology Supply Chain
A well-developed quantum technology supply chain
with limited dependence on foreign suppliers is critical
to U.S. leadership and competitiveness in quantum
technology. As President Biden’s Executive Order on
America’s Supply Chains notes, “resilient, diverse, and
secure supply chains” are “fundamental to U.S. economic
prosperity and national security.”187 A robust quantum
technology supply chain will boost American manu-
facturing capacity, help maintain the United States’
competitive edge in R&D, and create high-paying jobs. It
will also help insulate the United States from geopolit-
ical and economic competition, cyberattacks, and other
potential disruptions.188
To foster a resilient quantum computing supply chain,
policymakers must first understand which components
and materials are essential and how the supply chain is
currently structured. They must also identify vulnera-
bilities and assess the likelihood of potential disruptions.
The following section offers an overview of the quantum
computing supply chain and highlights the U.S. quantum
ecosystem’s primary supply chain challenges.
One key issue for the quantum supply chain is a lack of
clarity about which raw materials, components, manu-
facturing equipment, and supporting infrastructure are
required to make quantum systems function and there-
fore warrant U.S. government investment and protection.
As previously outlined in this report, the quantum com-
puting sector is nascent, with several different modalities
under development. Each modality requires a different
and evolving set of inputs, with very little overlap. While
superconducting qubits require helium dilution refriger-
ators, other modalities, like trapped-ion qubits, instead
rely on high-quality lasers and isotopically pure samples
of various elements. This means that dilution refrigera-
tors could be critically essential or completely irrelevant
depending on which quantum computing modalities
prevail. Unless the United States is prepared to produce
every input for every modality, an entirely domestic U.S.
supply chain is unrealistic.189
Further, the inputs on which quantum technologies
depend could change as quantum technologies mature.
Researchers and engineers can speculate about which
components, materials, and subsidiary technologies will
be required during the next phase of quantum computing
development, but a comprehensive list of enabling equip-
ment is impossible to compile until full-scale quantum
computers are readily available and integrated into
existing infrastructure. The establishment of a “well-de-
fined, complete, and stable” quantum technology supply
chain will thus “remain in flux” for the next several years
or even decades.190
Though there are still many unknowns, a 2022
Hyperion Research survey of 47 quantum technology
companies provides some insight into which materials,
components, or subassemblies are most important
and could present supply chain challenges in the near
term. The Quantum Computing table below outlines
the products respondents identified as the most likely
potential causes of a quantum computing supply chain
disruption in the next three years.191
Materials Components and Subassemblies
 ¡ Helium-3 gas
 ¡ Silicon-28
 ¡ Copper
 ¡ Aluminum
 ¡ Gold
 ¡ High-performance cryocoolers
 ¡ Pumps
 ¡ Valves
 ¡ Compressors
 ¡ Power supplies
 ¡ RF generators
 ¡ Superconducting wiring assemblies
 ¡ Dilution fridge components
 ¡ Fiber and coaxial cables
 ¡ Low-noise lasers
 ¡ Key manufacturing equipment
for quantum and classical chip
manufacturing and testing
Quantum Computing Materials, Components,
and Subassemblies192
@CNASDC
22
T

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Another challenge is that quantum technology supply
chains are global and highly specialized, with many
single points of failure.193 Hyperion Research’s 2022
survey revealed that a majority of quantum computing
companies lack supply chain diversity. Companies often
have only one supplier of their most critical manufac-
turing components, and finding an alternative supplier
would take more than a year.194 Additionally, many
critical suppliers reside outside of the United States.
One U.S. quantum company interviewed for this report
indicated that 80 percent of its supply chain falls outside
of the United States.195 The United States maintains
several foreign dependencies, which previous studies
attributed to “relative component costs, differences in
quality, a lack of domestic alternatives, and acquisition
of domestic suppliers by foreign companies.”196
Countries in Europe and Asia are developing outsized
influence over the availability of components needed to
build and sustain quantum computers, including cryo-
stats, synthetic diamonds, and various lithography tools.
This means that continued U.S. progress in quantum
computing increasingly depends on the health and
stability of a few key foreign suppliers. Should any one
of these suppliers experience an operational disruption
or decide to limit or terminate sales to the United States,
it could take the United States years to find or develop
alternative options and significantly handicap U.S.
quantum R&D efforts.
Dilution refrigerators, for example, are part of
a very small industry located primarily in Europe.
Finland-based Bluefors Oy, United Kingdom–based
Oxford Instruments, and Netherlands-based Leiden
Cryogenics BV are currently the leading producers of
dilution refrigerators used for quantum computing.197
A handful of U.S. companies—including California-
based Quantum Design and Colorado-based Maybell
Quantum—are developing the capabilities to produce
cryogenic systems. However, several quantum tech-
nology experts interviewed for this report—including
university professors and quantum startup CEOs—
noted that these companies are relatively immature
and require additional financial support to succeed.198
China similarly appreciates the supply chain challenges
associated with dilution refrigerators and is developing
its own independent capabilities in an effort to reduce
“reliance on international manufacturers” and “lead
in the quantum computing field.”199 In early 2024, a
leading Chinese news service reported that China “has
begun mass production of the ‘EZ-Q Fridge,’ a dilution
refrigerator essential for superconducting quantum
computer chips.”200
Europe serves as a hub for several other important
quantum computing inputs as well. The United Kingdom
is a key source of specialized synthetic diamonds and
monolithic integrated windows for vacuum chambers.201
Germany is an important source of high-quality lasers,
dielectric glass windows, and single-photon detectors.
France produces fiber phase modulators and double-angle
evaporators. Sweden provides high-electron mobility
transistor amplifiers, and the Netherlands is a leading
producer of advanced lithography equipment. Russia is
the leading producer of large sapphire wafers used in
some trapped-ion quantum computing systems, as well
as in the manufacturing of superconducting transmon
quantum systems.202 In essence, the United States relies on
suppliers across Europe for inputs that are necessary to all
four leading quantum computing modalities—supercon-
ducting, trapped ions, neutral atoms, and photonics.
Asia is another critical supplier region. Japan is a source
of photon detectors, blue gallium nitride diodes, nonlinear
optics, and electron beam lithography tools.203 China, the
Philippines, Taiwan, and Malaysia produce microcontrol-
lers. China is also a source of less-advanced electronics
and optics, as well as rare-earth elements, which are input
to many quantum technology components.204 The magnet
materials in the compressors used to precool dilution
refrigerators are composed of rare-earth elements, for
example. China accounts for “63 percent of the world’s
rare-earth mining, 85 percent of rare-earth processing,
and 92 percent of rare-earth magnet production.”205
China has already demonstrated a willingness to use
its advantageous position in the minerals supply chain
as geopolitical leverage.206 As recently as 2023, Chinese
officials reportedly contemplated banning the export
of certain rare-earth processing and refining technolo-
gies to the United States.207 A loss of access to rare-earth
elements and other critical minerals would carry impli-
cations beyond the quantum sector—without critical
minerals, U.S. innovation would stall, the cost of consumer
electronics would surge, and the U.S. military’s weapons
would fail to hit their targets.208 The rare-earth challenge
thus highlights the risk associated with depending on
competitors for critical components.
The quantum supply chain
is nimble. Policymakers and
industry stakeholders still have
an excellent opportunity to
shape the supply chain in a
way that favors U.S. interests.
23
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
The quantum technology supply chain is highly
dispersed and specialized with several single points
of failure, presenting significant difficulties for the
U.S. quantum industry and U.S. policymakers. At the
same time, however, the quantum supply chain is
nimble. Policymakers and industry stakeholders still
have an excellent opportunity to shape the supply
chain in a way that favors U.S. interests. To foster the
development of a secure and reliable supply chain, the
U.S. government should:
Conduct a comprehensive review of the quantum
technology supply chain.
The recently established White House Council on
Supply Chain Resilience (the Council) should initiate
an in-depth survey of the current quantum technology
supply chain to identify critical nodes and assess the
United States’ level of dependence on foreign sup-
pliers. The Council should compile its findings into
a report that details the components, materials, and
subassemblies required for each quantum computing
modality, identifies the suppliers of those inputs, and
assesses suppliers’ capacity for consistent, reliable
production and future growth. The report should also
identify opportunities to develop additional suppliers
across a range of regions, as well as the United States’
potential to build domestic production capacity for key
inputs. The Council should consult members of the
QED-C, quantum research institutes, and academic
researchers and engineers to gain a bigger picture of
the U.S. quantum ecosystem’s supply chain challenges
and concerns.
This information will help policymakers manage and
mitigate risk. Because a completely domestic quantum
technology supply chain is infeasible, the quantum
technology supply chain is inherently risky—some
degree of dependence on foreign suppliers is necessary.
A comprehensive review of current and anticipated
trends in the quantum supply chain will allow policy-
makers to choose where to accept risk and help shape
the development of a resilient and secure supply chain
that promotes U.S. interests. By illuminating potential
chokepoints and vulnerabilities, it will also help U.S.
policymakers design more effective export control
regimes should they eventually decide that trade
restrictions are necessary to slow or degrade China’s
quantum technology development.209
Leverage financial incentives and the Tech Hubs Program
to promote domestic production of quantum technology
inputs deemed too sensitive to reside outside of the
United States.
The White House should leverage the Defense
Production Act (DPA), as well as the Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR), Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR), and Tech Hubs programs to boost
domestic capacity for the production of quantum com-
puting components, materials, and subassemblies that
are deemed too sensitive to reside predominantly outside
of the United States.210
The Biden administration has already used the DPA
to strengthen the nation’s critical minerals supply chain.
In February 2023, President Biden invoked the DPA
to fund projects to increase the domestic availability
of lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite, and manganese to
support the production of large-capacity batteries and
enable the energy transition.211 Former president Donald
Trump similarly leveraged the DPA to improve domestic
mining and refining capacity and increase production
of samarium cobalt magnets.212 The White House could
model this approach to advance U.S. production of other
quantum technology materials and components as well,
such as helium or synthetic diamonds.
The White House can also use SBIR and STTR
programs to increase funding for U.S. companies devel-
oping key quantum technology inputs and incentivize
them to align their R&D efforts with U.S. government
priorities.213 The SBIR and STTR programs support
could, for example, give emergent cryogenics companies
a financial boost and help connect them with the broader
U.S. quantum computing ecosystem.
The Tech Hubs Program—a CHIPS Act–authorized
“economic development initiative designed to drive
regional innovation and job creation by strengthening
a region’s capacity to manufacture, commercialize,
and deploy technology that will advance American
competitiveness”—presents another opportunity to
strengthen and secure the United States’ quantum
technology supply chain.214 In October 2023, the Biden
administration announced two quantum Tech Hub
Designees—Elevate Quantum, which “aims to solidify
Colorado’s global leadership in quantum information
technology to increase infrastructure resilience and
strengthen the quantum hardware supply chain,” and
the Chicago Quantum Exchange, which aims to advance
a similar mission in Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin.215
The White House should establish a group of indepen-
dent external research teams to develop mechanisms
@CNASDC
24

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
to objectively gauge the success and impact of these
programs, and determine whether they can be replicated
and scaled in other regions. The White House should
consider establishing future quantum tech hubs in states
with a growing number of quantum computing compa-
nies, such as Massachusetts and California.
Direct and resource the QED-C to continually monitor
the U.S. quantum computing supply chain and foreign
competitors’ efforts to develop their own domestic
quantum computing ecosystem.
While the Council’s initial quantum supply chain survey
will help assess near-term challenges, the United States
also needs a long-term mechanism to detect new supply
chain vulnerabilities as quantum technologies evolve.
Early detection of emerging vulnerabilities will give pol-
icymakers a window of opportunity to intervene before
the United States develops unsustainable dependencies
on foreign suppliers.
Information about competitors’ efforts to boost
their own domestic infrastructure is also critical to
supply chain security and American competitiveness in
quantum computing. Understanding competitors’ supply
chain capabilities and intentions can help illuminate
which quantum computing modalities they are pursuing,
as well as opportunities for potential collaboration. It can
also help U.S. policymakers ensure that foreign efforts to
develop independent quantum computing ecosystems do
not adversely affect the U.S. quantum industry’s ability to
fairly compete abroad.216
The QED-C unveiled a framework for a “practical and
extensible supply chain tracking tool” in September 2023
and is thus well-positioned to assume responsibility for
continuous supply chain monitoring.217 The White House
should resource the QED-C to build an initial proof
of concept, which will allow the QED-C to refine the
tool’s functionality, determine whether the tool captures
appropriate data sources, and develop efficient pro-
cesses for collecting, verifying, aggregating, and updating
data over time. The QED-C should partner with The
Quantum Insider or similar intelligence platforms to
develop a comparable framework for monitoring com-
petitors’ quantum supply chain efforts.
Establish an international forum to coordinate supply
chains with U.S. allies and partners.
No single country has all the components and mate-
rials required to build a quantum computer. As such,
countries must maximize their comparative advantages
and cooperate to build a supply chain that is secure and
reliable. The United States can adopt a global leadership
position in quantum technology by creating a forum that
helps identify opportunities for coordination and facili-
tate supply chain burden sharing.
The Quad Center of Excellence in Quantum
Information Sciences (Center of Excellence) provides
an excellent foundation from which to build an inter-
national supply chain forum. The Center of Excellence
was established in June 2023 to bring “together subject
matter experts, capital allocators, and business leaders”
across the Quad countries—the United States, Australia,
India, and Japan—to “drive greater technological collab-
oration, market access, and cross-border investments.”218
The U.S. NQCO should propose the establishment of a
supply chain task force within the Center of Excellence
to discuss how the Quad countries can work together
to mitigate supply chain vulnerabilities and collectively
increase production of critical components and mate-
rials. The OSTP and the Department of State should
also host an international roundtable on quantum
computing supply chain security similar to a dialogue
the agencies held in May 2022 on international coop-
eration in quantum technology R&D.219 The roundtable
should gather the heads of quantum strategy offices
around the world, as well as industry representatives and
academic stakeholders.
Fostering a Quantum Technology Workforce
U.S. policymakers must also prioritize workforce
development to secure and advance American com-
petitiveness in quantum computing. The U.S. National
Quantum Strategy notes that “growing an American
quantum-smart workforce with expertise in a broad
range of physical, information, and engineering sciences
is crucial for assuring sustained progress in QIS.”220
Access to talent is required not only to invent, develop,
and scale quantum technologies, but to identify quantum
applications and ensure responsible technology use. A
well-trained quantum workforce is “key to realizing the
full practical value of quantum computing.”221 Access
to talent will be a critical factor in determining which
country prevails in quantum technology competition.
Because quantum technologies are still in an early
stage of development and the industry’s future trajectory
is highly uncertain, the precise definitions of “quantum
talent” and a “quantum workforce” are still unfolding.
No authoritative data source for determining quantum
workforce requirements exists, and the desirable jobs,
skills, and degrees are ambiguous. It is increasingly clear,
however, that a diverse talent pool representing various
25
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
disciplines and backgrounds is most conducive to
long-term competitiveness in quantum technology.
This includes both quantum-specific expertise—which
is required to advance the basic science—and general
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) talent—which is required to build a base of
supporting technologies and execute on potential
quantum applications.222
Quantum workforce requirements are also subject
to change as quantum technology progresses. A recent
Government Accountability Office report notes that
the proportion of quantum-specific to general STEM
expertise required depends on the stage of tech-
nology development. While the fundamental quantum
R&D process demands higher volumes of PhD-level
talent, the commercialization process demands more
generalized expertise. 223 Concerningly, “various indi-
cators—including job board analyses and interviews
with industry, academia, national laboratories, and
government agencies—reflect that the United States
maintains a ‘significant unmet demand for talent at all
levels.’”224
The general STEM
skills gap in the United
States is demonstrable
and widely acknowl-
edged.225 The United
States is “projected to
face a shortfall of nearly 2
million STEM workers by 2025, due in part to insuffi-
cient processes to develop future STEM talent.”226 U.S.
students historically perform poorly on national and
international standardized STEM tests and maintain
low STEM degree completion rates. They also face
significant disparities in access to STEM resources
based on socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity, and
sex, resulting in the underrepresentation of minority
groups in STEM careers. 227
These trends present challenges for the quantum
industry, which maintains a high demand for general
STEM expertise. According to a QED-C survey
assessing the workforce needs of 57 quantum compa-
nies, many of the employee aptitudes deemed most
important to companies’ success are broad STEM skill
sets, rather than quantum-specific ones. Quantum
companies need and struggle to find workers capable
of software and algorithm development, analog and
digital circuit design, and computer science and engi-
neering. The quantum industry also struggles to retain
these workers, whose broadly applicable skill sets are
needed in a range of attractive technology sectors.228
The United States suffers quantum talent gaps at
higher levels of expertise as well. According to a 2022
McKinsey & Company report, “Only about one qualified
candidate was available for every three quantum-specific
job openings, and more than half of quantum companies
were actively hiring.”229 In the words of Yuval Boger,
chief commercial officer at QuEra Computing, people
with the high-level skills required to drive innovation in
quantum computing are “unicorns” who “don’t exist.”230
Recent research indicates that “less than 50 percent of
quantum computing jobs will be filled by 2025 unless
significant interventions occur.”231 This dearth of quan-
tum-specific expertise may be due in part to a lack of
quantum-specific curricula at earlier stages of schooling.
According to the National Science and Technology
Council, “exposure to Quantum Information Science and
Technology (QIST) at the high school or undergraduate
level in the United States is limited and rarely avail-
able prior to advanced coursework or research.”232 The
“ensuing lack of awareness” about quantum often leads
talented STEM students to “pursue other directions.”233
Increased global interest in
quantum technology further
exacerbates the United States’
shortage of quantum talent. The
increased number of countries
involved in quantum R&D con-
tributes to a landscape in which
“readily available quantum
expertise is not only rare but globally dispersed,” and
countries must “compete to produce, attract, and retain
top talent.”234 Most existing quantum-relevant talent “is
educated and resides outside of the United States.”235
Only 10 of the top 20 quantum computing graduate
degree programs are in the United States, a surprisingly
low number given that the United States outspends
every country but China on quantum technology R&D.236
The highest number of “quantum-relevant graduates
are educated in European Union, followed by India and
China.”237 The European Union also has “the highest con-
centration of experts in quantum computing, followed by
the United Kingdom and Russia.”238
Even within the United States, the majority of quan-
tum-relevant talent is foreign-born. According to
an October 2021 report by the National Science and
Technology Council, foreign talent constitutes approx-
imately half of U.S. graduates in quantum-related
fields. Further, dissertation records indicate that nearly
half of U.S. PhDs focused directly on a quantum topic
were awarded to foreign nationals between 2014 and
2018. Foreign talent plays a critical role in developing
Access to talent will be a
critical factor in determining
which country prevails
in quantum technology
competition.
@CNASDC
26

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
U.S.-based quantum experts as well—the National
Science and Technology Council noted that a number
of the faculty members building quantum curricula and
driving basic scientific research in the United States
“are foreign-born themselves.”239 As such, international
collaboration is key to both advance the quantum tech-
nology field and ensure U.S. competitiveness.
Several recent government initiatives aim to address
the United States’ shortage of quantum talent. The
CHIPS Act directs the NSF to “evaluate the quantum
workforce, integrate quantum into STEM curricula at
all levels, and establish a ‘Next Generation Quantum
Leaders Pilot Program.’”240 Similarly, the FY24 NDAA
directs the DoD to establish a fellowship program for
quantum technology students, with a particular focus
on attracting “minority, geographically diverse, and
economically disadvantaged” students who “historically
lack access to quality STEM education resources and
job opportunities.”241 And in August 2020, OSTP and
NSF launched the National Q-12 Education Partnership
between government, industry, professional societies,
and the education community to enable “a foundation for
classroom and curricula materials, developed in concert
with key stakeholders from the quantum information
science community.”242 But these efforts “may not be
enough to give the United States the edge it needs to
outcompete other countries that threaten to do better in
producing and accessing quantum talent.”243
To support the development of a robust quantum
workforce, the U.S. government should:
Develop processes to understand workforce needs and
skills gaps within the quantum ecosystem.
While there is broad consensus that the supply of
quantum talent is insufficient to meet the demands
of the National Quantum Strategy, the United States
lacks a cohesive data source for determining work-
force requirements and identifying skills gaps. As noted
in a February 2022 National Science and Technology
Council report, the United States needs “additional
information, including but not limited to data on tech-
nical demands, training, awareness, and retention,” to
“comprehensively understand the long-term and short-
term scope” of the quantum workforce shortage. More
data on the range of skills needed to support quantum
technologies would “better inform and track workforce
development efforts.”244
The Biden administration should direct the NQCO to
conduct an annual systematic study of quantum work-
force needs and projections. The study should identify
current in-demand skills and anticipate which additional
skills may be required in the subsequent year to push
quantum research, development, and commercialization
to the next level. The study should also detail the types
of jobs available in the quantum ecosystem and which
backgrounds are most relevant for those jobs. Such
information would help job seekers identify and pursue
suitable reskilling or upskilling opportunities. It would
also help the academic community “make more informed
decisions about how best to educate the future quantum
workforce.”245 The NQCO should conduct the study in
close consultation with the primary drivers of the NQI
Act—NIST, NSF, and DOE—and the QED-C, which can
provide additional insight about areas of concern.
The NQCO study should also assess the capacity
of U.S. institutions—including government agencies,
national labs, quantum companies, and the academic
community—to effectively develop quantum talent. The
study should identify existing workforce development
and quantum education programs and generate metrics
to assess their success and impact. Understanding which
“initiatives work and why is critical to determine which
programs can be replicated and scaled.”246
Establish a national quantum education and workforce
development center to harmonize and support
existing initiatives to build a more robust pipeline of
quantum talent.
The United States’ current approach to quantum educa-
tion and workforce development is highly decentralized,
with government agencies, companies, and educational
institutions each executing disparate programs and
initiatives. While this approach is an important first step
toward mitigating the United States’ quantum workforce
challenges, it can lead to disparities in the depth and
scope of implementation efforts.247
Congress should include the establishment of a
national quantum education and workforce development
center in the NQI reauthorization to magnify existing
workforce development efforts and streamline imple-
mentation.248 The center would provide a venue for
government, industry, and academia to connect ongoing
initiatives, share resources and best practices, and
brainstorm new programming. The center could develop
and promote resources to help job seekers learn about
the educational requirements of their desired careers,
identify training opportunities, and connect with career
counselors, mentors, and other job seekers.249
The center should also create a digital talent matching
platform to connect job seekers to potential employers,
27
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
a suggestion similarly put forth in a previous Center
for a New American Security (CNAS) report on the
broader U.S. technology workforce.250 The Tasmanian
Government’s Rapid Response Skills Matching Service,
which helped businesses adversely affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic fill critical vacancies, could
serve as a model for this effort.251 The platform should
feature a centralized database to which job seekers can
voluntarily upload a résumé, cover letter, relevant cer-
tificates, and related application materials. Government
agencies, private quantum companies, and academic
institutions could use the database to quickly identify
candidates with the skills and experience required to
fill key positions.252
Work with allies and partners to create cross-training
and reciprocal research exchange programs with quantum
centers worldwide.253
Quantum talent is a commodity in short supply both
nationally and internationally, and every country
involved in quantum R&D must contend with work-
force challenges. No country has exclusive access to the
people required to advance state-of-the-art quantum
technologies.254 The Biden administration can therefore
collaborate with allies and partners to mitigate key skills
gaps and create opportunities for every country to benefit
from the quantum expertise that is readily available.
The Biden administration can start by expanding
the scope and participation of existing multilateral
workforce development efforts. For example, the Biden
administration should encourage the Quad partners to
increase the size of the Quad Fellowship program, which
aims to develop a network of STEM talent by sponsoring
American, Australian, Indian, and Japanese master’s
and doctoral students to study in the United States.255
The Fellowship currently supports 100 students each
year. Opening the fellowship to more students, partic-
ularly students in quantum-relevant disciplines, such
as physics, electrical engineering, and computer and
information science, will enable the Quad to stay at the
cutting edge of research and discovery and counteract
competitors’ efforts to train, recruit, and retain the best
talent. The Quad should also create opportunities for
STEM fellows to study in Australia, Japan, and India,
as geographically diverse fellowship placement options
will help ensure that all Quad partners benefit from the
exchange of STEM talent and could help broaden the
pool of potential talent from which to draw.256
The budding trilateral relationship between the
United States, South Korea, and Japan presents another
opportunity for international cooperation. The United
States already has bilateral government-to-govern-
ment agreements with both Japan and South Korea
that underscore the importance of quantum workforce
development.257 The United States also has academic
and industry partnerships with both countries,
including an IBM and Google-supported partnership
between the University of Chicago and the University of
Tokyo, and a memorandum of understanding between
IBM, IonQ, and the Korean government. The OSTP
should develop metrics to assess the effectiveness of
these existing initiatives and scale those that are effec-
tive into trilateral frameworks.258
Universities and quantum companies also have
important roles to play in improving the United States’
access to quantum-specific and general STEM talent.
To improve educational opportunities, increase interest
in quantum careers, and promote diversity, equity, and
inclusion in the quantum industry, universities and
private industry should:
Cooperate to develop industry-specific postsecondary
education programs and create a pipeline of candidates
ready to fill critical gaps.
As noted in a previous CNAS report on the U.S. tech-
nology workforce, academic institutions and industry
must work together to improve quantum education
and proficiency.259 Purdue University’s Semiconductor
Degrees and Credentials Program, which combines
classroom lectures with experiential learning
opportunities, is one example of academic-industry
cooperation that can be modeled and expanded within
the quantum ecosystem.
The Purdue program gives undergraduate and
graduate students a variety of pathways—including
a master’s degree, undergraduate minors, associate
degrees, and stackable certificates—to gain core
skills needed for the semiconductor industry.260 The
Semiconductor Degrees Leadership Board, comprised
of private sector executives, plays a critical role in
crafting the program’s curricula based on industry
requirements.261 Some industry partners, such as
semiconductor manufacturer SkyWater Technology,
even administer the program’s introductory seminar.
Industry partners also agreed to offer cooperative and
internship opportunities to Purdue students, enabling
them to gain hands-on experience while completing
their degrees.262 With over 11,000 undergraduate and
4,000 graduate students, Purdue’s program helps
maintain a pipeline of globally competitive talent.263
@CNASDC
28

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Leading quantum companies like IBM, IonQ, and
PsiQuantum could similarly partner with colleges and
universities to bolster and expand quantum computing
degree programs and ensure that students gain the
practical experience required to fill critical talent gaps
immediately upon graduation.264 Industry partners can
also help increase the attractiveness of quantum degree
programs by funding scholarships, agreeing to interview
students that maintain a certain grade point average,
and providing employees with competitive student loan
repayment benefits. Such efforts would help lower-in-
come students pursue quantum degrees and increase the
likelihood that graduates ultimately use their degrees to
pursue careers in the quantum field.
Industry could further support university programs
by hosting faculty at their manufacturing, research,
and development facilities for information sessions,
tours, and roundtable discussions. Increased commu-
nication and cooperation between industry leaders
and university faculty would help the two communi-
ties better understand each other’s needs and facilitate
resource sharing.265
Partner with K–12 school systems to develop quantum
curricula and experiential learning opportunities for
students.
The National Q-12 Education Partnership offers a frame-
work for integrating quantum education into existing
STEM content and curricula at the K–12 level.266 As
Emily Edwards noted in recent congressional testimony,
however, “there is still significant work to be done on
curriculum development and implementation” and K–12
teachers “need more scaffolding to demystify quantum
and build their confidence in teaching the topic.”267
Initiatives like George Mason University’s (GMU's)
K–12 Quantum Workforce Development Project can
help equip K–12 schools with the resources required
to increase students’ exposure to and understanding
of quantum.
The K–12 Quantum Workforce Development Project,
which is coordinated by faculty from GMU’s Quantum
Science and Engineering Center and supported by
federal funding, aims to “inspire the next generation
of students to pursue quantum careers and simultane-
ously prepare a diverse quantum workforce in Northern
Virginia.”268 As part of the project, GMU faculty run
workshops for K–12 teachers in Loudoun and Fairfax
counties to “develop teachers’ quantum knowledge, work
with teachers to adapt existing materials, and develop
new materials to integrate into K–12 classrooms.” The
project also provides stipends for elementary and
high school teachers to attend professional develop-
ment seminars that give teachers the tools to integrate
quantum fundamentals into existing curricula.
GMU hosts a free summer immersion program from
rising high school seniors as well, which “supports
student learning of quantum concepts and quantum
careers.” The program allows students to “complete a
virtual learning program and then spend a week living on
campus and visiting local quantum laboratories, indus-
tries, and government agencies” working in quantum.269
Students have had the opportunity to meet quantum
experts at NASA, NIST, and MITRE Labs, among other
organizations, as well as undergraduate and graduate
GMU students studying quantum science. According
to the Virginia Economic Development Partnership,
the project has helped accelerate local K–12 schools’
adoption of quantum curricula, increase students’
interest in quantum careers, and build new skills to
support quantum-focused organizations.270
Universities with quantum degree programs
and faculty with quantum expertise—such as the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University
of Chicago, and the University of California, Berkeley—
should launch similar initiatives in other states. The
quantum industry can support such initiatives by offering
to host K–12 teachers and students at their R&D facili-
ties, clearly communicating their anticipated workforce
requirements, and promoting their achievements to
generate excitement about careers in quantum.
Partner with state and local governments to expand
quantum education and professional development
opportunities to individuals in rural areas.
A previous CNAS report on the U.S. technology work-
force found that projected growth in the STEM field is
expected to disproportionately benefit workers residing
in metropolitan areas in coastal states, who typically hold
advanced degrees.271 But individuals in rural areas, as
well as individuals who lack college degrees, comprise a
sizable untapped talent pool in the United States, and the
quantum industry is well-positioned to offer them stable,
high-paying jobs.272
To fill critical talent gaps, quantum companies should
design reskilling and upskilling initiatives to attract
and uplift these communities. Quantum apprenticeship
programs, accelerated skill development programs, or
online certification programs would allow such under-
represented individuals to hone their skills and advance
their earning and promotion potential.
29
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Quantum companies could also host job fairs in
rural communities to stimulate interest in the quantum
industry, offer education opportunities, and allow
residents to learn about job openings. They could hold
seminars or briefings from quantum industry represen-
tatives, information sessions on pathways to quantum
careers, and panel discussions about how to apply for
relevant professional development opportunities. Such
events should be well-advertised in local grocery stores,
gas stations, libraries, and schools and held at various
times of day, allowing both shift and traditional workers
to attend.273
Conclusion
IS is a critical and emerging technology area
that could help shape geopolitics in the 21st
century. Quantum computing is a particularly
influential subset of QIS that promises to confer tremen-
dous economic and military benefits by dramatically
improving computational speed and processing power
across a range of industries. The country with the best
quantum computers may unlock advantages in several
key areas, including pharmaceuticals, batteries, fertil-
izers, intelligence collection, and advanced weapons
systems. Given the stakes, quantum computing has
become a central front in U.S.-China strategic competi-
tion. Maintaining America’s quantum computing edge is
therefore critical to U.S. national and economic security.
Thanks to strong government support, a robust and
innovative private industry, and a high-quality research
infrastructure, the United States is the global leader in
many approaches to quantum computing, including
neutral atoms, trapped ions, and photonics. But China
is catching up. Chinese researchers and engineers
have reached rough parity with their U.S. counterparts
in superconducting qubits. They have also unlocked
several significant breakthroughs in other QIS subsets
that could expedite their development of highly capable
quantum computers.
The CCP has pushed quantum computing to the top of
its list of strategic technology priorities. Chinese govern-
ment officials have bluntly stated their intent to beat the
United States and establish “supremacy” in quantum by
building an independent manufacturing chain, nurturing
quantum talent, and developing market-ready applica-
tions.274 This heightened government attention to and
investment in quantum will not guarantee success—
China still maintains several weaknesses that will be
challenging to overcome, such as the relatively small size
and scale of its quantum industry. Nonetheless, Chinese
technology companies have a track record of achieving
rapid and unexpected technical breakthroughs following
periods of government intervention in R&D processes.275
U.S. leadership in quantum computing is thus far
from assured.
Should China take the lead in quantum computing, it
would gain a powerful new toolkit of capabilities that
could be used to “threaten previously unreachable parts
of the United States’ corporate, military, and government
infrastructure.”276 China’s development of a powerful
quantum computer would allow it to crack standard
encryption protocols and expose sensitive intelligence,
as well as Americans’ personal data. China would gain
an upper hand in establishing market dominance as well‚
making it more difficult for U.S. quantum companies to
compete internationally. It could also establish quantum
technology governance frameworks that exacerbate
global socioeconomic and ethnic divisions and under-
mine democratic principles.
Perhaps most concerning, China may not need to
achieve global quantum leadership to introduce such
national and economic security threats. Many quantum
computing applications will have long development and
deployment timelines that are not materially affected by
a one- or two-year capability gap. In other words, even
if China remains a few years behind the United States in
quantum R&D, it can accelerate progress toward prob-
lematic military and commercial end uses so long as it
continues developing a domestic infrastructure that
supports quantum implementation. The level of threat
China poses in quantum technology does not depend
solely on its position relative to the United States, but
also on its ability to quickly infuse the computational
advantage afforded by quantum computing into an over-
arching production and deployment process.
This means that the best way for the United States
to stay ahead in quantum computing is to emphasize
policies that accelerate U.S. progress at a rate unat-
tainable by select adversaries. U.S. policymakers can
shape a brighter future by acting quickly to promote
the United States’ quantum advantages and ensure the
development of a global quantum ecosystem that har-
nesses the technology’s positive potential and mitigates
its risk. In the near term, policymakers should focus on
supporting the development of a resilient quantum tech-
nology supply chain and building a robust and diverse
quantum workforce.
The quantum technology supply chain is inherently
risky—it is highly dispersed and specialized with many
single points of failure. At the same time, however, it
is nimble, presenting numerous opportunities for U.S.
@CNASDC
30
Q

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
policymakers to mitigate vulnerabilities and promote
U.S. interests. The White House can support the
development of a resilient supply chain by conducting
a comprehensive supply chain review and leveraging
financial incentives, as well as the Tech Hubs Program,
to promote domestic production of sensitive quantum
technology inputs. The White House should also equip
the QED-C to quickly detect new supply chain vulner-
abilities as quantum technologies evolve, and establish
an international forum to coordinate supply chains with
U.S. allies and partners. These measures will give pol-
icymakers the information required to actively choose
where to accept risk, rather than passively assuming
risk due to a lack of awareness and understanding.
A well-trained workforce is also critical to real-
izing and maximizing the full potential of quantum
computing. Talent is required not only to invent,
develop, and scale quantum technologies but also to
identify quantum applications and ensure respon-
sible technology use. The United States lacks both
the quantum-specific and general STEM expertise
needed to continue driving quantum technologies
forward. The U.S. government can foster a more robust
talent pipeline by developing processes to understand
workforce needs and skills gaps within the quantum
ecosystem, establishing a national quantum educa-
tion and workforce development center, and creating
research exchange programs with allies and partners.
Industry and academia can support these initiatives
by creating industry-specific postsecondary education
programs, partnering with local school systems to build
quantum curricula and experiential learning opportuni-
ties for K–12 students, and expanding quantum education
and professional development programs to individuals
who are historically underrepresented in STEM pro-
fessions, such as those who reside in rural areas or lack
college degrees. These efforts will help the United States
outcompete other countries also striving to produce and
access quantum talent.
When leaving his post in March 2022, former DoD
Chief Data Officer David Spirk warned that there were
“not enough senior leaders getting their heads around
the implications of quantum.”277 Spirk called on pol-
icymakers to “speed up” their efforts to prepare for
the quantum future or risk falling behind adversaries
determined to produce the most advanced technolo-
gies.278 As Spirk’s comments indicate, the United States is
at an important inflection point. Quantum computing is
maturing rapidly, and researchers and engineers across
the globe are at the precipice of significant technological
breakthroughs. But actual applications remain limited
and the path to creating quantum systems of significant
scale is uncertain. Now is the time to formulate policies
that safeguard the United States’ quantum advantages.
Policymakers should heed Spirk’s call to “pick up the
pace” on quantum.279
U.S. policymakers can shape a brighter
future by acting quickly to promote the
United States’ quantum advantages
and ensure the development of a global
quantum ecosystem that harnesses the
technology’s positive potential and
mitigates its risk.
31
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Appendix: Appendix: Global Entities
Engaged in Quantum R&D
Below is a non-exhaustive list of the companies and insti-
tutions in China, as well as U.S.-allied countries, engaged
in material R&D efforts pertaining to quantum computing
hardware. The information is extracted from data collected
by Global Quantum Intelligence.280
Company Country Modality
Archer Materials Limited Australia Spin/Quantum Dot/
Complementary Metal-
Oxide-Semiconductor
(“CMOS”)
Centre for Quantum
Computation & Communication
Technology (CQC2T)
Australia Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
and Photonic
Diraq Australia Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Griffith University Australia Photonic
University of Queensland Australia Photonic
Quantum Brilliance Australia Nitrogen Vacancy Center
(“NV”)
Silicon Quantum Computing Australia Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Alpine Quantum Technologies Austria Trapped Ion
Parity Quantum Computing Austria Trapped Ion
University of Innsbruck Austria Trapped Ion
NTT Austria NV
IMEC Belgium Superconducting
Anyon Canada Superconducting
D-Wave Canada Annealing and Gate Models
InfinityQ Canada Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Nord Quantique Canada Superconducting
Photonic Canada Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
and Photonic
Simon Fraser University Canada Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
and Photonic
University of Waterloo Canada Superconducting/Trapped
Ion/ Photonic
Xanadu Canada Photonic
Bose Quantum China Photonic
Origin Quantum Computing China Superconducting and Spin/
Quantum Dot/CMOS
Qike Quantum China Trapped Ion
SpinQ China Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (“NMR”)
Company Country Modality
TuringQ China Photonic
University of Science &
Technology of China (USTC)
China Superconducting/Photonic
Wuhan Institute of Physics &
Mathematics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
China Cold/Neutral/Helium Atom
Niels Bohr Institute Denmark Sping/Quantum Dot/CMOS
and Superconducting
Sparrow Quantum Denmark Photonic
Technical University of
Denmark
Denmark Photonic
Aalto University Finland Superconducting
IQM Finland Finland Superconducting
Nokia Bell Labs Finland Topological
Alice&Bob France Superconducting
C12 Quantum Electronics France Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
CEA-Leti/Inac France Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Institut d’Optique France Cold/Neutral/Helium Atom
NextGenQ France Trapped Ion
Pasqal France Cold/Neutral/Helium Atom
Quandela France Photonic
Siquance France Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
ATIQ Project Germany Trapped Ion
eleQtron Germany Trapped Ion
Infineon Germany Superconducting, Trapped
Ion, and Spin/Quantum
Dot/CMOS
Planqc Germany Cold/Neutral/Helium Atom
Q.ANT Germany Photonic
Quantum Factory Germany Trapped Ion
QUDORA Technologies Germany Superconducting
RWTH Aachen Germany Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
@CNASDC
32

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Company Country Modality
University of Duisburg-Essen Germany NV
University of Konstanz Germany Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
University of Stuttgart
(PhotonQ Project)
Germany Photonic
QpiAI India Superconducting
Silicofeller India Superconducting
Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research
India Superconducting
Equal1 Ireland Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Quantum Source Labs Israel Photonic
Weizmann Institute Israel Trapped Ion
Rotonium Italy Photonic
Fujitsu Japan Superconducting and NV
Diamond
Hitachi Cambridge Laboratory Japan Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
NEC Japan Adiabatic/Annealing
The Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Corporation
(NTT)/National Institute of
Informatics (NII)/University
of Tokyo
Japan Photonic
Riken Japan Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Riken/Fujitsu Japan Superconducting
Toshiba Japan Superconducting
TU Wien/NII Tokyo Japan NV
Korea Institute of Science &
Technology
Korea NV
NXP Semiconductors Netherlands Trapped Ion
Quantware Netherlands Superconducting
QuiX Netherlands Photonic
QuTech Netherlands Superconducting, Spin/
Quantum Dot/CMOS, NV,
Topological
Qilimanjaro Spain Adiabatic/Annealing
Quantic Spain Superconducting
Chalmers University of
Technology
Sweden Superconducting and
Topological
Stockholm University Sweden Trapped Ion
ETH Zurich/Paul Sherrer
Institute
Switzerland Superconducting and
Trapped Ion
ID Quantique Switzerland Photonic
University of Basel Switzerland Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
Company Country Modality
Hon Hai (Foxconn) Taiwan Trapped Ion
Technology Innovation
Institute
United Arab
Emirates
Superconducting
Networked Quantum
Information Technologies
(NQIT)
United
Kingdom
Trapped Ion
ORCA Computing United
Kingdom
Photonic
Oxford Quantum Circuits United
Kingdom
Superconducting
Oxford University United
Kingdom
Superconducting, Trapped
Ion, Photonic, and NV
Quantum Motion Technologies United
Kingdom
Spin/Quantum Dot/CMOS
TundraSystems Global United
Kingdom
Photonic
Universal Quantum United
Kingdom
Trapped Ion
University of Bristol United
Kingdom
Photonic
University of Sussex United
Kingdom
Trapped Ion
33
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
1. “International Year of Quantum Science and Technology,”
International Year of Science and Technology Partners,
accessed May 9, 2024, https://quantum2025.org/about.
2. Edward Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese
Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology (Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Corporation, February 2, 2022), 1–115, https://
www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA869-1.html.
3. McKenzie Prillaman, “Building a Quantum Workforce
Doesn’t Just Mean Graduating More Ph.D.s,” APS News,
March 15, 2024, https://www.aps.org/publications/
apsnews/202404/quantum.cfm#:~:text=Science%20
stands%20at%20the%20verge,of%20Quantum%20Sci-
ence%20and%20Technology.
4. Jake Sullivan, “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake
Sullivan at the Special Competitive Studies Project Global
Emerging Technologies Summit” (public event, Special
Competitive Studies Project Global Emerging Technol-
ogies Summit, Washington, DC, September 16, 2022),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-re-
marks/2022/09/16/remarks-by-national-security-advi-
sor-jake-sullivan-at-the-special-competitive-studies-proj-
ect-global-emerging-technologies-summit. 
5. Sullivan, “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake
Sullivan at the Special Competitive Studies Project Global
Emerging Technologies Summit.” 
6. Edward Parker, Commercial and Military Applications and
Timelines for Quantum Technology (Santa Monica, CA:
RAND Corporation, October 28, 2021), https://www.rand.
org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1482-4.html.
7 . “Quantum Computing,” Boston Consulting Group,
accessed February 16, 2024, https://www.bcg.com/capa-
bilities/digital-technology-data/emerging-technologies/
quantum-computing.
8. Elsa B. Kania and John K. Costello, Quantum Hege-
mony? China’s Ambitions and the Challenge to U .S.
Innovation Leadership? (Washington, DC: Center for a
New American Security, September 12, 2018), https://
s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/hero/doc-
uments/CNASReport-Quantum-Tech_FINAL.pdf?m-
time=20180912133406&focal=none; Stuart A. Wolf et
al., Overview of the Status of Quantum Science and Technol-
ogy and Recommendations for the DoD (IDA, June 2019),
https://www.ida.org/research-and-publications/publica-
tions/all/o/ov/overview-of-the-status-of-quantum-sci-
ence-and-technology-and-recommendations-for-the-dod.
9. Kania and Costello, Quantum Hegemony? China’s Ambi-
tions and the Challenge to U .S. Innovation Leadership?
10. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Com-
mittee on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supple-
ment to the President’s FY 2023 Budget (National Science
& Technology Council, January 2023), https://www.
quantum.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/NQI-Annu-
al-Report-FY2023.pdf; Mateusz Masiowski et al., Quantum
Technology Monitor (McKinsey Digital, June 2022), https://
www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-in-
sights/quantum-computing-funding-remains-strong-but-
talent-gap-raises-concern.
11. Masiowski et al., Quantum Technology Monitor.
12. Masiowski et al., Quantum Technology Monitor.
13. “What is Quantum Information Science and Technolo-
gy?” University of Waterloo, accessed February 26, 2024,
https://uwaterloo.ca/institute-for-quantum-computing/
quantum-101/quantum-information-science-and-technolo-
gy.
14. “DOE Explains...Quantum Mechanics,” Office of Science
U.S. Department of Energy, accessed February 26, 2024,
https://www.energy.gov/science/doe-explainsquan-
tum-mechanics#:~:text=Quantum%20mechanics%20is%20
the%20field,%E2%80%9Cwave%2Dparticle%20duali-
ty.%E2%80%9D.
15. Glynn Cosker, “What Is Information Technology? A Be-
ginner’s Guide to the World of IT,” Rasmussen University
Technology Blog, May 2, 2023, https://www.rasmussen.
edu/degrees/technology/blog/what-is-information-tech-
nology.
16. National Quantum Initiative Advisory Committee, Renew-
ing the National Quantum Initiative: Recommendations for
Sustaining American Leadership in Quantum Information
Science (National Quantum Initiative Advisory Commit-
tee, June 2023), https://www.quantum.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2023/06/NQIAC-Report-Renewing-the-Nation-
al-Quantum-Initiative.pdf.
1 7. “What is quantum computing?” IBM, accessed February
26, 2024, https://www.ibm.com/topics/quantum-comput-
ing.
18. “What Is Superposition and Why Is It Important?” Caltech
Science Exchange, accessed February 26, 2024, https://
scienceexchange.caltech.edu/topics/quantum-science-ex-
plained/quantum-superposition.
19. “Interference in Quantum Computing,” Classiq, accessed
February 26, 2024, https://www.classiq.io/insights/inter-
ference-in-quantum-computing.
20. “Explore quantum,” Microsoft, accessed March 4, 2024,
https://quantum.microsoft.com/en-us/explore/concepts/
interference.
21. “Physics Tutor: Quantum Strangeness – Superposition and
Measurement,” Cambridge Coaching, accessed February
26, 2024, https://blog.cambridgecoaching.com/blog/
bid/313718/Physics-Tutor-Quantum-Strangeness-Superpo-
sition-and-Measurement#:~:text=Let’s%20say%20that%20
you%20flick,coin%20was%20in%20the%20air. 
@CNASDC
34

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
22. Gavin Wright, “Quantum Interference,” TechTarget, February
2023, https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/quan-
tum-interference.
23. “Quantum Applications Today,” University of Waterloo,
accessed February 26, 2024, https://uwaterloo.ca/insti-
tute-for-quantum-computing/quantum-101/quantum-appli-
cations-today#mri.
24. Sarah Sheldon, “Quantum Computing with Noisy Qubits,”
in Frontiers of Engineering: Reports on Leading-Edge Engi-
neering from the 2018 Symposium (Washington, DC: The Na-
tional Academies Press, 2019), https://nap.nationalacademies.
org/read/25333/chapter/6.
25. National Quantum Initiative Advisory Committee, Renewing
the National Quantum Initiative: Recommendations for Sus-
taining American Leadership in Quantum Information Science.
26. Rebel Brown, “Will Quantum Computers Replace Classical
Computers?” Innovative Quantum Solutions Company, ac-
cessed May 16, 2024, https://wp.quantumcomputinginc.com/
blog/quantum-computers-replace-classical/#:~:text=In%20
fact%2C%20classical%20computers%20will,do%20for%20
the%20foreseeable%20future.
2 7. Ashley Montanaro, “Quantum Algorithms: An Overview,”
npj Quantum Information 2, no. 15023 (January 2016): 1–8,
https://www.nature.com/articles/npjqi201523; Sanjoy
Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, and Umesh Vazirani,
“Quantum algorithms” in Algorithms (McGraw-Hill Educa-
tion, 2006), https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~vazirani/algo-
rithms/chap10.pdf.
28. P . W . Shor, “Algorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete
Logarithms and Factoring,” Proceedings 35th Annual Sympo-
sium on Foundations of Computer Science, https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/365700.
29. “Shor’s Algorithm,” QuEra, accessed February 26, 2024,
https://www.quera.com/glossary/shors-algorithm; Park-
er, Commercial and Military Applications and Timelines for
Quantum Technology. 
30. “Theory of Grover’s Search Algorithm,” Microsoft Learn,
accessed February 26, 2024, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-
us/azure/quantum/concepts-grovers; “Grover’s Algorithm,”
IBM Quantum Learning, accessed February 26, 2024, https://
learning.quantum-computing.ibm.com/course/fundamen-
tals-of-quantum-algorithms/grovers-algorithm#grovers-al-
gorithm.
31. “Quantum Simulation,” University of Waterloo, accessed
February 26, 2024, https://uwaterloo.ca/institute-for-quan-
tum-computing/quantum-101/quantum-information-sci-
ence-and-technology/quantum-simulation.
32. Bojia Duan et al., “A Survey on HHL Algorithm: From Theory
to Application in Quantum Machine Learning,” Physics Let-
ters A 384, no. 24 (August 2020): 21–38, https://www.science-
direct.com/science/article/abs/pii/S037596012030462X. 
33. Keith W . Crane et al., Assessment of the Future Economic
Impact of Quantum Information Science (IDA, August 2017)
https://www.ida.org/-/media/feature/publications/a/as/
assessment-of-the-future-economic-impact-of-quantum-in-
formation-science/p-8567 .ashx.
34. Interview with quantum engineer, April 1, 2024.
35. “Boeing Seeks New Ways to Engineer Strong, Lightweight
Materials,” IBM, accessed February 26, 2024, https://www.
ibm.com/casestudies/boeing#:~:text=Boeing’s%20partner-
ship%20with%20IBM%20Quantum,important%20step%20
toward%20that%20future.
36. “Boeing Seeks New Ways to Engineer Strong, Lightweight
Materials.”
3 7. “Boeing Seeks New Ways to Engineer Strong, Lightweight
Materials.”
38. Edis Osmanbasic, “Eye on Lithium: For Better Batteries, Use
Quantum Computers,” Engineering, May 18, 2022, https://
www.engineering.com/story/eye-on-lithium-for-better-bat-
teries-use-quantum-computers.
39. Michio Kaku, Quantum Supremacy: How the Quantum
Computer Revolution Will Change Everything (Washing-
ton DC: National Geographic Books, 2023); BMW Group,
“BMW Group, Airbus and Quantinuum Collaborate to Fast-
Track Sustainable Mobility Research Using Cutting-Edge
Quantum Computers,” press release, August 2, 2023,
https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/global/article/detail/
T0426579EN/bmw-group-airbus-and-quantinuum-collab -
orate-to-fast-track-sustainable-mobility-research-using-cut-
ting-edge-quantum-computers?language=en.
40. SavantX, “Quantum Computing Application Sees Real
World Success at Pier 300 at The Port of Los Angeles,”
PR Newswire, January 5, 2022, https://www.prnewswire.
com/news-releases/quantum-computing-application-sees-
real-world-success-at-pier-300-at-the-port-of-los-ange-
les-301455106.html; “SavantX: Logistics Optimization at the
Port of Los Angeles,” D-Wave Systems, accessed February 24,
2024, https://www.dwavesys.com/media/y3hl22va/dwave_
port_of_la_case_story_v7 .pdf.
41. James Dargan, “What Is NISQ Quantum Computing?” The
Quantum Insider, March 13, 2023, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2023/03/13/what-is-nisq-quantum-computing.
42. “Differentiating Quantum Error Correction, Suppression, and
Mitigation,” Q-CTRL, accessed February 24, 2024, https://q-
ctrl.com/topics/differentiating-quantum-error-correc-
tion-suppression-and-mitigation; Matthias Steffen, “What’s
the Difference between Error Suppression, Error Mitigation,
and Error Correction?” IBM, October 20, 2022, https://www.
ibm.com/quantum/blog/quantum-error-suppression-mitiga-
tion-correction; and Dayue Qin, Xiaosi Xu, and Ying Li, “An
Overview of Quantum Error Mitigation Formulas,” Chinese
Physics B 31, no. 9 (September 2022), https://iopscience.iop.
org/article/10.1088/1674-1056/ac7b1e/pdf.
35
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
43. “Differentiating Quantum Error Correction, Suppression,
and Mitigation.” 
44. “Introduction to Quantum Error Correction, QuEra, Sep-
tember 8, 2023, https://www.quera.com/blog-posts/intro-
duction-to-quantum-error-correction.
45. “Differentiating Quantum Error Correction, Suppression,
and Mitigation.” 
46. Steffan, “What’s the Difference between Error Suppression,
Error Mitigation, and Error Correction?”; “Neutral-Atom
Quantum Computers Are Having a Moment,” PhysicsWorld,
November 9, 2023, https://physicsworld.com/a/neutral-at-
om-quantum-computers-are-having-a-moment.
4 7. Austin G. Fowler, Ashley M. Stephens, and Peter Groszkow-
ski, “High Threshold Universal Quantum Computation on
the Surface Code,” Cornell University, December 16, 2012,
https://arxiv.org/abs/0803.0272.
48. Simon J. Evered et al., “High-Fidelity Parallel Entangling
Gates on a Neutral-Atom Quantum Computer,” Nature,
October 11, 2023, https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-
023-06481-y.
49. “What is Quantum Error Correction?” Q-CTRL, https://q-
ctrl.com/topics/what-is-quantum-error-correction; Earl
T. Campbell, Barbara M. Terhal, and Christophe Vuillot,
“Roads Towards Fault-Tolerant Universal Quantum Compu-
tation,” Cornell University, November 12, 2018, https://arxiv.
org/abs/1612.07330.
50. Sundar Pichai, “Our Progress toward Quantum Error Cor-
rection,” Google, February 22, 2023, https://blog.google/
inside-google/message-ceo/our-progress-toward-quan-
tum-error-correction; Jeremy Hsu, “Google Tests First Error
Correction in Quantum Computing,” IEEE Spectrum, March
4, 2015, https://spectrum.ieee.org/google-tests-first-er-
ror-correction-in-quantum-computing.
51. Hsu, “Google Tests First Error Correction in Quantum Com-
puting.”
52. Daphne Leprince-Ringuet, “Quantum Computing Is Just
Getting Going. But the Hype Could Bring Everything Crash-
ing Down,” ZDNET, November 1, 2021, https://www.zdnet.
com/article/quantum-computing-is-just-getting-going-but-
the-hype-could-bring-everything-crashing-down. 
53. “DiVincenzo’s Criteria,” Quantum Computing Codex,
accessed February 26, 2024, https://qc-at-davis.github.io/
QCC/How-Quantum-Computing-Works/DiVincenzo’s-Cri-
teria/DiVincenzo’s-Criteria.html#divincenzos-criteria-sup-
1sup; Shannon Brescher Shea, “Creating the Heart of a
Quantum Computer: Developing Qubits,” Office of Science
U.S. Department of Energy, February 10, 2020, https://www.
energy.gov/science/articles/creating-heart-quantum-com-
puter-developing-qubits; and Arnaud Carignan-Dugas
and Stefanie Beale, “Quantum Computing Brings New
Error Correction Challenges,” EE Times Asia, December
26, 2022, https://www.eetasia.com/quantum-comput-
ing-brings-new-error-correction-challenges. 
54. Jerry Chow et al., State of Quantum Computing: Building a
Quantum Economy (World Economic Forum, September
2022), https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_State_of_
Quantum_Computing_2022.pdf.
55. Leprince-Ringuet, “Quantum Computing Is Just Getting
Going. But the Hype Could Bring Everything Crashing
Down.”
56. Jerry Chow et al., State of Quantum Computing: Building a
Quantum Economy.
5 7. Jukka Knuutinen, “Why Superconducting Qubits Might
Be the Path to Quantum Advantage,” Quanscient, May 2,
2022, https://quanscient.com/blog/why-superconducting-
qubits-might-be-the-path-to-quantum-advantage; Frank
Harkins, “Introduction to Qubits: Part 2,” The Quantum
Insider, November 3, 2019, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2019/11/03/introduction-to-qubits-part-2; Rebel
Brown, “The Many Faces of a Qubit,” QCi, accessed May
16, 2024, https://wp.quantumcomputinginc.com/blog/the-
many-faces-of-a-qubit; and “Key Advantages of Neutral-At-
om Quantum Computer Architectures,” QuEra, October 9,
2023, https://www.quera.com/blog-posts/key-advantag-
es-of-neutral-atom-quantum-computer-architectures.
58. Frank Harkins, “Introduction To Qubits: Part 2,” The Quan-
tum Insider, November 3, 2019, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2019/11/03/introduction-to-qubits-part-2.
59. Harkins, “Introduction to Qubits: Part 2.”
60. Caroline Hopkins, “The World Is Running Out of Helium.
Here’s Why Doctors Are Worried.” NBC News, October
22, 2022, https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/
helium-shortage-doctors-are-worried-running-ele-
ment-threaten-mris-rcna52978.
61. Dr. William Oliver (director, Center for Quantum Engi-
neering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology), in discus-
sion with the author, October 17 , 2023.
62. John Russell, “IBM Opens Access to Latest Osprey
Quantum Processor at 413 Qubits,” HPCwire, May 9, 2023,
https://www.hpcwire.com/2023/05/09/ibm-opens-access-
to-latest-osprey-quantum-processor-at-413-qubits; Julian
Kelly, “A Preview of Bristlecone, Google’s New Quantum
Processor,” Google Research, March 5, 2018, https://blog.
research.google/2018/03/a-preview-of-bristlecone-goo-
gles-new.html; and “Quantum Computing Systems Achiev-
ing Quantum Practicality,” Intel Labs, accessed February
26, 2024, https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/
research/quantum-computing.html.
63. Kenneth R. Brown et al., “Materials Challenges for
Trapped-Ion Quantum Computers,” Nature Reviews Ma-
terials 6, no. 3 (Marc 2021): 892–905, https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41578-021-00292-1#article-info.
@CNASDC
36

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
64. Rebel Brown, “The Many Faces of a Qubit,” Quantum
Computing Inc, December 10, 2021, https://wp.quan-
tumcomputinginc.com/blog/the-many-faces-of-a-qubit;
Harkins, “Introduction To Qubits: Part 2.” Jonathan Hui,
“QC — How to build a Quantum Computer with Trapped
Ions?” Medium, January 14, 2019, https://jonathan-hui.
medium.com/qc-how-to-build-a-quantum-computer-
with-trapped-ions-88b958b81484.
65. Brown, “The Many Faces of a Qubit.”
66. Brown, “The Many Faces of a Qubit.”
6 7. Alvaro Ballon, “Photonic Quantum Computers,” Penny-
Lane, May 30, 2022, https://pennylane.ai/qml/demos/
tutorial_photonics.
68. Kaku, Quantum Supremacy: How the Quantum Computer
Revolution Will Change Everything.
69. Amirhossein Nourbakhsh et al., Quantum Computing:
Fundamentals, Trends and Perspectives for Chemical and
Biochemical Engineers (arXiv, January 2022), 128, https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/357734170_Quan-
tum_Computing_Fundamentals_Trends_and_Perspec-
tives_for_Chemical_and_Biochemical_Engineers; Feroz
Ahmad, “Photonic Quantum Computing,” Medium, July
17 , 2023, https://medium.com/quantum-engineering/pho-
tonic-quantum-computing-66c8be38035c.
70. Alvaro Ballon, “Neutral-Atom Quantum Computers,” Pen-
nyLane, May 29, 2023, https://pennylane.ai/qml/demos/
tutorial_neutral_atoms.
71. Charlotte Hu, “How Neutral Atoms Could Help Pow-
er Next-Gen Quantum Computers,” Popular Science,
February 10, 2023, https://www.popsci.com/technology/
neutral-atom-quantum-computer.
72. Highly Scalable Quantum Computing with Atomic
Arrays (Berkeley, CA: Atom Computing, August 2022),
1–8, https://atom-computing.com/wp-content/up-
loads/2022/08/Atom-Computing-Atomic-Arrays.pdf. 
73. Kyrlynn D, “Neutral Atoms Could Be the Next Big Thing
in the Quantum Industry, but Why?” Quantum Zeit-
geist, December 8, 2022, https://quantumzeitgeist.com/
neutral-atoms-could-be-the-next-big-thing-in-the-quan-
tum-industry-but-why.
74. Russ Fein, “Quantum Computing with Neutral Atoms,”
The Quantum Leap, January 17 , 2023, https://quantum-
tech.blog/2023/01/17/quantum-computing-with-neu-
tral-atoms.
75. Interview with quantum engineer, April 1, 2024.
76. Karen Wintersperger et al., “Neutral Atom Quantum
Computing Hardware: Performance and End-User
Perspective,” EPJ Quantum Technology 10, no. 32 (August
2023): 1–26, https://epjquantumtechnology.springeropen.
com/articles/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-023-00190-1#citeas.
7 7. Tzvetan Metodi, Error Correction and Fault-Tolerant Quan-
tum Computing (Office of Scientific and Technical Informa-
tion, U.S. Department of Energy, June 1, 2019), 1–29, https://
www.osti.gov/biblio/1640593#:~:text=10-,Fault%2DTol-
erant%20Quantum%20Computing%3A%20Quantum%20
Circuit%20Formalism,a%20two%2Dstate%20quantum%20
system.
78. National Strategic Overview for Quantum Information
Science (Washington, DC: Subcommittee on Quantum
Information Science under the Committee on Science
of the National Science & Technology Council, Septem-
ber 2018), https://www.quantum.gov/wp-content/up-
loads/2020/10/2018_NSTC_National_Strategic_Overview_
QIS.pdf; “Enhancing Competitiveness,” National Quantum
Initiative, accessed April 16, 2024, https://www.quantum.
gov/competitiveness.
79. “National Quantum Initiative,” National Quantum Coor-
dination Office, accessed February 16, 2024, https://www.
quantum.gov.
80. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Commit-
tee on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supplement to
the President’s FY 2024 Budget (National Science & Technol-
ogy Council, December 2023), https://www.quantum.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2023/12/NQI-Annual-Report-FY2024.
pdf.
81. “About the National Quantum Initiative,” National Quantum
Coordination Office, accessed February 16, 2024, https://
www.quantum.gov/about/#:~:text=Although%20the%20Na-
tional%20Quantum%20Initiative,extends%20beyond%20
these%20three%20agencies; “Enhancing the National
Quantum Initiative Advisory Committee,” Executive Office
of the President, May 4, 2022, https://www.federalreg-
ister.gov/documents/2022/05/09/2022-10076/enhanc-
ing-the-national-quantum-initiative-advisory-committee.
82. “National Quantum Initiative,” National Quantum Coordi-
nation Office, accessed May 6, 2024, https://www.quantum.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/NQI-Factsheet.pdf.
83. “The National Quantum Coordination Office,” National
Quantum Coordination Office, accessed February 16, 2024,
https://www.quantum.gov/nqco.
84. “About the National Quantum Initiative”; “Quantum in
the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022,” National Quantum
Coordination Office, accessed February 16, 2024, https://
www.quantum.gov/quantum-in-the-chips-and-science-act-
of-2022.
85. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022,
Pub. L. No. 117–81, 135 Stat. 1541 (2021).
86. “About the National Quantum Initiative”; John S. McCain
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019,
Pub. L. No. 115–232, 132 Stat. 1636 (2018); and National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, Pub. L. No.
116–92, 133 Stat. 1198 (2019).
37
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
8 7. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Committee
on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supplement to the
President’s FY 2023 Budget. 
88. Edward Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese
Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology (Santa Monica, CA:
RAND, February 2, 2022), 1–115, https://www.rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RRA869-1.html; Subcommittee on Quantum
Information Science Committee on Science, National Quan-
tum Initiative Supplement to the President’s FY 2023 Budget. 
89. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Committee
on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supplement to the
President’s FY 2023 Budget.
90. Masiowski et al., Quantum Technology Monitor.
91. Masiowski et al., Quantum Technology Monitor.
92. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industrial
Bases in Quantum Technology.
93. Hodan Omaar, The U .S. Approach to Quantum Policy (Center
For Data Innovation, October 10, 2023), 1–32, https://www2.
datainnovation.org/2023-us-quantum-policy.pdf.
94. Omaar, The U .S. Approach to Quantum Policy.
95. Written Public Comments (National Quantum Initiative Advi-
sory Committee, March 24, 2023), 1–6, https://www.quantum.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/NQIAC-2023-03-24-Writ-
ten-Comments.pdf.
96. Johnny Kung and Muriam Fancy, A Quantum Revolution:
Report on Global Policies for Quantum Technology (CIFAR,
April 2021), https://cifar.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/
QuantumReport-EN-May2021.pdf.
9 7. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Committee
on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supplement to the
President’s FY 2023 Budget.
98. “Quantum Leap Challenge Institutes (QLCI),” U.S. National
Science Foundation, accessed February 26, 2024, https://new.
nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/quantum-leap-challenge-in-
stitutes-qlci.
99. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science Committee
on Science, National Quantum Initiative Supplement to the
President’s FY 2023 Budget.
100. “More Institutions to Participate in Quantum Science and
Engineering with $38M from NSF,” NSF News, August 15,
2023, https://new.nsf.gov/news/more-institutions-partici-
pate-quantum-science.
101. “The National Quantum Information Science Research Cen-
ters,” U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, accessed
February 26, 2024, https://science.osti.gov/-/media/QIS/pdf/
QuantumBrochure2021.pdf; Hodan Omaar, The U .S. Approach
to Quantum Policy, 1–32.
102. U.S. Department of Energy “Department of Energy An-
nounces $11.7 Million for Research on Quantum Comput-
ing,” press release, July 27 , 2023, https://www.energy.gov/
science/articles/department-energy-announces-117-mil-
lion-research-quantum-computing.
103. The State of U .S. Science and Engineering 2022 (The Nation-
al Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, January
2022), 14–23, https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20221/u-s-and-
global-research-and-development.
104. National Quantum Initiative Advisory Committee (NQIAC)
Written Public Comments, 88 Fed. Reg. 13,811 (March 6,
2023); Omaar, The U .S. Approach to Quantum Policy.
105. Oliver, discussion.
106. Oliver, discussion.
107 . “About the National Quantum Initiative,” National Quantum
Coordination Office, accessed May 13, 2024, https://www.
quantum.gov/about; “Building the Quantum Workforce,”
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Scientific and Technical
Information, accessed May 13, 2024, https://science.osti.
gov/-/media/QIS/pdf/QuantumBrochure2021.pdf.
108. Quantum Technology Investment Update 2022 Review (The
Quantum Insider, February 2023), https://thequantuminsid-
er.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Quantum-Technolo-
gy-Investor-Update_vFF.pdf.
109. IQM Quantum Computers et al., State of Quantum 2024
(IQM Quantum Computers, January 2024), https://meeti-
qm.com/uploads/documents/State-of-Quantum-2024-re-
port.pdf; Scarlett Gao et al., “Is Winter Coming? Quantum
Computing’s Trajectory in the Years Ahead,” McKinsey &
Company, May 19, 2023, https://www.mckinsey.com/capa-
bilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/tech-forward/is-win-
ter-coming-quantum-computings-trajectory-in-the-years-
ahead.
110. The Quantum Insider, The Quantum Quarterly (The Quan-
tum Insider, October 2023), https://thequantuminsider.
com/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/Q3-2023-The-Quan-
tum-Quarterly.pdf; IQM Quantum Computers et al., State of
Quantum 2024.
111. Quantum Technology Monitor (McKinsey & Company, June
2022), https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/
business%20functions/mckinsey%20digital/our%20in-
sights/quantum%20computing%20funding%20remains%20
strong%20but%20talent%20gap%20raises%20concern/
quantum-technology-monitor.pdf.
112. Mateusz Masiowski et al., “Quantum Computing Funding
Remains Strong, but Talent Gap Raises Concern,” McKinsey
& Company, June 15, 2022, https://www.mckinsey.com/ca-
pabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/quantum-comput-
ing-funding-remains-strong-but-talent-gap-raises-concern;
Quantum Technology Investment Update 2022 Review.
@CNASDC
38

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
113. Quantum Technology Investment Update 2022 Review.
114. Mateusz Masiowski et al., “Quantum Computing Fund-
ing Remains Strong, but Talent Gap Raises Concern.”
115. Quantum Technology Investment Update 2022 Review.
116. Interviews were conducted in confidentiality and names
were agreed to be withheld; Interview with venture
capital investors, October 16–20, 2023.
117 . IQM Quantum Computers et al., State of Quantum 2024.
118. James Dargan, “Quantum Industry Explained: Ap-
plications, Innovations & Challenges,” The Quantum
Insider, February 5, 2024, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2024/02/05/quantum-industry-explained-applica-
tions-innovations-challenges.
119. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Indus-
trial Bases in Quantum Technology; “QED-C members,”
The Quantum Economic Development Consortium,
accessed February 29, 2024, https://quantumconsortium.
org/members.
120. Quantum Technology Monitor.
121. Quantum Technology Monitor.
122. Matteo Biondi et al., Quantum Computing Use Casesare
Getting Real—What Y ou Need to Know (McKinsey &
Company, December 2021), https://www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/quantum-
computing-use-cases-are-getting-real-what-you-need-
to-know.
123. Quantum Technology Monitor.
124. “QED-C members.”
125. “China Focus: Xi Unveils Plan to Make China ‘Great
Modern Socialist Country’ by Mid-21st Century,” Xin-
huaNet, October 18, 2017 , http://www.xinhuanet.com/
english/2017-10/18/c_136688933.htm.
126. Elsa B. Kania and John K. Costello, Quantum Hegemony?
China’s Ambitions and the Challenge to U .S. Innovation
Leadership (Washington, DC: Center for a New Amer-
ican Security, September 2018), https://s3.us-east-1.
amazonaws.com/files.cnas.org/hero/documents/CNAS-
Report-Quantum-Tech_FINAL.pdf.
127 . Kania and Costello, Quantum Hegemony? China’s Ambi-
tions and the Challenge to U .S. Innovation Leadership.
128. “Thirteenth Five- Year Science and Technology Mili-
tary-Civil Fusion Development Special Plan [“十三
五”科技军民融合发展专项规划》全文],” September
26, 2017 , http://www.aisixiang.com/data/106161.html;
Elsa B. Kania, “China’s Quantum Future,” Foreign Affairs,
September 26, 2018, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/china/2018-09-26/chinas-quantum-future.
129. “Notice of the State Council on the Printing and Distribution
of the Thirteenth Five- Year National Science and Technology
Innovation Plan [国务院关于印发“十三 五”国家科技创新
规划的通知],” State Council, August 8, 2016, http://www.gov.
cn/zhengce/content/2016-08/08/ content_5098072.htm.
130. Matt Swayne, “Origin Quantum’s Founder Pushes For Action
To Secure China’s Quantum Self-Reliance,” The Quan-
tum Insider, March 4, 2024, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2024/03/04/origin-quantums-founder-pushes-for-ac-
tion-to-secure-chinas-quantum-self-reliance.
131. Swayne, “Origin Quantum’s Founder Pushes For Action To
Secure China’s Quantum Self-Reliance.”
132. “Xi Focus: Xi Stresses Advancing Development of Quantum
Science and Technology,” XinhuaNet, October 17 , 2020,
http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-10/17/c_139447976.
htm.
133. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industrial
Bases in Quantum Technology.
134. Quantum Technology Monitor.
135. Brandon Kirk Williams, The Innovation Race: US-China
Science and Technology Competition and the Quantum Revo-
lution (Washington, DC: The Wilson Center, 2022), https://
www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/media/uploads/
documents/Williams_2022-23%20Wilson%20China%20Fel-
lowship_Understanding%20China%20Amid%20Change%20
and%20Competition.pdf.
136. Jakob Pii, “Chinese Quantum Companies And National
Strategy 2023,” The Quantum Insider, April 13, 2023, https://
thequantuminsider.com/2023/04/13/chinese-quantum-com-
panies-and-national-strategy-2023.
137 . “Federal Quantum Information Science: An Overview,” Con-
gressional Research Service, July 2, 2018, https://sgp.fas.org/
crs/misc/IF10872.pdf.
138. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industrial
Bases in Quantum Technology; Qiang Zhang et al., “Quan-
tum Information Research in China,” Quantum Science and
Technology 4, no. 4 (2019), https://iopscience.iop.org/arti-
cle/10.1088/2058-9565/ab4bea/pdf.
139. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industrial
Bases in Quantum Technology.
140. Yi-An Chang, Quantum Wars (Cheung Kong Graduate School
of Business, May 26, 2021), https://english.ckgsb.edu.cn/
knowledge/article/quantum-wars.
141. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industrial
Bases in Quantum Technology.
142. China Power Team, “Is China a Leader in Quantum Technol-
ogies?” China Power, August 14, 2023, https://chinapower.
csis.org/china-quantum-technology.
39
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
143. Jakob Pii, “Chinese Quantum Companies and National
Strategy 2023.”
144. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industri-
al Bases in Quantum Technology.
145. Johnny Kung and Muriam Fancy, A Quantum Revolution:
Report on Global Policies for Quantum Technology (CIFAR,
April 2021), https://cifar.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/
QuantumReport-EN-May2021.pdf.
146. Current and Emerging Technologies in U .S.-China Eco-
nomic and National Security Competition, 118th Cong.
(statement of Dr. Edward Parker, physical scientist, RAND
Corporation, 2024), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/
files/2024-02/Edward_Parker_Testimony.pdf.
14 7. Kania and Costello, Quantum Hegemony? China’s Ambi-
tions and the Challenge to U .S. Innovation Leadership.
148. Liu Zhen, “China’s Latest Quantum Radar Won’t Just Track
Stealth Bombers, but Ballistic Missiles in Space Too,” South
China Morning Post, June 15, 2018, https://www.scmp.com/
news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2151086/chinas-
latest-quantum-radar-wont-just-track-stealth; Current and
Emerging Technologies in U .S.-China Economic and National
Security Competition (statement of Edward Parker).
149. Kania, “China’s Quantum Future.”
150. Current and Emerging Technologies in U .S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition (statement of Edward
Parker).
151. Current and Emerging Technologies in U .S.-China Economic
and National Security Competition (statement of Edward
Parker).
152. Jakob Pii, “Chinese Quantum Companies And National
Strategy 2023.”
153. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industri-
al Bases in Quantum Technology.
154. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industri-
al Bases in Quantum Technology.
155. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Industri-
al Bases in Quantum Technology.
156. Stephen Chen, “China Launches World’s Fastest Program-
mable Quantum Computers,” South China Morning Post,
October 26, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/sci-
ence/article/3153727/china-launches-worlds-fastest-pro-
grammable-quantum-computers.
157 . Brady Helwing et al., “A Memo to the President on U.S.
Leadership in Compute and Microelectronics,” Special
Competitive Studies Project, November 21, 2023, https://
scsp222.substack.com/p/a-memo-to-the-president-on-
us-leadership; Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and
Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology.
158. Bryan T. Gard et al., “An Introduction to Boson-Sampling,”
arXiv, June 26, 2014, https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.6767.
159. Chen, “China Launches World’s Fastest Programmable
Quantum Computers”; Frank Arute et al., “Quantum Su-
premacy Using a Programmable Superconducting Proces-
sor,” Nature 574, no. 505–510 (October 23, 2019), https://
www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1666-5.
160. François Candelon et al., “The U.S., China, and Europe
Are Ramping up a Quantum Computing Arms Race.
Here’s What They’ll Need to Do to Win,” Fortune, Sep-
tember 2, 2022, https://fortune.com/2022/09/02/quan-
tum-computing-cryptography-companies-arms-race.
161. Global Times, “China Becomes 3rd Country to Deliv-
er Quantum Computers, after Canada and US,” Global
Times, January 30, 2023, https://www.globaltimes.cn/
page/202301/1284467 .shtml.
162. Bao Yan et al., “Factoring Integers with Sublinear Re-
sources on a Superconducting Quantum Processor,” arXiv,
December 23, 2022, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2212.12372.pdf.
163. Richard Waters, “Chinese Researchers Claim to Find Way
to Break Encryption Using Quantum Computers,” Finan-
cial Times, January 4, 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/
b15680c0-cf31-448d-9eb6-b30426c29b8b; Sam Howell,
“The China-US Quantum Race,” The Diplomat, January
13, 2023, https://thediplomat.com/2023/01/the-china-us-
quantum-race.
164. Heather R. Penney, The Quantum Advantage: Why it
Matters and Essential Next Steps (The Mitchell Institute,
January 2024), https://mitchellaerospacepower.org/
wp-content/uploads/2024/01/Disentagling_-Quantum_
Policy_Paper_46-FINAL.pdf.
165. “Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) and Quantum Cryp-
tography (QC),” National Security Agency / Central
Security Service, accessed February 27 , 2024, https://
www.nsa.gov/Cybersecurity/Quantum-Key-Distribu-
tion-QKD-and-Quantum-Cryptography-QC .
166. Penney, The Quantum Advantage: Why it Matters and
Essential Next Steps.
1 6 7. Penney, The Quantum Advantage: Why it Matters and
Essential Next Steps.
168. Kania and Costello, Quantum Hegemony? China’s Ambi-
tions and the Challenge to U .S. Innovation Leadership.
169. Huanqiu Shibao, “Quantum Technology China Presses the
‘Fast Forward Button’ 4,200 Related Enterprises in the
Quantum Field in My Country,” (Global Times, Chinese
edition), October 22, 2020.
170. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Indus-
trial Bases in Quantum Technology.
@CNASDC
40

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
171. QED-C letter
172. Pii, “Chinese Quantum Companies and National Strategy
2023.”
173. Pii, “Chinese Quantum Companies and National Strategy
2023.”
174. Kung and Fancy, A Quantum Revolution: Report on Global
Policies for Quantum Technology.
175. Reuters, “Baidu to Donate Quantum Computing Lab,
Equipment to Beijing Institute,” Reuters, January 3,
2024, https://www.reuters.com/technology/baidu-do-
nate-quantum-computing-lab-equipment-beijing-institu-
te-2024-01-03.
176. Casey Hall, “Alibaba’s Research Arm Shuts Quantum Com-
puting Lab amid Restructuring,” Reuters, November 27 ,
2023, https://www.reuters.com/technology/alibabas-re-
search-arm-shuts-quantum-computing-lab-amid-restruc-
turing-2023-11-27.
177 . Bureau of Industry and Security, “Commerce Implements
New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semi-
conductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic
of China (PRC),” October 7 , 2022, https://www.bis.doc.
gov/index.php/documents/about-bis/newsroom/press-
releases/3158-2022-10-07-bis-press-release-advanced-
computing-and-semiconductor-manufacturing-controls-
final/file.
178. Sam Howell, “To Restrict, or Not to Restrict, That Is the
Quantum Question,” Lawfare, May 1, 2023, https://www.
lawfaremedia.org/article/to-restrict-or-not-to-restrict-
that-is-the-quantum-question.
179. Kung and Fancy, A Quantum Revolution: Report on Global
Policies for Quantum Technology; James Dargan, “9 Lead-
ing Chinese Quantum Computing Companies [2022],” The
Quantum Insider, April 20, 2021, https://thequantumin-
sider.com/2021/04/20/9-companies-leading-the-quan-
tum-technologies-race-in-china; Parker et al., An Assess-
ment of the U .S. and Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum
Technology; and Kania and Costello, Quantum Hegemony?
China’s Ambitions and the Challenge to U .S. Innovation
Leadership.
180. Eric Schmidt et al., Platforms Interim Panel Report
(Special Competitive Studies Project, November 2022),
https://www.scsp.ai/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/Plat-
forms-Panel-IPR.pdf; Parker et al., An Assessment of the
U .S. and Chinese Industrial Bases in Quantum Technology.
181. Schmidt et al., Platforms Interim Panel Report.
182. U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
2023 Report to Congress (U.S.-China Economic and Secu-
rity Review Commission, November 2023), https://www.
uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2023-11/2023_Annual_Re-
port_to_Congress.pdf.
183. Elliott Mason, “Quantum Patent Trends Update: 2022,”
The Quantum Economic Development Consortium,
February 13, 2023, https://quantumconsortium.org/blog/
quantum-patent-trends-update-2022.
184. China Power Team, “Is China a Leader in Quantum Tech-
nologies?”
185. John Russell, “Alibaba Shuts Down its Quantum Comput-
ing Effort,” HPC Wire, November 30, 2023, https://www.
hpcwire.com/2023/11/30/alibaba-shuts-down-its-quan-
tum-computing-effort.
186. “How is the United States performing against China in
Quantum computing,” The Australian Strategic Policy
Institute, accessed February 27 , 2024, https://techtracker.
aspi.org.au/tech/quantum-computing/?c1=us&c2=cn.
187 . The White House, “Executive Order on America’s Supply
Chains,” February 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/02/24/execu-
tive-order-on-americas-supply-chains.
188. The White House, “Executive Order on America’s Supply
Chains.”
189. Howell, “To Restrict, or Not to Restrict, That Is the Quan-
tum Question.”
190. Bob Sorensen and Tom Sorensen, Challenges and Oppor-
tunities for Securing a Robust US Quantum Computing
Supply Chain (Hyperion Research, June 2022), https://
quantumconsortium.org/quantum-computing-sup-
ply-chain-issues.
191. Sorensen and Sorensen, Challenges and Opportunities for
Securing a Robust US Quantum Computing Supply Chain.
192. Sorensen and Sorensen, Challenges and Opportunities for
Securing a Robust US Quantum Computing Supply Chain.
193. Howell, “To Restrict, or Not to Restrict, That Is the
Quantum Question”; Edward Parker, Promoting Strong In-
ternational Collaboration in Quantum Technology Research
and Development (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation,
February 22, 2023), https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspec-
tives/PEA1874-1.html.
194. Sorensen and Sorensen, Challenges and Opportunities for
Securing a Robust US Quantum Computing Supply Chain.
195. Interviews were conducted in confidentiality and names
were agreed to be withheld; Interview with U.S. quantum
company, October 20, 2023.
196. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Indus-
trial Bases in Quantum Technology.
197 . Business Research Insights, Dilution Refrigerators Market
Report Overview (Business Research Insights, February
12, 2024), https://www.businessresearchinsights.com/
market-reports/dilution-refrigerators-market-100834.
41
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
198. Interviews were conducted in confidentiality and names
were agreed to be withheld; Interview with U.S. quantum
companies and university professors, October 16–20,
2023.
199. Matt Swayne, “Reports: China Mass Producing Dilu-
tion Refrigerator Critical to Superconducting Quantum
Computing,” The Quantum Insider, February 28, 2024,
https://thequantuminsider.com/2024/02/28/reports-chi-
na-mass-producing-dilution-refrigerator-critical-to-su-
perconducting-quantum-computing/#:~:text=“In%20
a%20first%2C%20China%20achieved,in%20a%20mes-
sage%20on%20X.
200. Swayne, “Reports: China Mass Producing Dilution Refrig-
erator Critical to Superconducting Quantum Computing.”
201. Quantum Computing and Communications: Status and
Prospects (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Account-
ability Office, October 2021), https://www.gao.gov/assets/
gao-22-104422.pdf.
202. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Indus-
trial Bases in Quantum Technology.
203. Sam Howell, “Why the US, Japan and South Korea
Should Take the Quantum Leap Together,” The Hill,
September 21, 2023, https://thehill.com/opinion/technol-
ogy/4212692-why-the-us-japan-and-south-korea-should-
take-the-quantum-leap-together.
204. Parker et al., An Assessment of the U .S. and Chinese Indus-
trial Bases in Quantum Technology.
205. Christina Lu, “The Critical Minerals Club,” Foreign Policy,
April 14, 2023, https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/04/14/
us-china-critical-mineral-security-europe-rare-earth-en-
ergy-transition; Lara Seligman, “China Dominates the
Rare Earths Market. This U.S. Mine Is Trying to Change
That.” POLITICO, December 14, 2022, https://www.
politico.com/news/magazine/2022/12/14/rare-earth-
mines-00071102.
206. Keith Bradsher, “Amid Tension, China Blocks Vital
Exports to Japan,” The New Y ork Times, September 22,
2010, https://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/23/business/
global/23rare.html.
207 . Shunsuke Tabeta, “China Weighs Export Ban for Ra-
re-Earth Magnet Tech,” Nikkei Asia, April 6, 2023, https://
asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Supply-Chain/China-weighs-
export-ban-for-rare-earth-magnet-tech.
208. Sam Howell, “Latin and South America Are a Key to the
United States’ Critical Minerals Puzzle,” The Diplomat,
May 5, 2023, https://thediplomat.com/2023/05/latin-and-
south-america-are-a-key-to-the-united-states-critical-
minerals-puzzle.
209. Howell, “To Restrict, or Not to Restrict, That Is the Quan-
tum Question.”
210. Anshu Siripurapu, “What Is the Defense Production Act?”
Council on Foreign Relations, December 22, 2021, https://
www.cfr.org/in-brief/what-defense-production-act;
“About: The SBIR and STTR Programs,” U.S. Small Busi-
ness Administration, accessed February 27 , 2024, https://
www.sbir.gov/about; and Parker, Promoting Strong Inter-
national Collaboration in Quantum Technology Research
and Development.
211. Camellia Moors, “Biden Expands Defense Production Act
Scope to Additional Minerals,” S&P Global Market Intel-
ligence, March 1, 2023, https://www.spglobal.com/mar-
ketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-headlines/
biden-expands-defense-production-act-scope-to-addi-
tional-minerals-74538353.
212. Caroline Coudriet, “NDAA Takes Aim at Critical Mineral
Supply Chain,” Roll Call, June 30, 2023, https://rollcall.
com/2023/06/30/ndaa-takes-aim-at-critical-mineral-sup-
ply-chain.
213. “About: The SBIR and STTR Programs.”
214. U.S. Economic Development Administration, “Biden-Har-
ris Administration Designates 31 Tech Hubs Across Amer-
ica,” press release, October 23, 2023, https://www.eda.gov/
news/press-release/2023/10/23/biden-harris-administra-
tion-designates-31-tech-hubs-across-america.
215. “Elevate Quantum Colorado,” U.S. Economic Develop-
ment Administration, accessed February 27 , 2024, https://
www.eda.gov/funding/programs/regional-technolo-
gy-and-innovation-hubs/2023/Elevate-Quantum-Colora-
do; “The Bloch Tech Hub,” U.S. Economic Development
Administration, accessed February 27 , 2024, https://www.
eda.gov/funding/programs/regional-technology-and-in-
novation-hubs/2023/The-Bloch-Tech-Hub.
216. Sorensen and Sorensen, Challenges and Opportunities for
Securing a Robust US Quantum Computing Supply Chain.
217 . Sorensen and Sorensen, Challenges and Opportunities for
Securing a Robust US Quantum Computing Supply Chain.
218. The Quad Investors Network, “The Quad Investors Net-
work Launches Quad Center of Excellence in Quantum
Information Sciences,” press release, June 9, 2023, https://
quadinvestorsnetwork.org/news/the-quad-investors-net-
work-launches-quad-center-of-excellence-in-quan-
tum-information-sciences.
219. The White House, “Readout: International Roundtable
on Pursuing Quantum Information Together,” press
release, May 7 , 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
ostp/news-updates/2022/05/07/readout-internation-
al-roundtable-on-pursuing-quantum-information-togeth-
er-2n-vs-2n.
220. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science,
Committee on Science, National Science & Technology
Council, National Strategic Overview for Quantum In-
formation Science (National Quantum Initiative, Sep-
@CNASDC
42

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
tember 2018), https://www.quantum.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2020/10/2018_NSTC_National_Strategic_Over-
view_QIS.pdf.
221. Jeremy Hilton, “Building the Quantum Workforce of the
Future,” Forbes, June 19, 2019, https://www.forbes.com/
sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/06/19/building-the-quan-
tum-workforce-of-the-future/?sh=5a5da44fa47d.
222. Subcommittee on Economic and Security Implications of
Quantum Science, Committee on Homeland and Na-
tional Security, National Science & Technology Council,
The Role of International Talent in Quantum Information
Science (Washington, DC: The White House, October
2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/up-
loads/2022/02/10-2021-NSTC_ESIX_INTL_TALENT_
QIS.pdf.
223. Quantum Technologies: Defense Laboratories Should
Take Steps to Improve Workforce Planning (Government
Accountability Office, December 2023), https://www.gao.
gov/assets/d24106284.pdf.
224. Subcommittee on Economic and Security Implications of
Quantum Science, Committee on Homeland and Na-
tional Security, National Science & Technology Council,
The Role of International Talent in Quantum Information
Science; Sam Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent
Shortage is a National Security Vulnerability,” Foreign Pol-
icy, July 31, 2023, https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/07/31/
us-quantum-technology-china-competition-security.
225. Abigail Okrent and Amy Burke, U .S. STEM Workforce:
Definition, Size, and Growth (National Science Foundation,
August 2021), https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20212/u-s-
stem-workforce-definition-size-and-growth; Executive
Office of the President, President’s Council of Advisors
on Science and Technology, Engage to Excel: Producing
One Million Additional College Graduates With Degrees in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (Wash-
ington, DC: The White House, February 2012), https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/micro-
sites/ostp/pcast-engage-to-excel-final_2-25-12.pdf; and
Amy Burke, Abigail Okrent, and Katherine Hale, U .S. and
Global STEM Education and Labor Force (Alexandria, VA:
National Science Foundation, January 18, 2022), https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20221/u-s-and-global-stem-educa-
tion-and-labor-force.
226. “Emerson Survey: 2 in 5 Americans Believe the STEM
Worker Shortage is at Crisis Levels,” Emerson, accessed
February 26, 2024, https://www.emerson.com/en-us/
news/corporate/2018-stem-survey; Howell, “The United
States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a National Security
Vulnerability.”
22 7. Joe Heim, “On the World Stage, U.S. Students Fall
Behind,” The Washington Post, December 6, 2016,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/edu-
cation/on-the-world-stage-us-students-fall-be-
hind/2016/12/05/610e1e10-b740-11e6-a677-b608fbb3aaf6_
story.html; Executive Office of the President, President’s
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Engage to
Excel: Producing One Million Additional College Graduates
With Degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math-
ematics; and Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent
Shortage is a National Security Vulnerability.”
228. Will Hunt and Remco Zwetsloot, The Chipmakers: U .S.
Strengths and Priorities for the High-End Semiconductor
Workforce (Washington, DC: Center for Security and Emerg-
ing Technology, September 2020), https://cset.georgetown.
edu/publication/the-chipmakers-u-s-strengths-and-priori-
ties-for-the-high-end-semiconductor-workforce.
229. State of Quantum Computing: Building a Quantum Econ-
omy (World Economic Forum, September 2022), https://
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_State_of_Quantum_Com-
puting_2022.pdf; Masiowski et al., “Quantum Computing
Funding Remains Strong, but Talent Gap Raises Concern”;
and Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage
is a National Security Vulnerability.”
230. Dan O’Shea, “Software Firms Race to Address Users’ Quan-
tum Talent Shortage,” Fierce Electronics, January 13, 2022,
https://www.fierceelectronics.com/embedded/software-
firms-race-address-users-quantum-talent-shortage.
231. Niko Mohr et al., “Five Lessons from AI on Closing Quan-
tum’s Talent Gap—before It’s Too Late,” McKinsey Digital,
December 1, 2022, https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/
mckinsey-digital/our-insights/five-lessons-from-ai-on-
closing-quantums-talent-gap-before-its-too-late; Howell,
“The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a National
Security Vulnerability.”
232. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science, Commit-
tee on Science, National Science & Technology Council,
Quantum Information Science and Technology Workforce
Development National Strategic Plan.
233. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science, Commit-
tee on Science, National Science & Technology Council,
Quantum Information Science and Technology Workforce
Development National Strategic Plan.
234. Subcommittee on Economic and Security Implications of
Quantum Science, Committee on Homeland and National
Security of the National Science & Technology Council, The
Role of International Talent in Quantum Information Science;
Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a
National Security Vulnerability.”
235. Quantum Technology Monitor; Howell, “The United States’
Quantum Talent Shortage is a National Security Vulnerabili-
ty.”
236. Kenna Hughes-Castleberry, “Top 20 Quantum Computing
Masters & Ph.D. Degree Programs in 2024, The Quan-
tum Insider, June 6, 2022, https://thequantuminsider.
com/2022/06/06/top-20-quantum-computing-masters-ph-
d-programs-in-2022.
43
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
237 . Quantum Technology Monitor.
238. Quantum Technology Monitor.
239. Subcommittee on Economic and Security Implications of
Quantum Science, Committee on Homeland and National
Security, National Science & Technology Council, The Role
of International Talent in Quantum Information Science.
240. Chips and Science Act, H.R.4346, 117th Congress (2021–
2022), https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/
house-bill/4346; Howell, “The United States’ Quantum
Talent Shortage is a National Security Vulnerability.”
241. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2024, S.2226, 118th Congress (2023–2024), https://www.
congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/2226; Sam
Howell, “How Policymakers Can Advance American
Quantum Technology Leadership in 2024,” Center for a
New American Security, January 30, 2024, https://www.
cnas.org/publications/commentary/how-policymak-
ers-can-advance-american-quantum-technology-leader-
ship-in-2024.
242. “About,” National Q-12 Education Partnership, accessed
February 26, 2024, https://q12education.org/about.
243. Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a
National Security Vulnerability;” World Economic Forum,
State of Quantum Computing: Building a Quantum Econo-
my.
244. Subcommittee on Quantum Information Science,
Committee on Science, National Science & Technology
Council, Quantum Information Science and Technology
Workforce Development National Strategic Plan.
245. Hodan Ommar, The U .S. Approach to Quantum Policy
(Center for Data Innovation, October 10, 2023), https://
www2.datainnovation.org/2023-us-quantum-policy.pdf.
246. Sam Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains
(Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security,
July 24, 2023), https://www.cnas.org/publications/re-
ports/technology-competition-a-battle-for-brains.
247 . Ommar, The U .S. Approach to Quantum Policy.
248. Advancing American Leadership in Quantum Technology,
118th Cong. (statement of Dr. Emily E. Edwards, exec-
utive director, Illinois Quantum Information Science
and Technology Center, University of Illinois Urba-
na-Champaign, 2023), https://republicans-science.
house.gov/_cache/files/c/1/c10a8f0a-5a9d-48e0-8eb8-
b60de9bfcb55/C8C808702DBE4033544464A3AC-
4C9D1F.2023-06-07-edwards-testimony.pdf.
249. Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a
National Security Vulnerability.”
250. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains.
251. “Rapid Response Skills Initiative,” Tasmanian Govern-
ment, accessed February 26, 2024, https://www.state-
growth.tas.gov.au/business/jobs_tasmania/jobs_tasma-
nia_program_guidelines/rapid_response_skills_initiative.
252. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains.
253. Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a
National Security Vulnerability.”
254. Advancing American Leadership in Quantum Technol-
ogy, 118th Cong. (statement of Dr. Celia Merzbacher,
executive director, Quantum Economic Develop-
ment Consortium, SRI International, 2023), https://
republicans-science.house.gov/_cache/files/b/4/
b49a9849-90b0-48b8-ac74-f31f150cfc5a/8AB470162392C-
8C265493F7B95CB9721.2023--06-07-merzbacher-testi-
mony.pdf.
255. “Elevating the Brightest Minds in Stem for Collective
Good,” Quad Fellowship, accessed February 26, 2024,
https://www.quadfellowship.org.
256. Sam Howell, “The Quad’s Quantum Leap: How Quad
Countries Can Boost Cooperation on Quantum Comput-
ing,” Australian National University National Security
College, December 2023, https://nsc.crawford.anu.edu.au/
sites/default/files/publication/nsc_crawford_anu_edu_
au/2023-12/sam_howell_the_quads_quantum_leap_how_
quad_countries_can_boost_cooperation_nsc.pdf.
257 . U.S. Department of State, “Tokyo Statement on Quantum
Cooperation,” press release, December 19, 2019, https://
www.state.gov/tokyo-statement-on-quantum-cooper-
ation; U.S. Department of State, “ Joint Statement of the
United States of America and Republic of Korea on Coop-
eration in Quantum Information Science and Technolo-
gies,” press release, April 26, 2023, https://www.state.gov/
joint-statement-of-the-united-states-of-america-and-re-
public-of-korea-on-cooperation-in-quantum-informa-
tion-science-and-technologies.
258. Howell, “Why the US, Japan and South Korea Should Take
the Quantum Leap Together.”
259. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains.
260. Purdue University, “Purdue Launches Nation’s First Com-
prehensive Semiconductor Degrees Program,” press re-
lease, May 27 , 2022, https://www.purdue.edu/newsroom/
releases/2022/Q2/purdue-launches-nations-first-compre-
hensive-semiconductor-degrees-program.html.
261. “Purdue Semiconductor Degrees,” Purdue University,
accessed February 26, 2024, https://engineering.purdue.
edu/semiconductors/degrees.
262. Prachi Patel, “U.S. Universities are Building a New Semi-
conductor Workforce,” IEEE Spectrum, May 13, 2023,
https://spectrum.ieee.org/chips-act-workforce-develop-
ment.
@CNASDC
44

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
263. “Comprehensive Semiconductors and Microelectronics
Program,” Purdue University, accessed February 26, 2024,
https://engineering.purdue.edu/semiconductors.
264. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains.
265. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains.
266. “QIS Key Concepts for Early Learners: K-12 Framework,”
National Q-12 Education Partnership, accessed February
26, 2024, https://q12education.org/learning-materi-
als-framework.
267 . Advancing American Leadership in Quantum Technology
(statement of Emily E. Edwards).
268. John Hollis, “Mason to Work with Corporate Partners
on the K12 Quantum Workforce Development Project,”
George Mason University, May 3, 2022, https://www.
gmu.edu/news/2022-05/mason-work-corporate-part-
ners-k12-quantum-workforce-development-project.
269. “Building the Quantum Workforce,” George Mason Uni-
versity, accessed February 26, 2024, https://sites.google.
com/view/building-the-quantum-workforce/home.
270. “Building Certainty Into Virginia’s Quantum Workforce
Pipeline,” Virginia Economic Development Partnership,
accessed February 26, 2024, https://www.vedp.org/news/
building-certainty-virginias-quantum-workforce-pipeline.
271. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains;
Okrent and Burke, The STEM Labor Force of Today: Scien-
tists, Engineers, and Skilled Technical Workers.
272. Okrent and Burke, The STEM Labor Force of Today: Scien-
tists, Engineers, and Skilled Technical Workers.
273. Howell, Technology Competition: A Battle for Brains.
274. Swayne, “Origin Quantum’s Founder Pushes for Action To
Secure China’s Quantum Self-Reliance.”
275. Qianer Liu, “How Huawei Surprised the US with a Cut-
ting-Edge Chip Made in China,” Financial Times, Novem-
ber 30, 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/327414d2-fe13-
438e-9767-333cdb94c7e1.
276. Howell, “The United States’ Quantum Talent Shortage is a
National Security Vulnerability.”
277 . Freddie Hudson, “Pentagon Must Act Now on Quantum
Computing or Be Eclipsed by Rivals,” C4ISR Net, January
20, 2023, https://www.c4isrnet.com/thought-leader-
ship/2023/01/20/pentagon-must-act-now-on-quantum-
computing-or-be-eclipsed-by-rivals.
278. Hudson, “Pentagon Must Act Now on Quantum Comput-
ing or Be Eclipsed by Rivals.”
279. Sam Howell, “Quantum Computing is the Future — But
We May Lose the Race if We Don’t Act Now,” Center for a
New American Security, June 27 , 2023, https://www.cnas.
org/publications/commentary/quantum-computing-is-
the-future-but-we-may-lose-the-race-if-we-dont-act-now.
280. Global Quantum Tech Ecosystem (New York, NY: Global
Quantum Intelligence, 2023), https://www.global-qi.com/
product-page/focus-report-global-quantum-tech-ecosys-
tems.
45
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | MAY 2024
The Quest for Qubits: Assessing U.S.-China Competition in Quantum Computing

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
CNAS Editorial
DIRECTOR OF STUDIES
Paul Scharre
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF STUDIES
Katherine L. Kuzminski
PUBLICATIONS & EDITORIAL DIRECTOR
Maura McCarthy
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Caroline Steel
CREATIVE DIRECTOR
Melody Cook
DESIGNER
Rin Rothback
Cover Art & Production Notes
COVER ILLUSTRATION
Melody Cook
PRINTER
CSI Printing & Graphics
Printed on an HP Indigo Digital Press
About the Center for a New
American Security
The mission of the Center for a New American Security (CNAS) is
to develop strong, pragmatic, and principled national security and
defense policies. Building on the expertise and experience of its
staff and advisors, CNAS engages policymakers, experts, and the
public with innovative, fact-based research, ideas, and analysis to
shape and elevate the national security debate. A key part of our
mission is to inform and prepare the national security leaders of
today and tomorrow.
CNAS is located in Washington, DC, and was established in February
2007 by co-founders Kurt M. Campbell and Michèle A. Flournoy.
CNAS is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt nonprofit organization. Its research is
independent and non-partisan.
©2024 Center for a New American Security
All rights reserved.
Center for a New American Security
1701 Pennsylvania Ave, NW
Suite 700
Washington, DC 20006
CNAS.org
@CNASdc
CEO
Richard Fontaine
Executive Vice President & Director
of Studies
Paul Scharre
Senior Vice President of Development
Anna Saito Carson
Contact Us
202.457.9400
info@cnas.org

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
