
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
MAY 2025 | BY ADITYA RAMJI
A BLUEPRINT TO ADVANCE THE
U.S.-INDIA ENERGY SECURITY
PARTNERSHIP
MAY 2025 | BY ADITYA RAMJI
A BLUEPRINT TO ADVANCE THE
U.S.-INDIA ENERGY SECURITY
PARTNERSHIP

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
A BLUEPRINT TO ADVANCE
THE U.S.–INDIA ENERGY
SECURITY PARTNERSHIP
BY ADITYA RAMJI

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
1
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Energy security remains a cornerstone of the U.S.-India partnership, being vital for eco-
nomic growth and national security. A U.S.-India Energy and Industrial Partnership
should involve deploying energy technologies at scale, reducing concentrations in energy
supply chains and manufacturing, and strengthening both the domestic industrial base
and industrial corridor between the two countries. This will require a four-pronged ap-
proach involving: research partnerships to leapfrog to new battery chemistries and small
modular reactors, among other emerging technologies; trade missions and technology
transfers in strategic sectors, including automotive and battery technologies; public-pri-
vate partnerships in areas such as lithium-ion battery and ancillary component manufac-
turing; and a bilateral track involving governments and financial institutions for funding
strategic sectors.
The United States and India can expect an eight-to-tenfold increase in demand for batter-
ies and critical minerals (such as nickel, copper, lithium, and graphite) by 2035. Address-
ing this demand will require joint resource mapping, capital deployment, and manufac-
turing and technology partnerships. Particular efforts must also be made on automotive
and transportation technologies, including hydrogen fuel cells, advanced driving assis-
tance, and drones. Furthermore, India’s expansion of natural gas, green hydrogen, and
nuclear power in its energy mix present opportunities for collaboration, with advantages
for the United States in cost-competitive electrolyzers and nuclear energy components.
All of these steps will present opportunities for collaboration and investments involving
the private sector and the two countries’ start-up ecosystems.
INTRODUCTION
India and the United States have strengthened their bilateral cooperation in the past two
decades, built on the foundation of shared values and interests of security, economic
prosperity, trade, and investment. The two countries reaffirmed their commitment to
bilateral cooperation, launching the U.S.–India COMPACT for the 21st Century, em-
phasizing energy security, critical emerging technologies, and trade enhancements, in a
joint statement during Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Washington in February
2025.1 Recent initiatives have included cooperation on power and energy efficiency, re-
sponsible oil and gas, including hydrogen and biofuels, batteries, the inclusion of India in
the Mineral Security Partnership (MSP), INDUS-Innovation, the initiative on Critical
and Emerging T echnologies (iCET), and more recently the U.S.–India TRUST (T rans-
forming the Relationship Utilizing Strategic T echnology) which cut across strategic sec-
tors including defense and aerospace.2 2025–26 will remain a crucial period to maintain
and expand on the bilateral efforts, building on the shared goals of industrial policy and
energy security.
1 White House, “United States–India Joint Leaders’ Statement,” White House, February 13, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefings-statements/2025/02/united-states-india-joint-leaders-statement/.
2 U.S. Department of Energy, “U.S.–India Strategic Clean Energy Partnership Ministerial Joint Statement,” U.S. Department
of Energy, September 2024, https://www.energy.gov/articles/us-india-strategic-clean-energy-partnership-ministerial-joint-
statement.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
2
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
The United States and India have recently expressed intent to increase bilateral trade vol-
umes to $500 billion by 2030, requiring double-digit growth in the next five years. Fol-
lowing this announcement, both countries have taken steps to negotiate a bilateral trade
agreement. Bilateral trade was estimated to be around $129.2 billion in 2024, registering
a robust 9.5 percent compounded annual growth rate since 2016.3 Since 2016, India has
seen increasing energy trade with the United States, primarily imports, peaking at $14.7
billion in 2022, forming 28 percent of total Indian imports from the United States.4
Figure 1: U.S.–India Trade Index from 2016–2023
2
announcement, both countries have taken steps to negotiate a bilateral trade agreement. Bilateral
trade was estimated to be around $129.2 billion in 2024, registering a robust 9.5 percent
compounded annual growth rate since 2016. 3 Since 2016, India has seen increasing energy trade
with the United States, primarily imports, peaking at $14.7 billion in 2022, forming 28 percent of
total Indian imports from the United States.4 5
Figure 1. U.S.–India Trade Index from 2016 – 2023
Source: Author's own creation, based on UN COMTRADE database, using HS commodities codes 2709, 2711.
U.S.-India total trade and energy trade between 2016 and 2023, indexed by 2019 trade volumes.6
Energy security has been considered a cornerstone for economic growth and crucial for national
security. Interestingly, both countries have seen 35 – 40 percent reduction in energy intensity
economy-wide between 2000 – 2022 and had a similar share of renew ables in power generation
of about 22 percent (as of 2022).7 8 In terms of final energy consumption, about 54.4 percent comes
from coal, oil, and natural gas in India, whereas the same constitutes about 72.2 percent in the
3 Office of the United States Trade Representative, “India Trade Summary,” accessed on April 15, 2025,
https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/south-central-asia/india.
4 International Trade Administration, “India-Renewable Energy,” International Trade Administration, December
2024, https://www.trade.gov/country-commercial-guides/india-renewable-energy.
5 Note: Includes crude and natural gas imports by India from the United States (HS Codes 2709 and 2711).
6 U.S.-India total trade and energy trade between 2016 and 2023, indexed by 2019 trade volumes, using HS
commodities codes 2709, 2711. See United Nations Statistics Division, “UN COMTRADE,” United Nations,
accessed on April 21, 2025,
https://comtradeplus.un.org/TradeFlow?Frequency=A&Flows=X&CommodityCodes=TOTAL&Partners=0&Report
ers=all&period=2024&AggregateBy=none&BreakdownMode=plus.
7 International Energy Agency, “United States Energy Mix,” International Energy Agency, accessed on April 16,
2025, https://www.iea.org/countries/united-states/energy-mix.
8 International Energy Agency, “India Energy Mix,” International Energy Agency, accessed on April 16, 2025,
https://www.iea.org/countries/india/energy-mix.
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
India - US Trade Index (Base = 100, 2019)
India - US Trade Index (Base = 100, 2019)
Total Trade India Exports India Imports India Energy Imports
Source: Author’s own creation, based on UN COMTRADE database, using HS commodities codes 2709, 2711. U.S.–India
total trade and energy trade between 2016 and 2023, indexed by 2019 trade volumes.5
Energy security has been considered a cornerstone for economic growth and crucial for
national security. Interestingly, both countries have seen 35–40 percent reduction in
energy intensity economy-wide between 2000–2022 and had a similar share of renew-
ables in power generation of about 22 percent (as of 2022). 6 In terms of final energy
consumption, about 54.4 percent comes from coal, oil, and natural gas in India, where-
as the same constitutes about 72.2 percent in the United States. 7 India remains a net
energy importer (approximately 36 percent of its total energy supply) compared to the
United States who is a net energy exporter (approximately 8 percent of its total energy
production).
3 Office of the United States T rade Representative, “India T rade Summary,” accessed on April 15, 2025, https://ustr.gov/
countries-regions/south-central-asia/india.
4 Includes crude and natural gas imports by India from the United States (HS Codes 2709 and 2711). See International T rade
Administration, “India-Renewable Energy,” International T rade Administration, December 2024, https://www.trade.gov/
country-commercial-guides/india-renewable-energy.
5 U.S.-India total trade and energy trade between 2016 and 2023, indexed by 2019 trade volumes, using HS commodities
codes 2709, 2711. See United Nations Statistics Division, “UN COMTRADE,” United Nations, accessed on April 21, 2025,
https://comtradeplus.un.org/T radeFlow?Frequency=A&Flows=X&CommodityCodes=TOTAL&Partners=0&Reporters=all&
period=2024&AggregateBy=none&BreakdownMode=plus.
6 International Energy Agency, “United States Energy Mix,” International Energy Agency, accessed on April 16, 2025, https://
www.iea.org/countries/united-states/energy-mix.
7 International Energy Agency, “India Energy Mix,” International Energy Agency, accessed on April 16, 2025, https://www.iea.
org/countries/india/energy-mix.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
3
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
Observer Research Foundation America (ORF America) hosted a series of closed-door,
invitation-only workshops with Indian and American energy and climate experts to bet-
ter understand actionable opportunities for the United States to cooperate with India.
Following the 2024 Indian and U.S. elections, ORF America closely tracked policy de-
velopments and changes in the strategic priorities of the newly elected governments. This
special report builds on the outcomes from the workshops, recent policy announcements,
and recommends a proposal for a U.S.-India Strategic Energy and Industrial Partner-
ship. This partnership could leverage respective strengths and the bilateral relationship
to meet the following objectives: 1) develop and deploy energy technologies at scale at
home and abroad; 2) reduce concentration in energy supply chains and manufacturing of
new energy technologies of the future; and 3) continue to strengthen both the domestic
industrial base and the industrial corridor between the two countries.
REDUCING CONCENTRATION AND INCREASING COMMERCIALIZATION IN
TECHNOLOGY AND ENERGY SUPPLY CHAINS
With the Inflation Reduction Act, the United States already has about 72 gigawatt hours
(GWh) of lithium-ion battery manufacturing capacity as of 2024, and over 36,000 tons
(as of 2023) of battery recycling capacity domestically attracting some of the world’s larg-
est investments.8 India is currently building capacity for over 60 GWh of battery man-
ufacturing that is expected to be operational in phases from 2027 onwards.9 By 2035,
estimates suggest that demand for batteries would be around 1000–1200 GWh and
160–380 GWh in the United States and India, respectively. The rapid growth in energy
technologies has put the spotlight on battery supply chains including the availability of
critical raw materials.
Global demand for critical minerals such as lithium, nickel, copper, graphite, and rare
earths is expected to double by 2035 from 2024 levels in a business-as-usual scenario,
with demand increasing by a factor of 3 to 5 times, in an accelerated global energy tran-
sition pathway.10 In this context, lithium demand for India and the United States battery
market is expected to increase 8 times by 2035, from 2024 levels. 11 Minerals such as
nickel, copper, and graphite also have over half of their demand coming from base indus-
trial sectors including infrastructure and steel, forming a strong foundational base to eco-
nomic growth. Both the United States and India are net importers of critical minerals.12
8 Benchmark Mineral Intelligence, “2025 Q1 Update Report,” Benchmark Mineral Intelligence, 2024, https://www.
benchmarkminerals.com/lithium-ion-batteries; U.S. Department of Energy, “FOTW #1350, July 8, 2024: In 2023 the United
States Had Battery Recycling Facilities Capable of Reclaiming More Than 35,000 T ons of Battery Materials,” U.S. Department
of Energy, July 2024, https://www.energy.gov/ eere/vehicles/articles/fotw-1350-july-8-2024-2023-united-states-had-battery-
recycling-facilities.
9 Siddharth Goel, T om Moerenhout, and Rahul Bollini, “Unlocking Supply Chains for Localizing Electric Vehicle Battery
Production in India,” International Institute for Sustainable Development, November 2024, https://www.iisd.org/system/
files/2024-11/electric-vehicle-battery-production-india.pdf.
10 International Energy Agency, “Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2024,” International Energy Agency, May 2024, https://
www.iea.org/reports/global-critical-minerals-outlook-2024.
11 Khan S. et al., “Upstream Lithium Sourcing Strategies For India,” University of California, Davis, May 2025, forthcoming.
12 Monia Snoussi-Mimouni and Sandra Avérous, “High demand for energy-related critical minerals creates supply chain
pressures,” WTO Blog, January 2024, https://www.wto.org/english/blogs_e/data_blog_e/blog_dta_10jan24_e.htm.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
4
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
The global landscape on critical minerals, while rooted in the context of energy transition
technologies and manufacturing, has expanded to include other strategic sectors such as
defense, aerospace, and high-value electronics, including semiconductors, further high-
lighting the importance of critical minerals as dual-use inputs.
A two-pronged strategy will be needed to secure the necessary raw materials from global
markets for short- and medium-term demand in the next 5–10 years, while they contin-
ue to develop potential domestic resources that can cater to long-term supply, even under
accelerated permitting timelines. During the deliberations, experts framed the emergence
and vitality of critical minerals as integral to a new industrial revolution. In this context,
it is crucial to highlight four areas: resource mapping, processing and refining, technol-
ogy development, and recycling. Both the United States and India have critical mineral
strategies, with India announcing its National Critical Minerals Mission (NCMM) in
February 2025, with many overlapping objectives, including accelerating domestic min-
eral exploration projects and recycling.13
Participants from the U.S. government emphasized that India is among the only credible
partners that can help break China’s dominance in clean energy manufacturing and stra-
tegic industries, including batteries, electrolyzers, and solar cells, as well as intermediary
inputs such as refined or processed materials. Participants from both countries agreed
that prioritizing diversification from China should be a key bilateral effort, in addition
to strengthening bilateral cooperation. Participants at the New Delhi workshop, while
echoing similar sentiments, emphasized that the bilateral partnership should also identify
next-generation technologies that create a comparative advantage, an objective that aligns
with the earlier bilateral iCET program and the newly announced U.S.–India TRUST
(T ransforming the Relationship Utilizing Strategic T echnology) initiative.14 The newly
announced research partnership between the Anusandhan National Research Founda-
tion in India and the United States National Science Foundation can play a strategic role
in advancing joint research and development (R&D) projects.15
In terms of specific minerals for further bilateral attention, the Washington workshop
highlighted that both the United States and India had import dependency across the
mineral value chain. One such example is graphite, which was highlighted as a viable
option to expand U.S.–India critical minerals trade. One expert pointed out that as
of 2023, the United States sourced 48 percent of its graphite imports from China at a
higher cost than India’s graphite export price. Materials such as graphite are used across
sectors ranging from steel to consumer goods to batteries, and thus, even if India-sourced
graphite can supply to non-clean technology sectors (given its ore quality) in the United
States, it can relieve part of the commodity price pressure. 16 A strategy of identifying
mineral dependencies and an economy-wide approach of sourcing diversification can
13 Ministry of Mines, “National Critical Mineral Missions, Powering India’s Clean Energy Future,” Press Information Bureau,
April 9, 2025, https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2025/apr/doc202549537601.pdf.
14 These include semiconductors, critical minerals, advanced materials, and pharmaceuticals. See White House, “United States-
India Joint Leaders’ Statement.”
15 “India–U.S. Joint Statement,” Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, February 13, 2025, https://www.mea.gov.
in/bilateral-documents.htm?dtl/39066/India__US_Joint_Statement_February_13_2025.
16 Aditya Ramji and Kristi Dayemo, “Releasing the Pressure: Understanding Upstream Graphite Value Chains and Implications
for Supply Diversification,” Institute of T ransportation Studies, University of California, Davis, January 2024, https://
escholarship.org/uc/item/0q83t5fd.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
5
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
be beneficial for both countries. Experts at the United States workshop also highlighted
that of the twelve strategic defense minerals for the United States, ten of them overlap
with India’s priorities as well, while overall, nineteen minerals overlap across the critical
mineral lists of the two countries.17
While the development of upstream mineral extraction projects can have a longer ges-
tation period, developing critical minerals refining capabilities can be achieved relatively
faster in both countries. The Washington workshop participants expressed that the bi-
lateral partnership could also evaluate the possibility of developing joint refining bases
in Southeast Asia and Africa, beyond their own respective domestic capacities. However,
India-sourced or Indian-company extracted and processed minerals are not currently
Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) compliant, which calls for a bilateral critical minerals
agreement that could make India an operationally compliant strategic partner.
In both the New Delhi and Washington workshops, participants discussed industrial
policy efforts in the two countries, highlighting the focus on onshoring manufacturing
through various policy measures requiring higher domestic content requirements. How-
ever, both countries will have to rely on international cooperation to ensure that they
remain competitive and have market access while participating in global supply chains.
Despite certain trade and economic tensions, the United States and India have com -
parative advantages that present an opportunity to create a critical minerals industrial
corridor, mainly due to viable costs of capital and labor in India, and advanced scientific
capabilities in both countries. Further, efforts such as the Supply Chain Resiliency Ini-
tiative by the U.S. EXIM Bank, providing targeted financing to develop critical mineral
projects from trusted partners, could be leveraged by India.18
In January 2025, the U.S. Department of Defense established the Strategic and Critical
Materials Board, which will comprise members from other departments, including En-
ergy, State, Commerce, and Interior, to ensure secure and resilient access to materials and
minerals and to identify innovative solutions for complex industrial base challenges.19 For
a successful partnership, India would also need to consider its institutional framework on
critical minerals to ensure effective engagement and implementation.
While both countries focus on the development of domestic industrial bases that can cut
across the value chain to improve their competitiveness, five key areas of bilateral cooper-
ation emerge on critical minerals and supply chains:
1. Advancing resource mapping through collaboration between the United States Geo-
logical Survey and the Geological Survey of India
17 U.S. Department of Energy, “Notice of Final Determination on 2023 DOE Critical Materials List,” U.S. Department of
Energy, July 2023, https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2023-07/preprint-frn-2023-critical-materials-list.pdf; Ministry
of Mines, “Report of the Committee on Identification of Critical Mines,” Ministry of Mines, June 2023, https://mines.gov.in/
admin/download/649d4212cceb01688027666.pdf.
18 Export-Import Bank of the United States, “Export-Import Bank of the United States Board of Directors Approves Supply
Chain Resiliency Initiative to Protect U.S. Jobs and Shift Critical Mineral Supply Chains Back to the United States and Away
from the People’s Republic of China,” Export-Import Bank of the United States, January 8, 2025, https://www.exim.gov/news/
export-import-bank-united-states-board-directors-approves-supply-chain-resiliency.
19 U.S. Department of Defense, “DOD Establishes Strategic and Critical Materials Board of Directors,” U.S. Department of
Defense, January 6, 2025, https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/4022309/dod-establishes-strategic-and-
critical-materials-board-of-directors/.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
6
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
2. Joint deployment of capital in mineral assets and refining facilities in domestic and
international markets
3. T echnology partnerships for battery manufacturing and recycling, building on the
Strategic Mineral Recovery Initiative
4. International cooperation through multilateral platforms, including the MSP and
Quad, to ensure supply chain diversification
5. Joint track and trace approaches to identify areas of vulnerabilities, investment op-
portunities, and technology development.
EXPANDING TIES IN THE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPMENT
The United States and India are major automotive hubs and the world’s second and third
largest markets, respectively.20 T echnology advancements will be key to maintaining the
global competitiveness of the automotive sector in both countries. This makes the auto-
motive sector between the two countries an important potential sector of cooperation,
and should be part of the ongoing trade discussions.
In the past, major U.S. automakers such as Ford, General Motors, and Navistar have had
strategic investments in the India market, while Indian companies such as Mahindra &
Mahindra Ltd. and Tata Sons have been making inroads in the United States, with the
former having its North America T echnical Center headquartered in Michigan.
Beyond vehicle manufacturing, automotive components trade has been robust between
the two countries. While 27 percent of India’s total automotive component exports are to
the United States (as of 2024), India remains the 9th largest trading partner in this sector
with the United States.21 While around half of the component imports to the United
States come from Mexico and Canada, India remains a key player in the Mexican auto-
motive industry, with 6 percent of component exports from India, as well as most major
Indian component manufacturers having factories in Mexico, thereby indirectly catering
to the U.S. automotive market.22
Further, both markets are expected to continue witnessing electric vehicle (EV) sales,
strengthening opportunities for technology cooperation and investments in EVs, EV
components, and electronics.23 The United States has built a strong capability around
high-voltage EV powertrains since 2021, while India has shown its capabilities in inno-
vation and cost optimization. Infrastructure development for EV charging also remains a
key area for cooperation, with the United States already implementing advanced policies.
20 International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers, “2023 Production Statistics,” accessed on April 15, 2025,
https://www.oica.net/category/production-statistics/2023-statistics/.
21 Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India, “Press Conference: Auto Components Industry’s Performance
Review FY 2024/FY2023,” Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India, July 25, 2024, https://acma.in/pdf/
Ind%20Presentation%20FY24.pdf.
22 It should be noted that close to 80 percent of the U.S. LDV market is manufactured in Mexico. See Marklines, “Global
Automotive Data Platform,” Marklines, accessed on May 1, 2025, https://www.marklines.com/portal_ top_en.html.
23 Argonne National Laboratory, “Light Duty Electric Drive Vehicles Monthly Sales Updates,” Argonne National Laboratory,
accessed on May 1, 2025, https://www.anl.gov/esia/light-duty-electric-drive-vehicles-monthly-sales-updates; Clean Mobility
Shift, “EV Dashboard,” Clean Mobility Shift, accessed on May 1, 2025, https://cleanmobilityshift.com/ev-dashboard/.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
7
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
Recent bilateral cooperation in road transportation has been largely around electric mo-
bility, through technical assistance driving EV adoption, deployment of electric transit
buses, and assessing the investment landscape to facilitate capital flow in the e-mobility
sector. For the next phase of e-mobility deployment, United States workshop participants
looked to the trucking sector, where various global logistics players are transitioning their
truck fleets in both countries, with automotive original equipment manufacturers mak-
ing significant investments in electric, fuel cell, and hydrogen-internal combustion en-
gine (ICE) technologies.
As sub-national governments in the United States continue to deploy electric and
low-emission buses for transit and school buses, there is limited manufacturing capacity
domestically, which provides an opportunity for Indian e-bus manufacturers to consider
investments in the United States. The efforts of the Michigan Economic Development
Corporation (MEDC), the state’s government investment promotion unit, to bring more
Indian businesses to the state, including the automotive sector, is a good example.24
United States workshop stakeholders agreed that ambitious industrial policies can and
should be aligned to aid this pillar of cooperation around the automotive industry and
technology development, including e-mobility, alternative fuels, hydrogen, and other
new emerging technologies, to ensure that the respective sectors in both countries con-
tinue to remain globally competitive. This takes further significance, especially in the
face of aggressive, cost-competitive Chinese automotive products, namely electric vehicle
exports to global markets.
Based on the deliberations, key areas of cooperation include:
1. Expanding automotive manufacturing in both countries, including joint ventures,
foreign direct investment (FDI) by the U.S. and Indian companies.
2. T echnology access and development for advanced automotive technologies, includ-
ing electric vehicles, hydrogen fuel cells, and hydrogen ICE powertrains for trucks,
advanced driving assistance (ADAS) technologies, among others.
3. Expanding transportation cooperation to include aviation and shipping sectors, in-
cluding sustainable aviation and marine fuels, drones, VTOL aircraft, etc.
ADVANCING DEVELOPMENT IN EMERGING FUELS, INCLUDING HYDROGEN AND
NUCLEAR COOPERATION
As both countries consider energy security goals, certain shared priorities emerge: (i) en-
suring affordable and reliable energy for end use sectors; (ii) advancing grid reliability and
resiliency; and, (iii) increasing share of nuclear power in the mix.25 In India’s case, three
key strategies in its energy security pathway include:
24 Kathleen Achtenberg, “Eight Michigan companies participating in trade mission to increase export opportunities in India,”
Michigan Economic Development Corporation, January 2020, https://www.michiganbusiness.org/press-releases/2020/01/eight-
michigan-companies-participating-in-trade-mission-to-increase-export-opportunities-in-india/.
25 U.S. Department of Energy, “Secretary Wright Acts to ‘Unleash Golden Era of American Energy Dominance’,” U.S.
Department of Energy, February 2025, http://energy.gov/articles/secretary-wright-acts-unleash-golden-era-american-energy-
dominance.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
8
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
• Expanding natural gas to 15 percent share of the energy mix from the current 6
percent
• Domestic production of 5 million metric tons (MMT) of green hydrogen by 2030
• 100 gigawatts (GW) of installed nuclear power capacity by 2047 with focus on small
modular reactors.
Natural gas will play a key role in India’s energy security pathway in the near future. As
India looks to increase its share of natural gas, it will continue to rely on imports, which
complements the U.S. policy on expanding liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports. India’s
natural gas demand saw a 10 percent annual increase in 2024, driven by rapid expansion
of infrastructure, especially for residential and transportation sectors. Since 2019, the
number of compressed natural gas (CNG) stations for transport have quadrupled, while
the number of residential gas connections have more than doubled, with a push towards
clean urban transportation and access to clean cooking fuels.26 By 2030, the number of
CNG stations and residential connections will almost double including a 50 percent
expansion in the gas transmission grid.27
India’s energy imports from the United States have consistently increased since 2016,
primarily driven by LNG, reaching a peak in 2022. India and the United States have
reaffirmed their commitment towards increasing energy trade including natural gas and
investments in infrastructure involving private sector in both countries. With India’s
increasing push for gas infrastructure and demand potential, the United States could
emerge as a strategic energy supplier for India, with long term security of both the re-
source as well as in terms of prices.
Natural gas takes further significance for India as it looks to scale hydrogen production.
Beyond India’s 5 MMT target of green hydrogen production by 2030, it also aims to be-
come an exporter of green hydrogen. Hydrogen demand is steadily increasing in various
sectors including industries, ports, steel manufacturing, and transportation, especially
the marine and aviation sectors. However, hydrogen is still a nascent industry and has
challenges including high costs to the end user and a lack of sufficient infrastructure.
Experts agreed that efficient production, distribution networks, and global markets must
be leveraged to incorporate hydrogen technologies at scale. Experts agreed that lever -
aging low-cost clean energy in both the United States and India can help reduce the
delivered cost of electricity in the production cycle. Moving hydrogen production closer
to consumption areas is another solution to reduce costs, and a clear short-term strategy.
Hydrogen for transportation remains uncertain due to lower costs of battery electric and
conventional ICE vehicles, and existing unreliability in hydrogen infrastructure.
The United States currently has an annual hydrogen production capacity of about 10
MMT , most of it currently being grey hydrogen, which is produced from natural gas,
using steam methane reforming. This emits around 3–5 kg CO2e per kilogram (kg) of
26 International Energy Agency, “India’s natural gas demand set for 60% rise by 2030, supported by upcoming global LNG
supply wave,” International Energy Agency, February 2025, https://www.iea.org/news/indias-natural-gas-demand-set-for-60-
rise-by-2030-supported-by-upcoming-global-lng-supply-wave.
27 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
9
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
hydrogen produced, compared to the green hydrogen threshold of less than 1 kg CO2e.28
In the case of India, the definition of green hydrogen is set at no more 2 kg of CO2e per
kilogram of hydrogen produced.29 These thresholds are important as they bring forth a
clear understanding of the potential for hydrogen cooperation between the two countries.
As India looks to scale up hydrogen deployment, a cost-effective pathway will include a
mix of grey and green hydrogen in the near to medium term. With India’s relatively less
stringent green hydrogen thresholds, the role of natural gas-based hydrogen production
would be significant, increasing demand for natural gas. This offers a unique convergence
of cooperation on both natural gas and hydrogen, between the two countries.
Prior to 2025, the two countries have been collaborating under the Renewable Energy
T echnology Action Platform (RETAP), to achieve their respective goals of reducing the
cost of green hydrogen. Going forward, rather than integrating hydrogen across sectors,
experts emphasized that its implementation should focus on select industries such as
steel, ammonia, and fertilizers. For instance, Indian steel manufacturers are actively ex-
ploring green steel production to stay competitive and carbon-compliant in global mar-
kets, especially with the announcement of the green steel taxonomy by India’s Ministry
of Steel.30 Electrolyzer costs are significantly cheaper in India than in the United States,
and one expert argued that the existing United States and India partnership should be
explored to expand its manufacturing in both countries. Long-term electricity grid stor-
age is another viable use case for hydrogen, although its demand will not arise for another
decade. Hydrogen is an important piece in the global fuels narrative, with significant
investments from the oil and gas industry, but it is imperative to continue focus on its
research and development before scaled implementation across sectors.
Nuclear power has been relatively stagnant in India at about 1.2 percent of its total en-
ergy supply, compared to 9.8 percent in the United States.31 India announced an ambi-
tious Nuclear Energy Mission in February 2025, with the goal of achieving 100 GW of
installed nuclear power capacity by 2047, with a focus on research and development of
Small Modular Reactors (SMRs). The United States has always focused on nuclear energy
as a key part of its energy security strategy, launching the Advanced SMR R&D Program
in 2019. After a long gap, this opens a strategic opportunity for U.S.–India cooperation
on nuclear energy, including private sector investment and technology licensing from
American companies to India, which has also been emphasized in the U.S–India joint
statement in February 2025.32 Building on the previous U.S.–India iCET program and
the new TRUST initiative, a specific avenue of civil nuclear cooperation will be critical.
This will enable the two countries to realize the full potential of the 2005 Civil Nuclear
Agreement, including specific measures such as amendments to the Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage Act 2010 by India and the removal of restrictions on Indian nuclear
entities and technology exports by the United States. The regulatory clearance approved
28 T essa Weiss et al., “Hydrogen Reality Check: All “Clean Hydrogen” Is Not Equally Clean,” Rocky Mountain Institute,
October 2022, https://rmi.org/all-clean-hydrogen-is-not-equally-clean/#.
29 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, “India announces definition of Green Hydrogen,” Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, August 2023, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1950421.
30 Ministry of Steel, “Union Minister of Steel and Heavy Industries, Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy, Releases India’s Green Steel
Taxonomy,” Ministry of Steel, December 2024, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2083839.
31 See International Energy Agency, “India Energy Mix,” and International Energy Agency, “United States Energy Mix.”
32 White House, “United States-India Joint Leaders’ Statement.”

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
10
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
by the U.S. Department of Energy to Holtec International, a U.S. firm, to transfer SMR
technology to India in March 2025 is a significant step in that direction.33
Based on the deliberations, key findings include:
1. Scaling hydrogen deployment through a combination of grey and green hydrogen
to manage costs including prioritizing end-use sectors such as steel, ammonia, and
fertilizer.
2. Leveraging cost competitive electrolyzer manufacturing in India to expand manufac-
turing in both countries.
3. Advancing a renewed strategic opportunity for U.S.–India cooperation on nuclear
energy, including private sector investment and technology licensing from American
companies to India.
4. With India’s increasing push for gas infrastructure and demand potential, the United
States could emerge as a strategic energy supplier for India, with long term security
of both the resource as well as in terms of prices.
DELIVERING FINANCE BY SPURRING PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT
Emerging markets have the greatest economic growth potential and, with stable econom-
ic principles, offer an attractive home for capital investment. India remains among the
most attractive markets for investment potential, with a robust gross domestic product
growth of 5–7 percent annually, attracting over $1 trillion cumulatively in FDI since
2000.34 India ranks 39th in the Global Innovation Index 2024, rising from 80th in 2015
and 40th in the World Competitive Index 2024.35 These factors, coupled with India’s
growing skilled workforce, large consumer market, and strong macroeconomic principles
make it a strong investment destination.
In the period from 2000–2024, FDI from the United States to India totaled about $69
billion, being a leading market for American firms in areas such as e-commerce, aviation,
railways, telecommunications, food processing, and heavy equipment.36
India’s commitment to clean energy transitions brings with it a market potential of $1.1
trillion. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), India’s financing require-
ments to meet its energy transition goals of 2030 and 2070 is a staggering $160 billion
per year.37 Recent initiatives announced during state visits, the G20, Quad (India, United
33 Holtec International, “The USG Authorizes Holtec International Under 10CFR810 to Provide SMR-300 Walk-Away-
Safe Nuclear Plants to India with the Concurrence of the Nation’s Government,” Holtec International, March 2025, https://
holtecinternational.com/2025/03/31/hh-40-07/.
34 The World Bank, “GDP growth (annual %) - India,” The World Bank, accessed on April 16, 2025, https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/NY.GDP .MKTP .KD.ZG?end=2023&locations=IN&start=2015; India Brand Equity Foundation, “Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI),” India Brand Equity Foundation, March 2025, https:// www.ibef.org/economy/foreign-direct-investment.
35 World Intellectual Property Organization, “India ranking in the Global Innovation Index 2024,” World Intellectual Property
Organization, accessed on April 16, 2025, https://www.wipo.int/gii-ranking/en/india.
36 U.S. Department of State, “2024 Investment Climate Statements: India,” U.S. Department of State, accessed on April 16,
2025, https://www.state.gov/reports/2024-investment-climate-statements/india/.
37 Faith Birol and Amitabh Kant, “India’s clean energy transition is rapidly underway, benefiting the entire world,” International
Energy Agency, January 10, 2022, https://www.iea.org/commentaries/india-s-clean-energy-transition-is-rapidly-underway-
benefiting-the-entire-world.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
11
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
States, Japan, Australia) summits, Indo-Pacific Economic Framework (IPEF), and at oth-
er forums, have been positive indicators of finance and investments continuing to remain
a high priority for bilateral and multilateral cooperation.38
United States workshop participants noted several avenues being pursued by the U.S.
government to deploy capital towards India’s energy transition, particularly through the
U.S. Development Finance Corporation (DFC). India is currently the largest market
for DFC at 10 percent with $4.3 billion exposure, with the aim of capitalizing on clean
energy transition, transportation, and job creation. Of this, $1.6 billion is dedicated to
clean energy projects.
In particular, the DFC’s financial instruments include guarantees and support mecha-
nisms to attract private sector investment in sectors that are usually not bankable, i.e.,
real or perceived risk is too high for the private sector to invest. A combination of policy
and financing mechanisms has resulted in significant success stories for electric buses and
solar photovoltaic manufacturing.39 These success stories offer important lessons that
can and should be applied to other sectors and technologies such as batteries, alternative
fuels, efficient cooling, and supply chains. For example, managing cooling demand in
India through efficient technologies and software is one way to manage surging power
demand in the country.
While Washington workshop participants discussed efforts through DFC as a bright
spot, New Delhi participants offered a more measured assessment of current bilateral
and multilateral efforts. Indian participants agreed that India’s finance needs for its ener-
gy transition are in orders of magnitude larger than other developing countries. No one
country, government, or institution will be the source of all this financing, so efforts from
development finance institutions like the DFC and multilateral development banks like
the World Bank by themselves will not be sufficient but can play a key role in derisking
the inflow of private capital. Consequently, external private sector funding and foreign
direct investment must be mobilized in the strategic sectors, especially as domestic capital
inflows in India are not sustainable.
Bilateral or multilateral finance efforts must account for India’s size and complexity, in-
cluding Indian federalism and sub-national engagement. For example, Indian partici-
pants suggested both governments explore partnerships to secure social protection fund-
ing for coal-dependent regions, especially as renewable energy in India gets cheaper, it will
phase out non-renewable sources of energy such as coal plants. Moreover, another area
to grow cooperation is engagement with state-owned enterprises in India, which span
sectors beyond privately developed renewables and drive much of the energy transition
in the country, including minerals, natural gas, hydrocarbons, nuclear, among others. In
terms of target sectors for investment, New Delhi workshop participants also noted that
Indian solar and e-mobility sectors are relatively mature. They stressed that new invest-
ments from international public funds should be redirected into sectors like grid scale
energy storage, offshore wind, and green hydrogen that need more public sector support
to encourage private investment.
38 U.S. Embassy & Consulates in India, “Fact Sheet: 2024 Quad Leaders’ Summit,” U.S. Embassy & Consulates in India,
September 21, 2024, https://in.usembassy.gov/fact-sheet-2024-quad-leaders-summit/.
39 U.S. Department of State, “2024 Investment Climate Statements: India.”

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
12
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
In the context of clean energy manufacturing, investment, and innovation, the Wash-
ington workshop participants agreed that the United States must evaluate developments
in the Indian private sector in tandem with governmental efforts. Along with the rise of
global Indian companies, its start-up ecosystem is making strides in industries including
critical minerals processing, battery manufacturing, hydrogen production, and e-mobili-
ty. On the other hand, India has used its Production-Linked Incentives (PLI) schemes to
drive strategic private investment in sectors like battery manufacturing, electronics and
components, and solar, among others, attracting close to $19 billion worth of invest -
ments between 2021–2024.40 Stakeholders agreed that it has had a significant impact in
kickstarting the transition to create an enabling environment to increase private sector
investment.
Both countries must therefore create channels for the private sector to address their im-
pediments and concerns. The International T rade Administration (ITA) has been taking
steps to address such concerns and deepen the U.S.–India commercial partnership. A
key ITA focus area is clean energy supply chains, particularly solar energy. Improving
the traceability of India–U.S. solar supply chains is imperative to reduce dependence on
Chinese solar exports. Collective action through multilateral efforts, including Australia
and Brazil, are necessary to address high-risk upstream issues in the solar value chain.
Similar opportunities exist in critical minerals and battery supply chains. With the new
TRUST initiative, strategic sectors such as defense and aerospace also offer significant
market opportunities for private sector investment and have the potential to accelerate
the development and deployment of critical future technologies.
Key findings of the workshops include:
1. Expanding financing opportunities beyond global Indian industries to include the
start-up ecosystem which is making strides in critical and emerging energy technol-
ogies.
2. Exploring a U.S.–India investment vehicle expanding the Production-Linked In -
centives (PLI’s) scheme to create a finance multiplier effect for critical and emerging
energy technologies.
3. Improve the traceability of India–U.S. supply chains to reduce dependency and vul-
nerabilities.
THE PATH FORWARD: A U.S.–INDIA STRATEGIC ENERGY AND INDUSTRIAL
PARTNERSHIP
Drawing on the workshop outcomes, it is clear that the United States and India are
best positioned to leverage their respective strengths and their bilateral relationship to:
1) develop and deploy energy technologies at scale at home and abroad; 2) reduce con-
centration in energy supply chains and manufacturing of new energy technologies of
40 Ministry of Commerce & Industry, “PLI scheme incentivizes domestic manufacturing, increases production, creates
new jobs and boosts exports,” Ministry of Commerce & Industry, March 2025, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.
aspx?PRID=2114011#:~:text=The%20impact%20of%20PLI%20Schemes,both%20domestic%20and%20foreign%20players.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
13
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
the future; and 3) continue to strengthen the both the domestic industrial base and the
industrial corridor between the two countries.
T o mutually strengthen strategic objectives, increase private sector investments, and cap-
ture economic opportunities, the United States and India should launch a U.S.–India
Strategic Energy and Industrial Partnership that builds upon 20+ years of successful
bilateral cooperation. This initiative should prioritize three key areas: (i) accelerate com-
mercialization of strategic technologies and battery supply chains; (ii) expand automotive
technology cooperation and investment; (iii) advance development of emerging fuels
including hydrogen and nuclear.
For a long-term and successful partnership, industrial policy, technology development,
and global competitiveness remain at the center, and achieving these concurrent objec-
tives will require a four-pronged approach:
• Research, Development, and Innovation: the partnership should reorient current
research partnerships to focus on next generation emerging and critical technologies
including leapfrogging to new battery chemistries, future automotive technologies,
hydrogen and nuclear SMR. Mirroring the recent U.S.–India Defense Acceleration
Ecosystem (INDUS-X), the launch of INDUS Innovation aims to advance indus-
try–academia partnerships and foster investments for new and emerging sectors in-
cluding space and energy.
• Trade and Investment: U.S.–India two-way goods trade in the automotive sector
totaled $3.8 billion and $600 million in the battery supply chain as of 2023.41 Bilat-
eral trade and investment have the potential to reorient battery supply chains away
from China and potentially meet U.S. domestic battery production deficits, as well
as open opportunities for technology transfer from the United States to India. Specif-
ic efforts could include trade missions, feasibility assessments, and export guarantees
to advance cooperation in the specific sectors identified. Further, specific provisions
within the trade framework to enable technology transfer in strategic sectors as well
as flow of specific critical minerals and advanced batteries, export and import of nu-
clear technologies, hydrogen fuel and electrolyzers, could go a long way in building a
global diversified supply chain for both countries.
• Public-Private Partnerships: Under the bilateral partnership, launching a specific
U.S.–India batteries task force bringing together major American and Indian indus-
try players along with both governments, trade groups and civil society, could serve
to catalyze strategic partnerships and investments needed to realize the other three
pillars. India could provide an alternative regional hub for lithium-ion battery and
ancillary component manufacturing in the Indo-Pacific. Additionally, specific tracks
on automotive industry cooperation, and alternative fuels (including hydrogen and
nuclear) would strengthen bilateral cooperation, opening new market opportunities.
In the context of such partnerships, leveraging existing institutional mechanisms be-
41 U.S.-India total automotive sector and battery supply chains trade in 2023 accessed using HS commodities codes 8702,
8703, 8704, 8711, 850650. See United Nations Statistics Division, “UN COMTRADE,” United Nations, accessed on
April 21, 2025, https://comtradeplus.un.org/T radeFlow?Frequency=A&Flows=X&CommodityCodes=TOTAL&Partners=0&
Reporters=all&period=2024&AggregateBy=none&BreakdownMode=plus.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
14
A Blueprint to Advance the U.S.-India Energy Security Partnership
tween the two countries can help accelerate the timelines, leading to tangible out-
comes in the near term.
• Finance: Beyond leveraging financial instruments from U.S. DFC, U.S. Export-Im-
port Bank and U.S. T rade and Development Agency (USTDA) to crowd in private
sector investment, the two countries can also setup a Finance for Strategic Sectors
track, that brings together financial institutions and private investors in both coun-
tries periodically to clearly identify a pipeline of projects for potential investment
prioritizing the sectors identified.
A U.S.–India Strategic Energy and Industrial Partnership has the potential to transform
bilateral cooperation and grow private sector cooperation. Consequently, there is a need
to break down past and existing U.S.–India partnerships and identify long-term goals
and potential domestic measures that could hinder initiatives at an operational level.
Partnerships need to account for these risks and vulnerabilities from both countries, and
guard against them in the long-term scenario. T rust building is essential, and both coun-
tries need to take steps to ensure policy continuity and build towards a multi-dimension-
al long-term partnership that transcends short-term geopolitical tensions. Lastly, while
domestic objectives around energy transitions may change, both countries will benefit
from prioritizing industrial policy outcomes and global competitiveness, especially as
global markets continue to focus on clean energy technologies and supply chains.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank Shayak Sengupta, Medha Prasanna, Caroline Arkalji, and Jeffrey D. Bean
for their research and writing in support of this project, and their review of an earlier draft of this paper.
The paper is part of ORF America’s Clean Energy and Climate work. This background paper reflects the
personal research, analysis, and views of the author, and does not represent the position of the institution,
its affiliates, or partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
The Observer Research Foundation America (ORF America) is an
independent, non-partisan, and nonprofit organization in Washington DC
dedicated to addressing policy challenges facing the United States, India,
and their partners in a rapidly changing world.
ORF America produces research, curates diverse and inclusive platforms,
and develops networks for cooperation between the developed and
developing worlds based on common values and shared interests. Its
areas of focus are international affairs, technology, climate and energy,
and economics. Established in 2020, ORF America is an overseas
affiliate of the Observer Research Foundation (ORF), India’s premier
non-government think tank.
Observer Research Foundation America
1100 17th St. NW , Suite 501, Washington DC 20036
www.orfamerica.org
ABOUT ORF AMERICA
