
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
THE TRADE-OFFS OF INNOVATING IN
CHINA IN TIMES OF GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY
RIVALRY
JEROEN GROENEWEGEN-LAU AND JACOB GUNTER
MERICS
REPORT

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
| 2
MERICS Report | June 2025
This report is the final of a three-part series funded by the German Federal Ministry of Re-
search, Technology and Space (BMFTR) as part of the project “Corporate Innovation in and
with China – Options for German and European decision-makers in a dynamic environ-
ment” (funding reference number 01DO21014B). The first and second reports were based
on surveys of and interviews with members of the European Union Chamber of Commerce
in China. This capstone report builds on ongoing research and a two-day conference held in
Berlin in December 2024 which included company representatives, leaders from industry
associations, academics and think tankers.
A special thanks goes to all the partners we engaged with throughout this project series, es -
pecially our partners under this BMFTR project consortium: Prof. Dr Jörn-Carsten Gottwald,
professor of East Asian Politics at Ruhr University Bochum, and Prof. Dr Markus Taube, pro -
fessor of Economic Studies on China at the University of Duisburg-Essen. A special thanks
also to the participants of the China Innovation Conference and MERICS colleagues Alex -
ander Brown, Antonia Hmaidi, and Andreas Mischer.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
| 3
MERICS Report | June 2025
KEY TAKEAWAYS
 European firms and policy makers have been too slow to understand the impact of
China’s shift to an innovation and technology industrial powerhouse.
 Many European companies rely on China’s innovation ecosystem in their global R&D
strategies, which over time can jeopardize their technology, often followed by their
market share in China, and eventually globally.
 China’s policy approach is tailored to further its national interests so foreign firms are
met with different environments and incentives based on what they have to offer.
 Those with strategic technology like the semiconductor value chain are courted to pull
in technology, though they may then lose market share once Chinese competitors have
caught up enough.
 Firms in less strategic sectors like automotive or consumer goods receive fewer incen-
tives but are more likely to be accepted longer-term as providers of jobs and investment.
 Many foreign firms adjust for China risks with a mix of localization, partial decoupling
of China operations from global ones, offshoring some R&D and operations while tai-
loring other operations more deeply to the China market. Such localization and siloing
of their China operations is protective but also brings disadvantages and costs.
 China’s industrial policy playbook leads to overcapacity and shrinking profit margins
for everyone, which eats into foreign firm’s ability to finance R&D investment and main-
tain their technology leads while also eroding their revenue base.
 European technology and innovation policies are based on openness to globalized
technology and investment and slow to adjust to technology challenges emanating
from China – specifically that European openness is taken advantage of while Beijing
strategically incentivizes foreign technology providers to enter China while limiting
technology outflows where China is on the cutting edge.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
| 4
MERICS Report | June 2025
CHINA’S INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM REMAINS ATTRACTIVE TO EUROPEAN FIRMS, BUT
RISKS ARE GROWING
European companies remain highly interested in engagement with China’s technology and
innovation ecosystems. However, compared to the recent past they are increasingly skepti-
cal and concerned about the risks of that engagement, both in terms of China’s own tech-
no-industrial agenda but also because of fears of escalation of the technology war with the
US. As a result, a range of opportunities, risks, and dilemmas face European companies
when considering how to approach China’s innovation ecosystem.
Opportunities
European companies continue to view China’s innovation ecosystem as increasingly cen-
tral to many of their global R&D strategies – a trend that has advanced steadily over recent
years. China’s market offers innovation strengths that are often complementary to Europe-
an industrial strong points, especially where Chinese green technology and digitalization
complement European core industries in fields like machinery, chemistry and medical de-
vices. In some areas, China’s advanced position offers opportunities for European industry
to catch up, especially in the automotive and auto component sectors where China’s electri-
fication, digitalization, and infotainment success are eagerly embraced by EU firms. These
opportunities are appealing, even if in some sectors China has implemented controls that
limit technology outflow, especially in digital and green technology.
Risks
However, not all European companies are equally engaged with the innovation ecosystem
in China, nor do they want to be. IP concerns remain especially pressing for companies in
strategically oriented sectors where Beijing is keen to capture technology capacities and
the United States and others are imposing export restrictions. This is most notable in the
semiconductor value chain and telecoms equipment, as well as emerging technologies
like AI and quantum. European SMEs are more conservative about conducting technology
collaboration in China, as the loss of one or two core pieces of IP could doom their firm.
Finally, some companies are being squeezed out of the China market, either by policies or
competition, yet continue to maintain sizeable R&D positions there, despite plummeting
market share, in the hope of finding and developing technology to take global.
Dilemmas
The interests of European companies pursuing innovation opportunities in China are in-
creasingly caught between China’s national innovation strategies and European national
innovation interests. And that’s without getting into the United States’ expanding mea-
sures limiting technology flows to China and innovation partnerships there. Because China
aims to draw in as much technology, capital, and data as possible it welcomes companies
that bring them in, while simultaneously making it harder for firms to move technology,
capital and data out of the country. Meanwhile, the EU remains overwhelmingly open be-
cause of its historical commitment to open innovation and globalized technology and inno -
vation. Europe is only slowly realizing the structural nature of China’s lack of reciprocity,
prompting it to scrutinize European outflows, apply more investment screening and now
possibly technology-based export controls.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
| 5
MERICS Report | June 2025
CHINA’S NATIONAL INTEREST-BASED POLICIES PULL IN FOREIGN TECHNOLOGY AND
INNOVATION, THEN SKEW THE BENEFITS
Chinese policymakers are eager to draw in European technologies and innovation capacity
in the right areas. Beijing is making some of the right noises in response to European inves -
tors’ concerns, though it does not always respond with actual policies. The European Union
Chamber of Commerce in China has repeatedly raised concerns that responses do not ma-
terialize. It welcomed positive signals like the State Council’s Opinions of the State Council
on Further Optimising the Foreign Investment Environment and Increasing Efforts to Attract
Foreign Investment, but criticized the failure to implement it, a year later. The Chamber’s
response to the CCP’s 3rd Plenum was also tepid. 1
Beijing makes strong efforts to attract the technology needed for China’s strategic goals.
Beijing tends to view less strategically relevant technologies more neutrally, although, in
principle, all investment is welcome to support the struggling economy. A foreign com-
pany’s position in Beijing’s eyes depends on the size of the technology gap compared to
Chinese firms – the larger the gap, the more Beijing will do to induce investment and tech-
nology localization.
Exhibit 1
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
China’s innovation ecosystem from the perspective of European
companies
STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES
 Financial resources
 Technological scaling and diffusion
 Strong government support
 Educational excellence
 Strategic resource concentration
 Scalability and speed
 STEM graduate output
 Technological leadership
 Inefficient resource allocation
 Incentives system issues
 Human capital challenges
 Regional disparities
 Reliability of data
 Bureaucratic inefficiencies
 Quality variance in education
 Demographic challenges
 Social disillusionment
OPPORTUNITIES THREATS
 Emerging transformative Technologies
 Shifts in global power
 Large domestic market
 Global leadership in some sectors
 Emerging technology leadership
 Global partnerships
 Localized production in Europe
 Policy and economic realignment
 Geopolitical risks
 Demographic challenges
 Economic instability
 Competitor strategies
 Internal systemic challenges
 Geopolitical decoupling
 Reliability of data
 Global competition

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
| 6
MERICS Report | June 2025
To assess the available strategies, it helps to distinguish between ‘Business class’, ‘Econ-
omy class’, and ‘Cargo hold’ positions, as outlined in the above chart. Those in business
class, with strategic technologies that are much more advanced than local options, tend
to get generous inducements to invest, from 100 percent foreign ownership deals to easier
access to land, subsidies, tax incentives, plus measures more directly linked to innova-
tion support. Such measures include better support in IP disputes, positive signals to help
attract local and international talent, including soft infrastructure like housing support,
access to international schools and more.
Foreign technology firms face ‘up or out’ competition to stay ahead of local
companies
These positions are not static. For instance, foreign companies who lose their technological
edge over local ones risk sliding into the ‘cargo hold’ class, where they may struggle for
market share. Once there, an uncaring Beijing leaves them to wither or, worse, may even
actively push them out. The trip from ‘business class’ to ‘cargo hold’ is a direct one, there is
no connecting flight through ‘economy class’, because the strategic nature of a technology
rarely changes, even if the technology gap does.
Exhibit 2
Beijing rolls out the red carpet for the right foreign
technology providers
China treats foreign firms based on strategic nature of tech and size of tech gap
More strategic
technologies
Less
strategic
technologies
Chinese
technology leadership
China-foreign
technology competition
Foreign
technology leadership
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
Business classCargo hold
Economy class

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
| 7
MERICS Report | June 2025
Importantly, there is no single line of demarcation between these two categories. Rather,
there is a grey zone where Beijing may decide that, though a technology gap remains, a
local firm has ‘good enough’ technology to tilt the playing field in their favor. Once that
threshold is crossed, Beijing seeks to push foreign players out, so market share can shift to
domestic firms, which thereby gain the scale and momentum to become efficient and glob -
ally competitive. This basic playbook has proved successful with high-speed rail, telecoms
equipment (5G), and electric vehicles. Some types of industrial machinery, industrial soft -
ware, medical devices and legacy semiconductors are also on this trajectory.
Firms in ‘economy class’ tend to have less uncertain fates. Beijing is largely ambivalent
about foreign investment in their sectors – typically downstream in value chains and con-
sumer-oriented goods – as the investment bolsters employment, tax revenue, HR develop -
ment, etc. without taking market share from local firms that could be used to fund R&D in
a strategic technology.
Market share saturation is a policy-driven path to closing China’s technology gap
China’s industrial policy seeks to close technology gaps with incentives to expand produc -
tion capacity. Beijing sees this as indirectly boosting innovation because production scale
leads to lower prices, larger global market share, faster product iteration and increased
R&D budgets, which in turn lead to better products and production processes.
First, the more China can expand its production and global market share, the more that it
will capture revenue bases and profits that can be funneled back into optimizing and inno -
vating products and production processes.
Second, the concentration of manufacturing in China generates all kinds of clustering and
spillover effects that hugely speed up innovation. China’s complete industrial clusters have
repeatedly come up in interviews during our three-year study as strengths that facilitate
innovation there. The ability to work at so-called “China speed” is largely due to shorter,
more direct links between different actors in the industrial ecosystem, including upstream
and downstream suppliers – from startups to multinational corporations (MNCs) – and a
range of service providers in contract research, digital modeling and talent development.
The World Intellectual Property Organization ranks the top 100 global science and tech-
nology clusters; in 2024, China had 26, the most of any country, and the global top ten
included the Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Guangzhou corridor (2), Beijing (3), Shanghai-Suzhou
(5) and Nanjing (9). 2
Third, growth in production scale also leads to faster product iteration cycles. Innovation
is not confined to researchers in labs doing basic research: it frequently happens on factory
production lines with technical engineers and process managers experimenting to finetune
their work, sometimes even leading to breakthroughs. The Asia Growth Partners Innova-
tion in China Survey found the most common sources for innovation ideas in China were
sales team input (76 percent), competitor benchmarking (71 percent), customer/user inter -
views (55 percent) and only then R&D centers (55 percent). 3
Foreign firms squeezed out in China will eventually suffer globally
Foreign competitors are also likely to get crowded out. China’s playbook leads to overcapac-
ity and shrinking profit margins for everyone, which eat into foreign firm’s ability to finance
R&D investment and maintain their technological lead.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
| 8
MERICS Report | June 2025
China’s growing market share across lower and mid-tier value chains creates an underap -
preciated risk: European companies left to occupy only the upper end of value chains are
unlikely to generate enough revenue to maintain this lead. Deindustrialization can slow
down innovation, especially if EU firms lose access to economic value and deep production
knowledge within the production segment in the supply chain. In the AGP survey, when
asked where companies were experiencing pressure from local competitors, 95 percent
said they felt high pressure on price and 66 percent said they felt high pressure on sales and
service speed – pressure on quality was the lowest, with only 11 percent saying pressure
was high, 42 percent saying it was medium, and 47 percent saying it was low. 4
This of course does not suggest that there are no paths for foreign companies in China to re-
main competitive and profitable. Beijing is happy to have foreign companies with the right
technologies as they grow the global market share of ‘made in China’ products and enrich Chi-
na’s industrial clusters. Many firms surveyed and interviewed for this study engage extensively
with local innovation partners, which helps the overall ecosystem. The efforts made by Euro-
pean firms to help their Chinese suppliers achieve global quality standards are a disregarded
form of technology transfer encouraged by Chinese policies on promoting local content.
China’s central government, which ultimately sets many of the rules, focuses on national
interest. It shuns open innovation and the free flow of technology in favor of mechanisms
to ensure more technology flows in than out. The innovation model that the Chinese state
has rolled out is based on intense pragmatism and realpolitik that prioritizes geopolitical
goals above all and frames foreign companies’ options accordingly. China’s most successful
innovation clusters display open, inclusive and cosmopolitan business environments that
are equally created and constrained by this framework.
FOR EUROPEAN FIRMS IN CHINA, LOCALIZATION AND PARTIAL DECOUPLING ARE
WIDESPREAD AND COMPLEX
As globalization is under pressure, European corporates are rebalancing their R&D foot -
prints and wider positions in China vis à vis global operations. European companies face
a ‘localization dilemma’. 5 Chinese incentivizes makes it attractive to do more R&D in the
country, but this simultaneously increases the risk of knowledge transfer to Chinese com-
petitors. Because the Chinese state structurally supports domestic firms, localizing in Chi-
na increasingly resembles a high-stakes game that is not for everyone. The AGP Innovating
in China survey found that 61 percent of respondents were investing more in innovation
programs in China, while 24 percent were investing less. 6
 Some firms have assessed that China is a losing proposition in the long run. They intend
to keep their current operations and R&D in China as long as possible but will invest
resources (including R&D) in other markets to beat their Chinese competitors there.
 Others have bolder assessments and are betting on the China market for R&D to maxi-
mize opportunities there, out-compete local rivals and advance the best technology and
attract the best talent. They hope to suppress market share and economies of scale for
their local competitors before these can become global competitors.
Protective localization does not always go smoothly. The 2024 European Union Chamber
of Commerce in China Position Paper identifies “a growing tendency towards siloing China
operations and supply chains” through such steps as onshoring or offshoring parts of sup -

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
| 9
MERICS Report | June 2025
ply chains, the heavy localization of staffing, data and information technology (IT) systems,
and sometimes R&D activities. The strategy has produced “instances of miscommunication
and misunderstanding between companies” China operations and headquarters (HQs) re-
sulting in a slowdown of existing operations; the reduced ability to capitalize on new proj -
ects or investment plans; the need to adapt product or service offerings; and even the need
to downsize or close operations.
Moving deeper, the findings of the China Innovation Conference unearthed further levels of
nuance. There was a considerable divergence between ‘less strategic’ and ‘more strategic’
industries – represented respectively by the automotive and auto components sectors and
semiconductor value chain. Below, we take a closer look at the dynamics in these sectors
and in the more or less strategic areas they represent to explore the conditions that could
be imposed on European actors and the responses available to them.
EU firms in less strategic industries are more optimistic about localization
Many less strategic MNCs find there is a case to be made for both pursuing diversification
overseas and onshoring/localizing into China’s innovation ecosystem. This typically leads
to a relatively siloed China branch so both it and the global operations could continue un-
der any geopolitical circumstances with minimal disruptions, at least in the short term.
The logic here is that China is too important a market to leave simply due to geopolitical
risks, hence the route to resilience is heavy localization and onshoring of China opera-
tions and supply chains. This will allow China operations to continue if decoupling pres -
sure intensifies in China, the United States and Europe. 41 per cent of respondents to the
European Chamber’s Business Confidence Survey 2024 reported some form of decoupling
between their China operations and their HQs in the past two years. 7 Many of the firms
adopting this resilience strategy are also diversifying their global operations away from
China to various extents.
In R&D activities, for many larger companies the fortification of their China operations has
led to further integration into China’s innovation ecosystem. These firms calculate that
technology and IP flows across borders can effectively be ‘locked in’ in ways that supply
chains cannot – if a company suddenly finds they cannot export a certain component to
China, this could shut down entire production lines; whereas if a company suddenly finds
they cannot transfer newer IP and know-how into or out of China, they can still rely on
whatever has already been transferred, then use the already expanded R&D footprint in
China for local operations.
Companies building up their R&D operations in China are doing so because they need to
remain competitive in the Chinese market and/or are scouting for Chinese suppliers with
advanced products, in the hope it could lead to innovation implemented globally – some-
thing that is becoming increasingly problematic as China continues to expand its restric -
tions on outbound technology. These firms are simultaneously building up internal R&D
infrastructure in China so they will have resilience to prioritize localized innovation within
the China bubble if technology flows become more restricted.
EU firms in more strategic industries are bound by geopolitics
European companies with strategic technology are more averse to localizing production in
China, let alone bringing their core technology to the market. That is in part due to IP theft

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
| 10
MERICS Report | June 2025
and competition fears, and in part current or anticipated restrictions imposed by the US
and others. This is notable in defense-related sectors like aerospace and aviation, as well as
the semiconductor value chain.
Many of these firms are already affected by US and/or EU controls, which have always exist -
ed on traditional dual use technology like many types of avionic systems that may be sold to
Chinese commercial aircraft makers, but which must only be produced in trusted countries
for export and cannot be localized as Beijing would like. The same is true for a growing
swatch of the semiconductor value chain, where certain technology can only be exported
and not localized or in some cases cutting-edge chips and equipment needs approval based
on end-users.
However, some firms in more strategic sectors are also hedging their bets in anticipation
of future developments. For some, that could mean escalation of the US-China technology
war to cover more of their products. These firms are preparing for a possible decoupling.
Others have assessed that they should strategically resist localization and only focus on
exports to avoid technology leakage that would risk their current leadership and accelerate
state-supported Chinese competitors.
Finally, some companies exist in strategic technology classes where Chinese firms have
already overtaken them and Beijing has found ways to effectively push them out of the
market, as happened in high-speed rail and 5G and telecoms equipment. Some firms in this
situation still leave R&D resources in China to scout for technology and partners, keep track
of trends in China’s technology, and do R&D to take to their global offerings.
CASE STUDIES: NOT ALL SECTORS ARE TREATED EQUALLY
The China Innovation Conference underlying this report included concentrations of indus -
try representatives and experts covering two technology groupings chosen to compare how
different technologies were viewed in China, how they fall into the US-China trade and
technology wars, and how broader decoupling in China and derisking in the EU are affect -
ing them. The findings that emerged clearly indicated that:
 The automotive sector is a less strategic technology class that can mostly avoid the
geopolitics of the moment – but with emerging technology like EV batteries, hydrogen
cell systems, and connected vehicle technologies, the strategic relevance of the sector
is likely to increase.
 The technologies that make up the semiconductor value chain are overwhelmingly on
the more strategic side of things. That puts them at the center of the technology war
and China’s self-reliance campaign and complicates European corporate engagement in
that space.
Cars themselves are treated as ‘less strategic’ by Beijing, but many component
technologies are critical to China’s ambitions
The automotive and auto components sectors are representative of the situation for industries
with less strategic and politically sensitive technologies, mostly avoiding Beijing’s lists of tar-
get technologies of the future other than EV-specific technology. For decades, European firms
in this sector have used their technological superiority to reap large profits from the Chinese

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
| 11
MERICS Report | June 2025
market. The requirement to have a Chinese joint venture partner did not challenge the market
dominance of European carmakers. However, the dynamic changed with the rise of electric
vehicles (EVs) bolstered by China’s innovators and intense industrial policy.
European automotive firms intend to use their size and global experience to remain relevant.
They also seek to leverage Chinese JV partners and business partners and are generally con-
fident about opportunities to collaborate on technology globally. The comparatively high
flexibility of these firms stems from an abundance of component suppliers for the OEMs and
abundance of OEMs for the component suppliers. As a result, they tend to view China as
critical for overcoming their weaknesses in electrification, digitalization, and infotainment.
European firms across this value chain often argue that these goals demand deeper engage-
ment in the China market and increased investments there, including R&D. Nevertheless,
Exhibit 3
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
European automakers on the back foot in EV technology
A SWOT analysis of the European automotive/auto components sector in regard to competition
and collaboration with Chinese firms
STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES
 ICE expertise (also hybrids)
 R&D clusters (highly integrated and
concentrated)
 Strong research, especially with universities
 Hydrogen, especially strong in passenger and
commercial vehicles
 Talent attraction and cultivation
 Cross-national cooperation and collaboration
 Brand reputation helps early adoption
 Late electrification – a weak battery supplier
ecosystem and lack of batteries expertise
 Costs – labor, energy, R&D
 Policy issues - lack of state support,
excess regulation, taxonomy rules
 Weak EV demand (customers, government
fleets) makes iterative innovation harder
 Talent shortages
 Infotainment (lack of development in this
area)
OPPORTUNITIES THREATS
 Learning in China to transfer out of China
 Potential to leverage Chinese technology
innovation + European brand, create new
JVs in EU
 Leverage European brand to global footprint
to partner with China technology
 European OEMs have Chinese suppliers as
options
 Chinese OEMs have European suppliers as
options
 China market does not have 2035 goals for
ending ICE sales
 China can deliver batteries for European EV
transition
 Current Sino-EU JVs are with China’s
weakest EV makers (SOEs)
 Autonomous driving may be commercialized
fast in China
 Differences in autonomous driving systems
 US decoupling is making development
harder
 Losing rest-of-world ICE market to China
hurts revenue stream
 EU suppliers compete with China suppliers
 China OEMs compete with European OEMs
 Dependencies on China for core EV
technology
 China’s growing export controls

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
| 12
MERICS Report | June 2025
they do recognize their considerable risks from existing and potential Chinese restrictions
on technology outflows in the green and digital spaces. They are especially worried about
self-driving or connected vehicles, due to the potential for securitization. Automakers’ suc -
cess is built on deeply globalized value chains and economies of scale but growing restric -
tions on connected vehicles in the United States and China, and possibly elsewhere, may
balkanize the global industry.
Perhaps most importantly, many of the core technologies within the sector still rank lower on
the scale of strategic significance. So, for now companies can probably count on the continu-
ity of current operations and strategies. However, divergence in connected vehicle systems
and infrastructure plus the looming prospect of EVs and EV core technology becoming more
embroiled in trade and technology wars does worry OEMs and component makers alike.
Exhibit 4
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
More strategic
technologies
Less
strategic
technologies
Chinese
technology leadership
China-foreign
technology competition
Foreign
technology leadership
EV
batteries
Critical EV
minerals/
materials
EVs, plug-in hybrids
Interface tech,
displays,
infotainment
Infrastructure-
based
connected
vehicle
systems
Individual/
autonomous
connected
vehicle
systems
ICE core
tech
Hydrogen
production
Emerging
tech:
e-fuels,
lightweight
 construction,
solid-state
batteries
Hydrogen
fuel cells
Legacy
chips for
auto-
motive/
components
Cutting edge
chips for
automotive/
components
Anodes/
cathodes
Range
extenders
Foreign automakers and component makers are not as secure in
China as they once were
How welcome foreign companies are depends on how strategic their technology is and how far
ahead/behind they are compared to local firms
Radar/
Lidar systems
Business classCargo hold
Economy class

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
| 13
MERICS Report | June 2025
Semiconductor value chain technologies are more strategically relevant and face a
complex political environment
The semiconductor value chain demonstrates the situation for more strategic industries
vividly. Covering most of the hardware and software underpinning semiconductor produc -
tion (machinery, inputs, chips, back-end processes, integrated software, etc.).
European players in this arena have either benefited from past technology gaps with Chi-
nese competitors or still do. But they are also at risk from policy-supported Chinese compet -
itors arising while Europe deliberates about how to promote and protect itself. Furthermore,
threats of escalation in the US-China trade war may well find European players caught in
the middle. Finally, threats from China’s overcapacity could accelerate deindustrialization
in Europe and other markets. By undermining firms’ customer bases, Chinese overcapacity
deprives them of revenue to fund their own R&D and remain competitive.
Exhibit 5
Europe's semiconductor ecosystem is exposed to politics and policy
A SWOT analysis of the European semiconductor value chain in regard to competition
and collaboration with Chinese firms
STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES
 Basic research
 Talent training
 Pro-European business leaders/community
 Quality focus
 Industrial base
 Democratic and open research environment
 Firms’ independence from government control
 Commercialization speed too slow
 Fragmentation
 State-support
 Bureaucracy
 Talent retention
 Public interest rather limited compared
to US, China, others
 Technological adoption
 Price competition
 IT-Security & data
OPPORTUNITIES THREATS
 Stronger focus on cybersecurity & data
 Catching-up in technologies
 Industrial policy
 Upskilling the workforce
 Internationalization of education
 Close ties with “like-minded countries ”
→Diversification
 R&D cooperation
 EU in a follower position
 Rules and regulations
 Unfair competition
 Rising trade barriers
 Rising nationalism
 European de-industrialization (losing
customer base at home)
 BRI (e.g. telecommunications equipment)
Source: MERICS
© MERICS

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
| 14
MERICS Report | June 2025
The strategic nature of the sectors is apparent in the second chart below, with almost all
brainstormed subcategories ending in the upper portions. The contrast between the left
and the right is also quite striking, showing the transition can be rapid in areas where
China’s firms have generally caught up. Foreign alternatives are pushed out to preserve
market share (and revenue) for local brands to fully catch up with, or even overtake, foreign
providers. However, many of the technologies in this grouping retain sizeable gaps over
Chinese counterparts for now, giving a sense of space to act to preserve that edge, though
not without urgency.
Firms will struggle without a strategic perspective from home
The return of geopolitics is fracturing the previous period of globalization in ways that
bring much more uncertainty than companies would like. As ideals of frictionless trade
and technology flows are being replaced by issues of supply-chain resilience and strate-
gic races in innovation and technologies, stakeholders are building in redundancies and
hedged bets.
Exhibit 6
China is desperate for foreign semiconductor tech, but often can't
get it
How welcome foreign companies are depends on how strategic their technology is and how far
ahead/behind they are compared to local firms
Source: MERICS
© MERICS
More strategic
technologies
Less
strategic
technologies
Chinese
technology leadership
China-foreign
technology competition
Foreign
technology leadership
SIC & GAN wafers
Chip packaging
and testing
Mainstream/
legacy chips
Big bandwith
memory
Lithography
ADAS chips
Semi-
conductor
optical/
laser
equipment
SIC & GAN Chips
AI chips
Inverters
Business classCargo hold
Economy class

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
| 15
MERICS Report | June 2025
This approach and the reassertion of national interests more generally require firms that
are active in multiple countries to re-assess and sometimes re-arrange their internal struc -
tures and regional priorities which, as outlined above, bring along other challenges. Com-
panies in more strategic technology classes are likely the most affected and will need to
change their relationship with globalization and their home market and policymakers the
most. While also negatively impacted, firms in less strategic sectors will have more options
available and where they can generally stay out of the geopolitical points of friction can
likely do so without as much of a rethink of their relationship with home governments.
EUROPEAN NATIONAL INNOVATION INTERESTS ARE NO LONGER FULLY ALIGNED
WITH CORPORATE ONES
European policymakers are increasingly struggling to balance protecting their national in-
terests, promoting the success and competitiveness of their companies, and derisking prob -
lematic aspects of their relations with China. At its most basic, that means:
 Minimizing the amount of technology and innovation flowing to China that could un-
dermine European core industries (especially those in more strategic technology classes)
while also allowing enough of it to flow to China for European companies and exports
to remain competitive there (especially in less strategic technologies).
 Maximizing the amount of technology and innovation flowing from China to Europe,
especially where it empowers goals like the green and digital transitions while also
minimizing dependency risks (i.e., it is better to have EV battery technology transferred
and/or localized in Europe than merely to import it)
In the past, there was tighter alignment between European national interests and corporate
interests in China. The decades-long shift from exporting to China to localizing some pro -
duction to localizing most production and supply chains to full on localizing even R&D and
IP has changed how corporate interests align with national ones. During those decades of
transition, corporates convincingly argued this was good for Europe – more of the higher
value work (R&D, HQ roles, high-end engineering, etc.) would remain and even expand in
Europe because global economies of scale would grow by doing more in China.
But extensive or even comprehensive siloing is changing that, as the entire point of it is not
to be reliant on globalized supply chains with high-value-added components and technol -
ogy and R&D flows from Europe to China. Throughout this project, a significant number of
conversations with government stakeholders included this dilemma – if they localize and
silo so much, what good is that for European citizens? Add to this the efforts of the EU and
many member states to derisk ties with China and the divergence grows wider.
European national innovation interests vary from sector to sector
The European automotive sector is in a precarious competitive position, specifically in elec -
trification, digitalization, and infotainment. Real opportunities for collaboration exist to
help the industry make up for its weaknesses, and could bring more Chinese investment
and technology to Europe. Doing so could help European players catch up, while increas -
ing the risks of being undermined by China’s EV makers. Cooperation would boost depen-
dencies on Chinese technology and supply chains and can inhibit European players from
pushing for indigenous innovation and capacity.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
| 16
MERICS Report | June 2025
Very different dynamics exist in the semiconductor value chain. Key lessons should be
learned from the areas where European champions are already being pushed out, such
as telecoms/network equipment. They tended to have more localized technology and R&D
footprints in China. In the many areas where European players across the value chain re-
main far enough ahead, companies are increasingly resisting Beijing’s localization pres -
sures and incentives, so as to maintain their own competitiveness and in anticipation of
technology war escalation.
However, these firms are insufficiently supported and protected by European policymakers,
even while contributing to European economic security by limiting their footprint in China,
often with significant loss of opportunities in the short term. As China’s industrial policy
agenda aims at the heart of these value chains, China’s progress in some technologies may
outpace European firms, who, with less government support and protection in their home
countries, are at risk of being crowded out, first in China, then in third markets and even
at home.
More than ever, these companies must think strategically and geopolitically and are in
greater need of policymakers to think about their future through those lenses as well.
European nations and firms urgently need better collaboration on China risks
The relationship between European governments and firms is changing profoundly, due
to geopolitical competition. The dilemma on both sides is to balance openness/market lib -
eralism and security, an emerging priority which conflicts with a core EU tenet. In less
sensitive or strategic sectors, open market liberalism will probably continue to make sense,
but security concerns must prompt the consideration of specific export controls and funda-
mental thinking about industrial policy in strategic technologies.
The tensions around openness are particularly salient around reciprocity. European firms
have taken IP and R&D to China that was developed with European support, yet this is
rarely reciprocated by Chinese firms bringing their core IP and R&D to the EU. China’s tech-
nology leaders mostly stick to an export model, sometimes with final steps and assembly
overseas in plants in Hungary or nearby the EU in Morroco or Turkey, as is happening in EVs
and EV batteries. This pattern exists because of:
 Official controls from Beijing, such as the existing or mooted controls on critical EV tech-
nology, from mineral refining to graphite to cathodes, or export controls on minerals like
germanium, gallium, antimony, and others. 8
 Informal window guidance from the party and/or state – Guidance has already been
issued to EV firms not to invest in EU members states that voted for countervailing tariffs
on subsidized EVs from China. 9
 China’s companies follow signaling from the party, state, and/or industry associations 10
– For instance, in early December 2024, after new US export controls were announced,
four major Chinese industry associations called US semiconductors “unsafe and unre-
liable” and urged member companies to be careful about selecting US semiconductor
technology suppliers. 11 It is easy to see how signals and reading the political tea leaves
in China might lead Chinese industry to be equally cautious about taking technology
abroad or about how they protect it when investing overseas.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
| 17
MERICS Report | June 2025
European policymakers and corporates are insufficiently responsive to changing
realities
Only recently have national governments in Europe woken up to China’s status as both a
systemic rival and a technology and innovation powerhouse. Policymakers in Brussels and
European capitals should realize that, faced with this urgent challenge, it is better to seek
‘good enough’ solutions than wait for perfect ones. The conversation among policymak -
ers tends to divide between pro-market liberalization and pro-industrial policy arguments,
when the actions so urgently needed are likely to demand a mix of both. Regulatory simpli-
fication and addressing the energy cost situation is essential. There are also key European
industries already being eroded, or soon to be at risk from fierce, state-backed Chinese
competitors – identifying the industries strategically most important to European interests,
and which ones can and should be reinforced, will be difficult but essential.
Meanwhile, European corporate leaders are moving too slow to address the challenges
presented by China’s emergence as an increasingly innovative and fast-moving industrial
giant. The extent of siloing of decision-making and information flow between global HQ
and China operations creates significant risks. Many firms interviewed for this project and
in other capacities have heavily outsourced their China expertise to their local operations.
Local staff may therefore make decisions that do not best serve the technology and inno -
vation interests of the wider global company. Siloing can also mean lost opportunities for
collaboration and positive impacts in global markets as links between China teams and the
global HQ are not strong or relevant enough.
European companies should embrace more circulation of junior and senior personnel from
HQ to China operations. They should also break the ‘bamboo ceiling’ so promising Chinese
nationals are able to circulate through HQ and other global operations to share their ex -
periences – this would also solve a common problem among interviewed companies, who
complained their best talent often quits to join competitors, to which we would ask how
many of their senior China team had ever been promoted to HQ.
Finally, the possibility of a ‘grand bargain’ should not be completely written off. For policy -
makers, the ideal would be positive corporate responses to guidance on national interests.
The corporate ideal would be to benefit from deregulation, cheaper energy and supportive
industrial policy. Some sort of deal combining these might be sensible – a quid pro quo of
deregulation in general and targeted industrial policy for strategic sectors, in exchange for
European companies thinking less as multinational and more as European companies in
regard to China.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
| 18
MERICS Report | June 2025
ENDNOTES
1 | EUCCC, “Statement on State Council’s Opinions on Attracting and Optimising Foreign Investment,”
2023, https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/press-releases/3549/statement_on_state_council_s_
opinions_on_attracting_and_optimising_foreign_investment; EUCCC, “European Chamber Calls for
More Action, Not More Action Plans,” European Business in China Position Paper 2024/2025 (Position
Paper 2024/2025), 2024, https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/press-releases/3649/europe-
an_chamber_calls_for_more_action_not_more_action_plans; EUCCC, “Stance on 2024 Annual Central
Economic Work Conference,” 2024, https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/press-releases/3680/
stance_on_2024_annual_central_economic_work_conference.
2 | WIPO, “GII Science and Technology Clusters 2024: Tokyo-Yokohama and Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Guang-
zhou Top the Ranking; Emerging Economies Make Their Move,” 2024, https://www.wipo.int/press-
room/en/articles/2024/article_0012.html.
3 | Asia Growth Partners, “Innovating in China. 2024 Strategic Landscape for Multinationals,” 2024,
https://asiagrowthpartners.com/insight/innovating-in-china.-2024-strategic-landscape-for-multina-
tionals/a60.
4 | Asia Growth Partners.
5 | Jacob Gunter and Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau, “China’s Innovation System and the Localization Dilemma”
(Merics, April 21, 2023), https://merics.org/en/report/chinas-innovation-system-and-localization-di-
lemma.
6 | Asia Growth Partners, “Innovating in China. 2024 Strategic Landscape for Multinationals.”
7 | EUCCC and Roland Berger, “Business Confidence Survey 2024,” 2024, https://www.europeanchamber.
com.cn/en/publications-business-confidence-survey.
8 | MOF, “关于《中国禁止出口限制出口技术目录》调整公开征求意见的通知 (Notice of Public Consultation on
Adjustments to China’s Catalog of Prohibited and Restricted Export Technologies),” 2025, https://fms.
mofcom.gov.cn/xxfb/art/2025/art_4717648e8ef94faba7564800b90ea3cc.html.
9 | Daniel Ren, “Beijing to Chinese EV Makers: Think Twice about Investing in Tariff-Backing EU Coun-
tries,” South China Morning Post, October 31, 2024, sec. Business, https://www.scmp.com/business/
china-business/article/3284591/beijing-chinese-ev-makers-think-twice-about-investing-tariff-backing-
eu-countries.
10 | Jacob Gunter and Max J. Zenglein, “The Party Knows Best: Aligning Economic Actors with China’s Stra-
tegic Goals” (Merics, October 12, 2023), https://merics.org/en/report/party-knows-best-aligning-eco -
nomic-actors-chinas-strategic-goals.
11 | Wu Yuli 吴遇利, “不再安全可靠！四大行业协会呼吁审慎选择美国芯片，多家企业回应业务影响 (No Longer Safe
and Reliable! Four Major Industry Associations Call for Prudent Choice of U.S. Chips, Many Companies
Respond to Business Impacts),” Pengpai, 2024, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_29533508.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
| 19
MERICS Report | June 2025
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jacob Gunter is Head of Program of “Economy and Industry” at MERICS. He has ten
years of experience in China, including four years as the Lead Pen of the European Union
Chamber of Commerce in China, where he served as a Senior Policy and Communications
Manager. He covers China’s political economy, industrial policy, innovation, self-reliance,
decoupling, and examines how the EU can better economically compete with China in
third markets.
Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau is Head of Program of “Science, Technology and Innovation”
at MERICS. Prior to that he worked at “China Policy”, a Beijing-based research and advi-
sory company. He set up the section education, science and innovation at China Policy in
2017, and led it until December 2020. Jeroen spent over ten years in China. He holds a
master’s degree Languages and Cultures of China from Leiden University and wrote about
Chinese popular music in his PhD dissertation.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
IMPRINT
CONTACT
Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau
Head of Program
Science, Technology and Innovation, MERICS
jeroen.groenewegen-lau@merics.de
Jacob Gunter
Head of Program
Economy and Industry, MERICS
jacob.gunter@merics.de
EDITORIAL TEAM
Claudia Wessling
Director Communications and Publications, MERICS
claudia.wessling@merics.de
Mary Hennock
Freelance Editor
GRAPHICS AND LAYOUT
STOCKMAR+WALTER Kommunikationsdesign
PUBLISHER
MERICS | Mercator Institute for China Studies
Alte Jakobstraße 85–86
10179 Berlin
Tel.: +49 30 3440 999 0
Mail: info@merics.de
www.merics.org
Copyright © 2025
MERCATOR INSTITUTE FOR CHINA STUDIES
ISSN (Print): 2941-5799
ISSN (Online): 2941-5608
