
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
The International Institute
for Strategic Studies
Europe and the Indo-Pacific:
Convergence and Divergence
in the Digital Order
Meia Nouwens, Senior Fellow for Chinese Security and Defence
Policy; Francesca Maremonti, Research Assistant, European
Security and Defence; Mariko Togashi, Research Fellow for
Japanese Security and Defence Policy; Hannah Brandt, Research
Analyst, European Security and Defence
December 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Contents
Executive summary 3
Introduction 5
Section 1: Supranational Policy Approaches in the European Union 7
National Critical Infrastructure 7
National AI Strategies 8
The Protection of National Innovation Ecosystems 9
Countering Disinformation in the Cyber Domain 10
Section 2: National Policy Approaches in the Indo-Pacific 12
National Critical Infrastructure in the Indo-Pacific 12
National AI Strategies 17
Protecting National Innovation Ecosystems 23
Who manages investment-screening regulations? 27
Disinformation in the Cyber Domain 30
Section 3: Comparisons between Europe and the Indo-Pacific 36
National Critical-infrastructure Protection 36
National AI Strategies 38
Protection of National Innovation Ecosystems 39
Disinformation in the Cyber Domain 41
Conclusion 44
Appendix 46
Notes 47
Cover
Three-dimensional render of global communications and networking in big city from an aerial view.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 3
Executive summary
European and Indo-Pacific countries are caught in the
middle of the mounting systemic rivalry between the
United States and China. The growing competition
between these two countries in the digital domain is
manifesting in different areas, including export controls,
technological standards and national industrial poli-
cies. However, considering the technological-innovation
debate solely through the lens of US–China competition
risks overlooking the approaches and responses that
other actors – namely the European Union and Indo-
Pacific countries – are pursuing to enhance and safe-
guard their national digital ecosystems.
Shifting the focus away from US–China technologi-
cal competition, this IISS research paper looks at the
approaches of the EU and Indo-Pacific countries in
selected domains of the digital order, identifying pat-
terns of convergence and divergence in this space.
Locating common practices and bringing to light gaps
in policy regulation could delineate key areas for further
cooperation between the EU and Indo-Pacific countries.
Therefore, the purpose of this report is to bring atten-
tion to how the EU and Indo-Pacific countries have
responded and continue to respond to four key areas
of strategy, regulation and international cooperation
within the digital order: 1) the protection of national
critical infrastructure (NCI) 2) harnessing AI 3) the pro-
tection of national innovation ecosystems 4) and coun-
tering cyber disinformation. These areas were selected
as they are particularly revelatory in terms of indicating
countries’ approaches to national resilience, competi-
tiveness, prosperity and security. For each of the four
domains, the analysis poses a number of questions in
order to draw out key aspects of countries’ approaches,
such as each country’s policy development; the govern-
mental authorities and stakeholders involved; domestic
debates over national security or prosperity; and part-
nerships and cooperation with other regional and inter-
national actors.
After examining EU responses in the four areas
of policy regulation, the report studies those of 41
countries, overseas territories and entities in the Indo-
Pacific, excluding China. To facilitate comparison, the
countries analysed are grouped into four subregions:
Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia, South Asia and Oceania.
The assessment of these countries’ responses relies on
primary government-policy documents and second -
ary sources. The analysis also draws on insights from
a workshop organised by the IISS, held in Singapore in
Spring 2023, which brought together government offi-
cials and leading experts in this field.
With regards to the four domains, this report finds
policy divergence in line with the examined countries’
diversity of economic growth and levels of technologi-
cal development and connectivity. Nevertheless, trends
can be identified for Indo-Pacific countries at the subre-
gional and regional levels, as well as similarities with
the EU in several of the areas considered.
Regarding NCI, the report highlights discussions
currently taking place at the minilateral level. These
include only a minority of Indo-Pacific states. On the
other hand, out of necessity the EU takes a supranational
approach, having made progress on transboundary
critical-infrastructure protection among member states.
The EU and Indo-Pacific countries could exchange best
practices for the protection of cross-border infrastruc-
ture and in order to enhance the resilience and protec-
tion of their NCI.
Concerning AI governance and the development of
national AI strategies, several countries in the Indo-
Pacific and the EU have made significant progress in AI
regulation in recent years and are seeking cooperation
in this domain with other governments at a regional
and international level while also pursuing a leader-
ship role in standard-setting. As several emerging and
developing countries in the Indo-Pacific lag behind in
regulating AI, this could provide an opportunity for EU
and more developed Indo-Pacific countries to share best
practices to facilitate the process towards AI regulation
and the development of national AI strategies. To ensure
wider inclusivity in the adoption of AI technology and

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
promote whole-of-society approaches to AI strategies,
the EU and like-minded countries in the Indo-Pacific
could build stronger ties with those countries predomi-
nantly concerned with prosperity (rather than security
or ethical concerns). Additionally, while some obsta-
cles to AI-strategy implementation derive from local
contexts, countries across the analysed regions seem
to share common challenges, such as unequal access to
data, data security and national government-systems
digitalisation, which points to the need for increased
cooperation in this sphere.
Protection of national innovation ecosystems is a
further area where the EU and Indo-Pacific countries
present both similarities and differences. Like the EU,
most Indo-Pacific countries participate in export-control
regulation, and some have indicated their commitment
to harmonise trade policies with international standards
or in minilateral agreements on restricting exports of
advanced technological components. On the other hand,
Indo-Pacific governments’ approaches to investment-
screening mechanisms are less homogeneous than that of
the EU’s supranational regulations, targeting a range of
different sectors but in some cases failing to thoroughly
address critical sectors. The EU and more developed
Indo-Pacific countries could redress the discontinuity
of foreign direct investment-screening mechanisms by
exchanging best practices with the regional countries
that take a predominantly prosperity-focused approach
to national innovation and critical-infrastructure devel-
opment, in order to help them develop national policies
that can both protect national innovation strengths and
support national socio-economic development.
Lastly, disinformation in the cyber domain is a phe-
nomenon faced by all EU and Indo-Pacific countries.
However, governments’ responses differ greatly, rang-
ing from fact-checking initiatives, legislation and the
involvement of civil society and the private sector, to
harsher measures like strengthening state control over
the online domain. A further difference between the
countries analysed is the origin of disinformation cam-
paigns and fake-news proliferation: these activities can
be traced back to domestic state and non-state actors
in some instances, and to foreign perpetrators in oth-
ers. To tackle this widespread and multifaceted phe-
nomenon, states must first agree a clear definition of
disinformation in the cyber domain. A definition could
be the building-block of the necessary legislative and
policy approaches to adopt effective countermeasures,
facilitating a joint effort that would encompass the best
practices from both the EU and Indo-Pacific countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 5
Introduction
The systemic rivalry between the United States and
China is increasingly expressed in the digital domain
on a global basis, whether through export controls,
competition over technological standards or national
industrial policies. European and Indo-Pacific states
currently find themselves in the middle of this com-
petition. The European Union perceives its strengths
as lying within the development of ethical technology
and as a regulatory powerhouse focused on ensuring
that digital and technological standards meet ethical
requirements. While EU member states still retain some
control over issues like investment-screening mecha-
nisms, the EU has passed – at an increasingly signifi-
cant rate – regulations that seek to protect European
digital and technological strengths. However, these
regulations do not always align with those of like-
minded countries, which, although in agreement with
the EU on many matters, still weigh the importance of
national security or prosperity differently in their policy
decision-making. There also remains friction between
the US and EU over certain approaches to technology
regulation and competition. Indo-Pacific states lack a
homogenous approach even more. This is unsurpris-
ing – the numerous countries that make up the region
vary widely in their economic growth, demographics
and levels of technological development and connectiv-
ity. States in Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia, South Asia
and Oceania all differ in their national strategies, regu-
lations and willingness to cooperate internationally on
issues related to technology and the digital order.
As such, there is a risk that viewing the global digi-
tal order solely through the lens of US–China relations
and their respective approaches to digital and techno-
logical strategy, regulation and alignment overlooks
the diverse set of responses from various countries in
Europe and the Indo-Pacific. This report’s purpose,
therefore, is to examine how the EU and individual
Indo-Pacific countries have and continue to respond
to four main areas of strategy, regulation and interna-
tional cooperation within the digital order: national
critical-infrastructure protection; harnessing AI; the
protection of national innovation ecosystems; and com-
batting cyber disinformation. This report takes a limited
approach to aspects of the ‘global digital order’ due to
limitations in scope. The four areas identified were cho-
sen due to their importance to national resilience, com-
petitiveness, prosperity and security.
In order to research these four topics for each coun-
try, the report examines the key policies and legislation
in place and their associated definitions, the primary
stakeholders involved and whether governments are
currently cooperating with like-minded counterparts
– in particular, European and Indo-Pacific states – in
these areas of policy development. The research relies
on primary government-policy documents and second-
ary sources where necessary. It also draws on insights
from a closed-door workshop with government and
expert participants from Europe and the Indo-Pacific,
which was organised by the IISS in Singapore in 2023.
The report examines European policy through the
lens of EU regulations in order to facilitate clearer
cross-examination. Though the authors of this report
acknowledge that in some instances EU regulation
only provides guidelines or voluntary mechanisms for
EU member states, these sources still indicate a gen-
eral policy trend across the EU’s 27 member states. For
the Indo-Pacific, the report examines 41 countries’ and
overseas territories’ policies related to the four catego-
ries, excluding China. These are grouped per chapter
into four subregions to facilitate inter-subregional com-
parisons: Northeast Asia, Southeast Asia, South Asia
and Oceania.
In Northeast Asia, the report focuses on Japan,
South Korea and Taiwan. In Southeast Asia, Brunei,
Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam are
examined. The report does not examine the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) as an entity, nor
other Indo-Pacific subregional or regional groupings, in
order to limit the report’s scope. An exception is made

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
for references to the participation of individual coun-
tries in minilateral groupings. In South Asia, the report
examines Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives,
Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Among the many dif-
ferences that characterise these countries, one is the
national approach to critical infrastructures. Oceania
refers to Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia,
Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru,
New Caledonia, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
The report is divided into three sections. Firstly, in
order to provide the European perspective, it examines
the EU’s response to these four areas of policy and reg-
ulation. It then compares developments between Indo-
Pacific subregions on the four areas in order to draw
conclusions about the variety of developments across
the region. It does this via four sections, each dedicated
to one area of policy and regulation examined in this
report. Lastly, it offers comparisons between Europe’s
and the Indo-Pacific’s current policy and regulatory
approaches to the global digital order in the policy areas
identified. The report also identifies gaps in current
cooperation, as well as convergences and divergences in
policy approaches, in order to help improve European
and Indo-Pacific digital cooperation.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 7
National Critical Infrastructure
How is National Critical Infrastructure
defined?
The process of defining critical infrastructure at an
EU-wide level began in 2004. Since then, the European
Union has provided a definition for national critical
infrastructures (NCIs) as well as for European Critical
Infrastructures (ECIs). The first is defined as ‘asset,
system or part thereof located in member states which
is essential for the maintenance of vital societal func-
tions, health, safety, security, economic or social well-
being of people, and the disruption or destruction of
which would have a significant impact in a member
state as a result of the failure to maintain those func-
tions’.1 The definition of ECI adds the clause that the
disruption of such infrastructure would impact at least
two member states. 2 The first pillar of the EU’s efforts
in ECI regulation is Council Directive 2008/114/EC on
European Critical Infrastructures, which only included
the energy and the transport sectors as critical infra-
structures. To this day, the Commission has proposed a
list of 11 critical sectors; member states are required to
identify critical entities for each sector by 2026. 3
Which part of government is responsible
for NCI policy and protection?
The approach adopted by the EU for the regulation
and protection of NCI is one that merges the efforts of
EU-designated authorities, member states and the pri-
vate sector. The Commission established the European
Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection
(EPCIP) in 2005.4 Today, this authority has been coupled
with the Critical Infrastructure Warning Information
Network and the European Reference Network for
Critical Infrastructure Protection (ERNCIP). 5 Member
states and private owners or operators are considered
to be the primary actors and bear ultimate respon-
sibility for protecting ECIs. Cooperation between
national authorities and the private sectors is therefore
recommended to enhance the resilience of critical infra-
structures.6 Member states are also required to cooper-
ate through bilateral schemes to ensure the protection
of transboundary critical infrastructures.
Do domestic debates about NCI lean more
towards prosperity or security?
Across the level of the EU Community, the definition
of critical infrastructures has been intertwined with
security concerns from the outset. The EPCIP was ini-
tially established to enhance the resilience of critical
infrastructures against terrorist threats. Today, the
spectrum of potential hazards has expanded to include
human-made threats, technological threats and natural
disasters, and debate remains heavily centred around
security priorities, with an emphasis on the protection
of the public.7
Heightened concern over dependencies on for-
eign sources, from non-liberal states in particular, and
potential supply-chain points of failure also influenced
the debate upon protecting critical infrastructure at the
EU and at the member-state level. For example, with
regards to European 5G national networks, the EU
published ‘The EU Toolbox for 5G Security’. 8 Though
the EU’s approach does not focus on any one country,
the purchase of and investment in European port infra-
structure by Chinese state-owned enterprises (SOEs),
Huawei’s rollout of 5G network technology, Chinese
private-sector acquisition of European businesses in key
strategic industries (such as robotics) and dependence
on Russia for energy supplies heightened European
concerns about potential state interference in European
critical infrastructure.9
Chinese investment in the EU’s digital
infrastructure and technology sectors
As shown in the IISS China Connects database,
Chinese SOEs and private-sector companies are heav-
ily invested in EU member states’ critical digital infra-
structure and strategic technology industries. From
1. Supranational Policy Approaches in the
European Union

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
2001–14, Chinese companies undertook 154 digital and
technology-related projects and investments in Europe,
ranging from national telecommunications-network
infrastructure, to data centres, to cooperation in aca-
demic programmes. Following China’s announce-
ment of its Digital Silk Road initiative, between 2015
and March 2023 this number rose to 440 new projects
and investments. However, a closer look shows that
new investments and projects by Chinese technology
companies in Europe have been declining since 2019.
Whereas in 2019, activity peaked with 124 new projects
and investments, in 2022 only 19 were recorded in the
IISS China Connects database. This decline in activity
is partly attributable to the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on global trade and investment. However,
the pandemic also heightened European governments’
criticism of Chinese foreign policy and concerns over
Europe’s over-reliance on Chinese technological sup-
ply chains.10 Since then, the EU has announced a policy
of de-risking from China.11
National AI Strategies
Do countries have national AI strategies?
EU member states (in addition to Norway and
Switzerland) signed the Declaration of Cooperation on
Artificial Intelligence in 2018, with the EU adopting the
Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence in the same
year and then reviewing it in 2021.12 Although the strat-
egy emphasised the need to strengthen cooperation on
AI at an EU-wide level, member states were still recom-
mended to develop their national AI strategies. Today, the
EU is proposing a new AI-regulations package, including
an updated version of the Coordinated Plan and, most
importantly, the first-ever legal framework for AI – the AI
Act – which is expected to be enacted by the end of 2023.
The proposed regulatory system aims to set requirements
and defining obligations for the application of AI, listing
AI categories following a risk-based approach.13
What are the main ambitions behind
national AI strategy?
With this newly proposed package, the EU aims to be
at the forefront of AI regulation in order to establish a
‘technology-neutral, uniform definition for AI that could
be applied to future AI systems’.14 The regulatory frame-
work prioritises the safety and fundamental rights of
people and businesses, while enhancing cooperation,
innovation and investments across the EU. The goal is to
ensure AI systems are ‘safe, transparent, traceable, non-
discriminatory and environmentally friendly’.15 Hence,
with this regulatory package, the EU aims to safeguard
key principles like inclusivity (extended to area of
growth), sustainability and accountability, as well as a
human-centred approach in the application of AI.16
Which part of government is responsible?
The Commission is responsible for the legislation of the AI
Act and the negotiation process is carried out through tri-
alogue meetings, bringing together European Parliament
representatives, the Council and the Commission.17 The
AI Act is conceived as a horizontal ‘legislative instrument
applicable to all AI systems placed on the market or used
in the Union’, and envisions national authorities enact-
ing it. According to the proposed legislation, a new body
should be established – the EU AI Office – in order to
support and harmonise the application of the AI Act and
coordinate cross-border investigations.18
Who are the main stakeholders in
developing and managing the strategy?
The EU promotes a whole-of-society approach along the
legislative process, as well as for impact assessment of
AI. The EU Parliament recommends a multistakeholder
governance approach. Stakeholders include the EU AI
Office, European standardisation organisations and
bodies and expert groups established under relevant
sectorial EU law, as well as partners in industry, small
and medium-sized enterprises, start-ups, civil society
and the research sector. 19 According to the AI Act, this
approach should enable cooperation beyond European
borders, promoting a model for global cooperation on
standardisation in the field of AI, which remains con-
sistent with EU values.20
Does the government seek partnership
with other countries?
The EU approach to AI regulation and implementa-
tion has consistently stressed the need for cooperation
both between member states and beyond. For example,

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 9
the EU is a member of the Global Partnership on AI
(GPAI) and the European Council has established the
Committee on Artificial Intelligence, which brings
together member states, the private sector, civil soci-
ety and regional and international organisations,
such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) and the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe, as well as non-
EU countries as observers (such as Japan and the US). 21
The EU has also engaged in bilateral partnerships with
international organisations, such as the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s ini-
tiative to support low-income countries develop their
AI strategies.22 International cooperation has also been
improved in the research sector, such as through the
EU–US Administrative Arrangement, which was signed
to enhance research on AI that addresses global chal-
lenges such as climate change, healthcare and natural
disasters, among others.23
What are the main challenges to execution
of the strategy?
Providing legal framework in such an innovative set-
ting is challenging for the EU. Besides this overarch-
ing issue, which itself is nested within the oft-changing
field of technological innovation, conceiving a func-
tioning enforcement structure is the main challenge to
the current AI regulatory package. The AI Act sets the
ground for an ecosystem of independent AI assessment.
Individuals and private organisations can submit com -
plaints about AI applications to the responsible authori-
ties. However, there is still a lack of clarity regarding
the mechanisms that will integrate the efforts of inde-
pendent assessments and member states’ authorities,
with the end result of merging them into a risk-based
regulatory framework at the EU level.24
The Protection of National
Innovation Ecosystems
Are export-control regulations in place?
In the EU, export-control regulations have been in
place since the late 1990s and have been continuously
strengthened in order to adhere to changing politi-
cal and legal landscapes. As such, the EU developed a
strategy against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) in December 2003 and the United
Nations Security Council (UNSC) adopted Resolution
1540 in 2004, which sought to prevent WMD prolifera-
tion to non-state actors.25 The first complete EU regula-
tion on export controls, Regulation (EC) No 428/2009,
was adopted in 2009 in adherence to the 2004 UN stand-
ards.26 Since then, this regulation has been amended,
the latest version being Regulation (EU) 2021/821 of the
European Parliament and of the Council, dating back to
May 2021, which not only takes into account the EU and
its member states’ international obligations, including
UNSC Resolution 1540, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention, but also commitments
agreed via multilateral export-control regimes, such as
the Australia Group, the Wassenaar Arrangement, the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile Technology
Control Regime.27 The EU’s export-control regulations
were further centralised on 20 October 2023, with the
publication of the first compilation of EU member
states’ national export-control lists. 28 This publication
enhances coordination of actions between member
states. Furthermore, export restrictions (sanctions) can
apply to dual-use exports and sensitive technology,
such as the restrictive measures imposed on Russia in
light of its actions in Ukraine since February 2022. 29
Lastly, some member states have also agreed to US-led
export restrictions against China on core technology
components, such as AI-related semiconductors.30
Who manages export-control regulations?
Export-control regulations in the EU remain nationally
enacted. The Commission, in close consultation with
member states and stakeholders, develops ‘guidelines
and/or recommendations for best practices to support
practical application of controls’.31 Member states estab-
lishing lists informed by these Commission guidelines, in
turn, ‘should inform the Commission and other member
states of such lists [as well as of] all decisions to refuse
an authorisation for an export for which an authorisa-
tion is required on the basis of a national control list’. 32
Hence, member states may allow the export of dual-use
items, as long as the export destination and object are
consistent with the EU’s General Export Authorisations.33

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Competent authorities may also provide global and indi-
vidual licences to one exporter that may cover exports of
one of multiple items to multiple countries or end users,
or to one consignee in a third country, respectively.34
What is considered in export-
control regulations?
Via Regulation (EU) 2021/821, the EU’s export-control
regime includes a list of dual-use items that could be used
in connection with a WMD programme or for human-
rights violations. Individual EU member states may
‘introduce additional controls on non-listed dual-use
items because of public security of human rights consid-
erations’.35 Since the publication of the first compilation of
member states’ national export-control lists, this list also
includes items such as machines that produce semicon-
ductors (the Dutch control list), quantum computing and
additive manufacturing devices (the Spanish control list).36
Are investment-screening mechanisms
in place?
Regulation (EU) 2019/452 established a framework for
the investment screening of foreign direct investment
(FDI) within the EU. However, national screening sys-
tems are not harmonised across EU member states.37 The
Commission plans to present a report to the European
Parliament and to the European Council by the end of
2023 with an evaluation of the functioning and effec-
tiveness of this regulation.38
Who manages export-screening
mechanisms?
Due to these national screening-system practices not
having been harmonised across the EU, member states
retain the competency to maintain, amend or adopt
FDI-screening mechanisms, as long as they are trans-
parent, protect sensitive information and do not dis-
criminate between non-EU countries. 39 Information on
new FDI-screening mechanisms must be shared with
the European Commission annually, as well as within
30 days of application. Regulation (EU) 2019/452 lists
cooperation procedures between the member states and
the European Commission and gives the Commission
the option to issue opinion – and member states, the
ability to issue comment – on these investments.40
Which technologies are considered in
investment-screening regulations?
Investment-screening regulations in the EU are based
nationally. As per Regulation (EU) 2019/452, the EU
Commission publishes an up-to-date list of national screen-
ing mechanisms of EU Member States and details what
each national mechanism applies to. The latest version of
this report has been updated as of 13 October 2023.41 Items
of critical importance in investment screening include criti-
cal infrastructure, critical technologies, supply of critical
inputs, such as energy and raw materials, access to sensi-
tive information and the ability to control information.42
Does the government seek partnership
with other countries?
The EU is currently engaged in a number of partnerships
with other countries in the area of investment screen-
ing and critical-infrastructure protection. As such, the
EU–US Trade and Technology Council (TTC) was estab-
lished in 2021 to cooperate on export controls, includ-
ing on information-sharing, legislative and regulatory
developments, good practices, industry compliance and
enforcement.43 Additionally, on 26 October 2021, the
Commission hosted an export-control dialogue with
the six Western Balkan countries to enhance their policy
alignment with the EU’s acquis Communautaire. 44 In the
FDI-screening domain, cooperation with like-minded
third countries and entities is encouraged. As such, the
EU supports the OECD’s ongoing work on investment
policies related to national security and public order. 45
Within the EU–US TTC, the virtual space FUTURIUM
provides room for businesses, public authorities, innova-
tors, researchers, civil society and policymakers to shape
the debate on investment screening.46
Countering Disinformation in the
Cyber Domain
What are the main concerns about
disinformation in the cyber domain?
In the cyber domain, election interference is a lead-
ing concern, with 73% of internet users worried about
online disinformation in the pre-election period for
the European Parliament in 2019, according to the 477
Special Eurobarometer survey. Cyber attacks, elite

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 11
capture of former senior politicians and the advance-
ment of polarisation in public debates are among the
main concerns within the EU. 47 Loopholes in existing
EU and national legislation and the lack of a common
strategy to challenge disinformation further complicate
the EU’s response to disinformation threats.48 However,
the EU lacks a common definition or authority to deter-
mine what counts as disinformation, as it is not directly
covered in the Digital Service Act or other secondary
legislation.49 Instead, fact-checking organisations, such
as CORRECTIV and Facebook/Meta, engage in the
evaluation of websites and advertisement in cyberspace
as well as countering disinformation within the EU. 50
Lastly, there is no explicit sanctions regime within the
EU that would sanction disinformation attacks.51
Who are considered the main perpetrators?
In 2022, the European Parliament’s Special Committee
on Foreign Interference in all Democratic Processes in
the EU, including Disinformation (INGE) conducted an
in-depth inquiry into malicious foreign powers’ activi-
ties within European cyberspace. It concluded that ‘for-
eign interference and information manipulation [was]
overwhelmingly carried out by Russia and China’.52
What resources have been dedicated to
countering disinformation?
To counter disinformation, the EU’s European External
Action Service (EEAS) established the EUvsDisinfo
flagship project within the EEAS East StratCom Task
Force in 2015. The team of journalists, communications
specialists and experts on Russia attempts to ‘forecast,
address, and respond to the Russian Federation’s ongo-
ing disinformation campaigns affecting the EU, its mem-
ber states, and countries in the shared neighbourhood’.53
Legislative frameworks and communications on
disinformation were passed in the following years. This
includes the April 2016 Joint Framework on countering
hybrid threats, the September 2018 Communication on
securing free and fair European elections, the September
2018 Code of Practice on Disinformation, and the
December 2018 Action Plan against Disinformation.
The 2018 Action Plan was adopted by the EEAS,
which prioritised improved detection, coordinated
response, private-sector mobilisation to tackle disin-
formation, raising awareness and empowering citi-
zens. It also included a Rapid Alert System to combat
disinformation, which was launched in March 2019.
The following year, the EU passed the Spring 2019
Communication on Tackling Online Disinformation: a
European Approach.54 Additionally, the EU introduced
an EU-wide ban on Russian propaganda outlets, such
as Sputnik TV and RT (Russia Today), in March 2022, in
reaction to disinformation on the Russian war of aggres-
sion in Ukraine.55
Does the government seek partnership
with other countries?
The EU cooperates with a host of governments on tack-
ling disinformation. There is strong cooperation with
Taiwan, given the latter’s experience with Chinese
disinformation. Additionally, the Council of Europe
adopted the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime,
allowing for sharing of best practices and creating rela-
tionships for cooperation on combatting cyber crime. 56
It comprises 68 countries, including EU member states,
countries of the EU’s Partnership for the Mediterranean
and Eastern Partnership, as well as Indo-Pacific states,
such as Australia, Japan, the Philippines and Sri Lanka,
with further signatories and countries invited to accede,
including Fiji, Kiribati, South Korea, New Zealand,
Timor-Leste and Vanuatu.57

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
National Critical Infrastructure in
the Indo-Pacific
How is National Critical Infrastructure
defined?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, Japan defines critical infrastructure
(CI) as ‘the backbone of people’s living and economic
activities formed by businesses providing services that
are extremely difficult to be substituted; If the function
of the services is suspended, deteriorates or becomes
unavailable, it could have a significant impact on the
people’s living and economic activities’.58 The 14 CI sec-
tors are information and communication services, finan-
cial services, aviation services, airport services, railway
services, electric-power supply services, gas-supply ser-
vices, government and administrative services (includ-
ing local government), medical services, water services,
logistics services, chemical industries, credit-card ser-
vices and petroleum industries. The Republic of Korea
(ROK) defines Critical Information Infrastructure (CII)
as ‘industrial control systems or information systems
related to national security, administration, defence, pub-
lic safety, finance, communications, transport, energy
and so on’ in the Act on the Protection of Information
and Communications Infrastructure. 59 Taiwan, as of
yet, does not have national legislation that defines criti-
cal infrastructure, and a recent conference of Taiwanese
legal and technology experts urged the government to
create legal definitions for these technologies, pass legis-
lation to protect them and promote greater cooperation
with the public and private sector. 60 Broadly speaking,
the Executive Yuan’s Guidance on National Critical
Infrastructure Security Defense divides National Critical
Infrastructure (NCI) into eight fields: energy, water
resources, telecommunications, transportation, banking
and finance, emergency aid and hospitals, central and
local governments and high-tech parks. 61 In September
2023, Taiwan’s national Cybersecurity Management
Law legislated that companies that provide critical infra-
structure and are government-owned or government-
funded must install a cyber-security chief.62
Southeast Asia
Among the Southeast Asian states, only the
Philippines and Indonesia feature a distinct definition
for NCI in their policy documents. The Indonesian
definition is based on threat, naming ‘Critical National
Infrastructures [as] assets, services, objects in the form
of physical or logical that involving the livelihood
of many people, national interests and/or revenue of
country that are strategic, in case of threats and attacks
cause more loss of lives, destabilizing political, social,
cultural and national economy as well as the sover-
eignty of the nation’. 63 The Philippines’ definition
includes a threat, a growth and a development angle:
‘Critical Infrastructures are…key infrastructures not
only for economic growth and development but also
as societal instruments for the conduct of everyday
activities. Hence, any threat posed against these infra-
structures would be threats to national security.’ 64 As
such, relevant sectors for protection range from gov-
ernment, transportation (land, sea and air), energy,
water, health, emergency services and disaster
response to banking and finance, telecommunications,
media and business-process outsourcing. 65 However,
most Southeast Asian countries do not have any pol-
icy documents on NCI, including Laos, Myanmar and
Vietnam. Brunei, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand
have definitions for National Critical Information
Infrastructure (NCII) and Cambodia is developing a
cyber crime law that will foreseeably mention NCII. 66
South Asia
Across the region, definitions of NCI are blurred and
often linked to the identification of specific critical sec-
tors or to the definition of NCII. The Nepalese govern-
ment provides a clear definition under its Cybersecurity
Policy, identifying NCI as the essential services that
2. National Policy Approaches in the
Indo-Pacific

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 13
underpin society and serve as the backbone of Nepal’s
economy, security and health. 67 India defines critical
sectors as those ‘whose incapacity or destruction will
have a debilitating impact on national security, econ-
omy, public health or safety’. 68 Bangladesh, India and
Pakistan have identified the sectors considered crucial
to economic and societal security in their respective
cyber-security strategies. 69 The three countries define
the six sectors that most countries point to as critical:
information and communications technology (ICT),
energy, finance, health, transport and water.70
While Bangladesh’s list is limited to these sectors
(with the addition of monuments and buildings as NCI),
India’s and Pakistan’s list goes further. The list of NCI
released by Indian authorities in 2015 added new sec-
tors to the previous version, such as defence, space, law
enforcement, security and intelligence, sensitive gov-
ernment organisations and critical manufacturing. For
the rest of the countries in the region, development in
this sphere is in progress. According to the Information
and Cyber Security Strategy of Sri Lanka 2018–2023, a
Critical Infrastructure Protection Policy currently being
developed to safeguard and protect national security.
Similarly, Bhutan’s first National Cybersecurity Strategy,
which would identify CII, is undergoing the cabinet’s
approval after the first draft was released in 2020.71
Oceania
In Oceania, both Australia and New Zealand have clear
definitions for NCI. In its 2023 Critical Infrastructure
Resilience Strategy, Australia defines critical infra-
structure as ‘those physical facilities, supply chains,
information technologies and communication net-
works, which if destroyed, degraded or rendered una-
vailable for an extended period, would significantly
impact the social or economic wellbeing of the nation,
or affect Australia’s ability to conduct national defence
and ensure national security’. 72 In New Zealand, the
Cyber Security Strategy defines critical infrastructure
as ‘physical and digital assets, services, and supply
chains, the disruption (loss, compromise) of which
would severely impact the maintenance of national
security, public safety, fundamental rights, and well-
being of all New Zealanders’. 73 In the meantime,
its Infrastructure Strategy calls for the need for the
definition to be ‘developed to align with international
best practice’. 74
In Kiribati, NCI is linked with cyber. 75 In the other
countries, when NCI is debated, it is mostly applied to
the security of ‘human-made physical and organisa-
tional structures…disruption [of which] can seriously
and negatively affect [the countries’] ability to func-
tion as a successful society’, including infrastructure
as diverse as schools, homes, medical facilities, roads,
ports, coastal protection, power, water and modern
telecommunications services, maritime connectivity,
ports, airports, energy, communication, utilities, sports
facilities and environmental-management infrastruc-
ture. Only Guam – an organised, unincorporated US
territory – and French Polynesia and New Caledonia –
overseas collectivities of France – focus on physical and
virtual assets.76
Which part of government is responsible
for NCI policy and protection?
Northeast Asia
In Japan, the Cybersecurity Strategic Headquarters
under the cabinet is responsible for NCI policy. The
National Center of Incident Readiness and Strategy for
Cybersecurity (NISC), the secretariat of the Cybersecurity
Strategic Headquarters, oversees coordinating cyber-
security policy and formulating key documents, such as
the Cybersecurity Strategy and the Cybersecurity Policy
for Critical Infrastructure Protection. 77 The NISC was
established in 2015 and was formerly called the National
Information Security Center, which was founded in 2005.
At the working level, NISC and respective ministries
for each CI cooperate for CI protection. The ministries
in charge of CI include the Financial Services Agency;
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications;
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare; Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry; and Ministry of Land,
Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. In the ROK,
the Critical Information Infrastructure Protection
Committee under the prime minister’s office is responsi-
ble for NCI policy. The implementation is split between
two organisations. The National Intelligence Service
oversees the public sector, and the Ministry of Science
and ICT oversees the private sector. 78 Under Taiwan’s

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Cybersecurity Management Law, the Executive Yuan
can stipulate guidelines that restrict ICT product usage
that might endanger national cyber security. 79 It is also
given the power to announce a list of banned brands of
ICT products and services that relevant entities cannot
procure or use. The Administration for Cyber Security
within the Ministry of Digital Affairs manages the
implementation of the Cybersecurity Law. 80 Taiwan’s
National Information and Communication Security
Taskforce within the Executive Yuan oversees the joint
national cyber-security defence mechanism and links
the central government responsible entity with the
relevant industry entities, as well as the national-level
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, a Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT) and the Security
Operation Center (SOC).81
Southeast Asia
In Cambodia, Indonesia and the Philippines, the respec-
tive departments responsible for ICT oversee NCI
(including cyber in Cambodia) policy and protection. 82
In Indonesia, no structures for strategic and tactical
protection of NCI have been developed; bodies for NCI
protection (ID-SIRTII, GovCert and ID-Cert) have been
created only at the operational level.83 For those countries
that feature definitions for NCII in their respective cyber
strategies, the relevant cyber-security agency is respon-
sible for NCII policy and protection, complemented by
the Ministry of Transport and Infocommunications in
Brunei, the Ministry of Homeland Affairs in Singapore
and the Digital Economy Promotion Agency in Thailand.
South Asia
Most South Asian countries have set up departments
and units to strengthen the resilience and protection
of their digital infrastructure. Despite the different
pace in recognising and defining CII, national gov-
ernments are investing in building up government
mechanisms for CII protection. The Indian govern-
ment established the National Critical Information
Infrastructure Protection Centre in 2014, which
released the consequent Guidelines for the Protection
of National Critical Information Infrastructure. 84 In
the same year, Bangladesh set up an ICT division
within the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and
Information Technology. More recently, Pakistan has
constituted the Cyber Governance Policy Committee,
as part of the Ministry of Information Technology and
Telecommunication, which released the National Cyber
Security Policy 2021.85
For other countries in the region, the process is
ongoing, having designated units and working groups
within their governments but not yet having approved
national strategies. Bhutan is combining the efforts of
the Bhutan Computer Incident Response Team (BtCIRT)
and the Ministry of Information and Communications’
Department of IT and Telecom to define CII and develop
national strategies. Nepal created a draft of the National
Cybersecurity Policy released in 2016, highlighting the
government´s commitment to strengthening NCI pro-
tection. Sri Lanka put in place the Digital Infrastructure
Protection Agency, which, to this day, is still more
focused on increasing connectivity than implementing
regulations.86 The Maldivian government has not yet
dedicated a working unit to CII protection.
Oceania
In Oceanian countries, no single entity is generally
responsible for NCI policy and protection. In Australia,
the Minister for Home Affairs has regulatory and
authorisation responsibilities, granted by amendments
to the Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018, which
are supported by the Cyber and Infrastructure Security
Centre.87 In New Zealand, the National Security Group
of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
published the Cyber Security Strategy 2019. 88 The
National Cyber Security Centre and the Government
Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) share respon-
sibility for implementing the 2019 strategy. 89 The
Infrastructure Commission, which is an Autonomous
Crown Entity, is in charge of the Infrastructure Strategy.90
In the Pacific Islands, various ministries are respon-
sible for NCI policy and protection. Palau and Vanuatu
focus on the hard security of infrastructure; in the for-
mer, periodical condition assessments are conducted by
the Bureau of Public Utilities, while in the latter, protec-
tion is provided by the National Security Forces. The
Ministry of Home Affairs assures NCI protection in Fiji,
while in Kiribati the CERT contains the different policy
understandings and priorities for all four examples.91

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 15
Do domestic debates about NCI lean more
towards prosperity or security?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, Japan seems to have put more
emphasis on prosperity than the ROK. In the latter, the
government can implement NCI policy without major
pushbacks from the private sector as the state operates
most NCIs centrally. 92 On the other hand, in Japan the
private sector is more involved in NCIs. The domestic
debate on how it could balance prosperity and security
was at its most heated when the government passed
the Economic Security Promotion Act in 2022, which
included the security of core infrastructure. During
the Diet session on the passage of this act, economic
prosperity and business activities were two of the
main concerns. Due to Taiwan’s extensive experience
of cyber-security attacks on its NCI, domestic debate
there leans heavily towards security considerations and
Taiwan increasingly requires private-sector companies
to improve their security practices.93
Southeast Asia
Discourses in Southeast Asian countries on NCI seem to
be split between those countries seeing their potential
for prosperity, and those that approach NCI through a
security prism and focus on the risks attached to a limited
protection of NCI. The first group of countries includes
Indonesia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam. In Myanmar,
infrastructural development is seen as a great enabler
for trade, mobility, productivity and, subsequently,
economic growth. 94 Massive scale-ups of the electrical
grid under the National Electrification Plan, as well as
road-network developments and other infrastructural
investments, are to be undertaken under the Myanmar
Sustainable Development Plan.95 Nonetheless, the mili-
tary coup on 1 February 2021, coupled with the COVID-
19 pandemic and ongoing internal conflict, has led to a
deteriorated economic situation, with the World Bank
asserting that ‘nearly a decade of progress on poverty
reduction has been undone’. 96 Political volatility and
uncertainty continue to limit Myanmar’s development
of critical infrastructure. Conflict, electricity outages,
trade and foreign-exchange restrictions and frequent
changes to rules and regulations also continue to disrupt
business operations.97 In Indonesia, the government has
undertaken dialogues with the private sector and has
reformed its regulations to create a more conducive
environment for private-sector participation in infra-
structural development, which is seen as a key priority
for the government and highlighted by a 51% increase
in government infrastructure spending in 2015.98
The second group of countries includes Brunei,
Malaysia and Singapore. Infrastructure and tech-
nology therewith are set on par with ‘major power
dynamic, regional and global instability, terrorism and
violent extremism [...] and natural disasters ’.99 In the
Philippines and Cambodia, the discourse seems to be
split evenly. As part of its counter-terrorism strategy,
in 2017 Singapore passed the Infrastructure Protection
Act to protect NCI, complimented by the 2021 Strategy
on Secure Critical Infrastructure, both highlighting the
urgency of protection against possible threats.100
South Asia
In many South Asian countries, the debate about NCI
revolves around the potential to increase connectivity in
the country and to address development challenges. In
the Maldives, for example, national infrastructures are
still very fragmented, given the nature of the country’s
territory. As such, the concern about security does not
feature in the domestic debate. For many South Asian
governments, the priority is the protection of NCI from
natural disasters, rather than the exposure to security
threats. On the other hand, India and Nepal integrate
security objectives with the development of their NCI.
Oceania
In Oceania, both Australia and New Zealand seek
to balance security and prosperity, with Australia
working collaboratively with stakeholders, includ-
ing critical-infrastructure owners and operators. 101
The Cyber Security Strategy 2019 states that ‘strong
cyber security practices result in businesses remain-
ing productive, profitable and transparent to cus-
tomers and shareholders’. 102
In the Pacific Islands, domestic debates about NCI
fall into four categories. Firstly, there are those states
that focus on security and third-entity threats to their
NCI, such as Fiji, Guam (through its US connection),

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Vanuatu, and to some extent, Kiribati and Tonga.
Secondly, states such as French Polynesia, Nauru, Palau
and Tuvalu view their infrastructure security as fac-
ing harm from climate change and national disaster.
Thirdly, debates in Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Papua
New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Timor-Leste and, to
some extent, Kiribati, Tonga and Tuvalu, revolve mostly
around the positive impacts of infrastructural devel-
opment for their economic development and human
prosperity. Lastly, Cook Islands recognises both the
challenges and advantages of technological develop-
ments. As such, its Cyber Security Review states that
‘if the government wants to continue harnessing the
development potentials of digitization, it must ensure
citizens’ wellbeing, national emergency responses and
critical infrastructure’.103
What is the exposure to Chinese-
technology investments according to IISS
China Connects?
Northeast Asia
Northeast Asian states, even with attentive govern-
ments in place, remain highly exposed to poten-
tial threats from Chinese technologies. Japan is
exposed to Chinese 5G networks, telecommunica-
tions, e-commerce, fintech (financial technology),
data centres and fibre-optics networks. In Japan, the
only cancelled project related to 5G networks was
Huawei and NTT Docomo’s large-scale 5G field trial.
The ROK has allowed Chinese 5G technology in its
national network rollout. The ROK has, however,
taken the approach of segmenting its national net-
work from any network used by the United States
Forces Korea. No 5G project in the ROK has been
cancelled. Taiwan has long been wary of Chinese-
origin ICT technology and has not integrated this
into its ICT networks. However, some Taiwanese
energy installations of national importance do use
Chinese surveillance technology to secure their sites,
and civilians use Chinese technology. Nevertheless,
the greatest threat to Taiwan’s NCI is its proximity
to China, and the risk of physical and cyber-security
interference regardless of the origin of Taiwan’s digi-
tal infrastructure and technology.
Southeast Asia
All Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
countries are exposed to Chinese telecommunications
and 5G networks, except for Laos and Vietnam in the
case of the latter. Indonesia, Myanmar, Thailand and
Vietnam also cooperate with China on fibre-optics
cables. No projects in any of the countries have been
halted or cancelled.
South Asia
In a region that India has traditionally considered to be
its strategic backyard, Beijing’s technological outreach
in South Asia has been modest when compared to other
regions. China’s technology investments have increased
overall over the past decade but have seen a recalibration
in recent years. Pakistan, being the recipient of vast Chinese
investments in its digital sector, represents an exception
to the block of countries analysed. Nevertheless, some
common trends can be observed among the countries in
the region. South Asian countries have been exposed to
Chinese investments in the sector of fibre-optics network
technology, with three projects in Pakistan (Peace, Africa-1
and Pak-China Cable), the Maldives Sri Lanka Cable and
the cross-border internet cable with Nepal. Smart-city pro-
jects have been carried out in several regional countries, for
example, in Sri Lanka’s logistical hub in Colombo Port.104
Further initiatives include a safe-city project in Lahore,
Pakistan, and several data centres across the region.
In all South Asian countries – except for Bhutan –
Chinese companies have been involved in the delivery of
3G, 4G and 5G networks over the past 15 years. Despite
Huawei’s predominance in most of these countries, in
India, telecommunications company ZTE was a more
significant investor in the sector, although both com-
panies’ presence in India has shrunk dramatically since
2020. Overall, the Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka have
been more receptive to Chinese technological invest-
ments, but Bangladesh less so. On the other hand, the
Bhutanese, Indian and Nepalese markets appear to be
less exposed to Chinese technological outreach.
Oceania
In Oceania, Australia is highly exposed to Chinese tech-
nologies and investments. Such technologies in Australia
include security-information systems, telecommunications,

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 17
data centres, e-commerce, fintech, 5G networks, power gen-
eration, and fibre-optics network technology. Moreover,
China has acquired several ports and invested in raw min-
erals in Australia. The only project that was cancelled due to
security concerns was the majority acquisition of Ausgrid,
which is categorised as energy-transmission infrastructure.
New Zealand is less exposed to Chinese technologies but
the exposure still includes telecommunications, fintech and
e-commerce. New Zealand cancelled Huawei’s 5G trial
with telecommunications company Spark.
Only a small number of Pacific Islands states are
exposed to Chinese technology investments, such as
Vanuatu with an e-governance collaboration, Solomon
Islands on telecommunications and Papua New Guinea
on 5G, telecommunications, e-governance and fibre
optics. No projects in any of the countries have been
halted or cancelled.
National AI Strategies
Do the countries in question have national
AI strategies in place?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, both Japan and the ROK have
national AI strategies. Japan published its first AI
Strategy in 2019 and has updated it since then. 105 The
latest strategy is the AI Strategy 2022, published in April
2022.106 The ROK published the National Strategy for
Artificial Intelligence in 2019. 107 In June 2023, Taiwan’s
Executive Yuan published its second national AI plan,
having published its first in 2018.108
Southeast Asia
Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam have national
AI strategies in place.109 Malaysia and the Philippines each
launched national AI roadmaps in 2021 and Cambodia
created a national AI assessment in 2023 on which it plans
to build its AI strategy.110 Conversely, Brunei, Laos and
Myanmar do not have any national AI strategies in place.
South Asia
Among South Asian countries, India is the only one to
have approved a national AI strategy, while Pakistan and
Bangladesh have proposed drafts. India published its
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence in 2018 after
several rounds of discussion.111 Bangladesh has released
its National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence for 2019–
24.112 In 2022, the Pakistani Ministry of Information and
Telecommunication published the draft of its National
Artificial Intelligence Policy, which was met with criti-
cism due to the lack of a whole-of-society approach
along the drafting process .113 In Bhutan and Nepal,
there is a domestic debate on the need for their respec-
tive governments to develop and implement national
AI strategies. Sri Lanka and the Maldives have digital
strategies but lack a national approach to AI.
Oceania
In Oceania, Australia already has an AI strategy
and New Zealand has laid groundwork for its own.
Australia has the AI Action Plan, which is a key com-
ponent of its Digital Economy Strategy. 114 Although
still not in a complete form, New Zealand suggests
six cornerstones for a future strategy: ‘Uniquely New
Zealand’, ‘Human centred and trusted AI’, ‘Investment
in AI economy’, ‘Preparing the workforce’ and ‘Our
place in the world’, with all of the above supported by
‘enabling foundations’.115
Among the Pacific Islands states, French Polynesia,
New Caledonia and Guam have access to AI strategies
thanks to their respective connections to France and
the US; however, these strategies are not specifically
dedicated to these collectivities or territories. Kiribati
has highlighted a need for AI development in its 2019
National ICT Policy; Timor-Leste has a Strategic Plan
for Digital Development , and Solomon Islands has a
National E-commerce Strategy.116
What are the main ambitions behind
national AI strategies?
Northeast Asia
Japan, the ROK and Taiwan have somewhat similar
AI objectives, focused on improving industrial com-
petitiveness and harnessing the positive aspects of AI
for economic growth and addressing demographic
changes. However, Japan also seeks address natural dis-
asters through AI while Taiwan seeks to use it to com-
bat climate change. Japan’s AI Strategy 2022 lays out

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
its five strategic objectives: (1) to deal with imminent
crises, such as pandemics and natural disasters; (2) to
develop and attract human resources for the AI era; (3)
to improve industrial competitiveness; (4) to establish
technological systems; and (5) international cooperation
in the AI field. 117 The ROK’s ambitions are ‘to achieve
digital competitiveness, create huge economic effect of
AI, and improve quality of life for people by 2030’. 118
Taiwan’s initial four-year Taiwan AI Action Plan in 2018
sought to attract global top-tier technology companies
working on AI, like Google and Microsoft, to Taiwan.
Taiwan’s second National AI Plan aims to increase the
value of Taiwan’s AI industry to over USD8.16 billion,
focusing on developing talent and industry, improving
work environments and increasing Taiwan’s technolog-
ical influence and participation in overseas markets. 119
In general, the government is currently examining how
AI could impact Taiwan’s society, resolve labour short-
ages, address issues such as a rapidly ageing society
and achieve net-zero greenhouse-gas emission goals.120
Southeast Asia
All six Southeast Asian countries’ AI strategies are
development- and prosperity-related with ambitions of
transforming their respective infrastructure, workforce
and economic models. In this regard, AI shall assist
Vietnam’s Fourth Industrial Revolution, or lead to ‘inclu-
sive sustainable industrial development’ in the case of
the Philippines.121 Additionally, all countries focus on
research and development, particularly on AI talent. 122
This focus on prosperity through AI is not surprising.
Recent studies, including the 2020 EDBI and Kearney
study, assess that by 2023, AI technologies could unlock
USD1 trillion to Southeast Asian GDPs.123 Indonesia, the
Philippines and Singapore further focus on regulatory
developments, on a global scale and in partnership with
third countries. Only Singapore’s AI strategy clearly out-
lines the need for the country to adapt to new and dis-
ruptive technologies.124 As such, Singapore’s AI vision
for 2030 is best outlined via the following statement:
‘Domestically, our private and public sectors will use
AI decisively to generate economic gains and improve
lives. Internationally, Singapore will be recognised as a
global hub in innovating, piloting, test-bedding, deploy-
ing and scaling AI solutions for impact’.125
South Asia
Among the three countries in South Asia that have
approved or proposed AI strategies – Bangladesh, India
and Pakistan – different stands on digitalisation and AI
adoption can be observed. One difference emerges from
the slogans that India and Bangladesh have circulated
to promote their AI strategies, respectively #aiforall and
‘ AI for Innovative Bangladesh’.126 While for India the
emphasis is on society and connectivity, for Bangladesh
the goal is innovation and development. These concepts
are cemented in the respective AI strategies. From the
text of the Indian AI strategy, it appears that the gov-
ernment aims to leverage AI not only to foster economic
growth, but also to increase social inclusion and address
a number of issues related to AI implementation, such
as ethics and privacy.127
On the other hand, in recent years Bangladesh has
made striking developments towards digitalisation
and promotes AI as an ‘accelerator’ of this process, one
which will transform the country into a technologi-
cally advanced state. 128 The Pakistani AI draft strategy
seems to encompass both stands in its strategic objec-
tives, stressing Pakistani society’s need to evolve effi-
ciently in the age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.129
Technological competitiveness boosted by AI is pre-
sented throughout the document as intertwined with
the livelihoods of Pakistani citizens.
To some degree, the list of sectors prioritised by
governments in their national AI policies reflects the
national approach to AI strategy. Indian policy has the
most limited list of areas of intervention and is focused
on sectors with greater societal impact, such as educa-
tion, healthcare, agriculture and food security, mobil-
ity and – a unique case – smart cities. 130 Pakistan’s and
Bangladesh’s lists of drafts add fields closer to their
economic-development goals, such as the finance sector,
trade, commerce and manufacturing. 131 Among South
Asian countries, Pakistan is the only one to include
the defence sector, echoing other countries beyond the
region like China, France and the US.
Oceania
In Oceania, increasing productivity and problem-solving
seem to be the biggest objectives. Australia’s strategic goal
is to establish itself as ‘a global leader in developing and

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 19
adopting trusted, secure and responsible AI’.132 Australia
aims to drive productivity and prosperity, create jobs,
solve current real-world problems and grow new busi-
nesses and sectors by developing emerging technologies,
including AI.133 New Zealand also has objectives focused
on increasing productivity and developing new products
and markets. The country also aims to solve cross-border
problems through international collaboration.134
For those Pacific Islands states that have digital
strategies (Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste), the
economic potential of digital technologies is the main
driver for development in this domain.
Which part of government is responsible
for AI strategy design and implementation?
Northeast Asia
In Japan, the Cabinet Office is responsible for AI strategy
design, with various ministries in charge of implementa-
tion. These include the Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology; the Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Industry; the Ministry of Health, Labour and
Welfare; the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport
and Tourism; the Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications; and the Ministry of the Environment.135
Similarly, in the ROK, a pan-government committee is
responsible for AI strategy, and the implementation is
divided into respective ministries.136 The key difference
between the two countries’ approaches is that the ROK’s
has a clear role for the Ministry of National Defense in
establishing an intelligent-defence platform and establish-
ing a defence-intelligence data centre and developing the
intelligent supporting command centre, whereas in Japan,
no MoD personnel are involved in AI-strategy design,
etc.137 Taiwan’s Ministry of Digital Affairs is largely in
charge of Taiwan’s national AI strategy and is mandated
to establish an AI-evaluation centre, which is intended to
draft acts for AI regulation and provide a legislative basis
for AI usage. Cross-agency meetings are held to consider
AI-generated context and AI-related ethics.138
Southeast Asia
Among Southeast Asian countries, Singapore is the
only one to have a dedicated ‘National AI Office’ under
the Smart Nation and Digital Government Office. 139
In Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand, ministries
related to technology and/or innovation have designed
the AI strategies. In Vietnam, most ministries seem to
have been involved in design and implementation.
South Asia
Looking at the three countries that have pioneered AI
strategies in the South Asian region, India is the only
case where a specific committee was created within the
government to develop an AI programme. In fact, the
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology allo-
cated USD54 million to create the National Institution
for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), responsible for
the research and development of new and emerging
technologies in India. 140 Mandated by the government
in 2019 to develop an AI strategy, NITI Aayog delivered
it after collaborating with leading experts in the sec-
tor and stakeholders. In Bangladesh, the government
has appointed the Information and Communication
Technology Division to draft a national AI policy. 141 In
Pakistan, the draft of national AI strategy was released
under the Ministry of Information Technology &
Telecommunication. In the draft it is stated that the min-
istry aims to set up a national AI fund.142
Oceania
In Australia, while the Department of Industry, Science
and Resources is leading the coordination of AI policies,
other departments are also involved in the process. In
New Zealand, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and
Employment is leading the process with The AI Forum,
a purpose-driven NGO.143
Though Kiribati does not have an AI strategy, it has
established the position of Chief Information Security
Officer, following its 2019 Cyber Strategy.144
Who are the main stakeholders in
developing and managing the strategy?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, both Japan and the ROK emphasise
the importance of engaging with various stakeholders.
Specifically, both countries focus on the private sector as the
primary actor to lead innovation. In addition, academia is
key in both countries’ AI strategies, given the urgent need

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
for AI talent to be nurtured.145 In Taiwan, a variety of stake-
holders are consulted through specially created channels.
For example, Taiwan’s National Science and Technology
Council has launched a Taiwan AI Center of Excellence,
which serves as a platform to centralise the efforts by vari-
ous government agencies to formulate the rules governing
AI applications and to facilitate collaborations with inter-
national partners on AI projects.146 Taiwan’s government
also supports incubator projects to help develop start-ups
in Taiwan working on AI-technology application.147
Southeast Asia
Among Southeast Asian countries, Singapore and the
Philippines have a unique approach to AI that features
all echelons of society. 148 This is a product of the expan-
siveness and ambition of their AI strategies, which feature
not only goals around domestic prosperity, research and
development and talent acquisition, but also ambitions to
become AI hubs and regulatory front runners. Thailand
has a national AI committee that is the driver behind the
development of its AI strategy. This body was appointed
in August 2022 following Thailand’s acknowledgement
that it was lagging behind other regional states in terms of
providing a vision on how to harness the powers of AI.149
Development in Vietnam is driven mainly by ministries
and institutions related to the research and development
of AI, as is the case in Indonesia, where the government
and tech firms cooperate.150
South Asia
India identifies stakeholders as research organisations,
trade bodies, the tech-related private sector and venture-
capital firms. 151 The national AI strategy stresses the
need for the government to strengthen ties and boost
cooperation with these actors. Similarly, in Bangladesh,
the stakeholders involved in the AI-strategy develop-
ment are several government ministries, academia and
the tech-related private sector. Bangladesh delineates a
roadmap, available in its national AI policy, with specific
development milestones for the years to come. Among
these is a goal to expand the range of stakeholders into
an international network of partnerships that cooperate
with Bangladesh on AI development and application.152
On a different note, in Pakistan’s policy the definition
of the stakeholders cooperating for a national approach
to AI is less clear. Throughout the document, academia
and private industry are identified as stakeholders and
as the key partners with which the government should
engage to boost the digital ecosystem in Pakistan. The
national AI Policy even includes a few cases of success-
ful public-private cooperation, such as National Center
of Artificial Intelligence (NCAI).153
Oceania
In Oceania, both Australia and New Zealand take
a whole-of-society approach. In its AI Action Plan,
Australia emphasises coordination with businesses,
researchers and the community. New Zealand’s work-
ing vision also involves citizens, academia, start-ups
and industry.154
Does the government seek partnership
with other countries in aligning AI strategy?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, countries are actively seeking mini-
lateral and multilateral partnerships both within the
region as well as with other countries. One of the most
significant developments in the region was the Camp
David Summit held in August 2023. The three attend -
ing countries – Japan, the ROK and the US – commit-
ted to trilateral cooperation in AI.155 The three countries
are Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) members, which is the key plat-
form for analysing AI policy developments, and found-
ing members of the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI),
which is a critical body for policy implementation. 156
Japan led the G7 Hiroshima Summit in May 2023, which
called for establishing global standards for AI and
established the Hiroshima AI Process. 157 Japan is also
part of the effort to use AI to make progress on the UN
Sustainable Development Goals. 158 Bilaterally, Japan is
also strengthening AI cooperation with partners, such
as the EU, the United Kingdom and the US. US–Japan
cooperation is at an advanced stage, and the two coun-
tries are discussing AI cooperation both at a high and
a working level. 159 Japan and the EU confirmed their
cooperation in AI research and governance. 160 Japan
and the UK cooperate to establish AI principles and
governance under the Digital Partnership. 161 The ROK

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 21
is also strengthening cooperation and policy coordina-
tion with the US and the EU. 162 Following disruptions
to supply chains caused by the COVID-19 pandemic,
Western governments have increased their collabora-
tion on technology with Northeast Asian actors. This
has largely centred around semiconductors and strat-
egies to ‘friendshore’ Taiwanese manufacturing to
Europe, Japan and the US. However, in some instances,
European governments have agreed to deepen their
cooperation on scientific research with Taiwan, includ-
ing on AI.163
Southeast Asia
Among Southeast Asian countries, Singapore seeks
not only to develop its national AI, but also to be at the
forefront of regulation and standard-setting in inter-
national organisations, such as the World Economic
Forum, the OECD, the International Organization for
Standardization and the International Electrotechnical
Commission.164 It cooperates on bilateral and multi-
national AI research, including with France (as does
Vietnam). Vietnam’s top three international priorities
are the implementation of bilateral and multilateral
scientific-research cooperation programmes and pro-
jects on AI; the exchange of experts, researchers and
students; and the improvement of institutions to attract
foreign direct investment (FDI) and encourage multi-
national high-tech corporations to build centres for AI
research, development and application in Vietnam. 165
Indonesia has encouraged investments from Chinese,
Japanese and Korean tech firms in its domestic AI land-
scape, while also attempting to balance an influx of
Chinese and American investments.166
South Asia
The Indian government has tried to promote AI regula-
tion at both the regional and international level. With its
national AI strategy, India hopes to be able to define a
roadmap as a model for other emerging and developing
countries. At the same time, India engages in partnerships
with other like-minded countries at the international
level as a founding member of GPAI. The next GPAI sum-
mit will take place in New Delhi in December.167 Within
the framework of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue
(Quad), India also cooperates with Australia, Japan and
the US in the domain of new technologies and AI.168 The
Quad aims to promote a human-centric approach to AI,
in compliance with human rights and shared demo-
cratic values.169 While India plays an active role at the
international and multilateral tables, other countries in
the region have engaged in bilateral partnerships. The
Maldives, for instance, has cooperated with Singapore
on an AI project for healthcare, while Pakistan looks at
China’s AI-strategy model, with the collaboration on the
Sino-Pak Center for Artificial Intelligence.170
Oceania
In Oceania, both countries seek partnerships and coordi-
nation with other countries. Australia and New Zealand
are founding members of GPAI. 171 Australia’s key
partners in AI are the AUKUS countries. The AUKUS
Advanced Capabilities Pillar (Pillar Two) pursues US–
UK–Australia trilateral cooperation in cutting-edge
technologies. In May 2023, the first AI and autono-
mous trial was held. 172 Most recently, in October 2023,
Australia launched new AI cooperation with the US for
research into AI solutions for societal challenges, includ-
ing pandemics and droughts. 173 The private sector is
also active in the US–Australia cooperation in AI, which
includes Microsoft’s investment in AI infrastructure in
Australia.174 New Zealand also showed interest in join-
ing Pillar Two of AUKUS.175
What are the main challenges to execution
of the strategy?
Northeast Asia
Japan recognises the challenges in its AI Strategy 2022,
such as the delay in digitalisation and use of AI (par-
ticularly in government), the lack of AI talent, the lack
of trust in AI and the narrow scope of AI application.176
The ROK states that the main challenges include a
lack of data available to companies and individuals
and a closed distribution system, a technology gap
between leading countries, a potential gap between
the existing legal system and new technologies, a low
level of investment, a lack of AI talent, deteriorating
competitiveness in traditional industries, an ageing
system of government, and potential inequal benefits
from the spread of AI. For Taiwan, the challenge will

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
be navigating political sensitivities as it deepens its
cooperation with European partners on AI. This last
one will particularly be true considering the United
States’ heightened export controls on AI-related chips
to China.
Southeast Asia
In Southeast Asia, with the exception of Singapore,
investments in AI solutions lag behind other Indo-
Pacific regions. As such, the Philippine’s per-capita
investment is less than USD0.01; in Vietnam, it is
USD0.03; in Indonesia, it is USD0.20; in Malaysia,
USD0.23 and in Thailand it is USD0.37, compared to
Singapore’s USD68 per capita, or the United States’
USD155 per capita. 177 Additionally, the Philippines’
internet quality and speed are half the global average
for mobile internet in 2020 (17.83 megabits per second
(Mbps) vs 39.18 Mbps), and just over one-quarter of
the 2020 average when it comes to fixed broadband
(27.07 Mbps vs 87.84 Mbps). 178 Additionally, Thailand
does not currently have a regulatory framework for AI
use.179 In Vietnam, the lack of funding for AI develop-
ment, as well as the lack of a strong AI expert com-
munity, leads to a heavy reliance on FDI and the
outsourcing of Vietnamese and Vietnam-based AI and
tech companies. 180 Singapore’s regulatory and invest-
ment climate for AI development far outweighs that of
the other ASEAN countries. In a next step, in June 2023
the government identified the following six generative
AI risks – hallucinations, privacy and confidential-
ity, accelerated disinformation, copyright challenges,
embedded biases, and impersonation and deepfakes –
and subsequently set up a foundation to develop tool-
kits to mitigate these challenges in cooperation with
the open-source community. 181
South Asia
The challenges that Bangladesh, India and Pakistan
face in the implementation of their respective national
AI strategies are similar and can be grouped into three
macro-categories. The first is the lack of an enabling
data ecosystem. In Bangladesh, for example, the limit
is the lack of available AI technology and the lack of
the necessary infrastructures. 182 The second challenge
shared by the three countries is the lack of clarity over
privacy, security and ethical regulations. As a way for-
ward, both Bangladesh and Pakistan suggest turning
towards models adopted by countries that have made
progress in this sphere. Their interest, however, lands
on different actors: Bangladesh points to an EU General
Data Protection Regulation approach, whereas Pakistan
leans towards models implemented by China, Estonia
and the UK.183
Lastly, a common concern for India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh when looking at the integration of AI tech-
nologies in their economic sectors is the risk of employ-
ment disruption. In countries where the manufacturing
sector is a pillar of the national economy, the spread of
automatised work might have a major impact on their
workforce, if not accompanied with a necessary process
of reskilling. Another specificity that Bangladesh and
Pakistan point to as a challenge is digital literacy and
the need to boost it a societal level. On the other hand,
India highlights the low intensity of AI research as one
of its current challenges, with a research community
confined to a few academic institutions and meagre
investments coming from the private sector.184
Oceania
In Oceania, both Australia and New Zealand see
themselves as well-positioned to lead in the AI field.
Australia notes its leading position in academia and
strategic fields of AI, such as computer vision, deep
learning, field robotics, neural networks and machine
learning. Another strength comes from the whole-of-
economy settings, including a competitive, market-
driven economy with free and open trade, strong
digital infrastructure and an established skills pipe-
line.185 New Zealand refers to the quality of the gov-
ernment, a collaborative culture, multiculturalism,
good infrastructure, a high education level, an open
business environment, the level of research and the
ability to commercialise research. 186 That being said,
challenges remain in areas such as forming a compre-
hensive AI strategy and fully collaborating with the
private sector.
In most Pacific Islands states, digital infrastructure
and technical expertise are lacking and their develop-
ment is not yet a priority for the mostly economically
less prosperous governments.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 23
Protecting National
Innovation Ecosystems
Are export controls in place?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, both Japan and the ROK have export
controls in place. The Foreign Exchange and the Foreign
Trade Act provides the legal framework for export controls
in Japan. The ROK’s relevant laws in export controls include
the Foreign Trade Act, the Defense Acquisition Program
Act, the Nuclear Safety Act and the Prohibition of Chemical
and Biological Weapons Act.187 Taiwan is not a member
of the Australia Group, the Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR), the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) or
the Wassenaar Arrangement.188 However, Taiwan’s Foreign
Trade Act provides the legal basis for managing the trade
of Strategic High-tech Commodities and has a ‘catch-all’
control measure to strengthen end-user and end-uses con-
trols. Taiwan adopted the EU’s Community Regime for
Control of Exports of Dual Use Items and Technology and
the Common Military List of the EU in 2009.189
Both Japan and South Korea actively seek partnerships
with other countries in export controls. In May 2023, Japan,
with other G7 countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
the UK and the US) and the EU, announced a joint state-
ment which affirmed the importance of export-controls
cooperation on critical technologies.190 One of the most
recent major developments in the region was the joint
statement at the Camp David Summit in August 2023,
which emphasised the importance of the US–Japan–ROK
trilateral cooperation on export controls.191
Taiwan has independently stated that it will coop-
erate with US export controls on AI-related semicon-
ductors to China. 192 It has also followed US and EU
regulations on export controls. It also holds dialogues
with foreign countries on trade and investment that
include discussions on FDI-screening and export con-
trols. For example, the EU and Taiwan held a second
annual Trade and Investment Dialogue in 2023. 193
Southeast Asia
All Southeast Asian states – except Cambodia and Laos
– have export-control regulations. However, these regu-
lations mostly concern agricultural and environmental
products. Only Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines
and Thailand have implemented – in 2002, 2010, 2015
and 2019, respectively – strategic trade-management
acts, including export-control regulations based on the
US Commerce Control List. 194 Singapore has imple-
mented regulation in line with both the US Commerce
Control List and the EU’s control list. Myanmar’s
government has export-control regulations, also for
arms and ammunitions, though not adopted in coop-
eration with any third country or international entity.195
Vietnam requires exporters to obtain a licence for chem-
icals, explosive pre-substances and industrial explo-
sives.196 In 2022, Taiwan’s Ministry of Economic Affairs
expanded the scope of export restrictions to 57 products
that fell within Export Control Classification Number
Categories 3–9. In 2023, the list was further expanded
to cover new products in categories 0–2, in line with EU
and US regulations. 197 Though Malaysia has modelled
its export-control regulations on the EU’s control list, it
is not a member of any of the four multilateral regimes
governing export controls for conventional arms and
dual-use goods and technologies (the Australia Group,
the Wassenaar Arrangement, the MTCR or the NSG).
South Asia
All the countries in the South Asian region have export
controls in place, although they vary greatly in restric-
tions, formulations (law and regulations in place) and
responsible authorities. Several countries maintain their
respective export policies, which have been enforced for
decades, and regularly provide revised versions. India
has the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation)
Act of 1992, integrated with the Foreign Trade Policy
of 2015–20.198 Additionally, a new Foreign Trade Policy
2023 has been announced. 199 Likewise, Bangladesh
updates the 1950 Import and Export (Control) Act every
three years (most recently in a 2021–24 version) and Sri
Lanka recently amended its 1969 Imports and Exports
(Control) Act.200
Pakistan relies on the more recent Export Control
on Goods, Technologies, Material and Equipment
related to Nuclear and Biological Weapons and their
Delivery Systems Act (2004), since then amended
five times, with the latest version released in 2022. 201
Bhutan and the Maldives, similarly, have published

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
export-control policies in recent years under the cus-
tom general regulations. 202
India is the only regional country participating in bilat-
eral and multilateral fora and is inscribed in international
control mechanisms. The country first joined the MTCR
in 2016, joining the Wassenaar Arrangement one year
later, signalling a strong commitment to multilateral coop-
eration on export regulations and control over dual-use
technologies. More recently, in 2023, India strengthened
its ties with the EU, establishing the EU–India Trade and
Technology Council. This bilateral platform is forged over
a ‘common interest in ensuring security, prosperity and
sustainable development based on shared values’ and
aimed at strengthening strategic cooperation among two
like-minded actors, against the background of ‘rival gov-
ernance models’.203 It entails three working groups respon-
sible for: trade, investment and resilience of supply chains
for strategic technologies; green and clean energy tech-
nologies; and digital governance and digital connectivity.
Pakistan, although not a member of multilateral-
regulation frameworks, has over the years made efforts
to align with international export-control regimes.
According to the Pakistani government, export-
control lists have been harmonised with Wassenaar
Arrangement guidelines, the NSG, the MTCR and the
Australia Group.204
Oceania
In Oceania, both Australia and New Zealand have
export controls in place. Australia’s export controls are
regulated by legislation, including the Defence Trade
Control Act, the Customs Act and the Weapons of Mass
Destruction (Prevention of Proliferation) Act.205 In New
Zealand, the Customs and Excise Act provides the legal
basis for its export controls.206
Among the Pacific Islands states, only Cook Islands,
Palau, Samoa, Tuvalu and Vanuatu have indigenous
export-control regulations. 207 French Polynesia, New
Caledonia and Guam feature these as well to a cer-
tain extent, as an extension of French and US policies,
respectively. Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia,
Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste and Solomon
Islands do not have export-control regulations.
The US recognised Cook Islands as an independ-
ent state on 25 September 2023, which will allow for
‘expansion of military and diplomatic relations’, which
date back to the Second World War.208
In Oceania, there is a high level of coordination on
export controls. In June 2023, the Five Eyes countries –
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the UK and the US –
committed to coordinating export-control enforcement.209
Who manages export-control regulations?
Northeast Asia
In Japan, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
manages export-control regulations. In the ROK, the
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy is in charge of
export controls. In Taiwan, the Ministry of Economic
Affairs’ Bureau of Foreign Trade manages the list and
decides whether or not to grant export licences.210 A num-
ber of other entities help regulate commodities, includ-
ing the Industrial Development Bureau, the Atomic
Energy Council, the Ministry of National Defense, the
National Police Agency and the Ministry of Finance.211
Southeast Asia
In Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand,
sub-sections of the respective ministries of trade
and commerce manage export-control regulations. 212
As such, the Singapore Customs organisation fulfils
these tasks, whereas in Malaysia it is the Strategic
Trade Secretariat. In Thailand it is the Department
of Foreign Trade. In the Philippines, the Department
of Trade and Industry is the executive and technical
agency for the management of the strategic-goods
trade, while the National Security Council’s Strategic
Trade Management Committee has the central author-
ity over export-control regulations. In Myanmar, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs regulates arms and ammu-
nitions exports. 213
South Asia
The government units and agencies responsible for
export-control regulations vary across South Asian
countries. India and Pakistan have created ad-hoc
units, although each have taken a different approach.
Pakistan’s Strategic Export Control Division falls under
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, whereas the Indian gov-
ernment has created the Interministerial Cooperation

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 25
Group, which operates at the intersection of various
ministries and government departments.214
In Bangladesh and Nepal, export controls are man-
aged by Bangladesh’s Ministry of Commerce and
Nepal’s Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supplies,
which Nepal has coupled with a dedicated Trade and
Export Promotion Centre. In Bangladesh, export con-
trols are managed by the Ministry of Commerce. In
Nepal they are managed by the Ministry of Industry,
Commerce and Supplies, which it has coupled with
a dedicated Trade and Export Promotion Centre. 215
Similarly, in Sri Lanka and Bhutan, export controls
fall under the responsibility of their finance ministries.
Like Nepal, Bhutan has introduced an additional unit,
the Department of Revenue and Customs.216 In Bhutan,
government agencies enforce export restrictions. For
example, arms and ammunition restrictions are under
the control of Royal Bhutan Police or aircraft systems
under the Civil Aviation Authority. 217 The Maldives,
under the Custom Act of 2011, has mandated a sepa-
rate legal entity responsible for managing import and
export controls.218
Oceania
Australia’s and New Zealand’s export controls
are respectively managed by the Defence Export
Controls in the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade, depending on the
nature of the exports.
Although French Polynesia and New Caledonia
have the right under the French division of compe-
tency law for collectivities to define their own security
and defence policies, the relevant French authori-
ties seem to be in charge of managing export-control
regulations. 219 This applies to the US and Guam in a
similar fashion. Though export controls for dual-use
or strategic goods do not apply in the other Pacific
Islands states, in Tuvalu the minister responsible for
customs defines policies on exports of other goods; in
Samoa, the Central Bank is tasked with ensuring that
revenues from exports are repatriated to the island;
the Ministry of Health and Medical Services controls
Cook Islands’ exports; and in Vanuatu, the respective
ministry under which category the item to be exported
falls regulates exports. 220
What is considered in each country’s
export-control regulation?
Northeast Asia
Japan controls exports of both arms and dual-use
items.221 The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy
controls defence, nuclear-related, dual-use and other
strategic items in the ROK.222 Taiwan’s legislation covers
dual-use and military end-use commodities, software
and technology.223
Southeast Asia
Among Southeast Asian states with export-control regu-
lations in place, in Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore
and Thailand, military and dual-use goods are included
in export-control regulations. 224 In Myanmar, arms and
ammunitions complement the list of agricultural, min-
eral, marine and forestry products. 225 Vietnam requires
exporters to obtain government permits for goods
‘subject to export control in accordance with interna-
tional treaties to which Vietnam is a contracting part-
ner’ as well as chemicals, explosive pre-substances and
industrial explosives.226 In Indonesia, rice, animal and
bird products, wildlife, diamonds, tin, as well as metal
scraps, are under export controls. 227 In Brunei, export
controls are exercised on items such as rice, sugar, tim-
ber, prawn refuse and palm oil.228
South Asia
In its national export policy, India provides a list of
restricted goods under the acronym of SCOMET: special
chemicals, organisms, materials, equipment and tech-
nologies.229 Pakistan has dedicated a specific legislation
to ‘Export Control on Goods, Technologies, Material and
Equipment related to Nuclear and Biological Weapons
and their Delivery Systems’.230
Both Bhutan and Bangladesh include arms and
ammunitions in their national export policies. While
Bangladesh’s list is then limited to petrol and edible
goods, Bhutan adds uninhabited aircraft systems/
drones and wireless and remote sensing telecom-
munication, and broadcasting equipment. On the
contrary, dual-use technology and arms and ammu-
nitions are not included in the export-control lists of
the Maldives, Nepal or Sri Lanka, which enumerate

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
mostly edible, animal, agricultural and pharmaceuti-
cal products.
Oceania
Australia regulates military and dual-use goods and
technology in the items on the Defence and Strategic
Goods List (DSGL). The DSGL covers 1) defence and
related goods, software and technologies that are
designed or adapted for use by the armed forces, and
non-military goods that are inherently lethal, and 2)
non-lethal dual-use goods, software and technolo-
gies.231 Similarly, New Zealand controls exports on
items on the New Zealand Strategic Goods List, which
includes controlled military and dual-use goods, soft-
ware and technology.232
The export regulations of French Polynesia, Guam
and New Caledonia are in line with either the EU’s
strategic-goods list – including dual-use and military
items – or the US Export Administration Regulations, for
the case of the US military facilities on Guam. Among
the other Pacific Islands states that have (indigenous)
export-control regulations, none feature goods listed
by the US or the EU. In Tuvalu, sensitive government
data is included, whereas Vanuatu’s policies revolve
around cultural items, agricultural goods and those that
contribute to climate change, such as ozone-depleting
substances.233 Cook Islands, whose economy is heavily
reliant on fishing, has export-control regulations on fish;
and Samoa features a regulation by which all export rev-
enues must be repatriated to the island.234
Are investment-screening mechanisms
in place?
Northeast Asia
Both Japan and the ROK have investment-screening
mechanisms in place. The principal laws in this area are
the 1949 act (for Japan), and the 1998 act (for the ROK).
Both countries are moving in the direction of tightening
investment screening to protect sensitive technologies.
One of the major shifts in Japan’s screening was the 2019
amendment of the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade
Act. As a result, foreign investors must notify the govern-
ment in advance when they are acquiring ‘1% or more’
of Japanese stocks in the designated sectors (previously,
the threshold was ‘10% or more’).235 The ROK enacted the
Regulations on Operation of Security Review Procedures
for Foreign Investment, which requires foreign investors
to indicate whether they are acquiring de facto control of
a company and whether a purchase is related to certain
criteria which pertains to national security.236 While under
President Tsai Ing-Wen’s leadership Taiwan has sought to
attract investment, it has also tightened its FDI-screening
mechanism since 2022 in order to prevent Chinese firms
circumventing US export controls.237 The 1997 Statute for
Investment by Foreign Nationals governs FDI in Taiwan,
while the Measures on Investment Permits for people of
the Mainland Area specifically outlines restrictions for
nationals from the People’s Republic of China. 238 There
is no guidance on the interpretation of ‘national security’
when deciding on foreign investment cases, and invest-
ments are decided on a case-by-case basis. 239 Reaction
from the general public could also influence a decision.240
No monetary or market share-based threshold is required
to trigger a foreign-investment review.241
Southeast Asia
Indonesia (with the exception of technological goods),
Laos, Myanmar, the Philippines and Vietnam have
investment-screening mechanisms. 242 However, in
Indonesia, the government has shifted its approach from
a negative-investment list to a positive-investment list.
Now only six sectors are closed or restricted to invest-
ment from domestic and foreign entities, which are all
linked to illegal drugs, gambling, endangered fishing,
chemical production for warfare or related to climate
change. The change was made due to the fact that the
negative-investment list was deemed to dampen FDI and
economic growth. Thailand and Malaysia have foreign-
ownership restrictions in banking, insurance and tele-
communications. However, there are no national-security
screening mechanisms.243 In Brunei and Cambodia, there
are no provisions for investment screening. Without
a formal foreign-investment screening-mechanism in
place, Singapore currently maintains oversight and con-
trol over FDI by way of legislative restrictions, though
its conditions are generally favourable to foreign direct
investment. Licensing regimes work through seeking
approvals from sector regulators for any foreign invest-
ment in energy, telecommunications, broadcasting, the

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 27
domestic media sector, financial services, legal services,
public accounting services, ports and airports and prop-
erty ownership.244
South Asia
Among South Asian countries, most have regulatory
frameworks to screen foreign investments that might
hinder national security. India has an FDI-screening
mechanism in place and, in 2020, the government issued
a note adding a further layer to investment restric-
tions.245 With this amendment, the government imposed
the need for prior authorisation by the government for
investments coming from non-resident entities located in
countries that share land borders with India. This action
was aimed at ‘curbing opportunistic takeovers/acquisi-
tions of Indian companies due to the current COVID-19
pandemic’.246 The regulation applies to all sectors and all
sizes of investment.247
Pakistan has investment-screening mechanisms
for FDIs. To preserve public safety and national secu-
rity, it enforces restrictions on some investment sec-
tors, such as arms and ammunitions, high explosives
and radioactive substances. It also puts a threshold on
foreign ownership for investments in specific sectors,
including airlines, banking, agriculture and the media.
Furthermore, Pakistani law imposes restrictions on
investments coming from Indian and Israeli citizens. In
Nepal, foreign investments are regulated by a combi-
nation of several laws, such as the Foreign Investment
and Technology Transfer Act of 2019, rather than by
national-security screenings. Similarly, Bangladesh and
Sri Lanka apply restrictions to both foreign ownership
(e.g., only 60% in telecommunications in Bangladesh)
as well as sectors (e.g., arms, ammunition and defence
equipment). Bhutan relies on the least structured
screening mechanism, with only a ‘negative list’ of sec-
tors subjected to control. The Maldives, on the other
hand, has the national Foreign Direct Investment Policy
of 2020, which restricts investments in specific sectors,
such as manufacture of chemical products.
Oceania
In Oceania, both Australia and New Zealand
have investment-screening mechanisms in place.
Respectively, the Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers
Act 1975 and the Overseas Investment Act 2005 pro-
vide the basic investment-screening frameworks. 248
Investment-screening mechanisms are in place in Cook
Islands, Marshall Islands, Palau, Vanuatu, and partly in
Fiji. Though there is no screening mechanism in place in
Samoa, there are sectors where 100% ownership is only
possible for Samoan citizens, and certain sectors are sub-
ject to foreign ownership restrictions (such as fishing,
manufacturing, services, and sanitation).249However, the
categories comprised in investment screenings across
the Pacific Islands countries listed above do not restrict
foreign investment in technology sectors. Rather, where
investment-screening mechanisms are in place, they seek
to protect indigenous industries, such as agriculture,
marine resources, tourism and retail. Nonetheless, in the
Marshall Islands the law on investment screening is not
consistently enforced, allowing, for example, for foreign
investors in Marshall Islands to enter partnership agree-
ments with local Marshallese businesses. 250 It is uncer-
tain whether this is also the case across the other Pacific
Islands states.
Who manages investment-
screening regulations?
Northeast Asia
In Japan and the ROK, the Ministry of Economy, Trade
and Industry and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Energy respectively manage investment screening. In
Taiwan, the Investment Commission of the Ministry of
Economic Affairs manages foreign-investment reviews
with cooperation from relevant government agencies. The
Deputy Director-General of the National Security Bureau
(NSB) plays an outsized role as the NSB’s comments carry
the most weight in any decision on foreign investment.
Southeast Asia
In 2021, Indonesia established a new Ministry of
Investment that manages investment-screening reg-
ulations. 251 Likewise, in 2023 Malaysia established
an FDI Monitoring Committee under the Ministry
of International Trade and Industry. However, this
was only to monitor memoranda of understand-
ing and FDI flows; this committee undertakes no
screening. 252 Both Myanmar and the Philippines have

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
been trying to attract more FDI. In Myanmar, this is
done through the Myanmar Investment Commission
(MIC) under the auspices of Myanmar’s Directorate
of Investment and Company Administration. It was
re-established in 2016 (having originally been estab-
lished in 1994) to ‘carry out investment promotion,
facilitation, and coordination’. 253 Additionally, the
MIC assures that investments abide by the 2016
Myanmar Investment Law and can decide in which
sectors investments are to be protected, restricted
or prohibited. 254 Since 2012, there has been a push
to transform the MIC from a government-appointed
body to an independent board; however, thus far
there has been no reform progress. In the Philippines,
the Philippine Board of Investments seeks to attract
more foreign direct investment. This is done in coop-
eration with the Inter-Agency Investment Promotion
Coordination Committee and the National Economic
and Development Authority, which manage screen-
ings. The Philippines’ National Security Council also
participates in decisions on foreign direct invest-
ment screening. In Singapore, as there is no official
investment-screening mechanism, but instead, restric-
tions by ways of legislative and licensing regimes, the
main regulatory bodies controlling FDI are linked to
the area of investment. As such, in the case of real
estate, the Singapore Land Authority, the Housing
and Development Board and the Jurong Town
Corporation are involved. The Info-communications
Media Development Authority is the regulatory
body for broadcasting and domestic media; whereas
the Monetary Authority of Singapore is the regula-
tory body for financial services and banking. 255 On 6
November 2023, however, the Singaporean govern-
ment proposed the Significant Investments Review
Bill, which will regulate investments by local and for-
eign investors in certain entities. 256
When it comes to the management of investment-
screening mechanisms, Vietnam has the greatest
involvement of the authorities, requiring approval by
the People’s Committee in the province in which the
project would be located, in addition to approval by the
National Assembly of the Prime Minister for large-scale
projects, such as investment in airports, seaports, casi-
nos, oil and gas exploration, telecommunications and
networks infrastructure. 257 Hence, in Vietnam, invest-
ment screening is a regional and geographic issue, more
so than a domain-specific process (see Singapore) or a
centralised one (see Indonesia), given the lack of one
single agency dedicated to investment screening.
South Asia
India and the Maldives have set up a similar process
to screen foreign investments, with two routes for FDI
approval: ‘automatic’, or ‘government’. For investments
in India, under the government route, the Department
of Promotion of Industry and International Trade must
approve, along with the ministry with jurisdiction over
the restricted sector.258
Pakistan and Bangladesh combine a dedicated
authority and government bodies to manage their
screening mechanisms. In Pakistan, the leading author-
ity responsible for screenings is the Board of Investment
and approval is also granted by the cabinet and prime
minister. Likewise, Bangladesh has set up a dedi-
cated agency to approve investments, the Investment
Development Authority, along with the ministries
responsible for restricted sectors. 259 Lastly, Nepal dedi-
cates two authorities to manage investment controls:
the Department of Industry (in charge of screening
investment proposals) and the Investment Board Nepal,
chaired by the prime minister.260
Oceania
In Australia, the Foreign Investment Review Board in
the Trade and Investment Commission manages invest-
ment screening. 261 In New Zealand, the treasury is in
charge of investment screening.262
On Vanuatu, the Vanuatu Investment Promotion
Authority operating under the Ministry of Tourism,
Trade, Commerce & Ni-Vanuatu Business man-
ages investment-screening regulations. 263 In Marshall
Islands, the Office of the Registrar of Foreign
Investment, which was established when the
investment-screening law entered force, together with
the Ministry of Natural Resources and Development’s
Trade and Investment Division and the Office of the
Attorney General, manage investment-screening regu-
lations.264 In Palau and Cook Islands, foreign investors
need to submit information on the level of investment,

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 29
investors’ nationality, percentage of ownership and the
duration of the investment respectively to the Foreign
Investment Board or Cook Islands Investment Board,
and in Palau additionally to the ministry in charge
of the sector in which the investment will flow. 265 In
Samoa, the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labor
manages investment-screening regulations.266
What technologies are considered in
investment-screening regulations?
Northeast Asia
Japan has been adding new sectors to the ‘core sec-
tors’, for which prior notification is required for general
investors to purchase stocks. On top of the initial 12
industries (weapons, aircrafts, space, nuclear facilities,
dual-use technologies, cyber security, electricity, gas,
telecommunications, water supply, railway services and
oil), Tokyo added pharmaceuticals and medical devices
in 2019, metal-mining businesses for critical minerals in
2021 and nine more industries (fertilisers, permanent
magnet, engineering machinery and industrial robots,
semiconductors, storage battery, natural gas, metal and
minerals, vessel parts, and metal 3D printers) in 2023.267
The ROK controls foreign investments in defence
industries and what it deems National Core
Technology (NCT). 268 The ROK completely bans FDIs
in nuclear-power generation, and the restricted tech-
nology sectors include certain forms of power gen-
eration and telecommunications. 269 In 2022, the ROK
enacted the Special Act to Protect National Strategic
Industries, which requires stricter investment screen-
ing in NCT. NCTs include electrical and electronics,
automobile and railway, steel, shipbuilding, nuclear
power, ICT, space technology, biotechnology and
machine and robotics. 270
Taiwanese regulation limits foreign ownership in cer-
tain sectors to a specific percentage, such as in renewa-
ble energy, railway transport, freight transport by small
trucks, pesticide manufactures, real-estate develop-
ment, brokerage, leasing and trading. 271 Sectors closed
to foreign investment on national-security grounds
include public utilities, power distribution, natural gas,
postal service, telecommunications, mass media, and
air and sea transportation.272
Southeast Asia
In the Philippines, military-related industries, cyber
infrastructure and pipeline transportation technologies
are included in investment-screening regulations. 273 In
Thailand, regulations include business services, electric-
ity and telecommunications; in Vietnam, television, bank-
ing, telecommunications, transportation, e-commerce
and ICT are included.274 Singapore’s decision to propose
investment-screening legislation was made with the
aim of bolstering Singapore’s economic resilience and
national-security interests. Analysts such as OCBC Bank
chief economist Selena Ling stated that the Singaporean
government is likely to take a highly calibrated approach
to defining ‘critical entities’ in order to limit any potential
negative impact on foreign investment and the economy.275
South Asia
According to India’s FDI Policy, an array of technologies
falls under the restrictions of investment-screening mech-
anisms.276 This includes both technology, such as cable
networks or military technology of the defence indus-
try, and information technology, as for e-commerce, and
digital media. Among the sectors restricted by screening
regulations, many featured have the potential for dual-
use applications. Among these, civil aviation, satellites
(establishment and operation), telecommunications and
railway infrastructures (including signalling systems).
Among other regional countries, restrictions on invest-
ments in the defence sector feature in all national regula-
tions – with the exception of the Maldives – including for
arms, ammunition, defence equipment, military vehicles
and aircraft. Telecommunications and media are the other
sectors most subject to screening mechanisms; such mech-
anisms are in place in Bangladesh, the Maldives, Nepal
and Pakistan, the only exception being Sri Lanka. Similar
to India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka screen investments in
industries that might serve the development of dual-use
technologies, such as aviation and infrastructural projects.
Oceania
Australia controls foreign investments in ‘national secu-
rity business’. 277 This includes businesses responsible
for critical-infrastructure assets, which are defined in
the Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018. 278 These
critical-infrastructure assets include sectors such as

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
energy, communications, data storage and process -
ing, financial services and markets, water and sewer-
age, healthcare and medical, higher education and
research, food and grocery, transport, space technology
and defence. 279 New Zealand controls investments in
strategically important industries and high-risk critical
infrastructures, such as telecommunications infrastruc-
ture; entities with access to, or control over, dual-use or
military technology; critical direct suppliers to the New
Zealand Defence Force, the GCSB and the New Zealand
Security Intelligence Service; and systemically impor-
tant financial institutions and market infrastructure.280
With the exception of Palau, among the Pacific
Islands states no technology is considered in
investment-screening regulations. In Palau, every for-
eign investment is screened.281
Disinformation in the Cyber Domain
What are the main concerns about
disinformation in the cyber domain?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, besides common concerns, each coun-
try has specific and different threats in mind. In Japan,
disinformation has not significantly threatened national
security. While disinformation has not posed a signifi-
cant threat to Japan’s national security so far, officials
recognise scenarios where disinformation could lead
to social discord, such as in the event of a crisis in the
Taiwan Strait, or a natural disaster. In the ROK, the great-
est concern is not only external disinformation, but also
internal disinformation that may undermine democracy.
As political rivalries are intense in the ROK, it has been
the case that government intelligence and the military
has been involved in influence operations. Taiwan has
been a major target for misinformation and disinforma-
tion campaigns that aim to undermine trust in Taiwan’s
democracy and governance and bring Taiwan closer to
the mainland via political co-optation.282
Southeast Asia
For regional governments, disinformation emanating
from domestic opposition groups is one of the main
concerns. This is the case, for example, in Brunei,
Cambodia, Indonesia, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand
and Vietnam. 283 Election interference by third coun-
tries, especially China, has been reported in Malaysia
and Cambodia, as well as Chinese disinformation
directed at the Philippines’ territorial claims on the
South China Sea. 284
South Asia
Across South Asian countries, the proliferation of dis-
information, misinformation and conspiracy theory
is a common trend. ‘Fake news’ appears to be a chal-
lenge for all regional countries, particularly in relation
to political parties and electoral campaigns, and often
intensifies during the build-up to elections. In India,
concern is rising over fake news circulating on digital
platforms, which has resulted in episodes of physical
violence. 285 Disinformation thrives in recurring areas,
common among several countries – such as COVID-
19, ethnic or religious minorities – as well as interna-
tional actors. Former Pakistani prime minister Imran
Khan, for instance, shared his belief in a conspiracy
against his government, allegedly orchestrated by
the US. The circulation of this allegation on Twitter
resulted in a rally in Islamabad in 2022 in support
of the then-prime minister. 286 Overall, weaponising
fake news and disinformation may have a damaging
impact not only on domestic politics but also on inter-
state relations. For example, an EU DisinfoLab report
unveiled a 15-year-long disinformation campaign by
Indian actors to discredit Pakistan and influence the
UN and the EU. 287
In Bangladesh, disinformation campaigns ahead
of elections are a persistent issue. In September 2022,
when the government called for ‘good’ commenta -
tors to counter ‘propaganda’, many articles suddenly
appeared online praising the government, signed by
authors who appeared to be made-up profiles. This
happened again in September 2023, with many of the
unknown authors also promoting anti-Washington and
pro-Beijing narratives. 288 In Nepal, the public’s expo-
sure to online threat is particularly concerning, with
more than nine out of ten social-media users exposed
to disinformation (according to a study by the Center
for Media Research) and over 50% of internet users tar-
geted by online threats.289

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 31
Oceania
Australia’s and New Zealand’s greatest concern is inter-
ference in their electoral processes. Disinformation by
domestic and foreign actors is reported to have had an
influence on the 2019 Australian federal election.290 New
Zealand articulates that disinformation ‘is impacting
liberal democracies worldwide, eroding trust in insti-
tutions, and our ability to respond to it as a society is
being tested’.291
Among the Pacific Islands states, most disin-
formation in the cyber domain has been linked
to (domestic) political misinformation, especially
during pre-election periods, as well as COVID-19.
However, countries have been struggling with sev-
eral further categories of threats: third entities rig-
ging international legislation, or the proposal by
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to
introduce a carbon levy at the International Maritime
Organisation in July 2023, or the shipping industry
lobby paying off Cook Islands’ UN negotiator; the
pushing of anti-Western narratives, such as by China
in Solomon Islands following their 2021 bilateral-
security pact; and cyber attacks on critical (military)
infrastructure on Guam or the pirating, downloading
and distributing of copyrighted works digitally, in
French Polynesia’s capital, Pape’etē, in 2022. 292
Which actors are considered the
main perpetrators?
Northeast Asia
While not stating so officially, Japan assumes China
to be the main instigating actor in any future Taiwan
Strait crisis and is therefore concerned about Chinese
information warfare in the event of a crisis or conflict.
In the ROK, more weight is put on domestic perpetra-
tors. In 2021, then president Moon Jae-in’s government
tried to pass a bill that would punish the media for
publishing fake news, which could potentially have
undermined freedom of speech. 293 Although the bill
was postponed, it showed Seoul’s growing concerns
about the impact of disinformation on domestic poli-
tics. In Taiwan, disinformation and misinformation
is largely propagated by Chinese Communist Party-
linked entities.
Southeast Asia
Among Southeast Asian states, the reported perpe-
trators are domestic opposition groups and China.
According to various studies by Freedom House and
other analysts, Chinese influence in Southeast Asia's
media landscape is conducted through various means.
This ranges from promoting positive narratives, con-
necting with influencial individuals, and hacking.
Depending on the recipient and the goal: in Myanmar,
positive propaganda about China is disseminated
in local networks; in Malaysia, 90% of the Chinese-
language media is owned by a media company with
strong links to China; in Cambodia in 2018, China
hacked institutions relevant to the country’s electoral
system; in the Philippines, China is active in spreading
disinformation about The Philippines’ territorial claims
in the South China Sea.294 In Singapore, a 2019 Institute
for Strategic Research/French Defence College report
found that China had been highly active in spreading
disinformation. The Singaporean government, how-
ever, did not acknowledge the findings and even dis-
paraged the report’s findings, highlighting the sensitive
and complex nature of Singapore–China relations. 295 In
Thailand, the government controls most of the media,
fostering anti-separatist messaging during the 2019 mil-
itary coup.296
South Asia
In many instances of disinformation campaigns in
South Asian societies, the perpetrators are reported to
be domestic actors. In India, for example, the prolifera-
tion of fake news can often be traced back to actors close
to political parties, which seek to promote self-serving
narratives.297 In many instances, fake news is initially
disseminated by government actors, but bot-generated
messages on social media and networks of volunteers
close to political parties perpetuate and amplify the
subsequent disinformation campaign. 298 Although the
threat in these cases can be considered to be internal,
some external actors could see the potential to build on
existing fake news and ignite disinformation. China,
for example, could see a market for disinformation
campaigns in India. Similarly, in Nepal, where online
threats are a major concern, allegations have been made
that China orchestrated some of the disinformation

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
32 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
campaigns circulating in the country.299 In Pakistan, the
perpetrators of disinformation campaigns are thought
to be both state and non-state actors, whereas in
Bangladesh, the government is thought to be responsi-
ble for the deliberate spread of disinformation online.300
Oceania
Although not clearly stated, research points to China
as the main challenge to Australia in the information
space.301 New Zealand specifies country-sponsored
disinformation as a particular challenge and high-
lights the example of Russian disinformation related
to the COVID-19 pandemic after December 2021 in its
National Security Long-term Insights Briefing.302
In the Pacific Islands states, shipping and industrial
lobbies perpetrate legislative rigging against stricter
environmental-protection regulations. Though China is
thought to be behind small-scale disinformation cam-
paigns and attacks on critical infrastructure, no entity
publicly acknowledges it to be a perpetrator, except
for Guamanian and Australian experts and politicians
addressing attacks in Pacific Islands states (such as in
Papua New Guinea or Solomon Islands), or when China
is featured as being ‘among others’, such as in Marshall
Islands and Vanuatu.303
What resources have been dedicated to
countering disinformation?
Northeast Asia
Japan’s measures to counter disinformation are still at
an early stage of development. The ministries in ques-
tion currently conduct research separately. Tokyo plans
to establish a specialised organisation in 2024 to pre-
pare for information warfare, with an aim to solidify
the criteria by which to determine false information. 304
South Korea dealt with disinformation successfully
during the pandemic. The government made effective
and frequent direct communications with people and
strengthened public-private partnerships on fact check-
ing.305 In Taiwan, civil society plays an important role in
countering Chinese disinformation and misinformation
efforts. Examples include Taiwan FactCheck Center,
Cofacts and Doublethink Lab, which all help fact check
online or via social-media apps.306 Doublethink Lab also
promotes tools to counter conspiracy theories and disin-
formation while volunteer-led FakeNewsCleaner holds
regular media-literacy workshops. 307 Taiwan’s govern-
ment has also introduced measures to counter disin-
formation efforts, particularly through the Ministry of
Digital Affairs.
Southeast Asia
Across Southeast Asian states, ‘legislative opportun-
ism’ that seeks to curb voices of dissent in media has
been a general feature. Singapore implemented the 2019
Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation
Act, which punishes ‘false statements of fact’ with a
fine of up to SGD740 and a maximum prison sentence
of up to ten years. 308 The Cambodian government has
been proceeding in the forced closure of opposition-
news outlets and has implemented strict controls of the
information domain with the passing of laws such as
the Law on Telecommunications the Inter-Ministerial
Prakas on Publication Controls of Website and Social
Media Processing via Internet in the Kingdom of
Cambodia, and the Sub-Decree on the Establishment
of a National Internet Gateway. 309 In Indonesia, the
government adopted stronger defamation provisions
under the new Criminal Code in 2022, which may also
be abused to target opposition voices.310 Thai healthcare
advocates have faced governmental lawsuits on anti-
corruption charges during the COVID-19 pandemic. 311
In Vietnam, 40 members of the domestic opposition
have been imprisoned under disinformation charg-
es.312 Myanmar’s government has heightened its level
of media censorship, while at the same time conclud-
ing a content-sharing agreement with Russia’s Sputnik
news network in September 2023. 313 The Malaysian
government used its emergency powers to implement a
new fake-news ordinance in 2021 that imposes jail sen-
tences of up to three years for people who publish or
share any ‘wholly or partly false’ information about the
pandemic or the state of emergency of January 2021. 314
Human Rights Watch has criticised the ordinance as
posing a ‘serious threat to freedom of expression and
privacy and the right to a fair trial’. 315 On threats ema-
nating from foreign actors, however, Malaysia depicts
notably high levels of local resilience and response
(explaining China’s failed attempt to influence the 2018

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 33
elections), thanks to its foreign-ownership percentage
caps in broadcasting and its 1998 Communications
and Multimedia Act, which provides a legal mandate
to defend a free and open internet and ensures trans-
parency of the multimedia industries. 316 In Southeast
Asian countries, the prevalence of cyber threats has
spurred policy action. Some countries have created
governmental- and semi-governmental bodies to
counter disinformation. For example, in Vietnam, the
Ministry of Information and Communications man-
ages the Anti-Fake News Center. 317 Vietnam’s Ministry
of Information and Communications also announced
three digital-transformation platforms for Vietnamese
media outlets to counter disinformation, including a
security-breach platform, an emergency-response plat-
form and an e-newsroom management platform, which
analyses public opinion on social media.318 Vietnam also
maintains a National Cyber Security Center. In 2012,
the Lao government established LaoCERT, which is
tasked with handling cyber-security incidents, within
the Ministry of Technology and Communications.
LaoCERT’s capability was further enhanced by the 2015
Law on Prevention and Combating Cyber Crime with
capabilities for enhanced database-systems protection,
computer data and information, and server systems.
In 2003, the Bruneian government created a Dedicated
Authority for Info-communications Technology
Industry, established the Behavorial Insights Unit with
the WHO and set up a hotline to channel fake or mali-
cious information to the government. In the Philippines,
the Department of National Defense is tasked with
countering foreign disinformation.319
South Asia
National governments in South Asia have adopted
similar strategies to counter disinformation. Their
approaches focus primarily on four measures: bills
and regulations; fact-checking initiatives; educational
programmes; and institutional intervention (e.g.,
internet shutdowns). Bangladesh, India, Pakistan
and Sri Lanka have adopted most of these measures.
However, they rely on different legal frameworks to
curb disinformation. Bangladesh, for instance, com-
bines its ICT Act (2006) – which includes fake elec-
tronic publications – with the Digital Security Act
(2018) and the draft of its Cyber Security Strategy
2021–2025. Along with regulations, Bangladesh,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka have also mandated specific
government divisions with the authority to monitor
and counter disinformation. 320
Secondly, the four countries have launched fact-
checking initiatives in various forms and involving
different actors. In India, fact-checking has become a
lucrative business and both institutional and independ-
ent agencies are available. However, fact-checking initi-
atives are not always effective. In Pakistan, for instance,
the Ministry of Information opened a Twitter account
named ‘Fake News Buster’ to expose fake news, which
quickly became mostly inactive. 321 Thirdly, fact check-
ing is often coupled with governmental educational
programmes, addressing students as well as journal-
ists. India and Pakistan are investing in digital literacy
to counter disinformation, while in Bangladesh the
government set up the ‘cyber life’ programme.322 When
the previous measures have failed, governments have,
on some occasions, resorted to internet shutdowns,
such as in India and Sri Lanka. These two countries
have also introduced bans on social-media platforms.
India, for example, banned Chinese mobile apps like
WeChat, TikTok and Alipay in 2020, citing national-
security risks.323
Fourthly, the institutional attempts made to counter
disinformation have often resulted in a pattern of silenc-
ing dissident voices and infringing the right to freedom
of opinion and expression. Hence the other face of dis-
information is the weaponisation of countermeasures
and cyber-crime charges. The Bangladeshi govern-
ment promulgated a bill that entails imprisonment for
spreading ‘propaganda’, which has been used to pros-
ecute people expressing anti-government visions. This
pattern has raised concern in Western capitals, which
have denounced the government’s attempt to silence
criticism. 324 Lastly, another limitation of South Asian
countries’ regulation of the information sphere is the
lack of a definition for ‘disinformation’. Consequently,
countries lack clear legal frameworks to address this
phenomenon. Governments rely on their respective
cyber-security strategies, bills or information acts, and
lack a cohesive regulatory effort to address disinforma-
tion specifically.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
34 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Oceania
Meanwhile, Australia has made key progress in coun-
tering disinformation, taking multiple approaches at an
early stage. It created a taskforce for electoral integrity.
The government also passed the foreign-interference
laws in 2018, which added foreign-interference offences
into the Criminal Code. Moreover, the Australian
Electoral Commission launched a campaign against dis-
information in 2022.325 The Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission has also conducted inquiries
into the impacts of disinformation on digital platforms.326
In New Zealand, the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet is coordinating policies to develop
the whole-of-society approach to disinformation.
Although each ministry is responsible for specific disin-
formation issues, the cabinet takes the lead in ‘conven-
ing a civil society-led group to scope longer-term work’,
‘support for capacity-building and community resil-
ience’ and ‘commissioning public research and analysis
into the problem’.327
In the Pacific Islands states, Timor-Leste’s ‘Criminal
Defamation Law’ stands out as emulation of authoritar-
ian-style media laws in other South Asian and Southeast
Asian states.328 Conversely, other countries have joined
international campaigns and initiatives to increase
media literacy, such as the UN’s 2020 #PledgeToPause
and #TakeCareBeforeYouShare campaign. 329 Vanuatu
chose to increase governmental transparency by allow-
ing media to report more accurately on government
activities with its 2016 Right to Information Act, and
French Polynesia stands out as a front runner (also
among European countries) in the enforcement of
General Data Protection Regulation regulations and
resilience against cyber crime, even leading French del-
egations to train on the island.330
Does the government seek partnership
with other countries?
Northeast Asia
In Northeast Asia, the countries are seeking to deepen
international cooperation to counter disinformation. The
Japanese government is partnering with NATO on dis-
information, alongside cooperation in other technology
fields.331 At the Camp David Summit in August 2023, the
three countries in attendance – Japan, the ROK and the
US – announced plans to coordinate forthwith in coun-
tering disinformation.332 Recognising that Taiwan is a
battlefront for China to test hybrid threats, Western gov-
ernments are increasingly looking at Taiwan’s experi-
ence of China-conducted disinformation efforts and the
government and grassroots responses to it. In 2018, the
US and Taiwan agreed to strengthen cooperation on dis-
information.333 In 2021, an EU Disinformation Committee
travelled to Taiwan to learn from Taiwan’s experience,
while the EU Parliament has encouraged the EU and its
member states to deepen cooperation with Taiwan on
countering foreign interference and disinformation.334
Southeast Asia
Together with the US, the Bruneian government has
developed the ‘Harmony Square’ game, targeted at
the training of high schoolers in identifying fake news.
Brunei and Malaysia, as well as Cambodia, have teamed
up with the WHO and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), respec-
tively to gather information on COVID-19 and to regu-
late the health infodemic surrounding it.335 Nonetheless,
the UN has deemed the Brunei government’s measures
as being too harsh and repressive, especially surround-
ing the case of the charging of a woman on a false
COVID-19 statement. 336 Singaporean government offi-
cials have been participating in international panels on
combatting disinformation. The government has also
passed the 2019 Disinformation Act, which has been
criticised as ‘not complying with international law
and standards protecting the right to freedom of opin-
ion, expression and information’ by the International
Confederation of Jurists. 337 Myanmar’s Global New
Light and Russia’s Sputnik concluded a content-sharing
agreement in 2023.338
South Asia
Although the proliferation of fake news seems to be
a common challenge among all South Asian govern-
ments, there is no regional initiative to cooperate on
countermeasures. On the contrary, there are reports
that disinformation has been spread against foreign
state-actors within the region, for example, by the ruling
party in India, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), during

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 35
the Kashmir crisis with Pakistan in 2019.339 International
actors have also criticised the government’s censorship
of domestic political debate in the name of national secu-
rity. In this regard, some highlight how regional states’
growing economic ties with China might result in fur-
ther cooperation even in the sphere of information and
disinformation, leading to a worrying scenario of even
harsher censorship enforced in South Asian countries,
such as in Pakistan. The Quad has flagged its commit -
ment to countering Chinese disinformation campaigns
in the region.340
Nonetheless, some South Asian countries have
engaged in a joint effort with international institu-
tions to prevent and counter disinformation. India, as a
Quad member, recognises disinformation as one of the
regional challenges that the partnership should address.
The Quad also aims to strengthen resilience against dis-
information and cyber crime at a regional level. 341 In
Nepal, where fake news on the COVID-19 pandemic has
had an impact on public health and the vaccination cam-
paign, the government has cooperated with the WHO
and UNICEF to provide accurate information on the
virus.342 Likewise, the Maldivian government, in a joint
effort with the UN Development Programme (UNDP),
set up the Digital Citizen Learning Portal, offering
courses on digital literacy, to increase resilience during
the pandemic.343 Bhutan engaged with the EU on a one-
year project to empower journalists, local governments
and youth against the spread of disinformation. 344 In
Pakistan, the UNESCO Media and Information Literacy
programme has invested in teaching digital literacy to
online users. In India and Pakistan, private actors have
also taken the initiative. In 2018, Google News launched
a training programme for 8,000 Indian journalists, to
spread awareness and promote fact checking as a prac-
tice to curb disinformation. 345 Meanwhile in Pakistan,
Facebook cooperated with the government on a number
of occasions, including to remove disinformation cam-
paigns that would hinder public health.346
Oceania
In Oceania, countries actively seek partnerships with
other countries in countering disinformation. Both
Australia and New Zealand share knowledge and coor-
dinate policies on disinformation with the other Five
Eyes countries. Moreover, Australia is moving to cooper-
ate on disinformation with the other Quad countries.347
In particular, Australia, New Zealand, the UK and
the US provide assistance in the digital domain to
Pacific Islands states. 348 In December 2022, Australia
and Vanuatu signed a security pact that focuses on and
comprises humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, law
enforcement, cyber security, defence, border security
and maritime safety as a reaction to China’s defence pact
with Solomon Islands.349 This was hailed as a great suc-
cess in curtailing Chinese influence in the Pacific Islands
states. However, Vanuatu’s parliament is yet to ratify the
deal, with parliament’s signature having been cast into
doubt due to the deal possibly undermining Vanuatu’s
relationship with China. 350 Most Pacific Islands states
seek further partnerships with international organisa-
tions, such as the UN and the UNDP, as well as regional
alliances, such as Northern Mariana States–Micronesia–
Palau–Guam, or Samoa–Cook Islands–Niue.351

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
36 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
3. Comparisons between Europe and the
Indo-Pacific
National Critical-infrastructure
Protection
The EU, Northeast Asian countries, Australia
and New Zealand have similar definitions
of national critical infrastructure; however,
other countries in the Indo-Pacific are more
focused on cyber security.
The supranational nature of the EU’s definition of
national critical infrastructure (NCI) means that in addi-
tion to its wide-ranging list of assets and systems that
are essential for societal functions, the EU adds a con-
ditional clause that qualifies the disruption of European
critical infrastructure as impacting at least two member
states. While the EU has a list of at least 11 critical sec-
tors, member states are required to identify critical enti-
ties within each sector in the coming years.
Northeast Asian countries appear to have the most
developed definitions of NCI. This is, to some extent,
not surprising, considering their close geographic
proximity to adversarial states and perceptions
of nearby threats. Contributing to this perception
is their high level of economic development and
modern and next-generation infrastructure, which
increase the numbers of threat vectors that may be
at risk. While most countries include various levels
of specificity in their definitions of NCI, Taiwan also
includes ‘high-tech parks’. This may be an indirect
reference to the country’s high-tech semiconductor
industry and key players, such as semiconductor
manufacturer TSMC.
In Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Pacific, this
trend continues, where larger or more economically
advanced countries have developed more nuanced
frameworks for understanding their NCI. In
Southeast Asia, only the Philippines and Indonesia
have distinct policies and definitions, while other
states have instead limited their national policies to
the cyber domain and have developed legislation to
protect critical national-information infrastructure.
Cambodia is focused on combatting cyber crime. In
South Asia definitions are blurred and often linked
to National Critical Information Infrastructure
(NCII) legislation that focuses on the cyber security
of various sectors. In India, definitions are expanded
to include defence, space, law enforcement and criti-
cal manufacturing. In the Pacific, Australia and New
Zealand have clear definitions and legislation on
NCI protection, while smaller Pacific Islands states
only define NCI as physical assets. Of the smaller
island overseas territories, French Polynesia, Guam
and New Caledonia have adopted the French or US
NCI legislation that encompasses both physical and
digital assets.
Table 1: National critical-infrastructure protection
EU Northeast Asia Southeast Asia South Asia Oceania
11 critical sectors defined in
European legislation
Wide-ranging
definitions that cover
services and assets
Predominantly focused
on cyber domain
Predominantly focused
on the cyber domain and
physical assets, with some
defence sectors included
Australia/New Zealand and
overseas island territories
define NCI as physical and
digital assets
Security-focused policy approach, with
mention of natural disasters
Security-focused
policy approach,
with specific focus on
economic security
Prosperity-focused
policy approach
Prosperity-focused
policy approach
Prosperity-focused policy
approach, security risks from
natural disasters
EU member states hold competence
over critical-infrastructure protection;
different countries have taken different
approaches, but Chinese investment in
digital CNI is declining
Except in South Korea,
Chinese investment in
CNI is restricted
Chinese investment in
digital CNI not restricted
Except for India,
Chinese investment in
CNI not restricted
Except for Australia and New
Zealand, Chinese investment
in CNI not restricted
Note: CNI = critical national infrastructure
Source: IISS research

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 37
Larger and more developed countries
have centralised and cross-government
approaches to critical-infrastructure
development, but smaller and less
developed countries lack centralised
government stakeholders.
The EU and its member states regulate the EU criti-
cal infrastructure (EUCI) and the NCI respectively.
However, member states hold competence while the EU
can set standards and guidelines.
In Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, the cabinet or the
prime minister’s office oversees NCI protection, with
dedicated agencies, committees or taskforces assigned to
them. In Southeast Asia, owing to the primary focus on
NCII protection, departments in charge of information
and communications technologies (ICT) take the lead.
An exception is Thailand, where the Digital Economy
Promotion agency takes the lead. In South Asia the picture
is more mixed, with more developed and larger econo-
mies allocating responsibilities to specific ministries, and
smaller economies dedicating specific departments in gov-
ernment to the task. A number, like the Maldives, do not
have any dedicated ministries or departments yet. The pic-
ture is similar in the Pacific. In Australia, the Department
of Home Affairs and the Prime Minister’s Office, in coor-
dination with the Cabinet’s National Security Committee,
oversee NCI protection, while in New Zealand the
Government Communications Security Bureau oversees
this task. In the smaller Pacific Islands states various min-
istries are in charge, ranging from public-utility bureaus
to national-security forces to ministries of home affairs. In
Kiribati, the national CERT takes the lead.
The EU and like-minded Indo-Pacific
states take a predominantly security-driven
approach, while developing economies in
the Indo-Pacific are primarily concerned with
national prosperity or security risks posed by
natural disasters and non-state actors.
At the level of the EU – as well as at a national level for
its member states – debates about regulating NCI and
EUCI lean heavily towards security. Debates particu-
larly revolve around dependencies on foreign suppli-
ers and threats posed by non-liberal states. In Northeast
Asia, Australia and New Zealand, debates around
national economic-security strategies have highlighted
the interconnection between national security and
prosperity. An exception to this is Taiwan, where secu-
rity takes a more prominent role in debates due to the
ongoing and real threat posed by China. In Southeast
Asia, discourse seems to be more split, though not
along economic lines. Most countries take a more pros-
perity-focused approach, while Brunei, Malaysia and
Singapore emphasise security concerns. In South Asia,
the main concern is natural disasters, though India
and Nepal have begun to integrate security concerns
into their NCI-protection debates. Overall, the impor-
tance of economic development and prosperity weighs
more strongly in national debates. This is also true in
the Pacific Islands states, where countries recognise the
importance of NCI and NCII to national prosperity and
seek to protect NCI from natural disasters. The EU’s
debate also mentions the potential disruption caused
by natural disasters.
As a result of different national priorities and
approaches to NCI protection, the majority
of countries in the Indo-Pacific have not
restricted Chinese investment in NCI.
Chinese state-owned companies have invested sig-
nificantly in European port infrastructure as well as in
national telecommunications networks. However, since
2019, there has been some pushback following national-
level and EU-level debates about the risks posed by
foreign investment in NCI and EUCI. Some EU mem-
ber states have since passed policies to extract Chinese
components from the latter. However, there remains
an uneven approach across member states, and most
recently Germany allowed a Chinese investor to invest
in the Port of Hamburg.
Potentially as a result of the diverging approaches
to NCI protection in the four subregions examined, the
majority of countries in the Indo-Pacific studied in this
report have avoided restricting Chinese technology into
NCI or NCII. The exceptions are in Northeast Asia, where
governments have restricted Chinese participation in
NCII entirely (Japan and Taiwan) or partially (the ROK). In
Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Pacific, only Australia
and India have taken measures to restrict Chinese partici-
pation in NCI or NCII. However, while some countries

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
38 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
have not taken legislative action to enforce restrictions,
national government tenders for NCII contracts have
been awarded to non-Chinese companies, as was the case
in Singapore’s national 5G rollout.
National AI Strategies
Not all Indo-Pacific countries have AI
strategies in place, and goals for AI
strategies differ between the EU and Indo-
Pacific countries.
While EU member states are encouraged to develop their
own national AI strategies, the EU develops guidelines
and regulations at the EU level. The EU also plays a par-
ticular role in developing a legal framework for ethical
AI, and takes a risk-based approach. The EU’s goal is to
become a global regulatory leader in ethical AI, aiming
to ensure that AI systems are ‘safe, transparent, traceable,
non-discriminatory and environmentally friendly’.352
Developed economies in the Indo-Pacific or over-
seas territories are more likely to have national AI
strategies in place. Australia, French Polynesia, India,
Guam, Japan, New Caledonia, the ROK, Singapore
and Taiwan have such strategies. In Southeast Asia,
Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam have them. Others
have strategies in development, including Cambodia,
New Zealand, Pakistan and the Philippines. Some
countries have digital strategies, e-commerce strategies
or other strategies in place that are focused on economic
development and lack a centralised and comprehensive
national approach to AI. Smaller countries recognise the
needs for national AI strategies but are yet to formulate
centralised approaches.
Japan, the ROK and Taiwan have somewhat similar
AI objectives, focused on improving industrial com-
petitiveness and harnessing the positive aspects of AI
for economic growth and addressing demographic
changes. However, Japan also seeks to address natu-
ral disasters through AI while Taiwan seeks to use it
to combat climate change. Japan and Australia both
have ambitions to become leaders in trustworthy AI
and play a global role in AI regulatory development.
In Southeast Asia, the focus is almost entirely on devel-
opment and prosperity-related ambitions to transform
national economies, infrastructure and workforces. In
South Asia and the Pacific, countries are either focused
on societal transformation in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution or economic development with an empha-
sis on manufacturing, finance and trade. Pakistan
specifically makes mention of the importance of AI to
defence transformation.
Specific agencies dedicated to national AI
strategies are uncommon; however, most
countries in the Indo-Pacific and the EU
take a multistakeholder and whole-of-
society approach to strategy formulation.
The EU’s approach is unique in the sense that, as a
supranational entity, it is in the process of establish-
ing a specific EU AI Office to coordinate cross-border
implementation and investigation. In the Indo-Pacific,
most countries that have a national AI strategy in place
take cross-governmental approaches to designing and
implementing them. However, in India, Singapore
and Taiwan, single institutions have been assigned
responsibility for oversight of national AI-strategy
Table 2: National AI strategies
EU Northeast Asia Southeast Asia South Asia Oceania
EU AI Act National AI strategies in place Developed and emerging
economies have AI strategies
in place; smaller and less
developed economies
recognise the need for one, but
do not yet have one in place
Developed and emerging
economies have AI
strategies in place; smaller
and less developed
economies recognise the
need for one, but do not
yet have one in place
Developed economies
and overseas territories
have AI strategies
in place, but smaller
and less developed
economies do not
Focus on regulating
trustworthy AI,
improving innovative
competitiveness, addressing
demographic challenges
Focus on regulating
trustworthy AI, improving
innovative competitiveness,
addressing demographic
challenges and potential to use
AI to address natural disasters
Focus on societal impact,
socio-economic development
and prosperity
Focus on societal
transformation and Fourth
Industrial Revolution,
impacts on labour
Aside from more
extensive areas of focus
in developed economies,
focus on societal
transformation and Fourth
Industrial Revolution
Source: IISS research

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 39
implementation and development. Most countries that
have an AI strategy in place take a whole-of-society
approach, with its development involving academia
and industry. Both in the EU and the Indo-Pacific,
industry (mature, small and medium-sized enterprises,
as well as start-ups) and academic participation seeks to
align government policies with innovation, while aca-
demia is also included to meet the needs of nurturing
AI talent. The EU also includes civil society and social
partners in its approach.
The EU and specific Indo-Pacific countries
already cooperate on AI standards and
regulatory diplomacy, but countries in the
Indo-Pacific also cooperate with Russia
and China.
The EU’s AI Act specifically calls for promotion of its
model for global cooperation on AI standards that are con-
sistent with EU values. The EU actively engages in multi-
lateral forums on AI and supports multilateral initiatives
that help low-income countries develop their own national
AI strategies. Northeast Asian countries, Australia and
New Zealand are already heavily engaged in multilateral
and minilateral partnerships on AI development and align-
ment. The EU, the UK and the US are seen as their primary
partners. In Southeast Asia and South Asia, the Maldives,
Pakistan, Singapore and Vietnam engage in bilateral coop-
eration. This cooperation is not always with European
countries or the US. Indeed, Pakistan has an AI collabora-
tion programme with China. Indonesia sees partnership
through the lens of attracting foreign direct investment
(FDI) and is particularly interested in investment from
Chinese, Japanese and Korean tech firms in its AI sector.
The EU, Australia, India, New Zealand and Singapore seek
to be at the forefront of regulating and standard-setting in
multilateral institutions and standard-setting bodies.
The challenges to implementing AI
strategies are different depending on local
context, though some challenges are shared
across the EU and Indo-Pacific.
The challenges that the EU faces in implementing its
AI Act – and playing a legal role in AI regulation in
Europe – are unique compared to the challenges faced
by Indo-Pacific countries. In particular, the former
challenges revolve around the limitations of EU and
member state competencies.
In Northeast Asia and developed economies, challenges
to national AI-strategy development and implementation
are listed as delays in digitalisation, lack of talent and trust
and a potential lack of legal safeguards. Despite Japan and
South Korea being highly advanced economies, research
points to Northeast Asian governments’ low levels of
digitalisation of governments as a hinderance to AI imple-
mentation. The lack of regulatory frameworks and ethical
safeguards is also mentioned as a specific concern in South
Asian countries, who also point to a need for digital liter-
acy. In South Korea, the lack of data available to companies
and individuals for AI-technology development was spe-
cifically mentioned, while there are also concerns over the
potential inequalities that may result from uneven appli-
cation of AI technologies in national governments, both
between countries and within societies. This last point
is of particular concern in countries of lower economic
development, where manufacturing sectors are significant
sources of employment. In these countries, automation
could cause political instability. In Southeast Asian coun-
tries with booming start-up sectors, like Vietnam, the lack
of domestic funding for AI projects and companies means
that these states remain reliant on FDI for the development
of these sectors. Taiwan faces the unique challenge of find-
ing its AI-relevant technology sector at the centre of a tech-
nological rivalry between the US and China. This context
requires Taiwan to position itself carefully.
Protection of National
Innovation Ecosystems
Barring Cambodia and Laos, all countries
in the Indo-Pacific participate in export-
control regulations. However, the
investment-screening landscape across the
EU and Indo-Pacific is less active and less
homogenous in terms of approaches taken.
All countries in the EU and the Indo-Pacific, with the
exception of Cambodia and Laos, have export controls
in place. The EU is party to international and European
export-control regimes. However, particularly when it
comes to defence or dual-use technologies, not all Indo-
Pacific countries participate equally in international

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
40 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
export-control regimes, such as the Missile Technology
Control Regime, US Control List or the EU’s Wassenaar
Arrangement. As is the case in other areas of digital
and technology legislation, the more developed econo-
mies have the most advanced export-control legislation
and are the most engaged in multilateral export regula-
tions. Furthermore, in the Indo-Pacific, Japan currently
participates in US-led export-control restrictions on
China, which focus on semiconductors and AI. It is yet
unclear how regional participation in US export restric-
tions on China might be affected if such restrictions
cover more technologies.
The EU has implemented an FDI-screening regulation
that requires EU member states to put national screen-
ing mechanisms in place that meet an EU-legislated
minimum requirement for thresholds. However, due to
EU vs member-state competence, the EU’s regulation
only acts as a guidance, while final authority rests with
member states. The EU’s investment-screening land-
scape is thus an uneven one in regulatory terms.
Indo-Pacific states and overseas territories have taken
various approaches to national investment screening. The
most advanced economies – as well as the large emerging
economies – have investment-screening mechanisms in
place, including Australia, Japan, New Zealand, the ROK
and Taiwan. These are based on national-security con-
siderations as well as competitiveness. Taiwan, however,
does not provide guidance on its definition of national
security, nor does it outline what thresholds must be
met in order for investment-screening procedures to be
triggered. Given their high exposure to China and their
concerns related to Chinese investments, Japan and the
ROK are attempting to strike a balance between pursuing
economic growth and protecting national security.
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines
and Vietnam have investment-screening mechanisms
in place. Not all investment-screening regulations are
alike and in these countries, the focus is more on limit-
ing screening to promote investment. In Indonesia, the
government regulates very few sectors for investment
and instead has focused on encouraging foreign invest-
ment for economic growth.
As for NCIs, in most South Asian countries, the dis-
course around digital and technological innovation is
focused on prosperity and the potential to boost economic
growth. Countries like Bangladesh, Maldives and Pakistan
have open-investment regimes to attract foreign capital,
even in new technology sectors. Bangladesh, for instance,
launched its Hi-Tech Park as one of the country’s three
special economic zones. Although inward investments are
subject to some degree of screening controls (by the area’s
authority – Bangladesh Hi-tech Park Authority), the priority
is developing an ‘IT/High-tech industry in Bangladesh’.353
In some countries, national services and infrastructure
are restricted for national defence, such as telecommunica-
tions and media in South Asia and banking in Thailand
and Malaysia. However, like Thailand and Malaysia,
Pacific Islands states have regulations in place that restrict
Table 3: Protection of national innovation ecosystems
EU Northeast Asia Southeast Asia South Asia Oceania
Export controls focused
on military and dual-use
technologies; some EU
member states abide by
US export controls on
technology components,
such as semiconductors
Export controls focused
on military and dual-
use technologies
Export controls focused
on military and dual-use
technologies – with the
exception of Cambodia
and Laos
Export controls on military and
dual-use technologies
Export controls on military
and dual-use technologies
Investment-screening
mechanism regulation as
guidance, but unequal
application across EU
member states
Investment-screening
mechanisms in place in
all countries
Uneven investment-
screening regulatory
landscape; some countries
lack centralised systems for
screening, instead take a
regional approach
Uneven investment-screening
regulatory landscape; smaller
and less developed countries
do not have any in place;
some have passed regulation
without the development of a
formal mechanism
Uneven investment-
screening regulatory
landscape. Smaller and
less developed countries
do not have any in place
Investment-screening policy
is security focused
Investment-screening
policy is security focused
Investment-screening
policy, when in place,
is largely focused on
encouraging foreign
investment and prosperity
Investment-screening policy,
when in place, is security
focused – particularly in India
When in place,
investment-screening
policy is security focused
Source: IISS research

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 41
investment but do not necessarily act as a formal screen-
ing mechanism. This is the case for indigenous industries,
such as agriculture, marine resources, tourism and retail.
The national approach to innovation among Pacific Islands
states is very much focused on prosperity. This approach
is not limited to developing countries – in Singapore there
is oversight through regulation and investment-licensing
requirements without an official screening mechanism.
Similar agencies share responsibility for
investment screening and export controls;
however, in some Indo-Pacific states,
regional authorities within national systems
also play decisive roles.
In the EU, member states have competence over export-
control regulation and investment-screening mecha-
nisms, while the EU Commission provides guidance.
In most countries across the various Indo-Pacific
subregions, trade and economic ministries oversee the
implementation of export-control regulations and their
development. In smaller Pacific Islands states, central
banks or various other ministries – such as the health
ministry, or the ministry that is relevant to the exported
goods in question – take the lead.
In most countries and entities, the same government
ministries and departments manage national invest-
ment-screening mechanisms and regulation. However,
in some cases, national-security agencies also play an
important role. This is the case in Taiwan, for example.
In Indonesia, Malaysia and Myanmar, national
ministries and dedicated committees oversee foreign
investment. However, their primary responsibility is
to promote FDIs in their countries rather than to screen
them. Of the Southeast Asian countries, only Vietnam
has developed a formal investment-screening mecha-
nism across government departments (although in
Singapore a similar approach is under consideration).
In the Philippines, this prosperity-focused approach is
reflected in a decentralised system of investment screen-
ing. As such, regional authorities, rather than central
ministries, decide on foreign investments.
The EU and Indo-Pacific countries have
similar focus areas in export controls; however,
as investment-screening mechanisms serve
different purposes in different countries, they
also target different sectors.
In the EU, Northeast Asia, Southeast Asia, South Asia and
Australia and New Zealand, export controls are focused
on dual-use and defence commodities, software or tech-
nologies. In other Indo-Pacific subregions, national export
controls also contain some level of defence-related meas-
ures (such as ammunition and arms), as is the case in some
South Asian countries. However, in the Pacific Islands,
export controls specifically restrict the export of scarce
natural resources, agricultural products or cultural items.
Southeast Asian countries apply export controls to both
defence, dual-use or natural-resource products. Some
governments are even more specific, such as Bhutan,
which restricts the export of uninhabited aerial vehicles
and drones, remote-sensing technologies and broadcast-
ing equipment, and Tuvalu, which restricts the sharing of
sensitive government data with overseas actors.
In Australia, Japan, New Zealand, the ROK and
Taiwan, as well as the EU, foreign investments in areas
of national security are controlled. Across the states
mentioned, many industries fall into this category,
including healthcare and pharmaceuticals, transporta-
tion infrastructure, sensitive and emerging technologies
and ICT and government services, among others. In the
EU, foreign investments in raw materials are also con-
trolled. In Southeast Asia and South Asia, governments
are predominantly concerned with screening or restrict-
ing investments in defence, telecommunications, power
distribution and energy, ICT, transportation and media.
Disinformation in the Cyber Domain
In liberal democracies in the EU and
Indo-Pacific, disinformation is seen as a
threat to democratic systems and societal
resilience. However, some countries use
counter-disinformation strategies as a
guise for political censorship. The main
perpetrators of disinformation thus range
from external state actors to domestic
political opposition parties.
In Australia and New Zealand, as well as the EU and
Northeast Asia, governments are concerned about for-
eign disinformation and misinformation that seeks to

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
42 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
influence electoral voting, erode trust in democratic
institutions and cause social discord, particularly dur-
ing potential crises in the future that could impact gov-
ernments’ policy options. Existing research indicates
that China conducts disinformation campaigns in the
EU and all Indo-Pacific countries, with the exception of
Pakistan and India.
Australia, Japan, New Zealand, the ROK and
Taiwan, as well as the EU and South China Sea-
claimant state governments, have directly singled out
China as a specific threat. The EU also reports Russian
disinformation activity against the EU and its mem-
ber states. However, in the case of South Korea and
countries in Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Pacific
Islands, central governments point to domestic actors
in the disinformation space. National governments
have reportedly also conducted counter-disinforma-
tion efforts against domestic actors, such as opposi-
tion political parties. Governments thus engage in
political censorship under the guise of countering
disinformation. In South Asia, disinformation is par-
ticularly a concern with regards to ethnic or religious
minorities, COVID-19, elections, and international
actors. In Pakistan, for example, conspiracy theories
claim the US promotes ‘fake news’ about the govern-
ment. Disinformation campaigns are not only directed
against the state in the target country, but also target
third countries. In the Indo-Pacific, disinformation
campaigns are directed against the EU and the US.
In the Pacific Islands, disinformation campaigns by
third entities, who seek to influence specific voting
outcomes in international organisations, have also
been recorded.
More developed and prosperous countries
host a variety of counter-disinformation
initiatives, whether government- or civil
society-led. However, smaller and less
prosperous countries’ efforts are nascent.
In contrast to the EU’s varied toolbox of counter-
disinformation initiatives and bodies, the develop-
ment of specific government framework to combat
disinformation in the Indo-Pacific is still nascent.
The Australian and New Zealand governments have
focused on countering foreign interference and influ-
ence and employ a whole-of-society approach. As an
indication of the extensive disinformation campaigns
that have been directed against it, Taiwan has an
extensive framework of government and grassroots
mechanisms, information points and apps.
In some countries, particularly in Southeast Asia
and South Asia, national governments and civil society
have implemented specific legislation, fact-checking
initiatives, educational programmes and institutional
shutdowns to combat digital disinformation and cyber
attacks. At other times, these measures have been used
by governments to restrict opposition parties and activ-
ist ability to criticise the government in power. In the
Pacific Islands, countries have taken limited but targeted
measures, whether to improve media literacy, increase
media access to government, or enforce General Data
Protection Regulation regulations.
Table 4: Disinformation in the cyber domain
EU Northeast Asia Southeast Asia South Asia Oceania
Disinformation
seen as threat
to democratic
systems and
societal resilience
Disinformation seen as
threat to democratic
systems and societal
resilience; concern about
domestic disinformation
raised in South Korea
Concern about domestic
disinformation;
disinformation campaigns
targeted to change
opinion of third countries
Concern about domestic
disinformation; disinformation
campaigns targeted to change
opinion of third countries
In Australia and New Zealand,
disinformation seen as threat to
democratic systems and societal
resilience; disinformation campaigns
targeted to change opinion of
third-party countries and voting in
international organisations
EU-funded
initiatives on
countering
disinformation in
place, employing
a whole-of-
society approach
Countering
disinformation initiatives
in place, employing
a whole-of-society
approach, particularly
in societies that are
high targets, such as in
Taiwan; civil society plays
a key role
Countering
disinformation initiatives
in place, employing
a whole-of-society
approach; civil society
plays a key role
Countering disinformation
initiatives in place, employing a
whole-of-society approach; civil
society plays a key role; in smaller
economies, policies and efforts
are nascent
Except Australia and New Zealand,
in smaller economies, policies and
efforts are nascent
Source: IISS research

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 43
The EU, its member states, the US and
UN are seen as the partners of choice for
counter-disinformation cooperation in the
Indo-Pacific; however, private sectors are
also increasingly active.
The EU already cooperates with a host of govern-
ments on tackling disinformation, particularly with
like-minded liberal democracies. Northeast Asian
governments are viewed as battlegrounds for Chinese
disinformation campaigns and as such are attractive
partners to the EU and its member states for sharing best
practices. In Southeast Asia, the UN is the predominant
partner of choice to date on projects that seek to coun-
ter COVID-19 disinformation. The Quad has flagged
its commitment to countering Chinese disinformation
campaigns, specifically in the Indo-Pacific. However,
partnership is not limited to Western countries or inter-
national organisations. For example, Russia has part-
nered with Myanmar for a content-sharing agreement.
Private-sector companies are also engaged in the region,
with Facebook and Google, for example, providing train-
ing programmes for journalists and cooperating with gov-
ernments on responding to disinformation campaigns as
they arise or on promoting fact-checking practices.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
44 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
This report seeks to compare the approaches of the
European Union and Indo-Pacific states with regard
to four aspects of the global digital order: national
approaches to protecting critical infrastructure; national
AI-strategy development; national approaches to protect-
ing national innovation ecosystems through export con-
trols and investment-screening legislation; and national
approaches to countering disinformation campaigns.
The report has identified commonalities and dif-
ferences between the EU and Indo-Pacific countries.
In general, national approaches depend on the level
of economic development in each country and their
subsequent focus on either prosperity or security as a
priority. Developing economies and less developed
countries have tended to prioritise prosperity when
it comes to security over national decision-making on
issues ranging from critical-infrastructure protection
to whether to implement investment-screening regu-
lations. However, even within like-minded countries
(such as within the EU), approaches to investment
screening are varied, and EU member states have also
shown a tendency to prioritise national prosperity over
security considerations.
A key difference between countries is the types of
actors involved in decision-making and legislation
development. While the EU takes a supranational
approach to offering guidance where member states
have competence or legislation where permitted, other
countries have varying resources dedicated at the
national government or sub-national (regional gov-
ernment) levels. When prosperity is the focus, in some
cases regional governments have final decision-making
control over issues such as FDI.
When considering the main threats to national resil-
ience and critical infrastructure, countries across the
two regions also take different views. While in like-
minded liberal democracies, state actors are seen as the
main threats, others in the Indo-Pacific view domestic
threats as their primary concern. Lastly, for countries
in the Indo-Pacific, natural disasters and climate change
are often mentioned more frequently as specific threats.
The EU and countries in the Indo-Pacific thus take
differing approaches to common areas of concern
within the global digital order. While both regions
already cooperate on sharing best practices and national
approaches, more can be done. In the space of AI gov-
ernance, various countries in the Indo-Pacific and the
EU are vying for leadership roles in AI regulation and
standard-setting.
The EU could engage more with countries in the Indo-
Pacific that are predominantly concerned with prosperity
(rather than security or ethical concerns) to ensure an inclu-
sive approach. This engagement could focus on concerns
in emerging and developing economies, such as issues
related to the impact of AI on the workforce in manufac-
turing-reliant economies. Furthermore, several countries
in the Indo-Pacific have not yet developed national AI
strategies, which could provide an opportunity for EU and
Indo-Pacific countries to help share best practices. Lastly,
while all countries acknowledge the importance of AI,
Indo-Pacific states also note that unequal access to data,
data security and national-government systems digitalisa-
tion are specific challenges. Here, international best prac-
tices could again help countries facing challenges similar to
those that other countries have already overcome.
The EU and Indo-Pacific could also share best prac-
tices on transboundary-critical-infrastructure protec-
tion. In the Indo-Pacific, this could relate to countries
that share natural resources – such as water – that are
connected through energy pipelines and infrastructure,
or that are linked with critical digital infrastructure,
such as submarine cables. This is currently discussed at
the minilateral level, which excludes several countries
in the Indo-Pacific.
While national investment-screening mechanisms are
an important topic of debate in the EU, such mechanisms
have been implemented in only a minority of countries
in the Indo-Pacific. The EU and countries in the Indo-
Pacific could therefore engage with those in the region
that take a predominantly prosperity-focused approach
Conclusion

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 45
to national innovation and critical-infrastructure devel-
opment to help them put in place national policies capa-
ble of protecting national-innovation strengths while
also supporting national socio-economic development.
With regards to disinformation, further coop-
eration could entail defining disinformation. While
countries across the EU and Indo-Pacific share
concerns about disinformation, the actors and tar-
gets may differ between countries. Governments in
the EU and Indo-Pacific have also taken different
approaches to legislating definitions of disinfor-
mation. Therefore, states could be encouraged to
share more fully best practices regarding legislative
and policy approaches to countering disinforma-
tion. Lastly, civil society and NGOs are increasingly
active in the Indo-Pacific in offering fact-checking
and verification services free of charge via web or
app platforms. These efforts could be shared across
the region and with the EU to further improve upon
current policy approaches.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
46 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Appendix
Table 5: Selected national statistics
GDP per capita
2021 (USD)*
Human Development
Index 2021**
Population 2023*** Average
age****
Mobile phones
(per 100 citizens)†
Internet users (%
of population)††
Australia 66,916 0.951 26,439,111 38 87.6 89.6
Bangladesh 2,450 0.661 172,954,319 27 98.1 24.8
Bhutan 3,063 0.666 787,424 29 53.5
Brunei 31,449 0.829 452,524 33 95
Cambodia 1,608 0.593 16,944,826 27
Cook Islands 19,264 17,044 33
Fiji 4,647 0.730 936,375 27
French Polynesia 19,915 308,872 34
Guam 172,952 30
India 2,274 0.633 1,428,627,663 28 93.1 43
Indonesia 4,333 0.705 277,534,122 30 162.28 53.73
Japan 39,650 0.925 123,294,513 49 115.2 90.22
Kiribati 1,765 0.624 133,515 22
Laos 2,569 0.607 7,633,779 24 33.8
Malaysia 11,101 0.803 34,308,525 31 143.8 89.56
Maldives 10,366 0.747 521,021 32 245.92 62.93
Marshall Islands 6,111 0.639 41,996 26
Micronesia 3,573 0.628 544,321 26
Mongolia 4,510 0.739 3,447,157 27 117.4 62.5
Myanmar 1,089 0.585 54,577,997 30 35.1
Nauru 12,390 12,780 20
Nepal 1,206 0.602 30,896,590 24 134.41 37.7
New Caledonia 34,994 292,991 34
New Zealand 48,824 0.937 5,228,100 37 111.1 91.5
North Korea 654 26,160,821 36 12.3
Pakistan 1,480 0.544 240,485,658 21 79.61 25
Palau 12,084 0.767 18,058 36
Papua New
Guinea
2,673 0.558 10,329,931 22
Philippines 3,461 0.699 117,337,368 25 113.8 49.8
Samoa 3,919 0.707 225,681 21
Singapore 66,822 0.939 6,014,723 43 150.1 92
Solomon Islands 2,306 0.564 740,424 19
South Korea 34,940 0.925 51,784,059 44 111.5 96.51
Sri Lanka 3,918 0.782 21,893,579 33 179.3 35
Taiwan 33,059 ††† 0.916 † † † † 23,923,276 42 123.33
Thailand 7,067 0.800 71,801,279 40 105 77.84
Timor-Leste 1,517 0.607 1,360,596 21 29.1
Tonga 4,451 0.745 107,773 22
Tuvalu 5,370 0.641 11,396 25
Vanuatu 3,073 0.607 334,506 20
Vietnam 3,756 0.703 98,858,950 33 79 70.3
Notes: A blank space denotes that no data was available. *‘Basic Data Selection’ , United Nations, https://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/Basic., ** ‘HDR21-22_Statistical_Annex_
HDI_Table.xlsx’ , Human Development Index, https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fhdr.undp.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2F2021-
22_HDR%2FHDR21-22_Statistical_Annex_HDI_Table.xlsx&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK)., *** Worldometer, ‘Countries in the World by Population’ (2023), 16 July 2023, https://
www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country., **** Ibid., †World Population Review, ‘Cell Phones by Country 2023’ , https://worldpopulationreview.com/
country-rankings/cell-phones-by-country., ††Wisevoter, ‘Internet Users bzy Country’ , https://wisevoter.com/country-rankings/internet-users-by-country/., ††† CEIC, ‘Taiwan
GDP per Capita’ , https://www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/taiwan/gdp-per-capita#:~:text=Taiwan%20GDP%20per%20Capita%201%20Taiwan%20Gross%20Domestic,a%20
record%20low%20of%20140.000%20in%20Dec%201959., ††††BTI Transformation Index, ‘Taiwan Country Report 2022’ , https://bti-project.org/en/reports/country-report/TWN.
Source: IISS research

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 47
Notes
1 Official Journal of the European Union, ‘Council
Directive 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the
Identification and Designation of European Critical
Infrastructure and the Assessment of the Need to
Improve Their Protection’, OJ L345/75, 23 December 2008,
p. 3, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32008L0114.
2 Ibid.
3 European Commission, ‘Enhancing EU Resilience: As Step
Forward to Identify Critical Entities for Key Sectors’, 25 July
2023, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_23_3992.
4 European Commission, ‘Memo/06/477: The European
Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP)’,
12 December 2006, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_06_477.
5 European Commission, ‘Critical Infrastructure Warning
Information Network’, 2008, https://home-affairs.ec.europa.
eu/networks/critical-infrastructure-warning-information-
network-ciwin_en; European Commission, ‘European
Reference Network for Critical Infrastructure Protection’,
2009, https://erncip-project.jrc.ec.europa.eu/european-
reference-network-critical-infrastructure-protection.
6 Official Journal of the European Union, ‘Council Directive
2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the Identification and
Designation of European Critical Infrastructure and the
Assessment of the Need to Improve Their Protection’.
7 European Parliament Research Service, ‘European
Critical Infrastructure: Revision of Directive 2008/114/
EC’, European Parliament, February 2021, https://www.
europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2021/662604/
EPRS_BRI(2021)662604_EN.pdf.
8 European Commission, ‘The EU Toolbox for 5G Security’,
29 January 2020, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/
library/eu-toolbox-5g-security.
9 Meia Nouwens and Helena Legarda, ‘China’s Pursuit
of Advanced Dual-use Technologies’, IISS Research
Paper, 18 December 2018, https://www.iiss.org/blogs/
research-paper/2018/12/emerging-technology-dominance.
10 Laurens Cerulus, ‘Coronavirus Forces Europe to Confront
China Dependency’, Politico, 6 March 2020, https://www.
politico.eu/article/coronavirus-emboldens-europes-supply-
chain-security-hawks/.
11 European Commission, ‘Speech by the President on
EU-China relations to the Mercator Institute for China
Studies and the European Policy Centre’, 30 March 2023,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
speech_23_2063.
12 European Commission, ‘EU Member States Sign Up
to Cooperate on Artificial Intelligence’, Digibyte, 10
April 2018, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/
news/eu-member-states-sign-cooperate-artificial-
intelligence#:~:text=On%2010%20April%2025%20
European,European%20approach%20to%20deal%20
therewith; European Commission, ‘Coordinated Plan
on Artificial Intelligence’, 2018, https://digital-strategy.
ec.europa.eu/en/policies/plan-ai; European Commission,
‘Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence 2021 Review’, 21
April 2021, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/
coordinated-plan-artificial-intelligence-2021-review.
13 European Commission, ‘Regulatory Framework Proposal on
Artificial Intelligence’, 20 June 2023, https://digital-strategy.
ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai.
14 News European Parliament, ‘EU AI Act: First Regulation on
Artificial Intelligence’, 14 June 2023, https://www.europarl.
europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20230601STO93804/
eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence.
15 Ibid.
16 OECD, AI Policy Observatory, ‘ AI Act’, 2023, https://oecd.
ai/en/dashboards/policy-initiatives/http:%2F%2Faipo.oecd.
org%2F2021-data-policyInitiatives-27156.
17 European Parliament Legislative Train Schedule, ‘ Artificial
Intelligence Act in “ A Europe Fit for the Digital Age”’,
20 October 2023, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
legislative-train/theme-a-europe-fit-for-the-digital-age/
file-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence.
18 Tambiama Madiega, ‘ Artificial Intelligence Act’, European
Parliamentary Research Service, European Parliament, June
2023, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/
BRIE/2021/698792/EPRS_BRI(2021)698792_EN.pdf.
19 European Parliament, ‘ Artificial Intelligence Act’, P9_
TA(2023)0236, June 2023, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
doceo/document/TA-9-2023-0236_EN.pdf.
20 Ibid.
21 GPAI/The Global Partnership for Artificial Intelligence,
‘Community’, https://www.gpai.ai/community/; Council

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
48 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
of Europe, ‘CAI - Committee on Artificial Intelligence’,
https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial-intelligence/
cai#{%22126720129%22:[0],%22126720142%22.
22 UNESCO, ‘ Artificial Intelligence: Partnership Between
UNESCO and the EU to Speed up the Implementation of
Ethical Rules’, 27 June 2023, https://www.unesco.org/en/
articles/artificial-intelligence-partnership-between-unesco-
and-eu-speed-implementation-ethical-rules.
23 European Commission, ‘The European Union and the United
States of America Strengthen Cooperation on Research in
Artificial Intelligence and Computing for the Public Good’,
27 January 2023, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/
news/european-union-and-united-states-america-strengthen-
cooperation-research-artificial-intelligence.
24 Alex Engler, ‘Key Enforcement Issues of the AI Act Should
Lead EU Trilogue Debate’, Brookings, 16 June 2023, https://
www.brookings.edu/articles/key-enforcement-issues-of-the-
ai-act-should-lead-eu-trilogue-debate/.
25 UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, ‘UN Security Council
Resolution 1540 (2004)’, https://disarmament.unoda.org/
wmd/sc1540/.
26 European Commission, ‘Communication from the
Commission to the Council and the European Parliament.
Review of Export Control Policy: Ensuring Security and
Competitiveness in a Changing World’, 24 April 2014, EUR-
Lex - 52014DC0244 - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu).
27 European Parliament, ‘Regulation (EU) 2021/821 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2021
Setting Up a Union Regime for the Control of Exports,
Brokering, Technical Assistance, Transit and Transfer of
Dual-use Items’, 20 May 2021, https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/legislative-train/theme-a-stronger-europe-in-the-world/
file-review-of-dual-use-export-controls#:~:text=The%20
new%20regulation%2C%20Regulation%20(EU,entered%20
into%20force%20on%208; European Commission, ‘Exporting
Dual-use Items’, https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/
help-exporters-and-importers/exporting-dual-use-items_en.
28 European Commission, ‘EU Enables Coordinated Export
Controls by Compiling National Lists’, 26 October 2023,
https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/news/eu-enables-
coordinated-export-controls-compiling-national-
lists-2023-10-26_en.
29 European Commission, ‘FAQ on Export-related
Restrictions to Russia for Dual-use Items and “ Advanced
Technology” Items - Articles 2, 2a and 2b of Regulation
No 833/2014’, 19 July 2023, https://circabc.europa.
eu/ui/group/654251c7-f897-4098-afc3-6eb39477797e/
library/8d351fb1-67f0-4e5e-ac9e-f96af5708b0a/
details?download=true.
30 ‘U.S. Secures Deal With Netherlands, Japan on China Chip
Export Limit, Bloomberg Reports’, Reuters, 28 January 2023,
https://www.reuters.com/world/officials-netherlands-japan-
washington-chip-talks-2023-01-27/.
31 Official Journal of the European Union, ‘Regulation (EU)
2021/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council
on 20 May 2021 Setting Up a Union Regime for the Control
of Exports, Brokering, Technical Assistance, Transit and
Transfer of Dual-use Items (Recast)’, European Union,
11 June 2021, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=celex%3A32021R0821.
32 Ibid.
33 European Commission, ‘Exporting Dual-use Items’.
34 Ibid.
35 Ibid.
36 European Commission, ‘EU Enables Coordinated Export
Controls by Compiling National Lists’.
37 Official Journal of the European Union, ‘Regulation (EU)
2019/452 Establishing a Framework for the Screening of Foreign
Direct Investments into the European Union’, 19 March 2019,
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/LSU/?uri=CELEX:320
19R0452#:~:text=Regulation%20%28EU%29%202019%2F452%20
establishing%20a%20framework%20for%20the,on%20the%20
grounds%20of%20security%20or%20public%20order.
38 European Commission, ‘Investment Screening’, https://
policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/enforcement-and-protection/
investment-screening_en.
39 Official Journal of the European Union, ‘Regulation (EU)
2019/452 Establishing a Framework for the Screening of
Foreign Direct Investments Into the European Union’.
40 Ibid.
41 CIRCABC, ‘List of Screening Mechanisms Notified by
Member States’, 13 October 2023, https://circabc.europa.eu/
rest/download/7e72cdb4-65d4-4eb1-910b-bed119c45d47.
42 European Commission, ‘Factsheet on the EU Investment
Screening Regulation’, 4 July 2022, https://circabc.europa.
eu/ui/group/be8b568f-73f3-409c-b4a4-30acfcec5283/
library/5975e8f0-7679-47a2-9770-a49aedd5cef9/details.
43 European Commission, ‘Report From the Commission
to the European Parliament and the Council on the
Implementation of Regulation (EU) 2021/821 Setting Up

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 49
a Union Regime for the Control of Exports, Brokering,
Technical Assistance, Transit and Transfer of Dual-use
Items’, 1 September 2022, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52021DC0716.
44 Ibid.
45 European Commission, ‘Investment Screening’.
46 European Commission, ‘Working Group 8 - Investment
Screening’, https://futurium.ec.europa.eu/en/EU-US-TTC/wg8.
47 European Union, ‘ Action Plan Against Disinformation’,
March 2019, https://www.eeas.europa.eu/node/54866_en;
News European Parliament, ‘EU Must Prepare Better to
Fight Off Foreign Interference and Disinformation’, 9 March
2022, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20220304IPR24790/eu-must-prepare-better-to-fight-off-
foreign-interference-and-disinformation.
48 Ibid.
49 Alexander Peukert, ‘Who Decides What Counts
as Disinformation in the EU?’, Verfassungsblog,
24 October 2023, https://verfassungsblog.de/
who-decides-what-counts-as-disinformation-in-the-eu/.
50 Ibid.
51 News European Parliament, ‘EU Must Prepare Better to
Fight Off Foreign Interference and Disinformation’.
52 Ibid.
53 EUvsDisinfo, ‘ About’, https://euvsdisinfo.eu/about/.
54 European Union External Action Service, ‘Factsheet: Action
Plan Against Disinformation’, 5 December 2018, https://
www.eeas.europa.eu/node/54831_en#:~:text=The%20
Action%20Plan%20against%20Disinformation%20
focuses%20on%20four,industry%2C%20and%20d%29%20
raising%20awareness%20and%20empowering%20citizens;
European Union, ‘ Action Plan Against Disinformation’,
December 2018, https://commission.europa.eu/publications/
action-plan-disinformation-commission-contribution-
european-council-13-14-december-2018_en.
55 Council of the European Union, ‘EU Imposes Sanctions
on State-owned Outlets RT/Russia Today and Sputnik’s
Broadcasting in the EU’, 2 March 2022, https://www.
consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2022/03/02/
eu-imposes-sanctions-on-state-owned-outlets-rt-russia-
today-and-sputnik-s-broadcasting-in-the-eu/.
56 Council of Europe, ‘The Budapest Convention (ETS No. 185)
and its Protocols’, https://www.coe.int/en/web/cybercrime/
the-budapest-convention.
57 Ibid.
58 Cybersecurity Strategic Headquarters, ‘The Cybersecurity
Policy for Critical Infrastructure Protection’, Government
of Japan, 17 June 2022, https://www.nisc.go.jp/eng/pdf/
cip_policy_2022_eng.pdf.
59 Sungbaek Cho, ‘National Cybersecurity Organisation:
Republic of Korea’, NATO Cooperative Cyber
Defence Centre of Excellence, 2022, https://ccdcoe.org/
uploads/2022/12/ROK-Country-report.pdf.
60 Wang Ting-chuan and Jason Pan, ‘Experts Urge Laws to
Protect Critical Infrastructure Amid Increasing Threat’,
Taipei Times, 23 September 2023, https://www.taipeitimes.
com/News/taiwan/archives/2023/09/23/2003806661.
61 Ministry of Digital Affairs Administration for Cyber Security,
‘Cyber Security Defense for Critical Infrastructure’, 27 August
2022, https://moda.gov.tw/en/ACS/operations/ciip/650.
62 Taiwan, Ministry of Digital Affairs, ‘Cyber Security
Management Act’, 6 June 2018, https://law.moj.gov.
tw/ENG/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?pcode=A0030297;
Jono Thomson, ‘Taiwan Toughens Cyber Security
Regulations for Infrastructure Providers’, Taiwan News,
5 September 2023, https://www.taiwannews.com.tw/
en/news/4990283#:~:text=Certain%20companies%20
must%20establish%20cyber%20security%20oversight%20
role&text=TAIPEI%20(Taiwan%20News)%20
%E2%80%94%20Companies,revisions%20to%20cyber%20
security%20legislation.
63 Zainal Hasibuan, ‘Indonesia National Cyber Security
Strategy: Security and Sovereignty in Indonesia
Cyberspace’, Directorate of Information Security,
2013, https://www.slideshare.net/ditkaminfo/
iisf-indonesia-national-cyber-security-strategy-v2.
64 Republic of the Philippines Department of Energy,
‘Department Order No. 2004-03-002 Creation of the DOE
Committee for the Security of Critical Infrastructures’,
2004, https://www.doe.gov.ph/laws-and-issuances/
department-order-no-2004-03-002.
65 Office of the President of the Philippines,
‘Memorandum Circular No.50, s. 2018’, 12 October
2018, https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/2018/10/12/
memorandum-circular-no-50-s-2018/.
66 Cyber Security Agency of Singapore, ‘Singapore’s
Operational Technology Cybersecurity Masterplan 2019’,
1 October 2019, https://www.csa.gov.sg/Tips-Resource/
publications/2019/OT-Cybersecurity-Masterplan;
Malaysia, National Cyber Security Agency, ‘The Critical

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
50 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
National Information Infrastructure’, 27 October 2023,
https://www.nacsa.gov.my/cnii.php#:~:text=The%20
Critical%20National%20Information%20Infrastructure%20
%28CNII%29%20is%20defined,health%20and%20safety%20
as%20well%20as%20individual%20privacy; Cyber
Security Brunei, ‘Cybersecurity Order, 2023’, 2023, https://
csb.gov.bn/cyber-security-order; John P. Formichella,
Artima Brikshasri and Naytiwut Jamallsawat, ‘Thailand:
Cybersecurity Law in Thailand’, 2 December 2019, https://
www.mondaq.com/security/870568/cybersecurity-law-
in-thailand; UK, National Cyber Security Centre, ‘NCSC
Annual Review 2021’, 17 November 2021, https://www.
ncsc.gov.uk/collection/ncsc-annual-review-2021; Data
Guidance, ‘Cambodia - Data Protection Overview’,
October 2023, https://www.dataguidance.com/notes/
cambodia-data-protection-overview.
67 Government of Nepal, ‘National Cybersecurity Policy’,
August 2016, https://nta.gov.np/v1/uploads/contents/Nepal-
Cybersecurity-Policy-Draft.pdf.
68 Government of India, Ministry of Electronics and IT,
‘Information Technology (National Critical Information
Infrastructure Protection Centre and Manner of Performing
Functions and Duties) Rules, 2013’, 16 January 2014, https://
www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/GSR_19%28E%29_0.pdf.
69 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’, July 2021, https://moitt.gov.pk/
SiteImage/Misc/files/National%20Cyber%20Security%20
Policy%202021%20Final.pdf; Government of Bangladesh ICT
Division, ‘Bangladesh Cybersecurity Strategy 2021-2025’,
30 July 2021, https://ictd.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/
files/ictd.portal.gov.bd/page/6c9773a2_7556_4395_bbec_
f132b9d819f0/nothi_10314_2021_07_30_31627641428.pdf.
70 OECD, ‘OECD Reviews of Risk Management Policies, Good
Governance for Critical Infrastructure Resilience’, July 2019,
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/b1dac86e-en/index.
html?itemId=/content/component/b1dac86e-en.
71 Sri Lanka CERT, ‘Information and Cyber Security Strategy
of Sri Lanka 2019-2023’, November 2018, https://cert.gov.lk/
wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Information_and_CyberSecurity_
StrategyofSri-Lanka.pdf; International Technology Union,
‘What We Learned While Developing Bhutan’s First National
Cybersecurity Strategy’, 5 November 2020, https://www.itu.
int/hub/2020/11/what-we-learned-while-developing-bhutans-
first-national-cybersecurity-strategy/.
72 Government of Australia, Cyber and Infrastructure
Security Centre, ‘Defining Critical Infrastructure’,
18 July 2023, https://www.cisc.gov.au/what-is-
the-cyber-and-infrastructure-security-centre/
defining-critical-infrastructure.
73 New Zealand Government, ‘New Zealand’s Cyber Security
Strategy 2019’, July 2019, https://www.dpmc.govt.nz/sites/
default/files/2019-07/Cyber%20Security%20Strategy.pdf.
74 New Zealand Infrastructure Commission, ‘New Zealand
Infrastructure Strategy 2022 - 2052’, 31 October 2022, p. 93,
https://media.umbraco.io/te-waihanga-30-year-strategy/
mmahiykn/rautaki-hanganga-o-aotearoa-new-zealand-
infrastructure-strategy.pdf.
75 Kiribati Government, ‘Kiribati National Cybersecurity
Strategy 2020’, 2020, https://www.mict.gov.ki/sites/default/
files/National%20Cybersecurity%20Policy_0.pdf.
76 E-governance Academy, ‘Tonga National Cybersecurity
Framework’, 4 January 2022, https://digitaltransformation.
gov.to/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Tonga_National_
Cybersecurity_Framework_final.pdf; US, Department
of Homeland Security, ‘Homeland Security Act of
2002’, 25 November 2002, https://www.dhs.gov/
homeland-security-act-2002.
77 Government of Japan, National Center of Incident Readiness
and Strategy for Cybersecurity, ‘ About NISC’, https://www.
nisc.go.jp/eng/index.html#sec1.
78 Sungbaek, ‘National Cybersecurity Organisation: Republic
of Korea’.
79 PricewaterhouseCoopers, ‘ A Comparison of Cybersecurity
Regulations: Taiwan’, https://www.pwc.com/id/en/pwc-
publications/services-publications/legal-publications/a-
comparison-of-cybersecurity-regulations/taiwan.html.
80 Taiwan, Ministry of Digital Affairs, Administration for Cyber
Security, ‘Cyber Security Defense of Critical Infrastructure’,
https://moda.gov.tw/en/ACS/operations/ciip/650.
81 Ibid.
82 DataGuidance, ‘Cambodia - Data Protection Overview’,
October 2023, https://www.dataguidance.com/notes/
cambodia-data-protection-overview; ITU Academy,
‘Department of Information and Communication
Technology - Philippines (DICT)’, 2021, https://academy.
itu.int/department-information-and-communication-
technology-philippines-dict#:~:text=DTC%20Philippines%20
at%20a%20glance,the%20national%20ICT%20
development%20agenda.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 51
83 Hasibuan, ‘Indonesia National Cyber Security Strategy:
Security and Sovereignty in Indonesia Cyberspace’.
84 Government of India, ‘Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology Notification S.O.2235(E), 22 May
2018, https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/NCIIPC-
Rules-notification.pdf.
85 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’.
86 Information and Communication Technology Agency of Sri
Lanka, ‘Digital Infrastructure‘, October 2023, https://www.
icta.lk/digital-infrastructure/.
87 Australian Government, Department of Home Affairs,
Cyber and Infrastructure Security Centre, ‘Protecting
Australia Together’, 2022, https://www.cisc.gov.au/critical-
infrastructure-centre-subsite/Files/protecting-australia-
together.pdf.
88 New Zealand, Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, ‘New Zealand’s Cyber Security Strategy 2019’,
2 July 2019, https://www.dpmc.govt.nz/publications/
new-zealands-cyber-security-strategy-2019.
89 New Zealand, National Cyber Security Centre, ‘ About Us’,
https://www.ncsc.govt.nz/about-us/#mandates.
90 New Zealand Infrastructure Commission, ‘Transforming
Infrastructure for All New Zealanders’, https://tewaihanga.
govt.nz/.
91 Rakesh Kumar, ‘ Alliance to Protect Vital Cyber Systems’,
Fiji Times, 5 May 2023 https://www.fijitimes.com/
alliance-to-protect-vital-cyber-systems/; Government
of the Republic of Palau, ‘Palau National Infrastructure
Investment Plan 2021 to 2030’, 2 July 2021, https://www.
palaugov.pw/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/2021-2030-
National-Infrastructure-Investment-Plan.pdf; ‘Vanuatu
National Security Strategy’, Australia Pacific Security
College, 1 March 2021, https://pacificsecurity.net/resource/
vanuatu-national-security-strategy/; Pacific Region
Infrastructure Facility, ‘Fiji National Infrastructure
Investment Plan 2023-2034’, June 2023, https://theprif.
org/sites/default/files/documents/Fiji%20National%20
Infrastructure%20Investment%20Plan%202023_final.pdf;
Kiribati, ‘Kiribati National Cyber Security Strategy 2020’,
https://www.mict.gov.ki/sites/default/files/National%20
Cybersecurity%20Policy_0.pdf.
92 Evan Feigenbaum and Michael R. Nelson (eds), ‘The Korean
Way With Data’, Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, August 2021, p. 54, https://carnegieendowment.org/
files/202108-KoreanWayWithData_final3.pdf.
93 James A. Lewis, ‘Cyberattack on Civilian Critical
Infrastructures in a Taiwan Scenario’, CSIS, 11 August 2023,
https://www.csis.org/analysis/cyberattack-civilian-critical-
infrastructures-taiwan-scenario; Jono Thompson, ‘Taiwan
Toughens Cyber Security Regulations for Infrastructure
Providers’, Taiwan News, 5 September 2023, https://www.
taiwannews.com.tw/en/news/4990283.
94 Robin Burgess, ‘Infrastructure Development in Myanmar’,
International Growth Centre, 31 July 2019, https://www.
theigc.org/collections/infrastructure-development-myanmar.
95 Ibid.
96 World Bank, ‘The World Bank in Myanmar’, 30 October 2023,
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/myanmar/overview.
97 Ibid.
98 The World Folio, ‘ A Special Publication Produced
in Conjunction With ASEAN G2B Infrastructure
Investment Forum: The Public and Private Sector Meet
to Drive Indonesia’s Critical National Infrastructure
Agenda Forward’, 8 November 2016, https://issuu.com/
theworldfolio/docs/asean-g2b-infrastructure-investment.
99 Ibid; Prashanth Parameswaran, ‘What Does Brunei’s New
Defense White Paper Reveal About its Future Security
Outlook?’, Diplomat, 28 June 2021, https://thediplomat.
com/2021/06/what-does-bruneis-new-defense-white-paper-
reveal-about-its-future-security-outlook/.
100 Singapore Statutes Online, ‘Infrastructure Protection Act
2017: 2020 Revised Version’, 31 December 2021, https://
sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/IPA2017#:~:text=An%20Act%20
to%20provide%20for,in%20Singapore%20against%20
security%20risks.&text=1.,the%20Infrastructure%20
Protection%20Act%202017; Soumik Ghosh, ‘Singapore’s
2021 Strategy: Secure Critical Infrastructure’, Bankinfo
Security, 7 October 2021, https://www.bankinfosecurity.
asia/singapores-2021-strategy-secure-critical-
infrastructure-a-17661.
101 Australian Government, Department of Home Affairs, Cyber
and Infrastructure Security Centre, ‘Protecting Australia
Together’, p. 6.
102 New Zealand, Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet, ‘Cyber Security Strategy’, New Zealand
Government, 1 December 2020, p. 9, https://www.
dpmc.govt.nz/our-programmes/national-security/
cyber-security-strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
52 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
103 Cook Islands, Office of the Public Service Commissioner,
‘Media Release: Cyber Security CMM Review of the Cook
Islands’, 21 June 2022, https://www.psc.gov.ck/post/media-
release-cyber-security-cmm-review-of-the-cook-islands.
104 India, the Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, according to
IISS China Connects.
105 Government of Japan, ‘ AI Strategy 2019’, June 2020, https://
www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/ai/aistrategy2019_fu_sanko.pdf.
106 Ibid.
107 Government of the Republic of Korea, ‘National Strategy
for Artificial Intelligence’, 28 October 2019, https://wp.oecd.
ai/app/uploads/2021/12/Korea_National_Strategy_for_
Artificial_Intelligence_2019.pdf.
108 Taiwan, Executive Yuan, ‘ AI Innovation: Grand Strategy For
a Small Country’, 16 October 2018, https://english.ey.gov.
tw/News3/9E5540D592A5FECD/edadb735-e6a6-43e1-ac93-
1959602bb3ec; AI Taiwan, ‘Executive Yuan Announces Artificial
Intelligence Plan’, 4 June 2023, https://ai.taiwan.gov.tw/news/
executive-yuan-announces-artificial-intelligence-plan/.
109 Smart Nation Singapore, ‘National AI Strategy’, 30
November 2019, https://www.smartnation.gov.sg/media-
hub/publications/national-ai-strategy/; OECD AI Policy
Observatory, ‘National AI Strategy: Strategi Nasional
Kecerdasan Artifisial’, 6 September 2022, https://oecd.ai/
en/dashboards/policy-initiatives/http:%2F%2Faipo.oecd.
org%2F2021-data-policyInitiatives-26968; OECD AI Policy
Observatory, ‘ AI Policies in Thailand’, https://oecd.ai/en/
dashboards/countries/Thailand.
110 Justin Ponti, ‘The Philippines Launches National AI
Roadmap’, Opengov Asia, 10 May 2021, https://opengovasia.
com/the-philippines-launches-national-ai-roadmap/;
Malaysia, Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation,
‘Malaysia National Artificial Intelligence Roadmap 2021-
2025 (AI-RMAP)’, 2021, https://airmap.my/wp-content/
uploads/2022/08/AIR-Map-Playbook-final-s.pdf; Kingdom
of Cambodia, ‘ AI Landscape in Cambodia: Current Status
and Future Trends’, May 2023, https://misti.gov.kh/public/
file/202305301685426285.pdf.
111 See NITI Aayog, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
#AIFORALL’, June 2018, https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/
default/files/2023-03/National-Strategy-for-Artificial-
Intelligence.pdf.
112 See Government of Bangladesh ICT Division, ‘National
Strategy for Artificial Intelligence Bangladesh’, March 2020,
https://ictd.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/ictd.portal.
gov.bd/page/6c9773a2_7556_4395_bbec_f132b9d819f0/
Draft%20-%20Mastering%20National%20Strategy%20
for%20Artificial%20Intellgence%20-%20Bangladesh.pdf.
113 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’.
114 Australian Government, ‘ Australia’s AI Action Plan’, OECD
AI Policy Observatory, June 2021, p. 5, https://wp.oecd.ai/
app/uploads/2021/12/Australia_AI_Action_Plan_2021.pdf.
115 AI Forum New Zealand, ‘Introducing Aotearoa’s Proposed AI
Cornerstones’, 29 April 2021, https://aiforum.org.nz/2021/04/29/
introducing-aotearoas-proposed-ai-cornerstones/.
116 Government of Kiribati, ‘Kiribati National ICT Policy 2019’,
2019, https://www.mict.gov.ki/sites/default/files/National%20
ICT%20Policy.pdf; see Timor Tecnologia da Informacao
e Comunicacao, ‘Timor Digital 2032’, https://anyflip.com/
gvocj/zerd/basic; Solomon Islands Government, ‘Government
Launches First-ever National E-commerce Strategy 2022-
2027’, 1 May 2023, https://solomons.gov.sb/government-
launches-first-ever-national-e-commerce-strategy-2022-2027/.
117 Government of Japan, ‘ AI Strategy 2022’, Cabinet
Office, August 2022, https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/ai/
aistratagy2022en_ov.pdf.
118 Government of the Republic of Korea, Ministry of Science
and ICT, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence’, 17
December 2019, https://www.msit.go.kr/bbs/view.do?sCode
=eng&nttSeqNo=9&bbsSeqNo=46&mId=10&mPid=9.
119 Chung Li-hua and Jake Chung, ‘Executive Yuan Announces
Artificial Intelligence Plan’, Taipei Times, 4 June 2023, https://
www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2023/06/04/20
03800937#:~:text=A%20new%20government%20policy%20
dubbed,and%20Technology%20Policy%20said%20yesterday.
120 Ibid.
121 Department of Trade and Industry Philippines, ‘The
National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Strategy for the
Philippines: AI Towards Inclusive, Sustainable, and Resilient
Development’, https://doc.msit.go.kr/SynapDocViewServer/
viewer/doc.html?key=745687e0958b44e091e226d2e105dc
b2&convType=img&convLocale=ko_KR&contextPath=/
SynapDocViewServer.
122 Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, ‘National Strategy on R&D
Application of Artificial Intelligence’, 17 March 2021, https://
en.baochinhphu.vn/national-strategy-on-rd-and-application-
of-artificial-intelligence-11140663.htm#:~:text=To%20
promote%20research%2C%20development%20

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 53
and,ASEAN%20and%20over%20the%20world; OECD
AI Policy Observatory, ‘Thailand’s AI Strategy to Boost
Economic and Social Wellbeing’, 15 December 2022, https://
oecd.ai/en/wonk/thailand-ai-strategies.
123 Department of Trade and Industry Philippines, ‘The
National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Strategy for the
Philippines: AI towards Inclusive, Sustainable, and Resilient
Development’, https://innovate.dti.gov.ph/wp-content/
uploads/2020/07/AI-Roadmap-Usec-Aldaba.pdf.
124 Ibid; OECD AI Policy Observatory, ‘ AI in the United Kingdom’,
https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards/countries/UnitedKingdom;
Smart Nation Singapore, Digital Government Office, ‘National
Artificial Intelligence Strategy: Advancing our Smart Nation
Journey’, November 2019, https://www.smartnation.gov.sg/
files/publications/national-ai-strategy.pdf.
125 Ibid.
126 NITI Aayog, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
#AIFORALL’, p. 1; Government of Bangladesh ICT Division,
‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence Bangladesh
2019-2024’, p. 2.
127 Ibid.
128 Ibid.
129 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’.
130 Niti Aayog, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
#AIFORALL’, pp. 24–41.
131 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’; Government of Bangladesh ICT
Division, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
Bangladesh 2019-2024’, pp. 23–31.
132 OECD AI Policy Observatory, ‘ Australia’s AI Action Plan’, p.3.
133 Ibid.
134 AI Forum New Zealand, ‘ AI Strategy Draft Cornerstones’,
21 May 2021, https://aiforum.org.nz/2021/05/21/
ai-strategy-draft-cornerstones/.
135 Government of Japan, ‘ AI Strategy 2022’.
136 See Government of the Republic of Korea, ‘National Strategy
for Artificial Intelligence’, 2019, pp. 51–55, https://doc.msit.
go.kr/SynapDocViewServer/viewer/doc.html?key=745687e
0958b44e091e226d2e105dcb2&convType=img&convLocale
=ko_KR&contextPath=/SynapDocViewServer.
137 Government of Japan, ‘ AI Strategy’, Cabinet Office, https://
www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/ai/index.html.
138 Chung and Chung, ‘Executive Yuan Announces Artificial
Intelligence Plan’.
139 Smart Nation Singapore, ‘National AI Strategy’.
140 See ‘Chapter 7: AI Policy and National Strategies’ in Daniel
Zhang et al, ‘The AI Index 2021 Annual Report’, AI Index
Steering Committee, Human-Centered AI Institute, Stanford
University, March 2021, p. 8, https://aiindex.stanford.
edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/2021-AI-Index-Report-_
Chapter-7.pdf.
141 Government of Bangladesh, ICT Division, https://ictd.gov.bd/.
142 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’.
143 New Zealand, Ministry of Business, Innovation and
Employment, ‘Future Focus Areas’, https://www.mbie.
govt.nz/business-and-employment/economic-development/
industry-policy/industry-transformation-plans/digital-
technologies/digital-technologies-industry-transformation-
plan/future-focus-areas/; AI Forum New Zealand, ‘ About’,
2022, https://aiforum.org.nz/about/.
144 Government of Kiribati, ‘Position Description: Chief
Information Security Officer (Ministry of Information,
Communications and Transport)’, Ministry of Employment
and Human Resources, 23 September 2022, https://www.
employment.gov.ki/sites/default/files/2022-09/JD%20-%20
Chief%20Information%20Security%20Officer.pdf.
145 Government of Japan, ‘ AI Strategy 2022’; Government of the
Republic of Korea, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence’.
146 ‘Taiwan’s Government Official Opens AI
Center of Excellence’, Focus Taiwan, 28
March 2023, https://ai.taiwan.gov.tw/news/
taiwans-government-officially-opens-ai-center-of-excellence/.
147 See Netherlands, Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate
Policy, ‘ Artificial Intelligence; An Overview of Policies
and Developments in Taiwan’, Netherlands Enterprise
Agency, https://www.rvo.nl/sites/default/files/2020/04/
AI-Developments-in-Taiwan.pdf.
148 Smart Nation Singapore, ‘National Artificial Intelligence
Strategy: Advancing Our Smart Nation Journey’, November
2019, https://www.smartnation.gov.sg/files/publications/
national-ai-strategy.pdf; Department of Trade and Industry
Phillipines, ‘The National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Strategy
for the Philippines: AI towards Inclusive, Sustainable,
and Resilient Development’, https://innovate.dti.gov.ph/
wp-content/uploads/2020/07/AI-Roadmap-Usec-Aldaba.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
54 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
149 Thailand, Ministry of Digital Economy and Society,
‘Thailand National AI Strategy and Action Plan (2022 –
2027)’, https://ai.in.th/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/2022-
NAIS-Presentation-eng.pdf.
150 Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, ‘National Strategy on R&D
Application of Artificial Intelligence’; OECD AI Policy
Observatory, ‘National AI Strategy: Strategi Nasional
Kecerdasan Artifisial’.
151 Niti Aayog, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
#AIFORALL’, pp. 75–76.
152 Government of Bangladesh ICT Division, ‘National Strategy
for Artificial Intelligence Bangladesh 2019-2024’.
153 See Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’.
154 AI Forum New Zealand, ‘ AI Forum’.
155 White House, ‘The Spirit of Camp David: Joint Statement
of Japan, the Republic of Korea, and the United States’, 18
August 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2023/08/18/the-spirit-of-camp-david-
joint-statement-of-japan-the-republic-of-korea-and-the-
united-states/.
156 Government of Republic of Korea, Ministry of Science and
ICT, ‘Launch of First Global AI Initiative, GPAI (Jun15)’, 15
June 2020, https://www.msit.go.kr/eng/bbs/view.do?sCode=
eng&mId=4&mPid=2&pageIndex=&bbsSeqNo=42&nttSeqN
o=437&searchOpt=&searchTxt=.
157 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, ‘G7 Hiroshima Leaders’
Communique’, 20 May 2023, https://www.mofa.go.jp/
files/100506878.pdf.
158 US, Department of State, ‘ Artificial Intelligence for
Accelerating Progress on the Sustainable Development
Goals: Addressing Society’s Greatest Challenges’,
18 September 2023, https://www.state.gov/artificial-
intelligence-for-accelerating-progress-on-the-sustainable-
development-goals-addressing-societys-greatest-challenges/.
159 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, ‘The 15th
Japan-US Joint High-Level Committee (JHLC) Meeting
Under the Agreement Between Japan and the U.S. on
Cooperation in Research and Development in Science
and Technology’, 23 May 2023, https://www.mofa.go.jp/
press/release/press5e_000003.html; US, Department
of State, ‘The 16th Japan-US Joint Working-Level
Committee Meeting’, 17 June 2021, https://www.state.gov/
the-16th-japan-u-s-joint-working-level-committee-meeting/.
160 Council of the European Union, ‘EU-Japan Summit
(Brussels, 13 July 2023) - Joint Statement’, 13 July 2023,
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/65790/joint-
statement-st11825-en23.pdf.
161 UK, Department for Science, Innovation and Technology,
‘Guidance: UK-Japan Digital Partnership’, 7 December
2022, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
uk-japan-digital-partnership/uk-japan-digital-partnership.
162 US, Department of State, ‘U.S.-ROK Information and
Communications Technology Policy Forum 2023’, 25
September 2023, https://www.state.gov/u-s-rok-information-
and-communications-technology-policy-forum-2023/;
European Commission, ‘EU and Republic of Korea Digital
Partnership: Strengthening Our Economic Resilience’, 30
June 2023, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/
detail/en/ip_23_3607.
163 ‘Taiwan to Deepen Scientific Research Cooperation With
France’, Taiwan Today, 5 October 2023, https://taiwantoday.
tw/news.php?unit=2,6,10,15,18&post=242878.
164 Smart Nation Singapore, ‘National Artificial Intelligence
Strategy: Advancing Our Smart Nation Journey’, November
2019, https://www.smartnation.gov.sg/files/publications/
national-ai-strategy-summary.pdf.
165 Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, ‘National Strategy on R&D
and Application of Artificial Intelligence’.
166 Kayla Goode and Heeu Millie Kim, ‘Indonesia’s AI Promise
in Perspective’, CSET, August 2021, https://cset.georgetown.
edu/publication/indonesias-ai-promise-in-perspective/.
167 Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence, ‘ About GPAI’,
https://gpai.ai/about/.
168 White House, ‘Quad Principles on Technology Design,
Development, Governance, and Use’, 24 September 2021,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/24/quad-principles-on-technology-design-
development-governance-and-use/.
169 White House, ‘Joint Statement from Quad Leaders’,
24 September 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/09/24/
joint-statement-from-quad-leaders/.
170 ‘The Maldives’ AI Journey: Lessons Learned and Future
Prospects’, ISP Page, 27 June 2023, https://isp.page/
news/the-maldives-ai-journey-lessons-learned-and-
future-prospects/#:~:text=To%20this%20end%2C%20
the%20Maldives,the%20ethical%20use%20of%20AI;
see Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Information

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 55
Technology and Telecommunication, ‘National Cyber
Security Policy 2021’.
171 US, Department of State, ‘Joint Statement from Founding
Members of the Global Partnership on Artificial
Intelligence’, 15 June 2020, https://www.state.gov/
joint-statement-from-founding-members-of-the-global-
partnership-on-artificial-intelligence/.
172 UK, Ministry of Defence and Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory, ‘World First as UK Hosts Inaugural
AUKUS AI and Autonomy Trial’, 26 May 2023, https://www.
gov.uk/government/news/world-first-as-uk-hosts-inaugural-
aukus-ai-and-autonomy-trial.
173 White House, ‘FACT SHEET: Delivering on the
Next Generation of Innovation and Partnership with
Australia’, 25 October 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/10/25/fact-sheet-
delivering-on-the-next-generation-of-innovation-and-
partnership-with-australia/.
174 White House, ‘United States-Australia Joint Leaders’
Statement Building an Innovation Alliance,’ 25 October 2023,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2023/10/25/united-states-australia-joint-leaders-
statementbuilding-an-innovation-alliance/.
175 ‘New Zealand May Join AUKUS Pact’s Non-
nuclear Component’, Guardian, 28 March 2023,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/mar/28/
new-zealand-may-join-aukus-pacts-non-nuclear-component.
176 Government of Japan, ‘ AI Strategy 2022’.
177 Department of Trade and Industry Phillipines, ‘The National
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Strategy for the Philippines: AI
towards Inclusive, Sustainable, and Resilient Development’,
https://innovate.dti.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/
AI-Roadmap-Usec-Aldaba.pdf.
178 Ibid.
179 OECD AI Policy Observatory, ‘ AI Policies in Thailand’.
180 ‘The Future of Artificial Intelligence in Vietnam: An
Overview’, Innovatureinc.com, 8 May 2023, https://
innovatureinc.com/the-future-of-artificial-intelligence-in-
vietnam/#artificial-intelligence-in-vietnam.
181 Singapore Infocomm Media Development Authority,
‘Generative AI: Implications for Trust and Governance’,
2023, https://aiverifyfoundation.sg/downloads/
Discussion_Paper.pdf; Eileen Yu, ‘Singapore Identifies
Six Generative AI Risks, Sets Up Foundation to Guide
Adoption’, ZDNET, 8 June 2023, https://www.zdnet.com/
article/singapore-identifies-six-generative-ai-risks-sets-up-
foundation-to-guide-adoption/.
182 Such as big data, machine learning and deep learning; data
handling, storage, compute, scaling, extensibility and security.
183 Government of Bangladesh ICT Division, ‘National
Strategy for Artificial Intelligence Bangladesh 2019-
2024’, p. 47; Government of Pakistan, Ministry of IT and
Telecommunication, ‘Expression of Interest: The Feasibility
Study of National Centers of Research Innovation
and Entrepreneurship in AI and Allied Technologies
(NCRIE-AI)’, 17 October 2021, https://moitt.gov.pk/
SiteImage/Misc/files/EOI%20for%20NCRIE-AI.pdf.
184 See Niti Aayog, ‘National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
#AIFORALL’.
185 OECD AI Policy Observatory, ‘ Australia’s AI Action Plan’, p. 3.
186 AI Forum New Zealand, ‘ AI Forum’.
187 US, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and
Security, ‘South Korea Export Control Information’,
https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/all-articles/220-
eco-country-pages/1149-south-korea-export-control-
information#:~:text=Laws%20relevant%20to%20South%20
Korea%27s,of%20Chemical%20and%20Biological%20
Weapons%20(.
188 US, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry
and Security, ‘Taiwan Export Control Information’,
2020, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/all-
articles/220-eco-country-pages/1155-taiwan-export-
control-information?ref=interconnected.blog; Taiwan
International Trade Administration, ‘Export Controls Laws
(SHTC)’, http://www.trade.gov.tw/english/Pages/List.
aspx?nodeID=298.
189 US, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and
Security, ‘Taiwan Export Control Information’.
190 White House, ‘G7 Hiroshima Leaders’ Communique’,
20 May 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/05/20/
g7-hiroshima-leaders-communique/.
191 White House, ‘The Spirit of Camp David: Joint Statement of
Japan, the Republic of Korea, and the United States’.
192 ‘Taiwan Signals its Chip Firms Will Follow New US Rules on
China’, Reuters, 8 October 2022, https://www.reuters.com/
technology/taiwan-signals-its-chip-firms-will-follow-new-
us-rules-china-2022-10-08/.
193 European Commission, ‘EU and Taiwan Hold Second Trade
and Investment Dialogue’, 28 April 2023, https://policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
56 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
trade.ec.europa.eu/news/eu-and-taiwan-hold-second-trade-
and-investment-dialogue-2023-04-28_en.
194 US, Department of Commerce, US Bureau of Industry
and Security, ‘Enforcement’, https://www.bis.doc.gov/
index.php/enforcement/oea?id=1057; Malaysia, Ministry
of Investment, Trade and Industry, ‘MITI Official Portal’,
https://www.miti.gov.my/index.php/pages/view/sta2010;
International Committee of the Red Cross, ‘Philippines:
Strategic Trade Management Act 2015’, 13 November 2015,
https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/national-practice/strategic-
trade-management-act-2015; Pornapa Luengwattanakit et
al., ‘Thailand: Updates on Thailand’s Export Control and
Dual-use Items Regulations’, Global Compliance News,
21 January 2022, https://www.globalcompliancenews.
com/2022/01/21/thailand-updates-on-thailands-export-
control-and-dual-use-items-regulations06012022/.
195 Republic of the Union of Myanmar, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, ‘Myanmar Export / Import Rules and Regulations’,
30 October 2023, https://www.mofa.gov.mm/commercial/
myanmar-trade-rules/.
196 Dezan Shira et al., ‘Vietnam’s Import and Export
Regulations Explained’, Vietnam Briefing, 12 April 2019,
https://www.vietnam-briefing.com/news/vietnams-import-
export-regulations-explained.html/#:~:text=Vietnam%20
imposes%20a%20tax%20on,taxes%20and%20even%20
tax%20exemptions.
197 Louis Hsieh, ‘Taiwan Expands the List of Export Control
Items to Russia and Belarus’, Sanctions & Export
Controls Update, 13 January 2023, https://sanctionsnews.
bakermckenzie.com/taiwan-expands-the-list-of-export-
control-items-to-russia-and-belarus/#:~:text=In%20April%20
and%20May%202022,%2C%20lasers%2C%20and%20
aerospace%20products.
198 Government of India, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
‘ITCHS Based Import and Export Policy’, https://www.dgft.
gov.in/CP/?opt=itchs-import-export.
199 Government of India, Ministry of Commerce & Industry,
‘Foreign Trade Policy 2023 Announced’, 31 March 2023, https://
pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1912572.
200 Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh,
Export Promotion Bureau, ‘Policy and Policy Order’, 21
August 2022, http://www.epb.gov.bd/site/files/2e06c28e-
9bf8-4bb1-8aff-b144934b7081/Policy-and-Policy-Order;
Government of Sri Lanka, Ministry of Finance, Economic
Stabilization and National Policies, ‘Government
Notification: Imports and Exports Control Act, No. 1
of 1969’, 9 June 2023, https://www.treasury.gov.lk/api/
file/8655da55-e837-4f0e-a13a-023b0b625f5d.
201 Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
‘Pakistan Notifies Revised Control Lists Under the Export
Control Act of 2004’, 27 June 2022, https://mofa.gov.pk/
pakistan-notifies-revised-control-lists-under-the-export-
control-act-of-2004-7/.
202 Royal Government of Bhutan, Ministry of Finance, ‘Customs
Rules and Regulations of Bhutan 2017’, 27 December 2017,
https://www.mof.gov.bt/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/
CRRB2017.pdf; Maldives Customs Service, ‘Laws and
Regulations’, https://customs.gov.mv/Media/Materials/
laws-reg.
203 European Commission, ‘EU-India: New Trade and
Technology Council to Lead on Digital Transformation,
Green Technologies and Trade’, 6 February 2023, https://
ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_23_596.
204 Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
‘Pakistan Notifies Revised Control Lists Under the Export
Control Act of 2004’.
205 Australian Government, Defence, ‘Legislation, Regimes
and Agreements’, https://www.defence.gov.au/
business-industry/export/controls/export-controls/
legislation-regimes-agreements.
206 New Zealand, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, ‘Why
Do We Have Export Controls?’, https://www.mfat.govt.nz/
en/trade/export-controls/why/.
207 Government of Vanuatu, ‘Prohibition of Import and Export
of Ozone Depleting Substances, Order No. 12 of 2010’,
2010, http://www.paclii.org/vu/other/VUGovGaz/2010/45.
pdf; Tuvalu, ‘Customs Revenue and Border Protection Act
2014’, 2014, https://tuvalu.tradeportal.org/Regulations/
Details?lawId=21&l=en; Republic of Palau, Ministry of Finance,
‘Customs Regulations’, July 2006, http://palaucustoms.org/
files/common_unit_id/d1f9f60d-572e-4dde-9bef-e89aad48e2e3/
Customs%20Regulations%20.pdf; Cook Islands Trade Portal,
‘Food (Fish Export Processing) Regulations’, https://cook-
islands.tradeportal.org/Regulations/Details?lawId=171&l=en;
Central Bank of Samoa, ‘Export Procedures’, 19 July
2021, https://www.cbs.gov.ws/exchange-control/export-
procedures/#:~:text=Under%20the%20Exchange%20
Control%20Regulations,Form%20E%20and%20or%20fine.
208 White House, ‘Statement By President Biden
on the Recognition of the Cook Islands and the

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 57
Establishment of Diplomatic Relations’, 25 September
2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2023/09/25/statement-by-
president-biden-on-the-recognition-of-the-cook-islands-and-
the-establishment-of-diplomatic-relations/.
209 US, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and
Security, ‘Five Eyes Partners Agree to Formalize Cooperation
on Export Control Enforcement’, 28 June 2023, https://www.
bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/about-bis/newsroom/
press-releases/3294-2023-06-28-bis-press-release-five-eyes-
export-enforcement-coordination/file.
210 Hsieh, ‘Taiwan Expands the List of Export Control Items to
Russia and Belarus’.
211 Melissa Hanham et al., ‘Taiwan’s Export Control System:
Overview and Recommendations’, August 2017, James
Martin Center For Nonproliferation Studies, https://www.
nonproliferation.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/op32-
taiwan-export-control.pdf.
212 US, Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and
Security, ‘Enforcement’; Malaysia, Ministry of Investment,
Trade and Industry, ‘Strategic Trade Act (STA) 2010’,
https://www.miti.gov.my/index.php/pages/view/sta2010;
International Committee of the Red Cross, ‘Philippines:
Strategic Trade Management Act 2015’; Luengwattanakit et
al., ‘Thailand: Updates on Thailand’s Export Control and
Dual-use Items Regulations’.
213 Republic of the Union of Myanmar, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, ‘Myanmar Export / Import Rules and Regulations’,
30 October 2023, https://www.mofa.gov.mm/commercial/
myanmar-trade-rules/.
214 Pakistan, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Strategic Export Control
Division, ‘Strategic Export Controls’, 30 October 2023, http://
www.secdiv.gov.pk/page/strategic-export-controls; the
intersecting ministries are the Ministry of External Affairs,
the Department of Atomic Energy, Defence Research &
Development Organization, the Department of Space, the
Department of Chemical and Biotechnology and the National
Authority for the Chemical Weapons Convention.
215 Government of Nepal, Trade and Export Promotion Centre,
‘Trade and Export Promotion Centre’, http://www.tepc.gov.np/.
216 Royal Government of Bhutan, Ministry of Finance,
‘Department of Revenue and Customs’, https://www.mof.
gov.bt/departments/department-of-revenue-custom/.
217 Royal Government of Bhutan, Ministry of Finance, ‘Customs
Rules and Regulations of Bhutan 2017’.
218 Maldives Customs Service, ‘Export Examination’, https://
customs.gov.mv/Business/Exporters/export-examination.
219 High Commission of the Republic in French Polynesia,
‘The Status of Autonomy and the Distribution of
Skills’, https://www.polynesie-francaise.pref.gouv.fr/
Actions-de-l-Etat/Partenariat-Etat-Polynesie-francaise/
Autonomie-et-repartition-des-competences.
220 ‘Customs Revenue and Border Protection Act, 2014’,
Tuvalu Trade Portal; Central Bank of Samoa, ‘Export
Procedures’; Cook Islands Trade Portal, ‘Food (Fish
Export Processing) Regulations’; Government of Vanuatu,
‘Prohibited Export Regulations, Order No 113 of 2014’,
2014, https://vanuatucustoms.gov.vu/index.php/customs/
legislations/regulations.
221 Government of Japan, Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Industry, ‘Security of Export Control’,
https://www.meti.go.jp/policy/anpo/englishpage/
securityexportcontrolinjapan5.pdf.
222 Jaekwon Lee, ‘South Korea’s Export Control System’, SIPRI,
November 2013, https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/
files/misc/SIPRIBP1311.pdf.
223 Taiwan International Trade Administration, ‘Export Control
List for Dual Use Items and Technology and Common
Military List’, 21 September 2023, https://www.trade.gov.tw/
english/Pages/Detail.aspx?nodeID=298&pid=687872.
224 US Department of Commerice, Bureau of Industry and Security,
‘Enforcement’; Malaysia, Ministry of Investment, Trade and
Industry, ‘MITI Official Portal’, https://www.miti.gov.my/index.
php/pages/view/sta2010; International Committee of the Red
Cross, ‘Philippines: Strategic Trade Management Act 2015’;
Luengwattanakit et al., ‘Thailand: Updates on Thailand’s Export
Control and Dual-use Items Regulations’.
225 Republic of the Union of Myanmar, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, ‘Myanmar Export / Import Rules and Regulations’,
30 October 2023 https://www.mofa.gov.mm/commercial/
myanmar-trade-rules/.
226 ‘Vietnam’s Import and Export Regulations Explained’,
Vietnam Briefing.
227 Ayman Falak Medina, ‘Indonesia Regulates the Prohibition of
Certain Goods for Import and Export Under the Omnibus Law’,
ASEAN Briefing, 2 February 2022, https://www.aseanbriefing.
com/news/indonesia-regulates-the-prohibition-of-certain-goods-
for-import-and-export-under-the-omnibus-law/.
228 Brunei, ‘III. Trade Policies and Practices By Measure’,
WT/TPR/S/196, pp. 33–65, https://view.officeapps.live.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
58 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.wto.
org%2Fenglish%2Ftratop_e%2Ftpr_e%2Fs196-03_e.
doc&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK.
229 Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs,
‘ Appendix 3 [List of SCOMET Items] to schedule-2 of ITC
(HS) classification of export and import items, 2018)’, 20
December 2021, https://www.mea.gov.in/Portal/Images/
SCOMET-List-2021.pdf.
230 International Atomic Energy Agency, ‘Pakistan’s
National Legislation Entitled: “Export Control on Goods,
Technologies, Material and Equipment Related to Nuclear
and Biological Weapons and their Delivery Systems
Act, 2004”’, 23 November 2004, https://www.iaea.org/
sites/default/files/publications/documents/infcircs/2004/
infcirc636.pdf.
231 Australian Government, Defence, ‘The Defence and
Strategic Goods List’, https://www.defence.gov.au/
business-industry/export/controls/export-controls/
defence-strategic-goods-list.
232 New Zealand, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, ‘New
Zealand Strategic Goods List’, November 2021, https://
www.mfat.govt.nz/assets/Trade-General/Brokering-
weapons-AND-Trading-weapons-and-controlled-chemicals/
NZ-Strategic-Goods-List-November-2021.pdf.
233 Vanuatu Customs & Inland Revenue Department, ‘Customs
Revenue and Border Protection Act No.15 of 2014’, https://
vanuatucustoms.gov.vu/index.php/customs/legislations/
regulations; Government of Vanuatu, ‘Prohibited Export
Regulations, Order No 113 of 2014’, 2014; Government of
Vanuatu, ’Prohibited Import and Export of Ozone Depleting
Substances: Order No 12 of 2010’, 2010.
234 Cook Islands Trade Portal, ‘Food (Fish Export Processing)
Regulations’; Central Bank of Samoa, ‘Export Procedures’.
235 Government of Japan, Ministry of Finance, ‘Rules and
Regulations of the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade
Act’, 24 April 2020, https://www.mof.go.jp/english/policy/
international_policy/fdi/kanrenshiryou01_20200424.pdf.
236 Hyeonmin Kim and June Kyu Shin, ‘Foreign Direct
Investment Reviews 2023: Korea’, White & Case, 20 March
2023, https://www.whitecase.com/insight-our-thinking/
foreign-direct-investment-reviews-2023-korea.
237 Lauly Li, ‘Taiwan Unveils New Rules to Tighten Chinese
Investment Screening’, Nikkei Asia, 20 August 2020, https://
asia.nikkei.com/Economy/Trade-war/Taiwan-unveils-new-
rules-to-tighten-Chinese-investment-screening.
238 ‘Foreign Direct Investment Regimes: Taiwan 2023’, ICLG.
com, 30 November 2023, https://iclg.com/practice-areas/
foreign-direct-investment-regimes-laws-and-regulations/taiwan.
239 Ibid.
240 Ibid.
241 Ibid.
242 Ayman Falak Medina, ‘Vietnam’s Decree 31 Provides
Guidance on Implementation of the Investment Law’, ASEAN
Briefing, 27 May 2021, https://www.aseanbriefing.com/news/
vietnams-decree-31-provides-guidance-on-implementation-
of-the-investment-law/; UNCTAD Investment Policy Hub,
‘Investment Policy Monitor: The Philippines’, United Nations,
https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/investment-policy-
monitor/169/philippines; United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, ‘The Evolution of FDI Screening
Mechanisms - Key Trends and Features’, United Nations,
February 2023, https://unctad.org/system/files/official-
document/diaepcbinf2023d2_en.pdf; UNCTAD Investment
Policy Hub, ‘Myanmar Investment Law’, United Nations,
https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/investment-laws/laws/172/
myanmar-investment-law; ‘Positive Investment List: A Revoked
Negative Investment List’, Permitindo, 3 December 2021, https://
www.permitindo.com/news/indonesia-positive-investment-list.
243 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate
Statements: Thailand’, https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-
investment-climate-statements/thailand/; UNCTAD
Investment Policy Hub, ‘Malaysia’, United Nations, https://
investmentpolicy.unctad.org/country-navigator/129/
malaysia; US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate
Statements: Thailand’.
244 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate
Statements: Singapore’, https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-
investment-climate-statements/singapore/; ‘Foreign
Direct Investment in Singapore’, Pinsent Masons, 7 June
2023, https://www.pinsentmasons.com/out-law/guides/
singapores-foreign-investment-regime.
245 Government of India, Ministry of Commerce & Industry,
‘Government Amends the Extant FDI Policy for Curbing
Opportunistic Takeovers/Acquisitions of Indian Companies
Due to the Current COVID-19 Pandemic’, 18 April 2020,
https://commerce.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/
MOC637266276846656905_press_release_290420-II.pdf.
246 Government of India, Ministry of Commerce & Industry,
‘Government Amends the Extant FDI Policy For
Curbing Opportunistic Takeovers/Acquisitions of Indian

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 59
Companies Due to the Current COVID-19 Pandemic’,
28 August 2020, https://commerce.gov.in/press-releases/
government-amends-the-extant-fdi-policy-for-curbing-
opportunistic-takeovers-acquisitions-of-indian-companies-
due-to-the-current-covid-19-pandemic/.
247 This screening requirement has mostly impacted
Chinese companies, who had the most FDI in India
out of all the neighbouring countries. FDI plans by
China, Pakistan and others are in limbo as India keeps
permission pending. See ‘FDI plans by China, Pakistan,
Others in Limbo as India Keeps Permission Pending’,
Economic Times, 31 May 2023, https://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/40-50-fdi-
proposals-from-countries-sharing-land-border-with-
india-pending-for-approval/articleshow/100646373.
cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_
medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst.
248 Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade, ‘ Australia’s Foreign Investment Policy’, https://
www.dfat.gov.au/trade/investment/australias-foreign-
investment-policy; New Zealand Treasury, ‘Foreign
Investment Policy and National Interest Guidance’, 8 June
2021, https://www.treasury.govt.nz/publications/guide/
foreign-investment-policy-and-national-interest-guidance.
249 Government of Vanuatu, ‘ Appendix B: Reserved Business
Activities’, https://www.investvanuatu.vu/wp-content/
uploads/2021/04/Reserved-List.pdf; US, Department of State,
‘2023 Investment Climate Statements: Marshall Islands’,
https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-
statements/marshall-islands/; US, Department of State,
‘2023 Investment Climate Statements: Palau’, https://www.
state.gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-statements/
palau/; Cook Islands Development Investment Board,
‘The Cook Islands Investment Code’, https://btib.gov.ck/
foreign-investment/rules-of-investment/#:~:text=The%20
Investment%20Code%20Order%202003,reserved%20for%20
Cook%20Islanders%20only; Pacific Region Infrastructure
Facility, ‘Fiji National Infrastructure Investment Plan
2023-2034’, June 2023, https://theprif.org/sites/default/
files/documents/Fiji%20National%20Infrastructure%20
Investment%20Plan%202023_final.pdf; US, Department
of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate Statements: Samoa’,
https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-
statements/samoa/; Samoa Consolidated Legislation 2020,
‘Samoa Foreign Investment Act 2000’, Pacific Islands Legal
Information Institute, http://www.paclii.org/cgi-bin/sinodisp/
ws/legis/consol_act_2020/fia2000219/fia2000219.html?stem=&
synonyms=&query=foreign%20investment%20act.
250 US, Department of State, ‘Marshall Islands’, https://www.
state.gov/countries-areas/marshall-islands/.
251 UNCTAD Investment Policy Monitor, ‘Indonesia:
New Investment Ministry Established’, United
Nations, 28 April 2021, https://investmentpolicy.
unctad.org/investment-policy-monitor/measures/3712/
new-investment-ministry-established.
252 UNCTAD Investment Policy Hub, ‘Malaysia: Announced
the Establishment of an FDI Monitoring Committee’, United
Nations, 5 April 2023, https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/
investment-policy-monitor/measures/4304/announced-the-
establishment-of-an-fdi-monitoring-committee.
253 Directorate of Investment and Company Administration,
‘ About the MIC’, https://www.dica.gov.mm/en/information-
myanmar-investment-commission-mic, 17 November 2023.
254 Ibid.
255 ‘Foreign Direct Investment in Singapore’, Pinsent Masons, 7
June 2023, https://www.pinsentmasons.com/out-law/guides/
singapores-foreign-investment-regime.
256 Tsubasa Suruga, ‘Singapore Plans to Screen Major
Investments in “Critical Entities”’, Nikkei Asia, 6 November
2023, https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics/Singapore-plans-to-
screen-major-investments-in-critical-entities.
257 Ayman Falak Medina, ‘Vietnam’s Decree 31 Provides
Guidance on Implementation of the Investment Law’,
ASEAN Briefing.
258 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment
Climate Statements: India’, https://www.state.gov/
reports/2023-investment-climate-statements/india/.
259 Although it lacks in-house capacity and relies heavily on
intelligence. See Bangladesh Investment Development
Authority, ‘BIDA Mandate and Activities’, https://www.bida.
gov.bd/mandate-and-activities. The restricted sectors are:
Aviation; banks and financial institutions; coal, natural gas, and
mineral exploration, extraction, and supply; crude-oil refining;
deep-sea fishing; insurance companies; large-scale infrastructure
projects; power generation, supply and distribution; satellite
channels; seaports; and VOIP/IP telephone.
260 Government of Nepal, Investment Board Nepal, ‘ About Us’,
https://ibn.gov.np/about-us/what-is-ibn-3584.
261 Australian Government, Australian Trade and
Investment Commission, ‘ Approval for Foreign

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
60 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Investment in Australia’, https://www.globalaustralia.
gov.au/news-and-resources/guide-to-investing/
approval-for-foreign-investment-in-australia.
262 New Zealand Treasury, ‘Foreign Investment Policy
and National Interest Guidance’, 8 June 2021,
https://www.treasury.govt.nz/publications/guide/
foreign-investment-policy-and-national-interest-guidance.
263 FIPA Vanuatu, ‘Investment Policy and Related’, https://
investvanuatu.vu/newsroom/policy-and-regulations/.
264 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate
Statements: Marshall Islands’, https://www.state.
gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-statements/
marshall-islands/.
265 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate Statements:
Palau’; Cook Islands Development Investment Board, ‘The
Cook Islands Investment Code’, 2003, https://btib.gov.ck/
foreign-investment/rules-of-investment/#:~:text=The%20
Investment%20Code%20Order%202003,reserved%20for%20
Cook%20Islanders%20only.
266 ‘Samoa Foreign Investment Act 2000’, Pacific Islands Legal
Information Institute.
267 Yohei Hirose, ‘Japan to Boost Scrutiny Over Foreign
Investments in Chips, Batteries’, Nikkei Asia, 10 March 2023,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Tech/Semiconductors/Japan-
to-boost-scrutiny-over-foreign-investments-in-chips-batteries.
268 ‘Foreign Direct Investment Review 2023: Korea’, White & Case.
269 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate
Statements: South Korea’, https://www.state.gov/
reports/2023-investment-climate-statements/south-korea/.
270 ‘Korea Enacts Special Act to Protect and Foster National
High-tech Strategic Industry’, Kim & Chang, 13 April
2022, https://www.kimchang.com/en/insights/detail.
kc?sch_section=4&idx=24744; ‘National Core Technology
List Updated’, Kim & Chang, Spring/Summer 2017, https://
www.kimchang.com/newsletter/2017newsletter/ip/eng/
newsletter_ip_en_spring_summer2017_article05.html.
271 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate Statements:
Taiwan’, https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-investment-climate-
statements/taiwan/#:~:text=Taiwan%20President%20Tsai%20
Ing%2Dwen’s,R%26D%20to%20attract%20foreign%20investors.
272 Ibid.
273 UNCTAD Investment Policy Hub, ‘Investment
Policy Monitor: The Philippines’, United
Nations, https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/
investment-policy-monitor/169/philippines.
274 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
‘The Evolution of FDI Screening Mechanisms - Key trends
and features’, United Nations, February 2023, https://unctad.
org/system/files/official-document/diaepcbinf2023d2_en.pdf;
Ayman Falak Medina, ‘Vietnam’s Decree 31 Provides
Guidance on Implementation of the Investment Law’.
275 Chor Khieng Yuit, ‘Singapore Looking at Ways to Manage
Investments to Safeguard Economic Resilience, National
Security’, Straits Times, 28 August 2023, https://www.
straitstimes.com/business/s-pore-exploring-ways-to-manage-
investments-to-safeguard-economic-resilience-national-security.
276 Government of India, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal
Trade, ‘Consolidated FDI Policy Circular of 2020’, 15
October 2020, https://static.investindia.gov.in/2020-10/FDI-
PolicyCircular-2020.pdf.
277 Australian Government, Treasury, ‘Foreign Investment in
Australia’, https://foreigninvestment.gov.au/getting-started/
investment-information/business.
278 Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade, ‘ Australia’s Foreign Investment Policy’.
279 Australian Government, Department of Home Affairs,
Cyber and Infrastructure Security Centre, ‘Critical
Infrastructure: Changes to Current Regulation’, https://
www.cisc.gov.au/legislative-information-and-reforms/
critical-infrastructure#:~:text=The%20regulation%20of%20
critical%20infrastructure,in%20relevant%20critical%20
infrastructure%20sectors.
280 New Zealand Treasury, ‘Guidance Note: Foreign Investment
Policy an National Interest Guidance’, June 2021, https://
www.treasury.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2021-06/for-invest-
pol-nat-interest-guidance-jun21.pdf; Heidi Tworek and
Yoojung Lee, ‘Lessons From South Korea’s Approach to
Tackling Disinformation’, Brookings, 12 July 2021, https://
www.brookings.edu/articles/lessons-from-south-koreas-
approach-to-tackling-disinformation/.
281 US, Department of State, ‘2023 Investment Climate
Statements: Palau’.
282 Kenddrick Chan and Mariah Thornton, ‘China’s Changing
Disinformation and Propaganda Targeting Taiwan’,
Diplomat, 19 September 2022, https://thediplomat.
com/2022/09/chinas-changing-disinformation-and-
propaganda-targeting-taiwan/.
283 ‘Thailand Disinformation Profile’, ADTAC
Disinformation Inventory, https://inventory.adt.ac/wiki/

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 61
Thailand_Disinformation_Profile; ‘Disinformation Risk
Assessment: The Online News Market in Thailand’,
Global Disinformation Index, 8 June 2023, https://
www.disinformationindex.org/country-studies/2023-
06-08-disinformation-risk-assessment-the-online-news-
market-in-thailand/; Quoc Tan Trung Nguyen, ‘How
Vietnamese “Putinistas” Are Spreading Disinformation
About Ukrainians’, The Conversation, 3 May 2022,
https://theconversation.com/how-vietnamese-
putinistas-are-spreading-disinformation-about-
ukrainians-181131; Freedom House, ’Explore the
Map: Internet Freedom’, https://freedomhouse.org/
explore-the-map?type=fotn&year=2023.
284 BC Han and Benjamin Loh, ‘Beijing’s Global Media Influence
2022: Malaysia’, Freedom House, https://freedomhouse.
org/country/malaysia/beijings-global-media-influence/2022;
Somaly Nguon and Sopheak Srun, ‘Cambodia v. Hackers:
Balancing Security and Liberty in Cybercrime Law’, KAS
Foundation, 27 January 2020, https://www.kas.de/en/web/
kambodscha/single-title/-/content/cambodia-v-hackers-
balancing-security-and-liberty-in-cybercrime-law.
285 Matt Burgess, ‘To Fight Fake News on WhatsApp,
India is Turning Off the Internet’, Wired, 18
October 2018, https://www.wired.co.uk/article/
whatsapp-web-internet-shutdown-india-turn-off.
286 Rhea Mogul and Sophia Saifi, ‘Imran Khan Claims There’s
a US Conspiracy Against Him. Why Do So Many Pakistanis
Believe Him?’, CNN, 27 May 2022, https://edition.cnn.
com/2022/05/27/asia/pakistan-imran-khan-us-conspiracy-
intl-hnk/index.html.
287 Gary Machado Alexandre Alaphilippe, Roman Adamczyk and
Antoine Gregoire, ‘Indian Chronicles: Deep Dive Into 15-year
Operation Targeting the EU and UN to Serve Indian Interests’,
EU Disinfo Labs, 9 December 2020, https://www.disinfo.eu/
publications/indian-chronicles-deep-dive-into-a-15-year-
operation-targeting-the-eu-and-un-to-serve-indian-interests/.
288 ‘Fake Experts Praising Bangladesh Gov’t in Media Before
Elections: AFP Probe’, Al-Jazeera, 7 September 2023, https://
www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/9/7/fake-experts-praising-
bangladesh-govt-in-media-before-elections-afp-probe.
289 ‘92% of Nepal’s Social Media Users Are Exposed to
Misinformation: CMR-Nepal Survey’, Center for Media
Research Nepal, 23 June 2022, https://research.butmedia.
org/92-of-nepals-social-media-users-are-exposed-to-
misinformation-cmr-nepal-survey/; ‘Kaspersky 2019 Report:
PH is World’s 4th Country With Highest Number of Detected
Online Threats’, Manila Standard, 2 March 2020, https://www.
adas.ph/2020/03/02/kaspersky-2019-report-ph-is-worlds-4th-
country-with-highest-number-of-detected-online-threats/.
290 Parliament of Australia, Joint Standing Committee on
Electoral Matters, ‘Report on the Conduct of the 2019 Federal
Election and Matters Related Thereto’, December 2020, https://
www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/
Electoral_Matters/2019Federalelection/Report/section?id=com
mittees%2freportjnt%2f024439%2f73871.
291 New Zealand, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet,
‘Let’s Talk About our National Security: National Security
Long-term Insights Briefing’, March 2023, p. 12, https://
www.dpmc.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2023-05/National%20
Security%20Long-term%20Insights%20Briefing.pdf.
292 Royson Willie, ‘Use of Social Media for Disinformation’,
Daily Post Vanuatu, 5 August 2019, https://www.dailypost.
vu/news/use-of-social-media-for-disinformation/
article_fef0c512-65bf-53eb-a850-bc29e92ff1bf.html; Kelvin
Anthony, ‘Pacific Nations Worried Over “Disinformation”
on Carbon Levy Plan’, RNZ, 5 July 2023, https://www.rnz.
co.nz/international/pacific-news/493199/pacific-nations-
worried-over-disinformation-on-carbon-levy-plan; Rich
Collett-White, ‘Cook Islands UN Negotiator Paid $700k
by Shipping Industry Lobby Group’, 17 September 2021,
https://www.desmog.com/2021/09/17/cook-islands-
un-negotiator-paid-700k-by-shipping-industry-lobby-
group/#:~:text=A%20negotiator%20representing%20the%20
Cook,lobby%20group%20he%20helps%20run; Stephen
Dziedzic, ‘New Report Shows the Chinese Communist Party
Launched Coordinated Disinformation Campaign After
Solomon Islands Riot’, ABC News, 4 October 2022, https://
www.abc.net.au/news/2022-10-05/ccp-china-coordinated-
disinformation-campaign-solomon-islands/101500094;
Blake Johnson et al., ‘Suppressing the Truth and Spreading
Lies’, ASPI, 5 October 2022, https://www.aspi.org.au/report/
suppressing-truth-and-spreading-lies; Hannah Ritchie,
‘Microsoft: Chinese Hackers Hit Key US Bases on Guam’,
BBC, 25 May 2023, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-
asia-65705198; ‘ Alerte au piratage informatique!’ [‘Hacking
Alert!’], Outre-Mer La 1ere, 7 April 2022, https://la1ere.
francetvinfo.fr/polynesie/tahiti/polynesie-francaise/alerte-
au-piratage-informatique-1270508.html.
293 Choe Sang-Hun, ‘South Korea shelves “Fake News” Bill
amid International Outcry’, New York Times, 1 October 2021,

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
62 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/01/world/asia/south-
korea-fake-news-law.html.
294 Ryan Loomis and Heidi Holz, ‘China’s Efforts to Shape
the Information Environment in Myanmar’, CNA, 9
January 2020, https://www.cna.org/reports/2020/09/
chinese-information-shaping-in-myanmar; Han and Loh,
‘Beijing’s Global Media Influence 2022: Malaysia’; Nguon
and Srun, ‘Cambodia v. Hackers: Balancing Security and
Liberty in Cybercrime Law’; Gregory Winger, ‘China’s
Disinformation Campaign in the Philippines’, Diplomat,
6 October 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/10/
chinas-disinformation-campaign-in-the-philippines.
295 Justin Ong, ‘Singapore Particularly Vulnerable Yet Resilient
to Chinese Influence Operations: French Report’, Straits
Times, 2 October 2021, https://www.straitstimes.com/
singapore/politics/spore-particularly-vulnerable-yet-
resilient-to-chinese-influence-operations.
296 ‘Disinformation Risk Assessment: The Online News Market
in Thailand’, Global Disinformation Index, 8 June 2023,
https://www.disinformationindex.org/country-studies/2023-
06-08-disinformation-risk-assessment-the-online-news-
market-in-thailand/.
297 Editorial Board, ‘Two Faces: Editorial on BJP Govt’s
Manipulative Ways to Spread Fake News’, 20 July 2022,
https://www.telegraphindia.com/opinion/two-faces-editorial-
on-bjp-govts-manipulative-ways-to-spread-fake-news/
cid/1870851.
298 See Lawrence Freedman and Heather Williams, Changing the
Narrative: Information Campaigns, Strategy and Crisis Escalation
in the Digital Age (Abingdon: Routledge for The International
Institute for Strategic Studies, September 2023).
299 ‘Nepali Parliament Ratifies Contentious US Aid
Grant Amid Protests’, Al-Jazeera, 27 February
2017, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/2/27/
nepal-passes-contentious-us-grant-amid-protests.
300 See Asfandyar Mir and Niloufer Siddiqui, ‘Losing Facts
to Fiction: Nationalism, Misinformation, and Conspiracy
Theories in Pakistan’, Special Report no. 514, United States
Institute for Peace, November 2022, https://www.usip.org/
sites/default/files/2022-11/20221117_sr_514-losing-facts-fiction-
nationalism-misinformation-conspiracy-theories-pakistan.pdf.
301 Amy Searight, ‘Countering China’s Information
Operations: Lessons from Australia’, 8
May 2020, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
countering-chinas-influence-operations-lessons-australia.
302 See New Zealand, Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, ‘Let’s Talk About Our National Security: National
Security Long-term Insights Briefing’.
303 Anthony, ‘Pacific Nations Worried Over “Disinformation”
on Carbon Levy Plan’, RNZ.
304 Nikkei, ‘Nisejouhou no sonae de senmonsoshiki,
seihuhoushin kakushouchou unnyou wo touitsu e’, 偽
情報の備えで専門組織　政府方針、各省庁運用を統一へ
[Specialized Organisation to Prepare for Disinformation,
Unifying Government Policy and Operation of Ministries
and Agencies], 16 February 2023, https://www.nikkei.com/
article/DGXZQOUA09AER0Z00C23A2000000/.
305 Tworek and Lee, ‘Lessons From South Korea’s Approach to
Tackling Disinformation’.
306 Taiwan FactCheck Center, ‘ About Us’, https://tfc-taiwan.
org.tw/en/about-us; Cofacts, ‘What is Cofacts?’, https://
en.cofacts.tw/about; DoubleThink Lab, ‘ About DoubleThink
Lab’, https://doublethinklab.org/.
307 Fake News Cleaner, ‘Who Are We?’, https://www.
fakenewscleaner.tw/.
308 Singapore, Ministry of Communications and Information,
Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation
Act Office, ‘ About Us’, https://www.pofmaoffice.gov.sg/
about-us/.
309 Jasphet Quitzon and Sophal Ear, ‘Hun Sen’s Fight to
Control the Cambodian Infosphere’, East Asia Forum, 2
May 2023, https://www.eastasiaforum.org/2023/05/02/
hun-sens-fight-to-control-the-cambodian-infosphere/.
310 Sebastian Strangio, ‘Indonesia’s Parliament Passes
Repressive New Penal Code’, Diplomat, 6 December 2022,
https://thediplomat.com/2022/12/indonesias-parliament-
passes-repressive-new-penal-code/#:~:text=Diplomat%20
Brief&text=Under%20the%20new%20code%2C%20sex,a%20
maximum%20of%20three%20years.
311 Jonathan Corpus Ong, ‘Southeast Asia’s Disinformation
Crisis: Where the State is the Biggest Bad Actor and
Regulation is a Bad Word’, Social Science Research
Council, 12 January 2021, https://items.ssrc.org/
disinformation-democracy-and-conflict-prevention/
southeast-asias-disinformation-crisis-where-the-state-is-the-
biggest-bad-actor-and-regulation-is-a-bad-word/.
312 Strangio, ‘Indonesia’s Parliament Passes Repressive New
Penal Code’.
313 ‘Myanmar Junta Adds Russia’s “Firehose of Propaganda”
to its Arsenal’, Irrawaddy, 7 September 2023, https://www.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 63
irrawaddy.com/news/myanmars-crisis-the-world/myanmar-
junta-adds-russias-firehose-of-propaganda-to-its-arsenal.html.
314 Zsombor Peter, ‘Malaysia Uses emergency power to
impose “Fake News” Law’, VOA, 13 March 2021, https://
www.voanews.com/a/press-freedom_malaysia-uses-
emergency-powers-impose-fake-news-law/6203266.
html#:~:text=Malaysia’s%20fake%20news%20ordinance%20
sets,the%20publication%20of%20that%20information.
315 ‘Malaysia: Revoke “Fake News” Ordinance’, Human
Rights Watch, 13 March 2021, https://www.hrw.org/
news/2021/03/13/malaysia-revoke-fake-news-ordinance.
316 Han and Loh, ‘Beijing’s Global Media Influence 2022:
Malaysia’; ‘Malaysian Communication and Multimedia Act
of 1998 (CMA 1998), At 588’, Stanford World Intermediary
Liability Map, https://wilmap.stanford.edu/entries/
malaysian-communication-and-multimedia-act-1998-cma-
1998-act-588.
317 ‘Vietnam Launches Anti-fake News Center for the First
Time’, Vietnam Times, 16 January 2021, https://vietnamtimes.
org.vn/vietnam-launches-anti-fake-news-center-for-the-first-
time-27382.html.
318 Nhat Minh, ‘Vietnam Has Anti-Fake News Center’, Hanoi
Times, 13 January 2021, https://hanoitimes.vn/vietnam-has-
anti-fake-news-center-315877.html.
319 ‘Vietnam’s Government Struggles to Counter What it
Calls “Fake News”’, Radio Free Asia, 10 August 2022,
https://www.rfa.org/english/news/vietnam/vietnam-fake-
news-08102022233919.html; Lao Computer Emergency
Response Team, https://laocert.gov.la/Home; UN Women,
‘Lao Peoples Democratic Republic: Law on Prevention and
Combating Cyber Crime (2015)’, https://evaw-global-database.
unwomen.org/pt/countries/asia/lao-peoples-democratic-
republic/2015/law-on-prevention-and-combating-cyber-crime;
‘Brunei Introduces Hotline to Address Fake News on Social
Media’, Xinhua, 25 September 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.
com/english/2018-09/25/c_137492233.htm; Aqsa Younas
Rana, ‘Philippines Counters China’s Information Warfare in
South China Sea Dispute’, BNN, 29 October 2023, https://bnn.
network/world/china/philippines-counters-chinas-information-
warfare-in-south-china-sea-dispute/.
320 See ‘Bangladesh: Cybercrime Policies/Strategies’, Council
of Europe: Octopus Cybercrime Inventory, https://www.
coe.int/en/web/octopus/country-wiki-ap/-/asset_publisher/
CmDb7M4RGb4Z/content/bangladesh. Government
divisions mandated to monitor/counter disinformation are:
Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority, PEMRA
(Pakistan); Cyber Crime Investigation Division and Cyber
News Verification Center (Bangladesh); Sri Lanka Computer
Emergency Readiness Team, SLCERT (Sri Lanka).
321 Media Matters for Democracy, ‘Disinformation and the
Freedom of Opinion and Expression’, UN Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, https://www.
ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Expression/
disinformation/2-Civil-society-organisations/Media-Matters-
for-Democracy3.pdf.
322 Ayesha Binte Towhid, ‘Misinformation in
Bangladesh: A Brief Primer (Draft)’, LIRNEasia,
13 October 2021, https://lirneasia.net/2021/10/
misinformation-in-bangladesh-a-brief-primer/.
323 Maria Abi-Habib, ‘India Bans Nearly 60 Chinese Apps,
including TikTok and WeChat’, New York Times, 29 June
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/29/world/asia/tik-
tok-banned-india-china.html.
324 This was in response to the 1971 Indo-Pakistan
war; ‘Bangladesh Promises Free, Fair Polls After
US Warns of Visa Curbs’, Al-Jazeera, 25 May
2023, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/5/25/
bangladesh-promises-free-fair-polls-after-us-warns-of-visa.
325 Australian Electoral Commission, ‘ AEC Launches Campaign
to Combat Disinformation’, 12 April 2022, https://www.aec.
gov.au/media/2022/04-12.htm.
326 Luke Buckmaster and Tyson Wils, ‘Responding to Fake
News’, Parliament of Australia, https://www.aph.gov.
au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/
Parliamentary_Library/pubs/BriefingBook46p/FakeNews.
327 New Zealand, Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet, ‘Strengthening Resilience to
Disinformation’, 14 September 2023, https://www.
dpmc.govt.nz/our-programmes/national-security/
strengthening-resilience-disinformation.
328 Jim Nolan, ‘Will Timor-Leste be the Region’s Latest
Press Freedom Casualty?’, Interpreter, 18 June 2020,
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/
will-timor-leste-be-region-s-latest-press-freedom-casualty.
329 Verified, ‘ About Us’, https://shareverified.com/about/.
330 ‘Historic Right to Information Act Passed in Vanuatu’,
International Federation of Journalists, 8 December 2016,
https://ifex.org/historic-right-to-information-act-passed-
in-vanuatu/; ‘La Polynésie à la Pointe de la cybersécurité’
[Polynesia at the Forefront of Cybersecurity], Polynesia

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
64 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
the 1st, 25 January 2019, https://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/
polynesie/tahiti/polynesie-pointe-cybersecurite-673455.
html; Vincent Balouet, ‘Opinion: RGPD et Cyberattaques:
L’exemple Polynésien’ [Opinion: GDPR and Cyberattacks
- The Polynesian example], Les Echos, 5 October
2018, https://www.lesechos.fr/idees-debats/cercle/
opinion-rgpd-et-cyberattaques-lexemple-polynesien-141043.
331 Government of Japan, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
‘Individually Tailored Partnership Programme between
NATO and Japan for 2023–2026’, 12 July 2023, https://www.
mofa.go.jp/mofaj/files/100527274.pdf.
332 White House, ‘Fact Sheet: The Trilateral Leaders’ Summit
at Camp David’, 18 August 2023, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/08/18/
fact-sheet-the-trilateral-leaders-summit-at-camp-david/.
333 Russell Hsiao, ‘US-Taiwan Cooperation to Counter
PRC Interference and Disinformation’, Global Taiwan
Institute, 12 December 2018, https://globaltaiwan.
org/2018/12/us-taiwan-cooperation-to-counter-prc-
interference-and-disinformation/.
334 Staś Butler, ‘EU Disinformation Committee Heads to
Taiwan’, Diplomat, 2 November 2021, https://thediplomat.
com/2021/11/eu-disinformation-committee-heads-to-taiwan/
https://www.roc-taiwan.org/be_en/post/11688.html.
335 World Health Organization, ‘Infodemic Management
for Strong Emergency Response and Routine Health
Programmes in Malaysia and Brunei Darussalam’, 6 March
2023, https://www.who.int/westernpacific/news-room/
feature-stories/item/infodemic-management-for-strong-
emergency-response-and-routine-health-programmes-in-
malaysia-and-brunei-darussalam.
336 ‘Woman Charged for False Statement on COVID-19 as
Brunei Maintains Harsh Restrictions on Freedoms’, CIVICUS
Monitor, 27 September 2022, https://monitor.civicus.org/
explore/woman-charged-false-statement-covid-19-brunei-
maintains-harsh-restrictions-freedoms/.
337 International Commission of Jurists, ‘Dictating
the Internet: A Human Rights Assessment of the
Implementation of Singapore’s Protection from Online
Falsehoods and Manipulation Act 2019’, October 2021,
https://www.icj.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/
Singapore-Dictating-the-Internet-Legal-Briefing-2021-
ENG.pdf.
338 ‘Myanmar Junta adds Russia’s “Firehose of Propaganda” to
its Arsenal’, Irrawaddy.
339 Freedman and Williams, Changing the Narrative: Information
Campaigns, Strategy and Crisis Escalation in the Digital Age, pp.
43–59.
340 Anthony Galloway, ‘“Free From Coercion”: Quad
Countries to Counter China’s Disinformation Campaigns
and Trade Strikes’, Sydney Morning Herald, 8 February
2022, https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/
free-from-coercion-quad-countries-to-counter-china-
s-disinformation-campaigns-and-trade-strikes-20220207-
p59ud4.html.
341 US, Department of State, ‘Joint Statement
on Quad Cooperation in the Indo-Pacific’,
11 February 2022, https://www.state.gov/
joint-statement-on-quad-cooperation-in-the-indo-pacific/.
342 UNICEF Nepal, ‘Joint the Fight Against
Misinformation’, https://www.unicef.org/nepal/
join-fight-against-misinformation.
343 UN Development Programme, ‘UNDP Maldives’ Digital
Disruption Chart’, https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/
zskgke326/files/migration/mv/aad27f0d0253c48c18407c
695775fb02185f0f9176e63c1e89fa9233e27a13a4.pdf.
344 Journalists’ Association of Bhutan, ‘Empowering Bhutanese
to Combat Misinformation and Disinformation’, 7
November 2022, https://csogrant.bt/empowering-bhutanese-
to-combat-misinformation-disinformation/.
345 ‘Introducing the Google News Initiative India Training
Network’, Google India Blog, 19 June 2018, https://india.
googleblog.com/2018/06/introducing-google-news-
initiative.html.
346 Talal Raza, ‘Facebook Working to Protect “Pakistan’s
Elections From Abuse”’, Digital Rights Monitor, 11 July
2018, https://digitalrightsmonitor.pk/facebook-working-to-
protect-pakistans-elections-from-abuse/.
347 Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade, ‘Regional Architecture: The Quad’, https://
www.dfat.gov.au/international-relations/regional-
architecture/quad; US, Department of Homeland
Security, ‘Five Country Ministerial 2023 Communique’,
29 June 2023, https://www.dhs.gov/news/2023/06/29/
five-country-ministerial-2023-communique.
348 Get Safe Online, ‘ About Us’, https://www.getsafeonline.
org.vu/en/about-us/; ‘Dis and Misinformation Awareness
in Samoa, Cook Islands and Niue’, Duke University,
https://researchfunding.duke.edu/dis-and-misinformation-
awareness-samoa-cook-islands-and-niue.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Europe and the Indo-Pacific: Convergence and Divergence in the Digital Order 65
349 ‘ Australia Inks New Security Deal with Vanuatu’, Diplomat, 15
December 2022, https://thediplomat.com/2022/12/australia-
inks-new-security-deal-with-vanuatu/#:~:text=Australia%20
has%20signed%20a%20new%20security%20deal%20
with,enforcement%2C%20cybersecurity%2C%20
defense%2C%20border%20security%2C%20and%20
maritime%20safety.
350 Stephen Dziedzic, Mackenzie Smith and Leah Lowonbu,
‘Future of Australia-Vanuatu Security Pact in Doubt
After Pacific Island Nation Picks New PM’, ABC News, 5
September 2023, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-09-05/
australia-vanuatu-security-pact-rewrite-under-new-pm-
china/102815352.
351 Verified, ‘ About Us’.
352 European Parliament, ’AI Act: a step closer to the first
rules on Artificial Intelligence’, 11 May 2023, https://www.
europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20230505IPR84904/
ai-act-a-step-closer-to-the-first-rules-on-artificial-intelligence.
353 Bangladesh Hi-Tech Park Authority, ‘Bangladesh - Potential
Destination for Invest in Hi-tech’, https://ossbhtpa.gov.bd/.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
© The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2023
Acknowledgements
IISS–Europe acknowledges the financial support of Stiftung
Mercator in producing this research paper, including for a
workshop that helped inform the paper’s contents.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – UK
Arundel House | 6 Temple Place | London | wc2r 2pg | UK
t. +44 (0) 20 7379 7676 e. iiss@iiss.org www.iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Americas
2121 K Street, NW | Suite 600 | Washington DC 20037 | USA
t. +1 202 659 1490 e. iiss-americas@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Asia
9 Raffles Place | #49-01 Republic Plaza | Singapore 048619
t. +65 6499 0055 e. iiss-asia@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Europe
Pariser Platz 6A | 10117 Berlin | Germany
t. +49 30 311 99 300 e. iiss-europe@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Middle East
14th floor, GFH Tower | Bahrain Financial Harbour | Manama | Kingdom of Bahrain
t. +973 1718 1155 e. iiss-middleeast@iiss.org
